
Heyst did not turn his head; he only glanced at her out-stretched arm.

"No doubt we are followed; we are watched."

"I don't see anything now," she said.

"And it does not matter," Heyst went on in his ordinary voice. "Here we
are in the forest. I have neither strength nor persuasion. Indeed, it's
extremely difficult to be eloquent before a Chinaman's head stuck at
one out of a lot of brushwood. But can we wander among these big trees
indefinitely? Is this a refuge? No! What else is left to us? I did think
for a moment of the mine; but even there we could not remain very long.
And then that gallery is not safe. The props were too weak to begin
with. Ants have been at work there--ants after the men. A death-trap, at
best. One can die but once, but there are many manners of death."

The girl glanced about fearfully, in search of the watcher or follower
whom she had glimpsed once among the trees; but if he existed, he had
concealed himself. Nothing met her eyes but the deepening shadows of the
short vistas between the living columns of the still roof of leaves.
She looked at the man beside her expectantly, tenderly, with suppressed
affright and a sort of awed wonder.

"I have also thought of these people's boat," Heyst went on. "We could
get into that, and--only they have taken everything out of her. I have
seen her oars and mast in a corner of their room. To shove off in an
empty boat would be nothing but a desperate expedient, supposing even
that she would drift out a good distance between the islands before the
morning. It would only be a complicated manner of committing suicide--to
be found dead in a boat, dead from sun and thirst. A sea mystery.
I wonder who would find us! Davidson, perhaps; but Davidson passed
westward ten days ago. I watched him steaming past one early morning,
from the jetty."

"You never told me," she said.

"He must have been looking at me through his big binoculars. Perhaps, if
I had raised my arm--but what did we want with Davidson then, you and
I? He won't be back this way for three weeks or more, Lena. I wish I had
raised my arm that morning."

"What would have been the good of it?" she sighed out.

"What good? No good, of course. We had no forebodings. This seemed to be
an inexpugnable refuge, where we could live untroubled and learn to know
each other."

"It's perhaps in trouble that people get to know each other," she
suggested.

"Perhaps," he said indifferently. "At any rate, we would not have gone
away from here with him; though I believe he would have come in eagerly
enough, and ready for any service he could render. It's that fat man's
nature--a delightful fellow. You would not come on the wharf that time
I sent the shawl back to Mrs. Schomberg through him. He has never seen
you."

"I didn't know that you wanted anybody ever to see me," she said.

He had folded his arms on his breast and hung his head.

"And I did not know that you cared to be seen as yet. A misunderstanding
evidently. An honourable misunderstanding. But it does not matter now."

He raised his head after a silence.

"How gloomy this forest has grown! Yet surely the sun cannot have set
already."

She looked round; and as if her eyes had just been opened, she perceived
the shades of the forest surrounding her, not so much with gloom, but
with a sullen, dumb, menacing hostility. Her heart sank in the engulfing
stillness, at that moment she felt the nearness of death, breathing on
her and on the man with her. If there had been a sudden stir of leaves,
the crack of a dry branch, the faintest rustle, she would have screamed
aloud. But she shook off the unworthy weakness. Such as she was, a
fiddle-scraping girl picked up on the very threshold of infamy, she
would try to rise above herself, triumphant and humble; and then
happiness would burst on her like a torrent, flinging at her feet the
man whom she loved.

Heyst stirred slightly.

"We had better be getting back, Lena, since we can't stay all night in
the woods--or anywhere else, for that matter. We are the slaves of
this infernal surprise which has been sprung on us by--shall I say
fate?--your fate, or mine."

It was the man who had broken the silence, but it was the woman who
led the way. At the very edge of the forest she stopped, concealed by a
tree. He joined her cautiously.

"What is it? What do you see, Lena?" he whispered.

She said that it was only a thought that had come into her head. She
hesitated for a moment giving him over her shoulder a shining gleam in
her grey eyes. She wanted to know whether this trouble, this danger,
this evil, whatever it was, finding them out in their retreat, was not a
sort of punishment.

"Punishment?" repeated Heyst. He could not understand what she meant.
When she explained, he was still more surprised. "A sort of retribution,
from an angry Heaven?" he said in wonder. "On us? What on earth for?"

He saw her pale face darken in the dusk. She had blushed. Her whispering
flowed very fast. It was the way they lived together--that wasn't right,
was it? It was a guilty life. For she had not been forced into it,
driven, scared into it. No, no--she had come to him of her own free
will, with her whole soul yearning unlawfully.

He was so profoundly touched that he could not speak for a moment. To
conceal his trouble, he assumed his best Heystian manner.

"What? Are our visitors then messengers of morality, avengers of
righteousness, agents of Providence? That's certainly an original view.
How flattered they would be if they could hear you!"

"Now you are making fun of me," she said in a subdued voice which broke
suddenly.

"Are you conscious of sin?" Heyst asked gravely. She made no answer.
"For I am not," he added; "before Heaven, I am not!"

"You! You are different. Woman is the tempter. You took me up from pity.
I threw myself at you."

"Oh, you exaggerate, you exaggerate. It was not so bad as that," he said
playfully, keeping his voice steady with an effort.

He considered himself a dead man already, yet forced to pretend that
he was alive for her sake, for her defence. He regretted that he had
no Heaven to which he could recommend this fair, palpitating handful of
ashes and dust--warm, living sentient his own--and exposed helplessly to
insult, outrage, degradation, and infinite misery of the body.

She had averted her face from him and was still. He suddenly seized her
passive hand.

"You will have it so?" he said. "Yes? Well, let us then hope for mercy
together."

She shook her head without looking at him, like an abashed child.

"Remember," he went on incorrigible with his delicate raillery, "that
hope is a Christian virtue, and surely you can't want all the mercy for
yourself."

Before their eyes the bungalow across the cleared ground stood bathed in
a sinister light. An unexpected chill gust of wind made a noise in the
tree-tops. She snatched her hand away and stepped out into the open;
but before she had advanced more than three yards, she stood still and
pointed to the west.

"Oh look there!" she exclaimed.

Beyond the headland of Diamond Bay, lying black on a purple sea, great
masses of cloud stood piled up and bathed in a mist of blood. A crimson
crack like an open wound zigzagged between them, with a piece of dark
red sun showing at the bottom. Heyst cast an indifferent glance at the
ill-omened chaos of the sky.

"Thunderstorm making up. We shall hear it all night, but it won't visit
us, probably. The clouds generally gather round the volcano."

She was not listening to him. Her eyes reflected the sombre and violent
hues of the sunset.

"That does not look much like a sign of mercy," she said slowly, as if
to herself, and hurried on, followed by Heyst. Suddenly she stopped. "I
don't care. I would do more yet! And some day you'll forgive me. You'll
have to forgive me!"





CHAPTER NINE

Stumbling up the steps, as if suddenly exhausted, Lena entered the room
and let herself fall on the nearest chair. Before following her, Heyst
took a survey of the surroundings from the veranda. It was a complete
solitude. There was nothing in the aspect of this familiar scene to tell
him that he and the girl were not as completely alone as they had been
in the early days of their common life on this abandoned spot, with only
Wang discreetly materializing from time to time and the uncomplaining
memory of Morrison to keep them company.

After the cold gust of wind there was an absolute stillness of the
air. The thunder-charged mass hung unbroken beyond the low, ink-black
headland, darkening the twilight. By contrast, the sky at the zenith
displayed pellucid clearness, the sheen of a delicate glass bubble which
the merest movement of air might shatter. A little to the left, between
the black masses of the headland and of the forest, the volcano, a
feather of smoke by day and a cigar-glow at night, took its first fiery
expanding breath of the evening. Above it a reddish star came out like
an expelled spark from the fiery bosom of the earth, enchanted into
permanency by the mysterious spell of frozen spaces.

In front of Heyst the forest, already full of the deepest shades, stood
like a wall. But he lingered, watching its edge, especially where it
ended at the line of bushes, masking the land end of the jetty. Since
the girl had spoken of catching a glimpse of something white among the
trees, he believed pretty firmly that they had been followed in their
excursion up the mountain by Mr. Jones's secretary. No doubt the fellow
had watched them out of the forest, and now, unless he took the trouble
to go back some distance and fetch a considerable circuit inland over
the clearing, he was bound to walk out into the open space before the
bungalows. Heyst did, indeed, imagine at one time some movement between
the trees, lost as soon as perceived. He stared patiently, but nothing
more happened. After all, why should he trouble about these people's
actions? Why this stupid concern for the preliminaries, since, when
the issue was joined, it would find him disarmed and shrinking from the
ugliness and degradation of it?

He turned and entered the room. Deep dusk reigned in there already.
Lena, near the door, did not move or speak. The sheen of the white
tablecloth was very obtrusive. The brute these two vagabonds had tamed
had entered on its service while Heyst and Lena were away. The table was
laid. Heyst walked up and down the room several times. The girl remained
without sound or movement on the chair. But when Heyst, placing the two
silver candelabra on the table, struck a match to light the candles,
she got up suddenly and went into the bedroom. She came out again almost
immediately, having taken off her hat. Heyst looked at her over his
shoulder.

"What's the good of shirking the evil hour? I've lighted these
candles for a sign of our return. After all, we might not have been
watched--while returning, I mean. Of course we were seen leaving the
house."

The girl sat down again. The great wealth of her hair looked very dark
above her colourless face. She raised her eyes, glistening softly in
the light with a sort of unreadable appeal, with a strange effect of
unseeing innocence.

"Yes," said Heyst across the table, the fingertips of one hand resting
on the immaculate cloth. "A creature with an antediluvian lower jaw,
hairy like a mastodon, and formed like a pre-historic ape, has laid this
table. Are you awake, Lena? Am I? I would pinch myself, only I know that
nothing would do away with this dream. Three covers. You know it is the
shorter of the two who's coming--the gentleman who, in the play of his
shoulders as he walks, and in his facial structure, recalls a Jaguar.
Ah, you don't know what a jaguar is? But you have had a good look at
these two. It's the short one, you know, who's to be our guest."

She made a sign with her head that she knew; Heyst's insistence brought
Ricardo vividly before her mental vision. A sudden languor, like the
physical echo of her struggle with the man, paralysed all her limbs.
She lay still in the chair, feeling very frightened at this
phenomenon--ready to pray aloud for strength.

Heyst had started to pace the room.

"Our guest! There is a proverb--in Russia, I believe--that when a
guest enters the house, God enters the house. The sacred virtue of
hospitality! But it leads one into trouble as well as any other."

The girl unexpectedly got up from the chair, swaying her supple figure
and stretching her arms above her head. He stopped to look at her
curiously, paused, and then went on:

"I venture to think that God has nothing to do with such a hospitality
and with such a guest!"

She had jumped to her feet to react against the numbness, to discover
whether her body would obey her will. It did. She could stand up, and
she could move her arms freely. Though no physiologist, she concluded
that all that sudden numbness was in her head, not in her limbs. Her
fears assuaged, she thanked God for it mentally, and to Heyst murmured a
protest:

"Oh, yes! He's got to do with everything--every little thing. Nothing
can happen--"

"Yes," he said hastily, "one of the two sparrows can't be struck to the
ground--you are thinking of that." The habitual playful smile faded on
the kindly lips under the martial moustache. "Ah, you remember what you
have been told--as a child--on Sundays."

"Yes, I do remember." She sank into the chair again. "It was the only
decent bit of time I ever had when I was a kid, with our landlady's two
girls, you know."

"I wonder, Lena," Heyst said, with a return to his urbane playfulness,
"whether you are just a little child, or whether you represent something
as old as the world."

She surprised Heyst by saying dreamily:

"Well--and what about you?"

"I? I date later--much later. I can't call myself a child, but I am so
recent that I may call myself a man of the last hour--or is it the hour
before last? I have been out of it so long that I am not certain how far
the hands of the clock have moved since--since--"

He glanced at the portrait of his father, exactly above the head of the
girl, as if it were ignoring her in its painted austerity of feeling. He
did not finish the sentence; but he did not remain silent for long.

"Only what must be avoided are fallacious inferences, my dear
Lena--especially at this hour."

"Now you are making fun of me again," she said without looking up.

"Am I?" he cried. "Making fun? No, giving warning. Hang it all, whatever
truth people told you in the old days, there is also this one--that
sparrows do fall to the ground, that they are brought to the ground.
This is no vain assertion, but a fact. That's why"--again his
tone changed, while he picked up the table knife and let it fall
disdainfully--"that's why I wish these wretched round knives had some
edge on them. Absolute rubbish--neither edge, point, nor substance. I
believe one of these forks would make a better weapon at a pinch. But
can I go about with a fork in my pocket?" He gnashed his teeth with a
rage very real, and yet comic.

"There used to be a carver here, but it was broken and thrown away a
long time ago. Nothing much to carve here. It would have made a noble
weapon, no doubt; but--"

He stopped. The girl sat very quiet, with downcast eyes. As he kept
silence for some time, she looked up and said thoughtfully:

"Yes, a knife--it's a knife that you would want, wouldn't you, in case,
in case--"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"There must be a crowbar or two in the sheds; but I have given up all
the keys together. And then, do you see me walking about with a crowbar
in my hand? Ha, ha! And besides, that edifying sight alone might start
the trouble for all I know. In truth, why has it not started yet?"

"Perhaps they are afraid of you," she whispered, looking down again.

"By Jove, it looks like it," he assented meditatively. "They do seem to
hang back for some reason. Is that reason prudence, or downright fear,
or perhaps the leisurely method of certitude?"

Out in the black night, not very far from the bungalow, resounded a loud
and prolonged whistle. Lena's hands grasped the sides of the chair, but
she made no movement. Heyst started, and turned his face away from the
door.

The startling sound had died away.

"Whistles, yells, omens, signals, portents--what do they matter?" he
said. "But what about the crowbar? Suppose I had it! Could I stand
in ambush at the side of the door--this door--and smash the first
protruding head, scatter blood and brains over the floor, over these
walls, and then run stealthily to the other door to do the same
thing--and repeat the performance for a third time, perhaps? Could I? On
suspicion, without compunction, with a calm and determined purpose? No,
it is not in me. I date too late. Would you like to see me attempt this
thing while that mysterious prestige of mine lasts--or their not less
mysterious hesitation?"

"No, no!" she whispered ardently, as if compelled to speak by his
eyes fixed on her face. "No, it's a knife you want to defend yourself
with--to defend--there will be time--"

"And who knows if it isn't really my duty?" he began again, as if he had
not heard her disjointed words at all. "It may be--my duty to you, to
myself. For why should I put up with the humiliation of their secret
menaces? Do you know what the world would say?"

He emitted a low laugh, which struck her with terror. She would have got
up, but he stooped so low over her that she could not move without first
pushing him away.

"It would say, Lena, that I--the Swede--after luring my friend and
partner to his death from mere greed of money, have murdered these
unoffending shipwrecked strangers from sheer funk. That would be
the story whispered--perhaps shouted--certainly spread out, and
believed--and believed, my dear Lena!"

"Who would believe such awful things?"

"Perhaps you wouldn't--not at first, at any rate; but the power of
calumny grows with time. It's insidious and penetrating. It can even
destroy one's faith in oneself--dry-rot the soul."

All at once her eyes leaped to the door and remained fixed, stony, a
little enlarged. Turning his head, Heyst beheld the figure of Ricardo
framed in the doorway. For a moment none of the three moved, then,
looking from the newcomer to the girl in the chair, Heyst formulated a
sardonic introduction.

"Mr Ricardo, my dear."

Her head drooped a little. Ricardo's hand went up to his moustache. His
voice exploded in the room.

"At your service, ma'am!"

He stepped in, taking his hat off with a flourish, and dropping it
carelessly on a chair near the door.

"At your service," he repeated, in quite another tone. "I was made aware
there was a lady about, by that Pedro of ours; only I didn't know I
should have the privilege of seeing you tonight, ma'am."

Lena and Heyst looked at him covertly, but he, with a vague gaze
avoiding them both, looked at nothing, seeming to pursue some point in
space.

"Had a pleasant walk?" he asked suddenly.

"Yes. And you?" returned Heyst, who had managed to catch his glance.

"I haven't been a yard away from the governor this afternoon till
I started for here." The genuineness of the accent surprised Heyst,
without convincing him of the truth of the words.

"Why do you ask?" pursued Ricardo with every inflection of perfect
candour.

"You might have wished to explore the island a little," said Heyst,
studying the man, who, to render him justice, did not try to free his
captured gaze. "I may remind you that it wouldn't be a perfectly safe
proceeding."

Ricardo presented a picture of innocence.

"Oh, yes--meaning that Chink that has ran away from you. He ain't much!"

"He has a revolver," observed Heyst meaningly.

"Well, and you have a revolver, too," Mr. Ricardo argued unexpectedly.
"I don't worry myself about that."

"That's different. I am not afraid of you," Heyst made answer after a
short pause.

"Of me?"

"Of all of you."

"You have a queer way of putting things," began Ricardo.

At that moment the door on the compound side of the house came open with
some noise, and Pedro entered, pressing the edge of a loaded tray to his
breast. His big, hairy head rolled a little, his feet fell in front of
each other with a short, hard thump on the floor. The arrival changed
the current of Ricardo's thought, perhaps, but certainly of his speech.

"You heard me whistling a little while ago outside? That was to give him
a hint, as I came along, that it was time to bring in the dinner; and
here it is."

Lena rose and passed to the right of Ricardo, who lowered his glance for
a moment. They sat down at the table. The enormous gorilla back of Pedro
swayed out through the door.

"Extraordinary strong brute, ma'am," said Ricardo. He, had a propensity
to talk about "his Pedro," as some men will talk of their dog. "He ain't
pretty, though. No, he ain't pretty. And he has got to be kept under. I
am his keeper, as it might be. The governor don't trouble his head much
about dee-tails. All that's left to Martin. Martin, that's me, ma'am."

Heyst saw the girl's eyes turn towards Mr. Jones's secretary and rest
blankly on his face. Ricardo, however, looked vaguely into space,
and, with faint flickers of a smile about his lips, made conversation
indefatigably against the silence of his entertainers. He boasted
largely of his long association with Mr. Jones--over four years now, he
said. Then, glancing rapidly at Heyst:

"You can see at once he's a gentleman, can't you?"

"You people," Heyst said, his habitual playful intonation tinged with
gloom, "are divorced from all reality in my eyes."

Ricardo received this speech as if he had been expecting to hear
those very words, or else did not mind at all what Heyst might say.
He muttered an absent-minded "Ay, ay," played with a bit of biscuit,
sighed, and said, with a peculiar stare which did not seem to carry any
distance, but to stop short at a point in the air very near his face:

"Anybody can see at once you are one. You and the governor ought to
understand each other. He expects to see you tonight. The governor isn't
well, and we've got to think of getting away from here."

While saying these words he turned himself full towards Lena, but
without any marked expression. Leaning back with folded arms, the girl
stared before her as if she had been alone in the room. But under
that aspect of almost vacant unconcern the perils and emotion that had
entered into her life warmed her heart, exalted her mind with a sense of
an inconceivable intensity of existence.

"Really? Thinking of going away from here?" Heyst murmured.

"The best of friends must part," Ricardo pronounced slowly. "And, as
long as they part friends, there's no harm done. We two are used to be
on the move. You, I understand, prefer to stick in one place."

It was obvious that all this was being said merely for the sake of
talking, and that Ricardo's mind was concentrated on some purpose
unconnected with the words that were coming out of his mouth.

"I should like to know," Heyst asked with incisive politeness, "how you
have come to understand this or anything else about me? As far as I can
remember, I've made you no confidences."

Ricardo, gazing comfortably into space out of the back of his chair--for
some time all three had given up any pretence of eating--answered
abstractedly:

"Any fellow might have guessed it!" He sat up suddenly, and uncovered
all his teeth in a grin of extraordinary ferocity, which was belied by
the persistent amiability of his tone. "The governor will be the man
to tell you something about that. I wish you would say you would see my
governor. He's the one who does all our talking. Let me take you to him
this evening. He ain't at all well; and he can't make up his mind to go
away without having a talk with you."

Heyst, looking up, met Lena's eyes. Their expression of candour seemed
to hide some struggling intention. Her head, he fancied, had made an
imperceptible affirmative movement. Why? What reason could she have? Was
it the prompting of some obscure instinct? Or was it simply a delusion
of his own senses? But in this strange complication invading the
quietude of his life, in his state of doubt and disdain and almost of
despair with which he looked at himself, he would let even a delusive
appearance guide him through a darkness so dense that it made for
indifference.

"Well, suppose I do say so."

Ricardo did not conceal his satisfaction, which for a moment interested
Heyst.

"It can't be my life they are after," he said to himself. "What good
could it be to them?"

He looked across the table at the girl. What did it matter whether she
had nodded or not? As always when looking into her unconscious eyes, he
tasted something like the dregs of tender pity. He had decided to go.
Her nod, imaginary or not imaginary, advice or illusion, had tipped the
scale. He reflected that Ricardo's invitation could scarcely be anything
in the nature of a trap. It would have been too absurd. Why carry subtly
into a trap someone already bound hand and foot, as it were?

All this time he had been looking fixedly at the girl he called Lena. In
the submissive quietness of her being, which had been her attitude ever
since they had begun their life on the island, she remained as secret
as ever. Heyst got up abruptly, with a smile of such enigmatic and
despairing character that Mr. Secretary Ricardo, whose abstract gaze had
an all-round efficiency, made a slight crouching start, as if to dive
under the table for his leg-knife--a start that was repressed, as soon
as begun. He had expected Heyst to spring on him or draw a revolver,
because he created for himself a vision of him in his own image. Instead
of doing either of these obvious things, Heyst walked across the
room, opened the door and put his head through it to look out into the
compound.

As soon as his back was turned, Ricardo's hand sought the girl's arm
under the table. He was not looking at her, but she felt the groping,
nervous touch of his search, felt suddenly the grip of his fingers above
her wrist. He leaned forward a little; still he dared not look at her.
His hard stare remained fastened on Heyst's back. In an extremely low
hiss, his fixed idea of argument found expression scathingly:

"See! He's no good. He's not the man for you!"

He glanced at her at last. Her lips moved a little, and he was awed
by that movement without a sound. Next instant the hard grasp of his
fingers vanished from her arm. Heyst had shut the door. On his way back
to the table, he crossed the path of the girl they had called Alma--she
didn't know why--also Magdalen, whose mind had remained so long in doubt
as to the reason of her own existence. She no longer wondered at that
bitter riddle, since her heart found its solution in a blinding, hot
glow of passionate purpose.





CHAPTER TEN

She passed by Heyst as if she had indeed been blinded by some secret,
lurid, and consuming glare into which she was about to enter. The
curtain of the bedroom door fell behind her into rigid folds. Ricardo's
vacant gaze seemed to be watching the dancing flight of a fly in mid
air.

"Extra dark outside, ain't it?" he muttered.

"Not so dark but that I could see that man of yours prowling about
there," said Heyst in measured tones.

"What--Pedro? He's scarcely a man you know; or else I wouldn't be so
fond of him as I am."

"Very well. Let's call him your worthy associate."

"Ay! Worthy enough for what we want of him. A great standby is Peter in
a scrimmage. A growl and a bite--oh, my! And you don't want him about?"

"I don't."

"You want him out of the way?" insisted Ricardo with an affectation
of incredulity which Heyst accepted calmly, though the air in the room
seemed to grow more oppressive with every word spoken.

"That's it. I do want him out of the way." He forced himself to speak
equably.

"Lor'! That's no great matter. Pedro's not much use here. The business
my governor's after can be settled by ten minutes' rational talk
with--with another gentleman. Quiet talk!"

He looked up suddenly with hard, phosphorescent eyes. Heyst didn't move
a muscle. Ricardo congratulated himself on having left his revolver
behind. He was so exasperated that he didn't know what he might have
done. He said at last:

"You want poor, harmless Peter out of the way before you let me take you
to see the governor--is that it?"

"Yes, that is it."

"H'm! One can see," Ricardo said with hidden venom, "that you are a
gentleman; but all that gentlemanly fancifulness is apt to turn sour on
a plain man's stomach. However--you'll have to pardon me."

He put his fingers into his mouth and let out a whistle which seemed to
drive a thin, sharp shaft of air solidly against one's nearest ear-drum.
Though he greatly enjoyed Heyst's involuntary grimace, he sat perfectly
stolid waiting for the effect of the call.

It brought Pedro in with an extraordinary, uncouth, primeval
impetuosity. The door flew open with a clatter, and the wild figure it
disclosed seemed anxious to devastate the room in leaps and bounds;
but Ricardo raised his open palm, and the creature came in quietly.
His enormous half-closed paws swung to and fro a little in front of his
bowed trunk as he walked. Ricardo looked on truculently.

"You go to the boat--understand? Go now!"

The little red eyes of the tame monster blinked with painful attention
in the mass of hair.

"Well? Why don't you get? Forgot human speech, eh? Don't you know any
longer what a boat is?"

"Si--boat," the creature stammered out doubtfully.

"Well, go there--the boat at the jetty. March off to it and sit there,
lie down there, do anything but go to sleep there--till you hear my
call, and then fly here. Them's your orders. March! Get, vamos! No, not
that way--out through the front door. No sulks!"

Pedro obeyed with uncouth alacrity. When he had gone, the gleam of
pitiless savagery went out of Ricardo's yellow eyes, and his physiognomy
took on, for the first time that evening, the expression of a domestic
cat which is being noticed.

"You can watch him right into the bushes, if you like. Too dark, eh? Why
not go with him to the very spot, then?"

Heyst made a gesture of vague protest.

"There's nothing to assure me that he will stay there. I have no doubt
of his going, but it's an act without guarantee."

"There you are!" Ricardo shrugged his shoulders philosophically. "Can't
be helped. Short of shooting our Pedro, nobody can make absolutely sure
of his staying in the same place longer than he has a mind to; but I
tell you, he lives in holy terror of my temper. That's why I put on my
sudden-death air when I talk to him. And yet I wouldn't shoot him--not
I, unless in such a fit of rage as would make a man shoot his favourite
dog. Look here, sir! This deal is on the square. I didn't tip him a wink
to do anything else. He won't budge from the jetty. Are you coming along
now, sir?"

A short-silence ensued. Ricardo's jaws were working ominously under his
skin. His eyes glided: voluptuously here and there, cruel and dreamy,
Heyst checked a sudden movement, reflected for a while, then said:

"You must wait a little."

"Wait a little! Wait a little! What does he think a fellow is--a graven
image?" grumbled Ricardo half audibly.

Heyst went into the bedroom, and shut the door after him with a bang.
Coming from the light, he could not see a thing in there at first; yet
he received the impression of the girl getting up from the floor. On
the less opaque darkness of the shutter-hole, her head detached itself
suddenly, very faint, a mere hint of a round, dark shape without a face.

"I am going, Lena. I am going to confront these scoundrels." He was
surprised to feel two arms falling on his shoulders. "I thought that
you--" he began.

"Yes, yes!" the girl whispered hastily.

She neither clung to him, nor yet did she try to draw him to her. Her
hands grasped his shoulders, and she seemed to him to be staring into
his face in the dark. And now he could see something of her face,
too--an oval without features--and faintly distinguish her person, in
the blackness, a form without definite lines.

"You have a black dress here, haven't you, Lena?" he asked, speaking
rapidly, and so low that she could just hear him.

"Yes--an old thing."

"Very good. Put it on at once."

"But why?"

"Not for mourning!" There was something peremptory in the slightly
ironic murmur. "Can you find it and get into it in the dark?"

She could. She would try. He waited, very still. He could imagine
her movements over there at the far end of the room; but his eyes,
accustomed now to the darkness, had lost her completely. When she spoke,
her voice surprised him by its nearness. She had done what he had told
her to do, and had approached him, invisible.

"Good! Where's that piece of purple veil I've seen lying about?" he
asked.

There was no answer, only a slight rustle.

"Where is it?" he repeated impatiently.

Her unexpected breath was on his cheek.

"In my hands."

"Capital! Listen, Lena. As soon as I leave the bungalow with that
horrible scoundrel, you slip out at the back--instantly, lose no
time!--and run round into the forest. That will be your time, while we
are walking away, and I am sure he won't give me the slip. Run into the
forest behind the fringe of bushes between the big trees. You will know,
surely, how to find a place in full view of the front door. I fear for
you; but in this black dress, with most of your face muffled up in that
dark veil, I defy anybody to find you there before daylight. Wait in the
forest till the table is pushed into full view of the doorway, and you
see three candles out of four blown out and one relighted--or, should
the lights be put out here while you watch them, wait till three candles
are lighted and then two put out. At either of these signals run back as
hard as you can, for it will mean that I am waiting for you here."

While he was speaking, the girl had sought and seized one of his
hands. She did not press it; she held it loosely, as it were timidly,
caressingly. It was no grasp; it was a mere contact, as if only to make
sure that he was there, that he was real and no mere darker shadow in
the obscurity. The warmth of her hand gave Heyst a strange, intimate
sensation of all her person. He had to fight down a new sort of emotion,
which almost unmanned him. He went on, whispering sternly:

"But if you see no such signals, don't let anything--fear, curiosity,
despair, or hope--entice you back to this house; and with the first sign
of dawn steal away along the edge of the clearing till you strike the
path. Wait no longer, because I shall probably be dead."

The murmur of the word "Never!" floated into his ear as if it formed
itself in the air.

"You know the path," he continued. "Make your way to the barricade. Go
to Wang--yes, to Wang. Let nothing stop you!" It seemed to him that the
girl's hand trembled a little. "The worst he can do to you is to shoot
you, but he won't. I really think he won't, if I am not there. Stay with
the villagers, with the wild people, and fear nothing. They will be more
awed by you than you can be frightened of them. Davidson's bound to turn
up before very long. Keep a look-out for a passing steamer. Think of
some sort of signal to call him."

She made no answer. The sense of the heavy, brooding silence in the
outside world seemed to enter and fill the room--the oppressive infinity
of it, without breath, without light. It was as if the heart of hearts
had ceased to beat and the end of all things had come.

"Have you understood? You are to run out of the house at once," Heyst
whispered urgently.

She lifted his hand to her lips and let it go. He was startled.

"Lena!" he cried out under his breath.

She was gone from his side. He dared not trust himself--no, not even to
the extent of a tender word.

Turning to go out he heard a thud somewhere in the house. To open the
door, he had first to lift the curtain; he did so with his face over his
shoulder. The merest trickle of light, coming through the keyhole and
one or two cracks, was enough for his eyes to see her plainly, all
black, down on her knees, with her head and arms flung on the foot of
the bed--all black in the desolation of a mourning sinner. What was
this? A suspicion that there were everywhere more things than he
could understand crossed Heyst's mind. Her arm, detached from the bed,
motioned him away. He obeyed, and went out, full of disquiet.

The curtain behind him had not ceased to tremble when she was up on her
feet, close against it, listening for sounds, for words, in a stooping,
tragic attitude of stealthy attention, one hand clutching at her breast
as if to compress, to make less loud the beating of her heart. Heyst
had caught Mr. Jones's secretary in the contemplation of his closed
writing-desk. Ricardo might have been meditating how to break into it;
but when he turned about suddenly, he showed so distorted a face that
it made Heyst pause in wonder at the upturned whites of the eyes, which
were blinking horribly, as if the man were inwardly convulsed.

"I thought you were never coming," Ricardo mumbled.

"I didn't know you were pressed for time. Even if your going away
depends on this conversation, as you say, I doubt if you are the men to
put to sea on such a night as this," said Heyst, motioning Ricardo to
precede him out of the house.

With feline undulations of hip and shoulder, the secretary left the
room at once. There was something cruel in the absolute dumbness of the
night. The great cloud covering half the sky hung right against one,
like an enormous curtain hiding menacing preparations of violence. As
the feet of the two men touched the ground, a rumble came from behind
it, preceded by a swift, mysterious gleam of light on the waters of the
bay.

"Ha!" said Ricardo. "It begins."

"It may be nothing in the end," observed Heyst, stepping along steadily.

"No! Let it come!" Ricardo said viciously. "I am in the humour for it!"

By the time the two men had reached the other bungalow, the far-off
modulated rumble growled incessantly, while pale lightning in waves of
cold fire flooded and ran off the island in rapid succession. Ricardo,
unexpectedly, dashed ahead up the steps and put his head through the
doorway.

"Here he is, governor! Keep him with you as long as you can--till you
hear me whistle. I am on the track."

He flung these words into the room with inconceivable speed, and stood
aside to let the visitor pass through the doorway; but he had to wait
an appreciable moment, because Heyst, seeing his purpose, had scornfully
slowed his pace. When Heyst entered the room it was with a smile, the
Heyst smile, lurking under his martial moustache.





CHAPTER ELEVEN

Two candles were burning on the stand-up desk. Mr. Jones, tightly
enfolded in an old but gorgeous blue silk dressing-gown, kept his
elbows close against his sides and his hands deeply plunged into the
extraordinarily deep pockets of the garment. The costume accentuated his
emaciation. He resembled a painted pole leaning against the edge of the
desk, with a dried head of dubious distinction stuck on the top of it.
Ricardo lounged in the doorway. Indifferent in appearance to what
was going on, he was biding his time. At a given moment, between two
flickers of lightning, he melted out of his frame into the outer
air. His disappearance was observed on the instant by Mr. Jones, who
abandoned his nonchalant immobility against the desk, and made a few
steps calculated to put him between Heyst and the doorway.

"It's awfully close," he remarked

Heyst, in the middle of the room, had made up his mind to speak plainly.

"We haven't met to talk about the weather. You favoured me earlier in
the day with a rather cryptic phrase about yourself. 'I am he that is,'
you said. What does that mean?"

Mr. Jones, without looking at Heyst, continued his absentminded
movements till, attaining the desired position, he brought his shoulders
with a thump against the wall near the door, and raised his head. In
the emotion of the decisive moment his haggard face glistened with
perspiration. Drops ran down his hollow cheeks and almost blinded the
spectral eyes in their bony caverns.

"It means that I am a person to be reckoned with. No--stop! Don't put
your hand into your pocket--don't."

His voice had a wild, unexpected shrillness. Heyst started, and there
ensued a moment of suspended animation, during which the thunder's
deep bass muttered distantly and the doorway to the right of Mr. Jones
flickered with bluish light. At last Heyst shrugged his shoulders; he
even looked at his hand. He didn't put it in his pocket, however. Mr.
Jones, glued against the wall, watched him raise both his hands to
the ends of his horizontal moustaches, and answered the note of
interrogation in his steady eyes.

"A matter of prudence," said Mr. Jones in his natural hollow tones, and
with a face of deathlike composure. "A man of your free life has surely
perceived that. You are a much talked-about man, Mr. Heyst--and though,
as far as I understand, you are accustomed to employ the subtler
weapons of intelligence, still I can't afford to take any risks of
the--er--grosser methods. I am not unscrupulous enough to be a match for
you in the use of intelligence; but I assure you, Mr. Heyst, that in
the other way you are no match for me. I have you covered at this
very moment. You have been covered ever since you entered this room.
Yes--from my pocket."

During this harangue Heyst looked deliberately over his shoulder,
stepped back a pace, and sat down on the end of the camp bedstead.
Leaning his elbow on one knee, he laid his cheek in the palm of his hand
and seemed to meditate on what he should say next. Mr. Jones, planted
against the wall, was obviously waiting for some sort of overture.
As nothing came, he resolved to speak himself; but he hesitated. For,
though he considered that the most difficult step had been taken, he
said to himself that every stage of progress required great caution,
lest the man in Ricardo's phraseology, should "start to prance"--which
would be most inconvenient. He fell back on a previous statement:

"And I am a person to be reckoned with."

The other man went on looking at the floor, as if he were alone in the
room. There was a pause.

"You have heard of me, then?" Heyst said at length, looking up.

"I should think so! We have been staying at Schomberg's hotel."

"Schom--" Heyst choked on the word.

"What's the matter, Mr. Heyst?"

"Nothing. Nausea," Heyst said resignedly. He resumed his former attitude
of meditative indifference. "What is this reckoning you are talking
about?" he asked after a time, in the quietest possible tone. "I don't
know you."

"It's obvious that we belong to the same--social sphere," began Mr.
Jones with languid irony. Inwardly he was as watchful as he could be.
"Something has driven you out--the originality of your ideas, perhaps.
Or your tastes."

Mr Jones indulged in one of his ghastly smiles. In repose his features
had a curious character of evil, exhausted austerity; but when he
smiled, the whole mask took on an unpleasantly infantile expression. A
recrudescence of the rolling thunder invaded the room loudly, and passed
into silence.

"You are not taking this very well," observed Mr. Jones. This was
what he said, but as a matter of fact he thought that the business
was shaping quite satisfactorily. The man, he said to himself, had no
stomach for a fight. Aloud he continued: "Come! You can't expect to have
it always your own way. You are a man of the world."

"And you?" Heyst interrupted him unexpectedly. "How do you define
yourself?"

"I, my dear sir? In one way I am--yes, I am the world itself, come to
pay you a visit. In another sense I am an outcast--almost an outlaw.
If you prefer a less materialistic view, I am a sort of fate--the
retribution that waits its time."

"I wish to goodness you were the commonest sort of ruffian!" said Heyst,
raising his equable gaze to Mr. Jones. "One would be able to talk to you
straight then, and hope for some humanity. As it is--"

"I dislike violence and ferocity of every sort as much as you do," Mr.
Jones declared, looking very languid as he leaned against the wall, but
speaking fairly loud. "You can ask my Martin if it is not so. This, Mr.
Heyst, is a soft age. It is also an age without prejudices. I've heard
that you are free from them yourself. You mustn't be shocked if I tell
you plainly that we are after your money--or I am, if you prefer to make
me alone responsible. Pedro, of course, knows no more of it than
any other animal would. Ricardo is of the faithful-retainer
class--absolutely identified with all my ideas, wishes, and even whims!"

Mr Jones pulled his left hand out of his pocket, got a handkerchief out
of another, and began to wipe the perspiration from his forehead, neck,
and chin. The excitement from which he suffered made his breathing
visible. In his long dressing-gown he had the air of a convalescent
invalid who had imprudently overtaxed his strength. Heyst,
broad-shouldered, robust, watched the operation from the end of the camp
bedstead, very calm, his hands on his knees.

"And by the by," he asked, "where is he now, that henchman of yours?
Breaking into my desk?"

"That would be crude. Still, crudeness is one of life's conditions."
There was the slightest flavour of banter in the tone of Ricardo's
governor. "Conceivable, but unlikely. Martin is a little crude; but you
are not, Mr. Heyst. To tell you the truth, I don't know precisely
where he is. He has been a little mysterious of late; but he has my
confidence. No, don't get up, Mr. Heyst!"

The viciousness of his spectral face was indescribable. Heyst, who had
moved a little, was surprised by the disclosure.

"It was not my intention," he said.

"Pray remain seated," Mr. Jones insisted in a languid voice, but with a
very determined glitter in his black eye-caverns.

"If you were more observant," said Heyst with dispassionate contempt,
"you would have known before I had been five minutes in the room that I
had no weapon of any sort on me."

"Possibly; but pray keep your hands still. They are very well where they
are. This is too big an affair for me to take any risks."

"Big? Too big?" Heyst repeated with genuine surprise. "Good Heavens!
Whatever you are looking for, there's very little of it here--very
little of anything."

"You would naturally say so, but that's not what we have heard,"
retorted Mr. Jones quickly, with a grin so ghastly that it was
impossible to think it voluntary.

Heyst's face had grown very gloomy. He knitted his brows.

"What have you heard?" he asked.

"A lot, Mr. Heyst--a lot," affirmed Mr. Jones. He was vying to recover
his manner of languid superiority. "We have heard, for instance, of a
certain Mr. Morrison, once your partner."

Heyst could not repress a slight movement.

"Aha!" said Mr. Jones, with a sort of ghostly glee on his face.

The muffled thunder resembled the echo of a distant cannonade below the
horizon, and the two men seemed to be listening to it in sullen silence.

"This diabolical calumny will end in actually and literally taking my
life from me," thought Heyst.

Then, suddenly, he laughed. Portentously spectral, Mr. Jones frowned at
the sound.

"Laugh as much as you please," he said. "I, who have been hounded out
from society by a lot of highly moral souls, can't see anything funny in
that story. But here we are, and you will now have to pay for your fun,
Mr. Heyst."

"You have heard a lot of ugly lies," observed Heyst. "Take my word for
it!"

"You would say so, of course--very natural. As a matter of fact I
haven't heard very much. Strictly speaking, it was Martin. He collects
information, and so on. You don't suppose I would talk to that Schomberg
animal more than I could help? It was Martin whom he took into his
confidence."

"The stupidity of that creature is so great that it becomes formidable,"
Heyst said, as if speaking to himself.

Involuntarily, his mind turned to the girl, wandering in the forest,
alone and terrified. Would he ever see her again? At that thought he
nearly lost his self-possession. But the idea that if she followed
his instructions those men were not likely to find her steadied him a
little. They did not know that the island had any inhabitants; and he
himself once disposed of, they would be too anxious to get away to waste
time hunting for a vanished girl.

All this passed through Heyst's mind in a flash, as men think in moments
of danger. He looked speculatively at Mr. Jones, who, of course, had
never for a moment taken his eyes from his intended victim. And, the
conviction came to Heyst that this outlaw from the higher spheres was an
absolutely hard and pitiless scoundrel.

Mr Jones's voice made him start.

"It would be useless, for instance, to tell me that your Chinaman has
run off with your money. A man living alone with a Chinaman on an island
takes care to conceal property of that kind so well that the devil
himself--"

"Certainly," Heyst muttered.

Again, with his left hand, Mr. Jones mopped his frontal bone, his
stalk-like neck, his razor jaws, his fleshless chin. Again his voice
faltered and his aspect became still more gruesomely malevolent as of a
wicked and pitiless corpse.

"I see what you mean," he cried, "but you mustn't put too much trust
in your ingenuity. You don't strike me as a very ingenious person, Mr.
Heyst. Neither am I. My talents lie another way. But Martin--"

"Who is now engaged in rifling my desk," interjected Heyst.

"I don't think so. What I was going to say is that Martin is much
cleverer than a Chinaman. Do you believe in racial superiority, Mr.
Heyst? I do, firmly. Martin is great at ferreting out such secrets as
yours, for instance."

"Secrets like mine!" repeated Heyst bitterly. "Well I wish him joy of
all he can ferret out!"

"That's very kind of you," remarked Mr. Jones. He was beginning to
be anxious for Martin's return. Of iron self-possession at the
gaming-table, fearless in a sudden affray, he found that this rather
special kind of work was telling on his nerves. "Keep still as you are!"
he cried sharply.

"I've told you I am not armed," said Heyst, folding his arms on his
breast.

"I am really inclined to believe that you are not," admitted Mr. Jones
seriously. "Strange!" he mused aloud, the caverns of his eyes turned
upon Heyst. Then briskly: "But my object is to keep you in this room.
Don't provoke me, by some unguarded movement, to smash your knee or do
something definite of that sort." He passed his tongue over his lips,
which were dry and black, while his forehead glistened with moisture. "I
don't know if it wouldn't be better to do it at once!"

"He who deliberates is lost," said Heyst with grave mockery.

Mr Jones disregarded the remark. He had the air of communing with
himself.

"Physically I am no match for you," he said slowly, his black gaze fixed
upon the man sitting on the end of the bed. "You could spring--"

"Are you trying to frighten yourself?" asked Heyst abruptly. "You don't
seem to have quite enough pluck for your business. Why don't you do it
at once?"

Mr Jones, taking violent offence, snorted like a savage skeleton.

"Strange as it may seem to you, it is because of my origin, my breeding,
my traditions, my early associations, and such-like trifles. Not
everybody can divest himself of the prejudices of a gentleman as easily
as you have done, Mr. Heyst. But don't worry about my pluck. If you were
to make a clean spring at me, you would receive in mid air, so to speak,
something that would make you perfectly harmless by the time you landed.
No, don't misapprehend us, Mr. Heyst. We are--er--adequate bandits; and
we are after the fruit of your labours as a--er--successful swindler.
It's the way of the world--gorge and disgorge!"

He leaned wearily the back of his head against the wall. His vitality
seemed exhausted. Even his sunken eyelids drooped within the bony
sockets. Only his thin, waspish, beautifully pencilled eyebrows, drawn
together a little, suggested the will and the power to sting--something
vicious, unconquerable, and deadly.

"Fruits! Swindler!" repeated Heyst, without heat, almost without
contempt. "You are giving yourself no end of trouble, you and your
faithful henchman, to crack an empty nut. There are no fruits here, as
you imagine. There are a few sovereigns, which you may have if you like;
and since you have called yourself a bandit--"

"Yaas!" drawled Mr. Jones. "That, rather than a swindler. Open warfare
at least!"

"Very good! Only let me tell you that there were never in the world two
more deluded bandits--never!"

Heyst uttered these words with such energy that Mr. Jones, stiffening
up, seemed to become thinner and taller in his metallic blue
dressing-gown against the whitewashed wall.

"Fooled by a silly, rascally innkeeper!" Heyst went on. "Talked over
like a pair of children with a promise of sweets!"

"I didn't talk with that disgusting animal," muttered Mr. Jones
sullenly; "but he convinced Martin, who is no fool."

"I should think he wanted very much to be convinced," said Heyst, with
the courteous intonation so well known in the Islands. "I don't want to
disturb your touching trust in your--your follower, but he must be the
most credulous brigand in existence. What do you imagine? If the story
of my riches were ever so true, do you think Schomberg would have
imparted it to you from sheer altruism? Is that the way of the world,
Mr. Jones?"

For a moment the lower jaw of Ricardo's gentleman dropped; but it came
up with a snap of scorn, and he said with spectral intensity:

"The beast is cowardly! He was frightened, and wanted to get rid of
us, if you want to know, Mr. Heyst. I don't know that the material
inducement was so very great, but I was bored, and we decided to accept
the bribe. I don't regret it. All my life I have been seeking new
impressions, and you have turned out to be something quite out of
the common. Martin, of course, looks to the material results. He's
simple--and faithful--and wonderfully acute."

"Ah, yes! He's on the track--" and now Heyst's speech had the character
of politely grim raillery--"but not sufficiently on the track, as
yet, to make it quite convenient to shoot me without more ado. Didn't
Schomberg tell you precisely where I conceal the fruit of my rapines?
Pah! Don't you know he would have told you anything, true or false, from
a very clear motive? Revenge! Mad hate--the unclean idiot!"

Mr Jones did not seem very much moved. On his right hand the doorway
incessantly flickered with distant lightning, and the continuous rumble
of thunder went on irritatingly, like the growl of an inarticulate giant
muttering fatuously.

Heyst overcame his immense repugnance to allude to her whose image,
cowering in the forest was constantly before his eyes, with all the
pathos and force of its appeal, august, pitiful, and almost holy to him.
It was in a hurried, embarrassed manner that he went on:

"If it had not been for that girl whom he persecuted with his insane and
odious passion, and who threw herself on my protection, he would never
have--but you know well enough!"

"I don't know!" burst out Mr. Jones with amazing heat. "That
hotel-keeper tried to talk to me once of some girl he had lost, but I
told him I didn't want to hear any of his beastly women stories. It had
something to do with you, had it?"

Heyst looked on serenely at this outburst, then lost his patience a
little.

"What sort of comedy is this? You don't mean to say that you didn't know
that I had--that there was a girl living with me here?"

One could see that the eyes of Mr. Jones had become fixed in the depths
of their black holes by the gleam of white becoming steady there. The
whole man seemed frozen still.

"Here! Here!" he screamed out twice. There was no mistaking his
astonishment, his shocked incredulity--something like frightened
disgust.

Heyst was disgusted also, but in another way. He too was incredulous.
He regretted having mentioned the girl; but the thing was done, his
repugnance had been overcome in the heat of his argument against the
absurd bandit.

"Is it possible that you didn't know of that significant fact?" he
inquired. "Of the only effective truth in the welter of silly lies that
deceived you so easily?"

"No, I didn't!" Mr. Jones shouted. "But Martin did!" he added in a faint
whisper, which Heyst's ears just caught and no more.

"I kept her out of sight as long as I could," said Heyst. "Perhaps, with
your bringing up, traditions, and so on; you will understand my reason
for it."

"He knew. He knew before!" Mr. Jones mourned in a hollow voice. "He knew
of her from the first!"

Backed hard against the wall he no longer watched Heyst. He had the air
of a man who had seen an abyss yawning under his feet.

"If I want to kill him, this is my time," thought Heyst; but he did not
move.

Next moment Mr. Jones jerked his head up, glaring with sardonic fury.

"I have a good mind to shoot you, you woman-ridden hermit, you man in
the moon, that can't exist without--no, it won't be you that I'll shoot.
It's the other woman-lover--the prevaricating, sly, low-class, amorous
cuss! And he shaved--shaved under my very nose. I'll shoot him!"

"He's gone mad," thought Heyst, startled by the spectre's sudden fury.

He felt himself more in danger, nearer death, than ever since he had
entered that room. An insane bandit is a deadly combination. He did not,
could not know that Mr. Jones was quick-minded enough to see already the
end of his reign over his excellent secretary's thoughts and feelings;
the coming failure of Ricardo's fidelity. A woman had intervened!
A woman, a girl, who apparently possessed the power to awaken
men's disgusting folly. Her power had been proved in two instances
already--the beastly innkeeper, and that man with moustaches, upon whom
Mr. Jones, his deadly right hand twitching in his pocket, glared more in
repulsion than in anger. The very object of the expedition was lost from
view in his sudden and overwhelming sense of utter insecurity. And
this made Mr. Jones feel very savage; but not against the man with the
moustaches. Thus, while Heyst was really feeling that his life was
not worth two minutes, purchase, he heard himself addressed with
no affectation of languid impertinence but with a burst of feverish
determination.

"Here! Let's call a truce!" said Mr. Jones.

Heyst's heart was too sick to allow him to smile.

"Have I been making war on you?" he asked wearily. "How do you expect
me to attach any meaning to your words?" he went on. "You seem to be a
morbid, senseless sort of bandit. We don't speak the same language. If I
were to tell you why I am here, talking to you, you wouldn't believe
me, because you would not understand me. It certainly isn't the love
of life, from which I have divorced myself long ago--not sufficiently,
perhaps; but if you are thinking of yours, then I repeat to you that it
has never been in danger from me. I am unarmed."

Mr Jones was biting his lower lip, in a deep meditation. It was only
towards the last that he looked at Heyst.

"Unarmed, eh?" Then he burst out violently: "I tell you, a gentleman is
no match for the common herd. And yet one must make use of the brutes.
Unarmed, eh? And I suppose that creature is of the commonest sort. You
could hardly have got her out of a drawing-room. Though they're all
alike, for that matter. Unarmed! It's a pity. I am in much greater
danger than you are or were--or I am much mistaken. But I am not--I know
my man!"

He lost his air of mental vacancy and broke out into shrill
exclamations. To Heyst they seemed madder than anything that had gone
before.

"On the track! On the scent!" he cried, forgetting himself to the point
of executing a dance of rage in the middle of the floor.

Heyst looked on, fascinated by this skeleton in a gay dressing-gown,
jerkily agitated like a grotesque toy on the end of an invisible string.
It became quiet suddenly.

"I might have smelt a rat! I always knew that this would be the danger."
He changed suddenly to a confidential tone, fixing his sepulchral stare
on Heyst. "And yet here I am, taken in by the fellow, like the veriest
fool. I've been always on the watch for some beastly influence, but here
I am, fairly caught. He shaved himself right in front of me and I never
guessed!"

The shrill laugh, following on the low tone of secrecy, sounded so
convincingly insane that Heyst got up as if moved by a spring. Mr. Jones
stepped back two paces, but displayed no uneasiness.

"It's as clear as daylight!" he uttered mournfully, and fell silent.

Behind him the doorway flickered lividly, and the sound as of a naval
action somewhere away on the horizon filled the breathless pause.
Mr. Jones inclined his head on his shoulder. His mood had completely
changed.

"What do you say, unarmed man? Shall we go and see what is detaining
my trusted Martin so long? He asked me to keep you engaged in friendly
conversation till he made a further examination of that track. Ha, ha,
ha!"

"He is no doubt ransacking my house," said Heyst.

He was bewildered. It seemed to him that all this was an
incomprehensible dream, or perhaps an elaborate other-world joke,
contrived by that spectre in a gorgeous dressing gown.

Mr Jones looked at him with a horrible, cadaverous smile of inscrutable
mockery, and pointed to the door. Heyst passed through it first. His
feelings had become so blunted that he did not care how soon he was shot
in the back.

"How oppressive the air is!" the voice of Mr. Jones said at his elbow.
"This stupid storm gets on my nerves. I would welcome some rain, though
it would be unpleasant to get wet. On the other hand, this exasperating
thunder has the advantage of covering the sound of our approach. The
lightning's not so convenient. Ah, your house is fully illuminated!
My clever Martin is punishing your stock of candles. He belongs to the
unceremonious classes, which are also unlovely, untrustworthy, and so
on."

"I left the candles burning," said Heyst, "to save him trouble."

"You really believed he would go to your house?" asked Mr. Jones with
genuine interest.

"I had that notion, strongly. I do believe he is there now."

"And you don't mind?"

"No!"

"You don't!" Mr. Jones stopped to wonder. "You are an extraordinary
man," he said suspiciously, and moved on, touching elbows with Heyst.

In the latter's breast dwelt a deep silence, the complete silence of
unused faculties. At this moment, by simply shouldering Mr. Jones, he
could have thrown him down and put himself, by a couple of leaps, beyond
the certain aim of the revolver; but he did not even think of that. His
very will seemed dead of weariness. He moved automatically, his head
low, like a prisoner captured by the evil power of a masquerading
skeleton out of a grave. Mr. Jones took charge of the direction. They
fetched a wide sweep. The echoes of distant thunder seemed to dog their
footsteps.

"By the by," said Mr. Jones, as if unable to restrain his curiosity,
"aren't you anxious about that--ouch!--that fascinating creature to whom
you owe whatever pleasure you can find in our visit?"

"I have placed her in safety," said Heyst. "I--I took good care of
that."

Mr Jones laid a hand on his arm.

"You have? Look! is that what you mean?"

Heyst raised his head. In the flicker of lightning the desolation of the
cleared ground on his left leaped out and sank into the night, together
with the elusive forms of things distant, pale, unearthly. But in the
brilliant square of the door he saw the girl--the woman he had longed to
see once more as if enthroned, with her hands on the arms of the chair.
She was in black; her face was white, her head dreamily inclined on her
breast. He saw her only as low as her knees. He saw her--there, in the
room, alive with a sombre reality. It was no mocking vision. She was not
in the forest--but there! She sat there in the chair, seemingly without
strength, yet without fear, tenderly stooping.

"Can you understand their power?" whispered the hot breath of Mr. Jones
into his ear. "Can there be a more disgusting spectacle? It's enough to
make the earth detestable. She seems to have found her affinity. Move
on closer. If I have to shoot you in the end, then perhaps you will die
cured."

Heyst obeyed the pushing pressure of a revolver barrel between his
shoulders. He felt it distinctly, but he did not feel the ground under
his feet. They found the steps, without his being aware that he was
ascending them--slowly, one by one. Doubt entered into him--a doubt of
a new kind, formless, hideous. It seemed to spread itself all over him,
enter his limbs, and lodge in his entrails. He stopped suddenly, with
a thought that he who experienced such a feeling had no business to
live--or perhaps was no longer living.

Everything--the bungalow, the forest, the open ground--trembled
incessantly, the earth, the sky itself, shivered all the time, and the
only thing immovable in the shuddering universe was the interior of the
lighted room and the woman in black sitting in the light of the eight
candle-flames. They flung around her an intolerable brilliance which
hurt his eyes, seemed to sear his very brain with the radiation of
infernal heat. It was some time before his scorched eyes made out
Ricardo seated on the floor at some little distance, his back to the
doorway, but only partly so; one side of his upturned face showing the
absorbed, all forgetful rapture of his contemplation.

The grip of Mr. Jones's hard claw drew Heyst back a little. In the roll
of thunder, swelling and subsiding, he whispered in his ear a sarcastic:
"Of course!"

A great shame descended upon Heyst--the shame of guilt, absurd and
maddening. Mr. Jones drew him still farther back into the darkness of
the veranda.

"This is serious," he went on, distilling his ghostly venom into Heyst's
very ear. "I had to shut my eyes many times to his little flings; but
this is serious. He has found his soul-mate. Mud souls, obscene and
cunning! Mud bodies, too--the mud of the gutter! I tell you, we are
no match for the vile populace. I, even I, have been nearly caught. He
asked me to detain you till he gave me the signal. It won't be you
that I'll have to shoot, but him. I wouldn't trust him near me for five
minutes after this!"

He shook Heyst's arm a little.

"If you had not happened to mention the creature, we should both have
been dead before morning. He would have stabbed you as you came down
the steps after leaving me and then he would have walked up to me and
planted the same knife between my ribs. He has no prejudices. The viler
the origin, the greater the freedom of these simple souls!"

He drew a cautious, hissing breath and added in an agitated murmur: "I
can see right into his mind, I have been nearly caught napping by his
cunning."

He stretched his neck to peer into the room from the side. Heyst, too,
made a step forward, under the slight impulse of that slender hand
clasping his hand with a thin, bony grasp.

"Behold!" the skeleton of the crazy bandit jabbered thinly into his ear
in spectral fellowship. "Behold the simple, Acis kissing the sandals
of the nymph, on the way to her lips, all forgetful, while the menacing
fife of Polyphemus already sounds close at hand--if he could only hear
it! Stoop a little."





CHAPTER TWELVE

On returning to the Heyst bungalow, rapid as if on wings, Ricardo
found Lena waiting for him. She was dressed in black; and at once his
uplifting exultation was replaced by an awed and quivering patience
before her white face, before the immobility of her reposeful pose, the
more amazing to him who had encountered the strength of her limbs and
the indomitable spirit in her body. She had come out after Heyst's
departure, and had sat down under the portrait to wait for the return of
the man of violence and death. While lifting the curtain, she felt the
anguish of her disobedience to her lover, which was soothed by a feeling
she had known before--a gentle flood of penetrating sweetness. She
was not automatically obeying a momentary suggestion, she was under
influences more deliberate, more vague, and of greater potency. She had
been prompted, not by her will, but by a force that was outside of her
and more worthy. She reckoned upon nothing definite; she had calculated
nothing. She saw only her purpose of capturing death--savage, sudden,
irresponsible death, prowling round the man who possessed her, death
embodied in the knife ready to strike into his heart. No doubt it had
been a sin to throw herself into his arms. With that inspiration
that descends at times from above for the good or evil of our common
mediocrity, she had a sense of having been for him only a violent and
sincere choice of curiosity and pity--a thing that passes. She did not
know him. If he were to go away from her and disappear, she would utter
no reproach, she would not resent it; for she would hold in herself the
impress of something most rare and precious--his embraces made her own
by her courage in saving his life.

All she thought of--the essence of her tremors, her flushes of heat, and
her shudders of cold--was the question how to get hold of that knife,
the mark and sign of stalking death. A tremor of impatience to clutch
the frightful thing, glimpsed once and unforgettable, agitated her
hands.

The instinctive flinging forward of these hands stopped Ricardo dead
short between the door and her chair, with the ready obedience of a
conquered man who can bide his time. Her success disconcerted her. She
listened to the man's impassioned transports of terrible eulogy and even
more awful declarations of love. She was even able to meet his eyes,
oblique, apt to glide away, throwing feral gleams of desire.

"No!" he was saying, after a fiery outpouring of words in which the most
ferocious phrases of love were mingled with wooing accents of entreaty.
"I will have no more of it! Don't you mistrust me. I am sober in my
talk. Feel how quietly my heart beats. Ten times today when you, you,
you, swam in my eye, I thought it would burst one of my ribs or leap
out of my throat. It has knocked itself dead and tired, waiting for this
evening, for this very minute. And now it can do no more. Feel how quiet
it is!"

He made a step forward, but she raised her clear voice commandingly:

"No nearer!"

He stopped with a smile of imbecile worship on his lips, and with the
delighted obedience of a man who could at any moment seize her in his
hands and dash her to the ground.

"Ah! If I had taken you by the throat this morning and had my way with
you, I should never have known what you are. And now I do. You are a
wonder! And so am I, in my way. I have nerve, and I have brains, too.
We should have been lost many times but for me. I plan--I plot for my
gentleman. Gentleman--pah! I am sick of him. And you are sick of yours,
eh? You, you!"

He shook all over; he cooed at her a string of endearing names, obscene
and tender, and then asked abruptly:

"Why don't you speak to me?"

"It's my part to listen," she said, giving him an inscrutable smile,
with a flush on her cheek and her lips cold as ice.

"But you will answer me?"

"Yes," she said, her eyes dilated as if with sudden interest.

"Where's that plunder? Do you know?"

"No! Not yet."

"But there is plunder stowed somewhere that's worth having?"

"Yes, I think so. But who knows?" she added after a pause.

"And who cares?" he retorted recklessly. "I've had enough of this
crawling on my belly. It's you who are my treasure. It's I who found you
out where a gentleman had buried you to rot for his accursed pleasure!"

He looked behind him and all around for a seat, then turned to her his
troubled eyes and dim smile.

"I am dog-tired," he said, and sat down on the floor. "I went tired this
morning, since I came in here and started talking to you--as tired as if
I had been pouring my life-blood here on these planks for you to dabble
your white feet in."

Unmoved, she nodded at him thoughtfully. Woman-like, all her faculties
remained concentrated on her heart's desire--on the knife--while the man
went on babbling insanely at her feet, ingratiating and savage, almost
crazy with elation. But he, too, was holding on to his purpose.

"For you! For you I will throw away money, lives--all the lives but
mine! What you want is a man, a master that will let you put the heel of
your shoe on his neck; not that skulker, who will get tired of you in a
year--and you of him. And then what? You are not the one to sit still;
neither am I. I live for myself, and you shall live for yourself,
too--not for a Swedish baron. They make a convenience of people like you
and me. A gentleman is better than an employer, but an equal partnership
against all the 'yporcrits is the thing for you and me. We'll go on
wandering the world over, you and I both free and both true. You are no
cage bird. We'll rove together, for we are of them that have no homes.
We are born rovers!"

She listened to him with the utmost attention, as if any unexpected
word might give her some sort of opening to get that dagger, that awful
knife--to disarm murder itself, pleading for her love at her feet. Again
she nodded at him thoughtfully, rousing a gleam in his yellow eyes,
yearning devotedly upon her face. When he hitched himself a little
closer, her soul had no movement of recoil. This had to be. Anything
had to be which would bring the knife within her reach. He talked more
confidentially now.

"We have met, and their time has come," he began, looking up into her
eyes. "The partnership between me and my gentleman has to be ripped up.
There's no room for him where we two are. Why, he would shoot me like a
dog! Don't you worry. This will settle it not later than tonight!"

He tapped his folded leg below the knee, and was surprised, flattered,
by the lighting up of her face, which stooped towards him eagerly and
remained expectant, the lips girlishly parted, red in the pale face, and
quivering in the quickened drawing of her breath.

"You marvel, you miracle, you man's luck and joy--one in a million! No,
the only one. You have found your man in me," he whispered tremulously.
"Listen! They are having their last talk together; for I'll do for your
gentleman, too, by midnight."

Without the slightest tremor she murmured, as soon as the tightening of
her breast had eased off and the words would come:

"I wouldn't be in too much of a hurry--with him."

The pause, the tone, had all the value of meditated advice.

"Good, thrifty girl!" he laughed low, with a strange feline gaiety,
expressed by the undulating movement of his shoulders and the sparkling
snap of his oblique eyes. "You are still thinking about the chance of
that swag. You'll make a good partner, that you will! And, I say, what a
decoy you will make! Jee-miny!"

He was carried away for a moment, but his face darkened swiftly.

"No! No reprieve. What do you think a fellow is--a scarecrow? All hat
and clothes and no feeling, no inside, no brain to make fancies for
himself? No!" he went on violently. "Never in his life will he go again
into that room of yours--never any more!"

A silence fell. He was gloomy with the torment of his jealousy, and did
not even look at her. She sat up and slowly, gradually, bent lower and
lower over him, as if ready to fall into his arms. He looked up at last,
and checked this droop unwittingly.

"Say! You, who are up to fighting a man with your bare hands, could
you--eh?--could you manage to stick one with a thing like that knife of
mine?"

She opened her eyes very wide and gave him a wild smile.

"How can I tell?" she whispered enchantingly. "Will you let me have a
look at it?"

Without taking his eyes from her face, he pulled the knife out of its
sheath--a short, broad, cruel double-edged blade with a bone handle--and
only then looked down at it.

"A good friend," he said simply. "Take it in your hand and feel the
balance," he suggested.

At the moment when she bent forward to receive it from him, there was
a flash of fire in her mysterious eyes--a red gleam in the white mist
which wrapped the promptings and longings of her soul. She had done it!
The very sting of death was in her hands, the venom of the viper in her
paradise, extracted, safe in her possession--and the viper's head all
but lying under her heel. Ricardo, stretched on the mats of the floor,
crept closer and closer to the chair in which she sat.

All her thoughts were busy planning how to keep possession of that
weapon which had seemed to have drawn into itself every danger and
menace on the death-ridden earth. She said with a low laugh, the
exultation in which he failed to recognize:

"I didn't think that you would ever trust me with that thing!"

"Why not?"

"For fear I should suddenly strike you with it."

"What for? For this morning's work? Oh, no! There's no spite in you for
that. You forgave me. You saved me. You got the better of me, too. And
anyhow, what good would it be?"

"No, no good," she admitted.

In her heart she felt that she would not know how to do it; that if it
came to a struggle, she would have to drop the dagger and fight with her
hands.

"Listen. When we are going about the world together, you shall always
call me husband. Do you hear?"

"Yes," she said bracing herself for the contest, in whatever shape it
was coming.

The knife was lying in her lap. She let it slip into the fold of her
dress, and laid her forearms with clasped fingers over her knees, which
she pressed desperately together. The dreaded thing was out of sight at
last. She felt a dampness break out all over her.

"I am not going to hide you, like that good-for-nothing, finicky, sneery
gentleman. You shall be my pride and my chum. Isn't that better than
rotting on an island for the pleasure of a gentleman, till he gives you
the chuck?"

"I'll be anything you like," she said.

In his intoxication he crept closer with every word she uttered, with
every movement she made.

"Give your foot," he begged in a timid murmur, and in the full
consciousness of his power.

Anything! Anything to keep murder quiet and disarmed till strength had
returned to her limbs and she could make up her mind what to do. Her
fortitude had been shaken by the very facility of success that had come
to her. She advanced her foot forward a little from under the hem of her
skirt; and he threw himself on it greedily. She was not even aware of
him. She had thought of the forest, to which she had been told to run.
Yes, the forest--that was the place for her to carry off the terrible
spoil, the sting of vanquished death. Ricardo, clasping her ankle,
pressed his lips time after time to the instep, muttering gasping words
that were like sobs, making little noises that resembled the sounds of
grief and distress. Unheard by them both, the thunder growled distantly
with angry modulations of it's tremendous voice, while the world outside
shuddered incessantly around the dead stillness of the room where the
framed profile of Heyst's father looked severely into space.

Suddenly Ricardo felt himself spurned by the foot he had been
cherishing--spurned with a push of such violence into the very hollow of
his throat that it swung him back instantly into an upright position on
his knees. He read his danger in the stony eyes of the girl; and in
the very act of leaping to his feet he heard sharply, detached on the
comminatory voice of the storm the brief report of a shot which half
stunned him, in the manner of a blow. He turned his burning head, and
saw Heyst towering in the doorway. The thought that the beggar had
started to prance darted through his mind. For a fraction of a second
his distracted eyes sought for his weapon all over the floor. He
couldn't see it.

"Stick him, you!" he called hoarsely to the girl, and dashed headlong
for the door of the compound.

While he thus obeyed the instinct of self-preservation, his reason was
telling him that he could not possibly reach it alive. It flew open,
however, with a crash, before his launched weight, and instantly he
swung it to behind him. There, his shoulder leaning against it, his
hands clinging to the handle, dazed and alone in the night full of
shudders and muttered menaces, he tried to pull himself together. He
asked himself if he had been shot at more than once. His shoulder was
wet with the blood trickling from his head. Feeling above his ear, he
ascertained that it was only a graze, but the shock of the surprise had
unmanned him for the moment.

What the deuce was the governor about to let the beggar break loose like
this? Or--was the governor dead, perhaps?

The silence within the room awed him. Of going back there could be no
question.

"But she knows how to take care of her self," he muttered.

She had his knife. It was she now who was deadly, while he was disarmed,
no good for the moment. He stole away from the door, staggering, the
warm trickle running down his neck, to find out what had become of the
governor and to provide himself with a firearm from the armoury in the
trunks.





CHAPTER THIRTEEN

Mr Jones, after firing his shot over Heyst's shoulder, had thought it
proper to dodge away. Like the spectre he was, he noiselessly vanished
from the veranda. Heyst stumbled into the room and looked around. All
the objects in there--the books, portrait on the wall--seemed shadowy,
unsubstantial, the dumb accomplices of an amazing dream-plot ending in
an illusory effect of awakening and the impossibility of ever closing
his eyes again. With dread he forced himself to look at the girl. Still
in the chair, she was leaning forward far over her knees, and had hidden
her face in her hands. Heyst remembered Wang suddenly. How clear all
this was--and how extremely amusing! Very.

She sat up a little, then leaned back, and taking her hands from her
face, pressed both of them to her breast as if moved to the heart by
seeing him there looking at her with a black, horror-struck curiosity.
He would have pitied her, if the triumphant expression of her face had
not given him a shock which destroyed the balance of his feelings. She
spoke with an accent of wild joy:

"I knew you would come back in time! You are safe now. I have done it!
I would never, never have let him--" Her voice died out, while her eyes
shone at him as when the sun breaks through a mist. "Never get it back.
Oh, my beloved!"

He bowed his head gravely, and said in his polite. Heystian tone:

"No doubt you acted from instinct. Women have been provided with their
own weapon. I was a disarmed man, I have been a disarmed man all my life
as I see it now. You may glory in your resourcefulness and your profound
knowledge of yourself; but I may say that the other attitude, suggestive
of shame, had its charm. For you are full of charm!"

The exultation vanished from her face.

"You mustn't make fun of me now. I know no shame. I was thanking God
with all my sinful heart for having been able to do it--for giving you
to me in that way--oh, my beloved--all my own at last!"

He stared as if mad. Timidly she tried to excuse herself for disobeying
his directions for her safety. Every modulation of her enchanting voice
cut deep into his very breast, so that he could hardly understand the
words for the sheer pain of it. He turned his back on her; but a sudden
drop, an extraordinary faltering of her tone, made him spin round. On
her white neck her pale head dropped as in a cruel drought a withered
flower droops on its stalk. He caught his breath, looked at her closely,
and seemed to read some awful intelligence in her eyes. At the moment
when her eyelids fell as if smitten from above by an the gleam of
old silver familiar to him from boyhood, the very invisible power, he
snatched her up bodily out of the chair, and disregarding an unexpected
metallic clatter on the floor, carried her off into the other room. The
limpness of her body frightened him. Laying her down on the bed, he
ran out again, seized a four-branched candlestick on the table, and ran
back, tearing down with a furious jerk the curtain that swung stupidly
in his way, but after putting the candlestick on the table by the bed,
he remained absolutely idle. There did not seem anything more for him
to do. Holding his chin in his hand he looked down intently at her still
face.

"Has she been stabbed with this thing?" asked Davidson, whom suddenly he
saw standing by his side and holding up Ricardo's dagger to his sight.
Heyst uttered no word of recognition or surprise. He gave Davidson only
a dumb look of unutterable awe, then, as if possessed with a sudden
fury, started tearing open the front of the girls dress. She remained
insensible under his hands, and Heyst let out a groan which made
Davidson shudder inwardly the heavy plaint of a man who falls clubbed in
the dark.

They stood side by side, looking mournfully at the little black hole
made by Mr. Jones's bullet under the swelling breast of a dazzling and
as it were sacred whiteness. It rose and fell slightly--so slightly that
only the eyes of the lover could detect the faint stir of life. Heyst,
calm and utterly unlike himself in the face, moving about noiselessly,
prepared a wet cloth, and laid it on the insignificant wound,
round which there was hardly a trace of blood to mar the charm, the
fascination, of that mortal flesh.

Her eyelids fluttered. She looked drowsily about, serene, as if fatigued
only by the exertions of her tremendous victory, capturing the very
sting of death in the service of love. But her eyes became very
wide awake when they caught sight of Ricardo's dagger, the spoil of
vanquished death, which Davidson was still holding, unconsciously.

"Give it to me," she said. "It's mine."

Davidson put the symbol of her victory into her feeble hands extended to
him with the innocent gesture of a child reaching eagerly for a toy.

"For you," she gasped, turning her eyes to Heyst. "Kill nobody."

"No," said Heyst, taking the dagger and laying it gently on her breast,
while her hands fell powerless by her side.

The faint smile on her deep-cut lips waned, and her head sank deep into
the pillow, taking on the majestic pallor and immobility of marble.
But over the muscles, which seemed set in their transfigured beauty for
ever, passed a slight and awful tremor. With an amazing strength she
asked loudly:

"What's the matter with me?"

"You have been shot, dear Lena," Heyst said in a steady voice, while
Davidson, at the question, turned away and leaned his forehead against
the post of the foot of the bed.

"Shot? I did think, too, that something had struck me."

Over Samburan the thunder had ceased to growl at last, and the world of
material forms shuddered no more under the emerging stars. The spirit
of the girl which was passing away from under them clung to her triumph
convinced of the reality of her victory over death.

"No more," she muttered. "There will be no more! Oh, my beloved," she
cried weakly, "I've saved you! Why don't you take me into your arms and
carry me out of this lonely place?"

Heyst bent low over her, cursing his fastidious soul, which even at that
moment kept the true cry of love from his lips in its infernal mistrust
of all life. He dared not touch her and she had no longer the strength
to throw her arms about his neck.

"Who else could have done this for you?" she whispered gloriously.

"No one in the world," he answered her in a murmur of unconcealed
despair.

She tried to raise herself, but all she could do was to lift her head
a little from the pillow. With a terrible and gentle movement, Heyst
hastened to slip his arm under her neck. She felt relieved at once of
an intolerable weight, and was content to surrender to him the infinite
weariness of her tremendous achievement. Exulting, she saw herself
extended on the bed, in a black dress, and profoundly at peace, while,
stooping over her with a kindly, playful smile, he was ready to lift
her up in his firm arms and take her into the sanctuary of his innermost
heart--for ever! The flush of rapture flooding her whole being broke out
in a smile of innocent, girlish happiness; and with that divine radiance
on her lips she breathed her last--triumphant, seeking for his glance in
the shades of death.





CHAPTER FOURTEEN

 "Yes, Excellency," said Davidson in his placid voice; "there are more dead in this affair--more white people, I mean--than have been killed in many of the battles in the last Achin war."

Davidson was talking with an Excellency, because what was alluded to in
conversation as "the mystery of Samburan" had caused such a sensation in
the Archipelago that even those in the highest spheres were anxious to
hear something at first hand. Davidson had been summoned to an audience.
It was a high official on his tour.

"You knew the late Baron Heyst well?"

"The truth is that nobody out here can boast of having known him well,"
said Davidson. "He was a queer chap. I doubt if he himself knew how
queer he was. But everybody was aware that I was keeping my eye on him
in a friendly way. And that's how I got the warning which made me turn
round in my tracks. In the middle of my trip and steam back to Samburan,
where, I am grieved to say, I arrived too late."

Without enlarging very much, Davidson explained to the attentive
Excellency how a woman, the wife of a certain hotel-keeper named
Schomberg, had overheard two card-sharping rascals making inquiries from
her husband as to the exact position of the island. She caught only a
few words referring to the neighbouring volcano, but there were enough
to arouse her suspicions--"which," went on Davidson, "she imparted to
me, your Excellency. They were only too well founded!"

"That was very clever of her," remarked the great man.

"She's much cleverer than people have any conception of," said Davidson.

But he refrained from disclosing to the Excellency the real cause which
had sharpened Mrs. Schomberg's wits. The poor woman was in mortal terror
of the girl being brought back within reach of her infatuated Wilhelm.
Davidson only said that her agitation had impressed him; but he
confessed that while going back, he began to have his doubts as to there
being anything in it.

"I steamed into one of those silly thunderstorms that hang about the
volcano, and had some trouble in making the island," narrated Davidson.
"I had to grope my way dead slow into Diamond Bay. I don't suppose that
anybody, even if looking out for me, could have heard me let go the
anchor."

He admitted that he ought to have gone ashore at once; but everything
was perfectly dark and absolutely quiet. He felt ashamed of his
impulsiveness. What a fool he would have looked, waking up a man in the
middle of the night just to ask him if he was all right! And then the
girl being there, he feared that Heyst would look upon his visit as an
unwarrantable intrusion.

The first intimation he had of there being anything wrong was a big
white boat, adrift, with the dead body of a very hairy man inside,
bumping against the bows of his steamer. Then indeed he lost no time in
going ashore--alone, of course, from motives of delicacy.

"I arrived in time to see that poor girl die, as I have told your
Excellency," pursued Davidson. "I won't tell you what a time I had with
him afterwards. He talked to me. His father seems to have been a crank,
and to have upset his head when he was young. He was a queer chap.
Practically the last words he said to me, as we came out on the veranda,
were:

"'Ah, Davidson, woe to the man whose heart has not learned while young
to hope, to love--and to put its trust in life!'

"As we stood there, just before I left him, for he said he wanted to be
alone with his dead for a time, we heard a snarly sort of voice near the
bushes by the shore calling out:

"'Is that you, governor?'

"'Yes, it's me.'

"'Jeeminy! I thought the beggar had done for you. He has started
prancing and nearly had me. I have been dodging around, looking for you
ever since.'

"'Well, here I am,' suddenly screamed the other voice, and then a shot
rang out.

"'This time he has not missed him,' Heyst said to me bitterly, and went
back into the house.

"I returned on board as he had insisted I should do. I didn't want
to intrude on his grief. Later, about five in the morning, some of my
calashes came running to me, yelling that there was a fire ashore. I
landed at once, of course. The principal bungalow was blazing. The
heat drove us back. The other two houses caught one after another like
kindling-wood. There was no going beyond the shore end of the jetty till
the afternoon."

Davidson sighed placidly.

"I suppose you are certain that Baron Heyst is dead?"

"He is--ashes, your Excellency," said Davidson, wheezing a little; "he
and the girl together. I suppose he couldn't stand his thoughts before
her dead body--and fire purifies everything. That Chinaman of whom I
told your Excellency helped me to investigate next day, when the
embers got cooled a little. We found enough to be sure. He's not a bad
Chinaman. He told me that he had followed Heyst and the girl through the
forest from pity, and partly out of curiosity. He watched the house till
he saw Heyst go out, after dinner, and Ricardo come back alone. While he
was dodging there, it occurred to him that he had better cast the boat
adrift, for fear those scoundrels should come round by water and bombard
the village from the sea with their revolvers and Winchesters. He judged
that they were devils enough for anything. So he walked down the wharf
quietly; and as he got into the boat, to cast her off, that hairy man
who, it seems, was dozing in her, jumped up growling, and Wang shot him
dead. Then he shoved the boat off as far as he could and went away."

There was a pause. Presently Davidson went on, in his tranquil manner:

"Let Heaven look after what has been purified. The wind and rain will
take care of the ashes. The carcass of that follower, secretary, or
whatever the unclean ruffian called himself, I left where it lay, to
swell and rot in the sun. His principal had shot him neatly through the
head. Then, apparently, this Jones went down to the wharf to look for
the boat and for the hairy man. I suppose he tumbled into the water by
accident--or perhaps not by accident. The boat and the man were gone,
and the scoundrel saw himself alone, his game clearly up, and fairly
trapped. Who knows? The water's very clear there, and I could see him
huddled up on the bottom, between two piles, like a heap of bones in a
blue silk bag, with only the head and the feet sticking out. Wang was
very pleased when he discovered him. That made everything safe, he said,
and he went at once over the hill to fetch his Alfuro woman back to the
hut."

Davidson took out his handkerchief to wipe the perspiration off his
forehead.

"And then, your Excellency, I went away. There was nothing to be done
there."

"Clearly!" assented the Excellency.

Davidson, thoughtful, seemed to weigh the matter in his mind, and then
murmured with placid sadness:

"Nothing!"

October 1912--May 1914




                                WITHIN THE
                                  TIDES


                                  TALES

    . . . Go, make you ready.

                                                  HAMLET _to the_ PLAYERS.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                * * * * *

                             LONDON & TORONTO
                          J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
                        PARIS: J. M. DENT ET. FILS

                                * * * * *

FIRST EDITION       _February_ 1915
REPRINTED           _April_ 1915; _August_ 1919

                                * * * * *

                                    To
                       MR. AND MRS. RALPH WEDGWOOD

                THIS SHEAF OF CARE-FREE ANTE-BELLUM PAGES
               IN GRATITUDE FOR THEIR CHARMING HOSPITALITY
                        IN THE LAST MONTH OF PEACE




Contents

                                      PAGE
THE PLANTER OF MALATA                    3
THE PARTNER                            119
THE INN OF THE TWO WITCHES             175
BECAUSE OF THE DOLLARS                 223

THE PLANTER OF MALATA


CHAPTER I


In the private editorial office of the principal newspaper in a great
colonial city two men were talking.  They were both young.  The stouter
of the two, fair, and with more of an urban look about him, was the
editor and part-owner of the important newspaper.

The others name was Renouard.  That he was exercised in his mind about
something was evident on his fine bronzed face.  He was a lean, lounging,
active man.  The journalist continued the conversation.

And so you were dining yesterday at old Dunsters.

He used the word old not in the endearing sense in which it is sometimes
applied to intimates, but as a matter of sober fact.  The Dunster in
question was old.  He had been an eminent colonial statesman, but had now
retired from active politics after a tour in Europe and a lengthy stay in
England, during which he had had a very good press indeed.  The colony
was proud of him.

Yes.  I dined there, said Renouard.  Young Dunster asked me just as I
was going out of his office.  It seemed to be like a sudden thought.  And
yet I cant help suspecting some purpose behind it.  He was very
pressing.  He swore that his uncle would be very pleased to see me.  Said
his uncle had mentioned lately that the granting to me of the Malata
concession was the last act of his official life.

Very touching.  The old boy sentimentalises over the past now and then.

I really dont know why I accepted, continued the other.  Sentiment
does not move me very easily.  Old Dunster was civil to me of course, but
he did not even inquire how I was getting on with my silk plants.  Forgot
there was such a thing probably.  I must say there were more people there
than I expected to meet.  Quite a big party.

I was asked, remarked the newspaper man.  Only I couldnt go.  But
when did you arrive from Malata?

I arrived yesterday at daylight.  I am anchored out there in the bayoff
Garden Point.  I was in Dunsters office before he had finished reading
his letters.  Have you ever seen young Dunster reading his letters?  I
had a glimpse of him through the open door.  He holds the paper in both
hands, hunches his shoulders up to his ugly ears, and brings his long
nose and his thick lips on to it like a sucking apparatus.  A commercial
monster.

Here we dont consider him a monster, said the newspaper man looking at
his visitor thoughtfully.

Probably not.  You are used to see his face and to see other faces.  I
dont know how it is that, when I come to town, the appearance of the
people in the street strike me with such force.  They seem so awfully
expressive.

And not charming.

Wellno.  Not as a rule.  The effect is forcible without being clear. . . .
I know that you think its because of my solitary manner of life away
there.

Yes.  I do think so.  It is demoralising.  You dont see any one for
months at a stretch.  Youre leading an unhealthy life.

The other hardly smiled and murmured the admission that true enough it
was a good eleven months since he had been in town last.

You see, insisted the other.  Solitude works like a sort of poison.
And then you perceive suggestions in facesmysterious and forcible, that
no sound man would be bothered with.  Of course you do.

Geoffrey Renouard did not tell his journalist friend that the suggestions
of his own face, the face of a friend, bothered him as much as the
others.  He detected a degrading quality in the touches of age which
every day adds to a human countenance.  They moved and disturbed him,
like the signs of a horrible inward travail which was frightfully
apparent to the fresh eye he had brought from his isolation in Malata,
where he had settled after five strenuous years of adventure and
exploration.

Its a fact, he said, that when I am at home in Malata I see no one
consciously.  I take the plantation boys for granted.

Well, and we here take the people in the streets for granted.  And
thats sanity.

The visitor said nothing to this for fear of engaging a discussion.  What
he had come to seek in the editorial office was not controversy, but
information.  Yet somehow he hesitated to approach the subject.  Solitary
life makes a man reticent in respect of anything in the nature of gossip,
which those to whom chatting about their kind is an everyday exercise
regard as the commonest use of speech.

You very busy? he asked.

The Editor making red marks on a long slip of printed paper threw the
pencil down.

No.  I am done.  Social paragraphs.  This office is the place where
everything is known about everybodyincluding even a great deal of
nobodies.  Queer fellows drift in and out of this room.  Waifs and strays
from home, from up-country, from the Pacific.  And, by the way, last time
you were here you picked up one of that sort for your assistantdidnt
you?

I engaged an assistant only to stop your preaching about the evils of
solitude, said Renouard hastily; and the pressman laughed at the
half-resentful tone.  His laugh was not very loud, but his plump person
shook all over.  He was aware that his younger friends deference to his
advice was based only on an imperfect belief in his wisdomor his
sagacity.  But it was he who had first helped Renouard in his plans of
exploration: the five-years programme of scientific adventure, of work,
of danger and endurance, carried out with such distinction and rewarded
modestly with the lease of Malata island by the frugal colonial
government.  And this reward, too, had been due to the journalists
advocacy with word and penfor he was an influential man in the
community.  Doubting very much if Renouard really liked him, he was
himself without great sympathy for a certain side of that man which he
could not quite make out.  He only felt it obscurely to be his real
personalitythe trueand, perhaps, the absurd.  As, for instance, in that
case of the assistant.  Renouard had given way to the arguments of his
friend and backerthe argument against the unwholesome effect of
solitude, the argument for the safety of companionship even if
quarrelsome.  Very well.  In this docility he was sensible and even
likeable.  But what did he do next?  Instead of taking counsel as to the
choice with his old backer and friend, and a man, besides, knowing
everybody employed and unemployed on the pavements of the town, this
extraordinary Renouard suddenly and almost surreptitiously picked up a
fellowGod knows whoand sailed away with him back to Malata in a hurry;
a proceeding obviously rash and at the same time not quite straight.
That was the sort of thing.  The secretly unforgiving journalist laughed
a little longer and then ceased to shake all over.

Oh, yes.  About that assistant of yours. . . .

What about him, said Renouard, after waiting a while, with a shadow of
uneasiness on his face.

Have you nothing to tell me of him?

Nothing except. . . .  Incipient grimness vanished out of Renouards
aspect and his voice, while he hesitated as if reflecting seriously
before he changed his mind.  No.  Nothing whatever.

You havent brought him along with you by chancefor a change.

The Planter of Malata stared, then shook his head, and finally murmured
carelessly: I think hes very well where he is.  But I wish you could
tell me why young Dunster insisted so much on my dining with his uncle
last night.  Everybody knows I am not a society man.

The Editor exclaimed at so much modesty.  Didnt his friend know that he
was their one and only explorerthat he was the man experimenting with
the silk plant. . . .

Still, that doesnt tell me why I was invited yesterday.  For young
Dunster never thought of this civility before. . . .

Our Willie, said the popular journalist, never does anything without a
purpose, thats a fact.

And to his uncles house too!

He lives there.

Yes.  But he might have given me a feed somewhere else.  The
extraordinary part is that the old man did not seem to have anything
special to say.  He smiled kindly on me once or twice, and that was all.
It was quite a party, sixteen people.

The Editor then, after expressing his regret that he had not been able to
come, wanted to know if the party had been entertaining.

Renouard regretted that his friend had not been there.  Being a man whose
business or at least whose profession was to know everything that went on
in this part of the globe, he could probably have told him something of
some people lately arrived from home, who were amongst the guests.  Young
Dunster (Willie), with his large shirt-front and streaks of white skin
shining unpleasantly through the thin black hair plastered over the top
of his head, bore down on him and introduced him to that party, as if he
had been a trained dog or a child phenomenon.  Decidedly, he said, he
disliked Willieone of these large oppressive men. . . .

A silence fell, and it was as if Renouard were not going to say anything
more when, suddenly, he came out with the real object of his visit to the
editorial room.

They looked to me like people under a spell.

The Editor gazed at him appreciatively, thinking that, whether the effect
of solitude or not, this was a proof of a sensitive perception of the
expression of faces.

You omitted to tell me their name, but I can make a guess.  You mean
Professor Moorsom, his daughter and sisterdont you?

Renouard assented.  Yes, a white-haired lady.  But from his silence, with
his eyes fixed, yet avoiding his friend, it was easy to guess that it was
not in the white-haired lady that he was interested.

Upon my word, he said, recovering his usual bearing.  It looks to me
as if I had been asked there only for the daughter to talk to me.

He did not conceal that he had been greatly struck by her appearance.
Nobody could have helped being impressed.  She was different from
everybody else in that house, and it was not only the effect of her
London clothes.  He did not take her down to dinner.  Willie did that.
It was afterwards, on the terrace. . . .

The evening was delightfully calm.  He was sitting apart and alone, and
wishing himself somewhere elseon board the schooner for choice, with the
dinner-harness off.  He hadnt exchanged forty words altogether during
the evening with the other guests.  He saw her suddenly all by herself
coming towards him along the dimly lighted terrace, quite from a
distance.

She was tall and supple, carrying nobly on her straight body a head of a
character which to him appeared peculiar, somethingwellpagan, crowned
with a great wealth of hair.  He had been about to rise, but her decided
approach caused him to remain on the seat.  He had not looked much at her
that evening.  He had not that freedom of gaze acquired by the habit of
society and the frequent meetings with strangers.  It was not shyness,
but the reserve of a man not used to the world and to the practice of
covert staring, with careless curiosity.  All he had captured by his
first, keen, instantly lowered, glance was the impression that her hair
was magnificently red and her eyes very black.  It was a troubling
effect, but it had been evanescent; he had forgotten it almost till very
unexpectedly he saw her coming down the terrace slow and eager, as if she
were restraining herself, and with a rhythmic upward undulation of her
whole figure.  The light from an open window fell across her path, and
suddenly all that mass of arranged hair appeared incandescent, chiselled
and fluid, with the daring suggestion of a helmet of burnished copper and
the flowing lines of molten metal.  It kindled in him an astonished
admiration.  But he said nothing of it to his friend the Editor.  Neither
did he tell him that her approach woke up in his brain the image of
loves infinite grace and the sense of the inexhaustible joy that lives
in beauty.  No!  What he imparted to the Editor were no emotions, but
mere facts conveyed in a deliberate voice and in uninspired words.

That young lady came and sat down by me.  She said: Are you French, Mr.
Renouard?

He had breathed a whiff of perfume of which he said nothing eitherof
some perfume he did not know.  Her voice was low and distinct.  Her
shoulders and her bare arms gleamed with an extraordinary splendour, and
when she advanced her head into the light he saw the admirable contour of
the face, the straight fine nose with delicate nostrils, the exquisite
crimson brushstroke of the lips on this oval without colour.  The
expression of the eyes was lost in a shadowy mysterious play of jet and
silver, stirring under the red coppery gold of the hair as though she had
been a being made of ivory and precious metals changed into living
tissue.

. . . I told her my people were living in Canada, but that I was brought
up in England before coming out here.  I cant imagine what interest she
could have in my history.

And you complain of her interest?

The accent of the all-knowing journalist seemed to jar on the Planter of
Malata.

No! he said, in a deadened voice that was almost sullen.  But after a
short silence he went on.  Very extraordinary.  I told her I came out to
wander at large in the world when I was nineteen, almost directly after I
left school.  It seems that her late brother was in the same school a
couple of years before me.  She wanted me to tell her what I did at first
when I came out here; what other men found to do when they came outwhere
they went, what was likely to happen to themas if I could guess and
foretell from my experience the fates of men who come out here with a
hundred different projects, for hundreds of different reasonsfor no
reason but restlessnesswho come, and go, and disappear!  Preposterous.
She seemed to want to hear their histories.  I told her that most of them
were not worth telling.

The distinguished journalist leaning on his elbow, his head resting
against the knuckles of his left hand, listened with great attention, but
gave no sign of that surprise which Renouard, pausing, seemed to expect.

You know something, the latter said brusquely.  The all-knowing man
moved his head slightly and said, Yes.  But go on.

Its just this.  There is no more to it.  I found myself talking to her
of my adventures, of my early days.  It couldnt possibly have interested
her.  Really, he cried, this is most extraordinary.  Those people have
something on their minds.  We sat in the light of the window, and her
father prowled about the terrace, with his hands behind his back and his
head drooping.  The white-haired lady came to the dining-room window
twiceto look at us I am certain.  The other guests began to go awayand
still we sat there.  Apparently these people are staying with the
Dunsters.  It was old Mrs. Dunster who put an end to the thing.  The
father and the aunt circled about as if they were afraid of interfering
with the girl.  Then she got up all at once, gave me her hand, and said
she hoped she would see me again.

While he was speaking Renouard saw again the sway of her figure in a
movement of grace and strengthfelt the pressure of her handheard the
last accents of the deep murmur that came from her throat so white in the
light of the window, and remembered the black rays of her steady eyes
passing off his face when she turned away.  He remembered all this
visually, and it was not exactly pleasurable.  It was rather startling
like the discovery of a new faculty in himself.  There are faculties one
would rather do withoutsuch, for instance, as seeing through a stone
wall or remembering a person with this uncanny vividness.  And what about
those two people belonging to her with their air of expectant solicitude!
Really, those figures from home got in front of one.  In fact, their
persistence in getting between him and the solid forms of the everyday
material world had driven Renouard to call on his friend at the office.
He hoped that a little common, gossipy information would lay the ghost of
that unexpected dinner-party.  Of course the proper person to go to would
have been young Dunster, but, he couldnt stand Willie Dunsternot at any
price.

In the pause the Editor had changed his attitude, faced his desk, and
smiled a faint knowing smile.

Striking girleh? he said.

The incongruity of the word was enough to make one jump out of the chair.
Striking!  That girl striking!  Stri . . .!  But Renouard restrained his
feelings.  His friend was not a person to give oneself away to.  And,
after all, this sort of speech was what he had come there to hear.  As,
however, he had made a movement he re-settled himself comfortably and
said, with very creditable indifference, that yesshe was, rather.
Especially amongst a lot of over-dressed frumps.  There wasnt one woman
under forty there.

Is that the way to speak of the cream of our society; the top of the
basket, as the French say, the Editor remonstrated with mock
indignation.  You arent moderate in your expressionsyou know.

I express myself very little, interjected Renouard seriously.

I will tell you what you are.  You are a fellow that doesnt count the
cost.  Of course you are safe with me, but will you never learn. . . .

What struck me most, interrupted the other, is that she should pick me
out for such a long conversation.

Thats perhaps because you were the most remarkable of the men there.

Renouard shook his head.

This shot doesnt seem to me to hit the mark, he said calmly.  Try
again.

Dont you believe me?  Oh, you modest creature.  Well, let me assure you
that under ordinary circumstances it would have been a good shot.  You
are sufficiently remarkable.  But you seem a pretty acute customer too.
The circumstances are extraordinary.  By Jove they are!

He mused.  After a time the Planter of Malata dropped a negligent

And you know them.

And I know them, assented the all-knowing Editor, soberly, as though
the occasion were too special for a display of professional vanity; a
vanity so well known to Renouard that its absence augmented his wonder
and almost made him uneasy as if portending bad news of some sort.

You have met those people? he asked.

No.  I was to have met them last night, but I had to send an apology to
Willie in the morning.  It was then that he had the bright idea to invite
you to fill the place, from a muddled notion that you could be of use.
Willie is stupid sometimes.  For it is clear that you are the last man
able to help.

How on earth do I come to be mixed up in thiswhatever it is?
Renouards voice was slightly altered by nervous irritation.  I only
arrived here yesterday morning.



CHAPTER II


His friend the Editor turned to him squarely.  Willie took me into
consultation, and since he seems to have let you in I may just as well
tell you what is up.  I shall try to be as short as I can.  But in
confidencemind!

He waited.  Renouard, his uneasiness growing on him unreasonably,
assented by a nod, and the other lost no time in beginning.  Professor
Moorsomphysicist and philosopherfine head of white hair, to judge from
the photographsplenty of brains in the head tooall these famous
bookssurely even Renouard would know. . . .

Renouard muttered moodily that it wasnt his sort of reading, and his
friend hastened to assure him earnestly that neither was it his
sortexcept as a matter of business and duty, for the literary page of
that newspaper which was his property (and the pride of his life).  The
only literary newspaper in the Antipodes could not ignore the fashionable
philosopher of the age.  Not that anybody read Moorsom at the Antipodes,
but everybody had heard of himwomen, children, dock labourers, cabmen.
The only person (besides himself) who had read Moorsom, as far as he
knew, was old Dunster, who used to call himself a Moorsomian (or was it
Moorsomite) years and years ago, long before Moorsom had worked himself
up into the great swell he was now, in every way. . . Socially too.
Quite the fashion in the highest world.

Renouard listened with profoundly concealed attention.  A charlatan, he
muttered languidly.

Wellno.  I should say not.  I shouldnt wonder though if most of his
writing had been done with his tongue in his cheek.  Of course.  Thats
to be expected.  I tell you what: the only really honest writing is to be
found in newspapers and nowhere elseand dont you forget it.

The Editor paused with a basilisk stare till Renouard had conceded a
casual: I dare say, and only then went on to explain that old Dunster,
during his European tour, had been made rather a lion of in London, where
he stayed with the Moorsomshe meant the father and the girl.  The
professor had been a widower for a long time.

She doesnt look just a girl, muttered Renouard.  The other agreed.
Very likely not.  Had been playing the London hostess to tip-top people
ever since she put her hair up, probably.

I dont expect to see any girlish bloom on her when I do have the
privilege, he continued.  Those people are staying with the Dunsters
_incog._, in a manner, you understandsomething like royalties.  They
dont deceive anybody, but they want to be left to themselves.  We have
even kept them out of the paperto oblige old Dunster.  But we shall put
your arrival inour local celebrity.

Heavens!

Yes.  Mr. G. Renouard, the explorer, whose indomitable energy, etc., and
who is now working for the prosperity of our country in another way on
his Malata plantation . . . And, by the by, hows the silk
plantflourishing?

Yes.

Did you bring any fibre?

Schooner-full.

I see.  To be transhipped to Liverpool for experimental manufacture, eh?
Eminent capitalists at home very much interested, arent they?

They are.

A silence fell.  Then the Editor uttered slowlyYou will be a rich man
some day.

Renouards face did not betray his opinion of that confident prophecy.
He didnt say anything till his friend suggested in the same meditative
voice

You ought to interest Moorsom in the affair toosince Willie has let you
in.

A philosopher!

I suppose he isnt above making a bit of money.  And he may be clever at
it for all you know.  I have a notion that hes a fairly practical old
cove. . . . Anyhow, and here the tone of the speaker took on a tinge of
respect, he has made philosophy pay.

Renouard raised his eyes, repressed an impulse to jump up, and got out of
the arm-chair slowly.  It isnt perhaps a bad idea, he said.  Ill
have to call there in any case.

He wondered whether he had managed to keep his voice steady, its tone
unconcerned enough; for his emotion was strong though it had nothing to
do with the business aspect of this suggestion.  He moved in the room in
vague preparation for departure, when he heard a soft laugh.  He spun
about quickly with a frown, but the Editor was not laughing at him.  He
was chuckling across the big desk at the wall: a preliminary of some
speech for which Renouard, recalled to himself, waited silent and
mistrustful.

No!  You would never guess!  No one would ever guess what these people
are after.  Willies eyes bulged out when he came to me with the tale.

They always do, remarked Renouard with disgust.  Hes stupid.

He was startled.  And so was I after he told me.  Its a search party.
They are out looking for a man.  Willies soft hearts enlisted in the
cause.

Renouard repeated: Looking for a man.

He sat down suddenly as if on purpose to stare.  Did Willie come to you
to borrow the lantern, he asked sarcastically, and got up again for no
apparent reason.

What lantern? snapped the puzzled Editor, and his face darkened with
suspicion.  You, Renouard, are always alluding to things that arent
clear to me.  If you were in politics, I, as a party journalist, wouldnt
trust you further than I could see you.  Not an inch further.  You are
such a sophisticated beggar.  Listen: the man is the man Miss Moorsom was
engaged to for a year.  He couldnt have been a nobody, anyhow.  But he
doesnt seem to have been very wise.  Hard luck for the young lady.

He spoke with feeling.  It was clear that what he had to tell appealed to
his sentiment.  Yet, as an experienced man of the world, he marked his
amused wonder.  Young man of good family and connections, going
everywhere, yet not merely a man about town, but with a foot in the two
big Fs.

Renouard lounging aimlessly in the room turned round: And what the
devils that? he asked faintly.

Why Fashion and Finance, explained the Editor.  Thats how I call it.
There are the three Rs at the bottom of the social edifice and the two
Fs on the top.  See?

Ha! Ha!  Excellent!  Ha! Ha! Renouard laughed with stony eyes.

And you proceed from one set to the other in this democratic age, the
Editor went on with unperturbed complacency.  That is if you are clever
enough.  The only danger is in being too clever.  And I think something
of the sort happened here.  That swell I am speaking of got himself into
a mess.  Apparently a very ugly mess of a financial character.  You will
understand that Willie did not go into details with me.  They were not
imparted to him with very great abundance either.  But a bad
messsomething of the criminal order.  Of course he was innocent.  But he
had to quit all the same.

Ha! Ha! Renouard laughed again abruptly, staring as before.  So
theres one more big F in the tale.

What do you mean? inquired the Editor quickly, with an air as if his
patent were being infringed.

I meanFool.

No.  I wouldnt say that.  I wouldnt say that.

Welllet him be a scoundrel then.  What the devil do I care.

But hold on!  You havent heard the end of the story.

Renouard, his hat on his head already, sat down with the disdainful smile
of a man who had discounted the moral of the story.  Still he sat down
and the Editor swung his revolving chair right round.  He was full of
unction.

Imprudent, I should say.  In many ways money is as dangerous to handle
as gunpowder.  You cant be too careful either as to who you are working
with.  Anyhow there was a mighty flashy burst up, a sensation, andhis
familiar haunts knew him no more.  But before he vanished he went to see
Miss Moorsom.  That very fact argues for his innocencedont it?  What
was said between them no man knowsunless the professor had the
confidence from his daughter.  There couldnt have been much to say.
There was nothing for it but to let him gowas there?for the affair had
got into the papers.  And perhaps the kindest thing would have been to
forget him.  Anyway the easiest.  Forgiveness would have been more
difficult, I fancy, for a young lady of spirit and position drawn into an
ugly affair like that.  Any ordinary young lady, I mean.  Well, the
fellow asked nothing better than to be forgotten, only he didnt find it
easy to do so himself, because he would write home now and then.  Not to
any of his friends though.  He had no near relations.  The professor had
been his guardian.  No, the poor devil wrote now and then to an old
retired butler of his late father, somewhere in the country, forbidding
him at the same time to let any one know of his whereabouts.  So that
worthy old ass would go up and dodge about the Moorsoms town house,
perhaps waylay Miss Moorsoms maid, and then would write to Master
Arthur that the young lady looked well and happy, or some such cheerful
intelligence.  I dare say he wanted to be forgotten, but I shouldnt
think he was much cheered by the news.  What would you say?

Renouard, his legs stretched out and his chin on his breast, said
nothing.  A sensation which was not curiosity, but rather a vague nervous
anxiety, distinctly unpleasant, like a mysterious symptom of some malady,
prevented him from getting up and going away.

Mixed feelings, the Editor opined.  Many fellows out here receive news
from home with mixed feelings.  But what will his feelings be when he
hears what I am going to tell you now?  For we know he has not heard yet.
Six months ago a city clerk, just a common drudge of finance, gets
himself convicted of a common embezzlement or something of that kind.
Then seeing hes in for a long sentence he thinks of making his
conscience comfortable, and makes a clean breast of an old story of
tampered with, or else suppressed, documents, a story which clears
altogether the honesty of our ruined gentleman.  That embezzling fellow
was in a position to know, having been employed by the firm before the
smash.  There was no doubt about the character being clearedbut where
the cleared man was nobody could tell.  Another sensation in society.
And then Miss Moorsom says: He will come back to claim me, and Ill
marry him.  But he didnt come back.  Between you and me I dont think
he was much wantedexcept by Miss Moorsom.  I imagine shes used to have
her own way.  She grew impatient, and declared that if she knew where the
man was she would go to him.  But all that could be got out of the old
butler was that the last envelope bore the postmark of our beautiful
city; and that this was the only address of Master Arthur that he ever
had.  That and no more.  In fact the fellow was at his last gaspwith a
bad heart.  Miss Moorsom wasnt allowed to see him.  She had gone herself
into the country to learn what she could, but she had to stay downstairs
while the old chaps wife went up to the invalid.  She brought down the
scrap of intelligence Ive told you of.  He was already too far gone to
be cross-examined on it, and that very night he died.  He didnt leave
behind him much to go by, did he?  Our Willie hinted to me that there had
been pretty stormy days in the professors house, buthere they are.  I
have a notion she isnt the kind of everyday young lady who may be
permitted to gallop about the world all by herselfeh?  Well, I think it
rather fine of her, but I quite understand that the professor needed all
his philosophy under the circumstances.  She is his only child nowand
brilliantwhat?  Willie positively spluttered trying to describe her to
me; and I could see directly you came in that you had an uncommon
experience.

Renouard, with an irritated gesture, tilted his hat more forward on his
eyes, as though he were bored.  The Editor went on with the remark that
to be sure neither he (Renouard) nor yet Willie were much used to meet
girls of that remarkable superiority.  Willie when learning business with
a firm in London, years before, had seen none but boarding-house society,
he guessed.  As to himself in the good old days, when he trod the
glorious flags of Fleet Street, he neither had access to, nor yet would
have cared for the swells.  Nothing interested him then but parliamentary
politics and the oratory of the House of Commons.

He paid to this not very distant past the tribute of a tender,
reminiscent smile, and returned to his first idea that for a society girl
her action was rather fine.  All the same the professor could not be very
pleased.  The fellow if he was as pure as a lily now was just about as
devoid of the goods of the earth.  And there were misfortunes, however
undeserved, which damaged a mans standing permanently.  On the other
hand, it was difficult to oppose cynically a noble impulsenot to speak
of the great love at the root of it.  Ah!  Love!  And then the lady was
quite capable of going off by herself.  She was of age, she had money of
her own, plenty of pluck too.  Moorsom must have concluded that it was
more truly paternal, more prudent too, and generally safer all round to
let himself be dragged into this chase.  The aunt came along for the same
reasons.  It was given out at home as a trip round the world of the usual
kind.

Renouard had risen and remained standing with his heart beating, and
strangely affected by this tale, robbed as it was of all glamour by the
prosaic personality of the narrator.  The Editor added: Ive been asked
to help in the searchyou know.

Renouard muttered something about an appointment and went out into the
street.  His inborn sanity could not defend him from a misty creeping
jealousy.  He thought that obviously no man of that sort could be worthy
of such a womans devoted fidelity.  Renouard, however, had lived long
enough to reflect that a mans activities, his views, and even his ideas
may be very inferior to his character; and moved by a delicate
consideration for that splendid girl he tried to think out for the man a
character of inward excellence and outward giftssome extraordinary
seduction.  But in vain.  Fresh from months of solitude and from days at
sea, her splendour presented itself to him absolutely unconquerable in
its perfection, unless by her own folly.  It was easier to suspect her of
this than to imagine in the man qualities which would be worthy of her.
Easier and less degrading.  Because folly may be generouscould be
nothing else but generosity in her; whereas to imagine her subjugated by
something common was intolerable.

Because of the force of the physical impression he had received from her
personality (and such impressions are the real origins of the deepest
movements of our soul) this conception of her was even inconceivable.
But no Prince Charming has ever lived out of a fairy tale.  He doesnt
walk the worlds of Fashion and Financeand with a stumbling gait at that.
Generosity.  Yes.  It was her generosity.  But this generosity was
altogether regal in its splendour, almost absurd in its lavishnessor,
perhaps, divine.

In the evening, on board his schooner, sitting on the rail, his arms
folded on his breast and his eyes fixed on the deck, he let the darkness
catch him unawares in the midst of a meditation on the mechanism of
sentiment and the springs of passion.  And all the time he had an abiding
consciousness of her bodily presence.  The effect on his senses had been
so penetrating that in the middle of the night, rousing up suddenly,
wide-eyed in the darkness of his cabin, he did not create a faint mental
vision of her person for himself, but, more intimately affected, he
scented distinctly the faint perfume she used, and could almost have
sworn that he had been awakened by the soft rustle of her dress.  He even
sat up listening in the dark for a time, then sighed and lay down again,
not agitated but, on the contrary, oppressed by the sensation of
something that had happened to him and could not be undone.



CHAPTER III


In the afternoon he lounged into the editorial office, carrying with
affected nonchalance that weight of the irremediable he had felt laid on
him suddenly in the small hours of the nightthat consciousness of
something that could no longer be helped.  His patronising friend
informed him at once that he had made the acquaintance of the Moorsom
party last night.  At the Dunsters, of course.  Dinner.

Very quiet.  Nobody there.  It was much better for the business.  I say
. . .

Renouard, his hand grasping the back of a chair, stared down at him
dumbly.

Phew!  Thats a stunning girl. . . Why do you want to sit on that chair?
Its uncomfortable!

I wasnt going to sit on it.  Renouard walked slowly to the window,
glad to find in himself enough self-control to let go the chair instead
of raising it on high and bringing it down on the Editors head.

Willie kept on gazing at her with tears in his boiled eyes.  You should
have seen him bending sentimentally over her at dinner.

Dont, said Renouard in such an anguished tone that the Editor turned
right round to look at his back.

You push your dislike of young Dunster too far.  Its positively
morbid, he disapproved mildly.  We cant be all beautiful after thirty.
. . . I talked a little, about you mostly, to the professor.  He appeared
to be interested in the silk plantif only as a change from the great
subject.  Miss Moorsom didnt seem to mind when I confessed to her that I
had taken you into the confidence of the thing.  Our Willie approved too.
Old Dunster with his white beard seemed to give me his blessing.  All
those people have a great opinion of you, simply because I told them that
youve led every sort of life one can think of before you got struck on
exploration.  They want you to make suggestions.  What do you think
Master Arthur is likely to have taken to?

Something easy, muttered Renouard without unclenching his teeth.

Hunting man.  Athlete.  Dont be hard on the chap.  He may be riding
boundaries, or droving cattle, or humping his swag about the back-blocks
away to the devilsomewhere.  He may be even prospecting at the back of
beyondthis very moment.

Or lying dead drunk in a roadside pub.  Its late enough in the day for
that.

The Editor looked up instinctively.  The clock was pointing at a quarter
to five.  Yes, it is, he admitted.  But it neednt be.  And he may
have lit out into the Western Pacific all of a suddensay in a trading
schooner.  Though I really dont see in what capacity.  Still . . . 

Or he may be passing at this very moment under this very window.

Not he . . . and I wish you would get away from it to where one can see
your face.  I hate talking to a mans back.  You stand there like a
hermit on a sea-shore growling to yourself.  I tell you what it is,
Geoffrey, you dont like mankind.

I dont make my living by talking about mankinds affairs, Renouard
defended himself.  But he came away obediently and sat down in the
arm-chair.  How can you be so certain that your man isnt down there in
the street? he asked.  Its neither more nor less probable than every
single one of your other suppositions.

Placated by Renouards docility the Editor gazed at him for a while.
Aha!  Ill tell you how.  Learn then that we have begun the campaign.
We have telegraphed his description to the police of every township up
and down the land.  And whats more weve ascertained definitely that he
hasnt been in this town for the last three months at least.  How much
longer hes been away we cant tell.

Thats very curious.

Its very simple.  Miss Moorsom wrote to him, to the post office here
directly she returned to London after her excursion into the country to
see the old butler.  Wellher letter is still lying there.  It has not
been called for.  Ergo, this town is not his usual abode.  Personally, I
never thought it was.  But he cannot fail to turn up some time or other.
Our main hope lies just in the certitude that he must come to town sooner
or later.  Remember he doesnt know that the butler is dead, and he will
want to inquire for a letter.  Well, hell find a note from Miss
Moorsom.

Renouard, silent, thought that it was likely enough.  His profound
distaste for this conversation was betrayed by an air of weariness
darkening his energetic sun-tanned features, and by the augmented
dreaminess of his eyes.  The Editor noted it as a further proof of that
immoral detachment from mankind, of that callousness of sentiment
fostered by the unhealthy conditions of solitudeaccording to his own
favourite theory.  Aloud he observed that as long as a man had not given
up correspondence he could not be looked upon as lost.  Fugitive
criminals had been tracked in that way by justice, he reminded his
friend; then suddenly changed the bearing of the subject somewhat by
asking if Renouard had heard from his people lately, and if every member
of his large tribe was well and happy.

Yes, thanks.

The tone was curt, as if repelling a liberty.  Renouard did not like
being asked about his people, for whom he had a profound and remorseful
affection.  He had not seen a single human being to whom he was related,
for many years, and he was extremely different from them all.

On the very morning of his arrival from his island he had gone to a set
of pigeon-holes in Willie Dunsters outer office and had taken out from a
compartment labelled Malata a very small accumulation of envelopes, a
few addressed to himself, and one addressed to his assistant, all to the
care of the firm, W. Dunster and Co.  As opportunity offered, the firm
used to send them on to Malata either by a man-of-war schooner going on a
cruise, or by some trading craft proceeding that way.  But for the last
four months there had been no opportunity.

You going to stay here some time? asked the Editor, after a longish
silence.

Renouard, perfunctorily, did see no reason why he should make a long
stay.

For health, for your mental health, my boy, rejoined the newspaper man.
To get used to human faces so that they dont hit you in the eye so hard
when you walk about the streets.  To get friendly with your kind.  I
suppose that assistant of yours can be trusted to look after things?

Theres the half-caste too.  The Portuguese.  He knows whats to be
done.

Aha!  The Editor looked sharply at his friend.  Whats his name?

Whos name?

The assistants you picked up on the sly behind my back.

Renouard made a slight movement of impatience.

I met him unexpectedly one evening.  I thought he would do as well as
another.  He had come from up country and didnt seem happy in a town.
He told me his name was Walter.  I did not ask him for proofs, you know.

I dont think you get on very well with him.

Why?  What makes you think so.

I dont know.  Something reluctant in your manner when hes in
question.

Really.  My manner!  I dont think hes a great subject for
conversation, perhaps.  Why not drop him?

Of course!  You wouldnt confess to a mistake.  Not you.  Nevertheless I
have my suspicions about it.

Renouard got up to go, but hesitated, looking down at the seated Editor.

How funny, he said at last with the utmost seriousness, and was making
for the door, when the voice of his friend stopped him.

You know what has been said of you?  That you couldnt get on with
anybody you couldnt kick.  Now, confessis there any truth in the soft
impeachment?

No, said Renouard.  Did you print that in your paper.

No.  I didnt quite believe it.  But I will tell you what I believe.  I
believe that when your heart is set on some object you are a man that
doesnt count the cost to yourself or others.  And this shall get printed
some day.

Obituary notice? Renouard dropped negligently.

Certainsome day.

Do you then regard yourself as immortal?

No, my boy.  I am not immortal.  But the voice of the press goes on for
ever. . . . And it will say that this was the secret of your great
success in a task where better men than youmeaning no offencedid fail
repeatedly.

Success, muttered Renouard, pulling-to the office door after him with
considerable energy.  And the letters of the word PRIVATE like a row of
white eyes seemed to stare after his back sinking down the staircase of
that temple of publicity.

Renouard had no doubt that all the means of publicity would be put at the
service of love and used for the discovery of the loved man.  He did not
wish him dead.  He did not wish him any harm.  We are all equipped with a
fund of humanity which is not exhausted without many and repeated
provocationsand this man had done him no evil.  But before Renouard had
left old Dunsters house, at the conclusion of the call he made there
that very afternoon, he had discovered in himself the desire that the
search might last long.  He never really flattered himself that it might
fail.  It seemed to him that there was no other course in this world for
himself, for all mankind, but resignation.  And he could not help
thinking that Professor Moorsom had arrived at the same conclusion too.

Professor Moorsom, slight frame of middle height, a thoughtful keen head
under the thick wavy hair, veiled dark eyes under straight eyebrows, and
with an inward gaze which when disengaged and arriving at one seemed to
issue from an obscure dream of books, from the limbo of meditation,
showed himself extremely gracious to him.  Renouard guessed in him a man
whom an incurable habit of investigation and analysis had made gentle and
indulgent; inapt for action, and more sensitive to the thoughts than to
the events of existence.  Withal not crushed, sub-ironic without a trace
of acidity, and with a simple manner which put people at ease quickly.
They had a long conversation on the terrace commanding an extended view
of the town and the harbour.

The splendid immobility of the bay resting under his gaze, with its grey
spurs and shining indentations, helped Renouard to regain his
self-possession, which he had felt shaken, in coming out on the terrace,
into the setting of the most powerful emotion of his life, when he had
sat within a foot of Miss Moorsom with fire in his breast, a humming in
his ears, and in a complete disorder of his mind.  There was the very
garden seat on which he had been enveloped in the radiant spell.  And
presently he was sitting on it again with the professor talking of her.
Near by the patriarchal Dunster leaned forward in a wicker arm-chair,
benign and a little deaf, his big hand to his ear with the innocent
eagerness of his advanced age remembering the fires of life.

It was with a sort of apprehension that Renouard looked forward to seeing
Miss Moorsom.  And strangely enough it resembled the state of mind of a
man who fears disenchantment more than sortilege.  But he need not have
been afraid.  Directly he saw her in a distance at the other end of the
terrace he shuddered to the roots of his hair.  With her approach the
power of speech left him for a time.  Mrs. Dunster and her aunt were
accompanying her.  All these people sat down; it was an intimate circle
into which Renouard felt himself cordially admitted; and the talk was of
the great search which occupied all their minds.  Discretion was expected
by these people, but of reticence as to the object of the journey there
could be no question.  Nothing but ways and means and arrangements could
be talked about.

By fixing his eyes obstinately on the ground, which gave him an air of
reflective sadness, Renouard managed to recover his self-possession.  He
used it to keep his voice in a low key and to measure his words on the
great subject.  And he took care with a great inward effort to make them
reasonable without giving them a discouraging complexion.  For he did not
want the quest to be given up, since it would mean her going away with
her two attendant grey-heads to the other side of the world.

He was asked to come again, to come often and take part in the counsels
of all these people captivated by the sentimental enterprise of a
declared love.  On taking Miss Moorsoms hand he looked up, would have
liked to say something, but found himself voiceless, with his lips
suddenly sealed.  She returned the pressure of his fingers, and he left
her with her eyes vaguely staring beyond him, an air of listening for an
expected sound, and the faintest possible smile on her lips.  A smile not
for him, evidently, but the reflection of some deep and inscrutable
thought.



CHAPTER IV


He went on board his schooner.  She lay white, and as if suspended, in
the crepuscular atmosphere of sunset mingling with the ashy gleam of the
vast anchorage.  He tried to keep his thoughts as sober, as reasonable,
as measured as his words had been, lest they should get away from him and
cause some sort of moral disaster.  What he was afraid of in the coming
night was sleeplessness and the endless strain of that wearisome task.
It had to be faced however.  He lay on his back, sighing profoundly in
the dark, and suddenly beheld his very own self, carrying a small bizarre
lamp, reflected in a long mirror inside a room in an empty and
unfurnished palace.  In this startling image of himself he recognised
somebody he had to followthe frightened guide of his dream.  He
traversed endless galleries, no end of lofty halls, innumerable doors.
He lost himself utterlyhe found his way again.  Room succeeded room.  At
last the lamp went out, and he stumbled against some object which, when
he stooped for it, he found to be very cold and heavy to lift.  The
sickly white light of dawn showed him the head of a statue.  Its marble
hair was done in the bold lines of a helmet, on its lips the chisel had
left a faint smile, and it resembled Miss Moorsom.  While he was staring
at it fixedly, the head began to grow light in his fingers, to diminish
and crumble to pieces, and at last turned into a handful of dust, which
was blown away by a puff of wind so chilly that he woke up with a
desperate shiver and leaped headlong out of his bed-place.  The day had
really come.  He sat down by the cabin table, and taking his head between
his hands, did not stir for a very long time.

Very quiet, he set himself to review this dream.  The lamp, of course, he
connected with the search for a man.  But on closer examination he
perceived that the reflection of himself in the mirror was not really the
true Renouard, but somebody else whose face he could not remember.  In
the deserted palace he recognised a sinister adaptation by his brain of
the long corridors with many doors, in the great building in which his
friends newspaper was lodged on the first floor.  The marble head with
Miss Moorsoms face!  Well!  What other face could he have dreamed of?
And her complexion was fairer than Parian marble, than the heads of
angels.  The wind at the end was the morning breeze entering through the
open porthole and touching his face before the schooner could swing to
the chilly gust.

Yes!  And all this rational explanation of the fantastic made it only
more mysterious and weird.  There was something daemonic in that dream.
It was one of those experiences which throw a man out of conformity with
the established order of his kind and make him a creature of obscure
suggestions.

Henceforth, without ever trying to resist, he went every afternoon to the
house where she lived.  He went there as passively as if in a dream.  He
could never make out how he had attained the footing of intimacy in the
Dunster mansion above the baywhether on the ground of personal merit or
as the pioneer of the vegetable silk industry.  It must have been the
last, because he remembered distinctly, as distinctly as in a dream,
hearing old Dunster once telling him that his next public task would be a
careful survey of the Northern Districts to discover tracts suitable for
the cultivation of the silk plant.  The old man wagged his beard at him
sagely.  It was indeed as absurd as a dream.

Willie of course would be there in the evening.  But he was more of a
figure out of a nightmare, hovering about the circle of chairs in his
dress-clothes like a gigantic, repulsive, and sentimental bat.  Do away
with the beastly cocoons all over the world, he buzzed in his blurred,
water-logged voice.  He affected a great horror of insects of all kinds.
One evening he appeared with a red flower in his button-hole.  Nothing
could have been more disgustingly fantastic.  And he would also say to
Renouard: You may yet change the history of our country.  For economic
conditions do shape the history of nations.  Eh?  What?  And he would
turn to Miss Moorsom for approval, lowering protectingly his spatulous
nose and looking up with feeling from under his absurd eyebrows, which
grew thin, in the manner of canebrakes, out of his spongy skin.  For this
large, bilious creature was an economist and a sentimentalist, facile to
tears, and a member of the Cobden Club.

In order to see as little of him as possible Renouard began coming
earlier so as to get away before his arrival, without curtailing too much
the hours of secret contemplation for which he lived.  He had given up
trying to deceive himself.  His resignation was without bounds.  He
accepted the immense misfortune of being in love with a woman who was in
search of another man only to throw herself into his arms.  With such
desperate precision he defined in his thoughts the situation, the
consciousness of which traversed like a sharp arrow the sudden silences
of general conversation.  The only thought before which he quailed was
the thought that this could not last; that it must come to an end.  He
feared it instinctively as a sick man may fear death.  For it seemed to
him that it must be the death of him followed by a lightless, bottomless
pit.  But his resignation was not spared the torments of jealousy: the
cruel, insensate, poignant, and imbecile jealousy, when it seems that a
woman betrays us simply by this that she exists, that she breathesand
when the deep movements of her nerves or her soul become a matter of
distracting suspicion, of killing doubt, of mortal anxiety.

In the peculiar condition of their sojourn Miss Moorsom went out very
little.  She accepted this seclusion at the Dunsters mansion as in a
hermitage, and lived there, watched over by a group of old people, with
the lofty endurance of a condescending and strong-headed goddess.  It was
impossible to say if she suffered from anything in the world, and whether
this was the insensibility of a great passion concentrated on itself, or
a perfect restraint of manner, or the indifference of superiority so
complete as to be sufficient to itself.  But it was visible to Renouard
that she took some pleasure in talking to him at times.  Was it because
he was the only person near her age?  Was this, then, the secret of his
admission to the circle?

He admired her voice as well poised as her movements, as her attitudes.
He himself had always been a man of tranquil tones.  But the power of
fascination had torn him out of his very nature so completely that to
preserve his habitual calmness from going to pieces had become a terrible
effort.

He used to go from her on board the schooner exhausted, broken, shaken
up, as though he had been put to the most exquisite torture.  When he saw
her approaching he always had a moment of hallucination.  She was a misty
and fair creature, fitted for invisible music, for the shadows of love,
for the murmurs of waters.  After a time (he could not be always staring
at the ground) he would summon up all his resolution and look at her.
There was a sparkle in the clear obscurity of her eyes; and when she
turned them on him they seemed to give a new meaning to life.  He would
say to himself that another man would have found long before the happy
release of madness, his wits burnt to cinders in that radiance.  But no
such luck for him.  His wits had come unscathed through the furnaces of
hot suns, of blazing deserts, of flaming angers against the weaknesses of
men and the obstinate cruelties of hostile nature.

Being sane he had to be constantly on his guard against falling into
adoring silences or breaking out into wild speeches.  He had to keep
watch on his eyes, his limbs, on the muscles of his face.  Their
conversations were such as they could be between these two people: she a
young lady fresh from the thick twilight of four million people and the
artificiality of several London seasons; he the man of definite
conquering tasks, the familiar of wide horizons, and in his very repose
holding aloof from these agglomerations of units in which one loses ones
importance even to oneself.  They had no common conversational small
change.  They had to use the great pieces of general ideas, but they
exchanged them trivially.  It was no serious commerce.  Perhaps she had
not much of that coin.  Nothing significant came from her.  It could not
be said that she had received from the contacts of the external world
impressions of a personal kind, different from other women.  What was
ravishing in her was her quietness and, in her grave attitudes, the
unfailing brilliance of her femininity.  He did not know what there was
under that ivory forehead so splendidly shaped, so gloriously crowned.
He could not tell what were her thoughts, her feelings.  Her replies were
reflective, always preceded by a short silence, while he hung on her lips
anxiously.  He felt himself in the presence of a mysterious being in whom
spoke an unknown voice, like the voice of oracles, bringing everlasting
unrest to the heart.

He was thankful enough to sit in silence with secretly clenched teeth,
devoured by jealousyand nobody could have guessed that his quiet
deferential bearing to all these grey-heads was the supreme effort of
stoicism, that the man was engaged in keeping a sinister watch on his
tortures lest his strength should fail him.  As before, when grappling
with other forces of nature, he could find in himself all sorts of
courage except the courage to run away.

It was perhaps from the lack of subjects they could have in common that
Miss Moorsom made him so often speak of his own life.  He did not shrink
from talking about himself, for he was free from that exacerbated, timid
vanity which seals so many vain-glorious lips.  He talked to her in his
restrained voice, gazing at the tip of her shoe, and thinking that the
time was bound to come soon when her very inattention would get weary of
him.  And indeed on stealing a glance he would see her dazzling and
perfect, her eyes vague, staring in mournful immobility, with a drooping
head that made him think of a tragic Venus arising before him, not from
the foam of the sea, but from a distant, still more formless, mysterious,
and potent immensity of mankind.



CHAPTER V


One afternoon Renouard stepping out on the terrace found nobody there.
It was for him, at the same time, a melancholy disappointment and a
poignant relief.

The heat was great, the air was still, all the long windows of the house
stood wide open.  At the further end, grouped round a ladys work-table,
several chairs disposed sociably suggested invisible occupants, a company
of conversing shades.  Renouard looked towards them with a sort of dread.
A most elusive, faint sound of ghostly talk issuing from one of the rooms
added to the illusion and stopped his already hesitating footsteps.  He
leaned over the balustrade of stone near a squat vase holding a tropical
plant of a bizarre shape.  Professor Moorsom coming up from the garden
with a book under his arm and a white parasol held over his bare head,
found him there and, closing the parasol, leaned over by his side with a
remark on the increasing heat of the season.  Renouard assented and
changed his position a little; the other, after a short silence,
administered unexpectedly a question which, like the blow of a club on
the head, deprived Renouard of the power of speech and even thought, but,
more cruel, left him quivering with apprehension, not of death but of
everlasting torment.  Yet the words were extremely simple.

Something will have to be done soon.  We cant remain in a state of
suspended expectation for ever.  Tell me what do you think of our
chances?

Renouard, speechless, produced a faint smile.  The professor confessed in
a jocular tone his impatience to complete the circuit of the globe and be
done with it.  It was impossible to remain quartered on the dear
excellent Dunsters for an indefinite time.  And then there were the
lectures he had arranged to deliver in Paris.  A serious matter.

That lectures by Professor Moorsom were a European event and that
brilliant audiences would gather to hear them Renouard did not know.  All
he was aware of was the shock of this hint of departure.  The menace of
separation fell on his head like a thunderbolt.  And he saw the absurdity
of his emotion, for hadnt he lived all these days under the very cloud?
The professor, his elbows spread out, looked down into the garden and
went on unburdening his mind.  Yes.  The department of sentiment was
directed by his daughter, and she had plenty of volunteered moral
support; but he had to look after the practical side of life without
assistance.

I have the less hesitation in speaking to you about my anxiety, because
I feel you are friendly to us and at the same time you are detached from
all these sublimitiesconfound them.

What do you mean? murmured Renouard.

I mean that you are capable of calm judgment.  Here the atmosphere is
simply detestable.  Everybody has knuckled under to sentiment.  Perhaps
your deliberate opinion could influence . . .

You want Miss Moorsom to give it up?  The professor turned to the young
man dismally.

Heaven only knows what I want.

Renouard leaning his back against the balustrade folded his arms on his
breast, appeared to meditate profoundly.  His face, shaded softly by the
broad brim of a planters Panama hat, with the straight line of the nose
level with the forehead, the eyes lost in the depth of the setting, and
the chin well forward, had such a profile as may be seen amongst the
bronzes of classical museums, pure under a crested helmetrecalled
vaguely a Minervas head.

This is the most troublesome time I ever had in my life, exclaimed the
professor testily.

Surely the man must be worth it, muttered Renouard with a pang of
jealousy traversing his breast like a self-inflicted stab.

Whether enervated by the heat or giving way to pent up irritation the
professor surrendered himself to the mood of sincerity.

He began by being a pleasantly dull boy.  He developed into a
pointlessly clever young man, without, I suspect, ever trying to
understand anything.  My daughter knew him from childhood.  I am a busy
man, and I confess that their engagement was a complete surprise to me.
I wish their reasons for that step had been more nave.  But simplicity
was out of fashion in their set.  From a worldly point of view he seems
to have been a mere baby.  Of course, now, I am assured that he is the
victim of his noble confidence in the rectitude of his kind.  But thats
mere idealising of a sad reality.  For my part I will tell you that from
the very beginning I had the gravest doubts of his dishonesty.
Unfortunately my clever daughter hadnt.  And now we behold the reaction.
No.  To be earnestly dishonest one must be really poor.  This was only a
manifestation of his extremely refined cleverness.  The complicated
simpleton.  He had an awful awakening though.

In such words did Professor Moorsom give his young friend to understand
the state of his feelings toward the lost man.  It was evident that the
father of Miss Moorsom wished him to remain lost.  Perhaps the
unprecedented heat of the season made him long for the cool spaces of the
Pacific, the sweep of the oceans free wind along the promenade decks,
cumbered with long chairs, of a ship steaming towards the Californian
coast.  To Renouard the philosopher appeared simply the most treacherous
of fathers.  He was amazed.  But he was not at the end of his
discoveries.

He may be dead, the professor murmured.

Why?  People dont die here sooner than in Europe.  If he had gone to
hide in Italy, for instance, you wouldnt think of saying that.

Well!  And suppose he has become morally disintegrated.  You know he was
not a strong personality, the professor suggested moodily.  My
daughters future is in question here.

Renouard thought that the love of such a woman was enough to pull any
broken man togetherto drag a man out of his grave.  And he thought this
with inward despair, which kept him silent as much almost as his
astonishment.  At last he managed to stammer out a generous

Oh!  Dont let us even suppose. . .

The professor struck in with a sadder accent than before

Its good to be young.  And then you have been a man of action, and
necessarily a believer in success.  But I have been looking too long at
life not to distrust its surprises.  Age!  Age!  Here I stand before you
a man full of doubts and hesitation_spe lentus_, _timidus futuri_.

He made a sign to Renouard not to interrupt, and in a lowered voice, as
if afraid of being overheard, even there, in the solitude of the terrace

And the worst is that I am not even sure how far this sentimental
pilgrimage is genuine.  Yes.  I doubt my own child.  Its true that shes
a woman. . . . 

Renouard detected with horror a tone of resentment, as if the professor
had never forgiven his daughter for not dying instead of his son.  The
latter noticed the young mans stony stare.

Ah! you dont understand.  Yes, shes clever, open-minded, popular,
andwell, charming.  But you dont know what it is to have moved,
breathed, existed, and even triumphed in the mere smother and froth of
lifethe brilliant froth.  There thoughts, sentiments, opinions,
feelings, actions too, are nothing but agitation in empty spaceto amuse
lifea sort of superior debauchery, exciting and fatiguing, meaning
nothing, leading nowhere.  She is the creature of that circle.  And I ask
myself if she is obeying the uneasiness of an instinct seeking its
satisfaction, or is it a revulsion of feeling, or is she merely deceiving
her own heart by this dangerous trifling with romantic images.  And
everything is possibleexcept sincerity, such as only stark, struggling
humanity can know.  No woman can stand that mode of life in which women
rule, and remain a perfectly genuine, simple human being.  Ah!  Theres
some people coming out.

He moved off a pace, then turning his head: Upon my word!  I would be
infinitely obliged to you if you could throw a little cold water. . . 
and at a vaguely dismayed gesture of Renouard, he added: Dont be
afraid.  You wouldnt be putting out a sacred fire.

Renouard could hardly find words for a protest: I assure you that I
never talk with Miss Moorsomononthat.  And if you, her father . . . 

I envy you your innocence, sighed the professor.  A father is only an
everyday person.  Flat.  Stale.  Moreover, my child would naturally
mistrust me.  We belong to the same set.  Whereas you carry with you the
prestige of the unknown.  You have proved yourself to be a force.

Thereupon the professor followed by Renouard joined the circle of all the
inmates of the house assembled at the other end of the terrace about a
tea-table; three white heads and that resplendent vision of womans
glory, the sight of which had the power to flutter his heart like a
reminder of the mortality of his frame.

He avoided the seat by the side of Miss Moorsom.  The others were talking
together languidly.  Unnoticed he looked at that woman so marvellous that
centuries seemed to lie between them.  He was oppressed and overcome at
the thought of what she could give to some man who really would be a
force!  What a glorious struggle with this amazon.  What noble burden for
the victorious strength.

Dear old Mrs. Dunster was dispensing tea, looking from time to time with
interest towards Miss Moorsom.  The aged statesman having eaten a raw
tomato and drunk a glass of milk (a habit of his early farming days, long
before politics, when, pioneer of wheat-growing, he demonstrated the
possibility of raising crops on ground looking barren enough to
discourage a magician), smoothed his white beard, and struck lightly
Renouards knee with his big wrinkled hand.

You had better come back to-night and dine with us quietly.

He liked this young man, a pioneer, too, in more than one direction.
Mrs. Dunster added: Do.  It will be very quiet.  I dont even know if
Willie will be home for dinner.  Renouard murmured his thanks, and left
the terrace to go on board the schooner.  While lingering in the
drawing-room doorway he heard the resonant voice of old Dunster uttering
oracularly

. . . the leading man here some day. . . . Like me.

Renouard let the thin summer portire of the doorway fall behind him.
The voice of Professor Moorsom said

I am told that he has made an enemy of almost every man who had to work
with him.

Thats nothing.  He did his work. . . . Like me.

He never counted the cost they say.  Not even of lives.

Renouard understood that they were talking of him.  Before he could move
away, Mrs. Dunster struck in placidly

Dont let yourself be shocked by the tales you may hear of him, my dear.
Most of it is envy.

Then he heard Miss Moorsoms voice replying to the old lady

Oh!  I am not easily deceived.  I think I may say I have an instinct for
truth.

He hastened away from that house with his heart full of dread.



CHAPTER VI


On board the schooner, lying on the settee on his back with the knuckles
of his hands pressed over his eyes, he made up his mind that he would not
return to that house for dinnerthat he would never go back there any
more.  He made up his mind some twenty times.  The knowledge that he had
only to go up on the quarter deck, utter quietly the words: Man the
windlass, and that the schooner springing into life would run a hundred
miles out to sea before sunrise, deceived his struggling will.  Nothing
easier!  Yet, in the end, this young man, almost ill-famed for his
ruthless daring, the inflexible leader of two tragically successful
expeditions, shrank from that act of savage energy, and began, instead,
to hunt for excuses.

No!  It was not for him to run away like an incurable who cuts his
throat.  He finished dressing and looked at his own impassive face in the
saloon mirror scornfully.  While being pulled on shore in the gig, he
remembered suddenly the wild beauty of a waterfall seen when hardly more
than a boy, years ago, in Menado.  There was a legend of a
governor-general of the Dutch East Indies, on official tour, committing
suicide on that spot by leaping into the chasm.  It was supposed that a
painful disease had made him weary of life.  But was there ever a
visitation like his own, at the same time binding one to life and so
cruelly mortal!

The dinner was indeed quiet.  Willie, given half an hours grace, failed
to turn up, and his chair remained vacant by the side of Miss Moorsom.
Renouard had the professors sister on his left, dressed in an expensive
gown becoming her age.  That maiden lady in her wonderful preservation
reminded Renouard somehow of a wax flower under glass.  There were no
traces of the dust of lifes battles on her anywhere.  She did not like
him very much in the afternoons, in his white drill suit and planters
hat, which seemed to her an unduly Bohemian costume for calling in a
house where there were ladies.  But in the evening, lithe and elegant in
his dress clothes and with his pleasant, slightly veiled voice, he always
made her conquest afresh.  He might have been anybody distinguishedthe
son of a duke.  Falling under that charm probably (and also because her
brother had given her a hint), she attempted to open her heart to
Renouard, who was watching with all the power of his soul her niece
across the table.  She spoke to him as frankly as though that miserable
mortal envelope, emptied of everything but hopeless passion, were indeed
the son of a duke.

Inattentive, he heard her only in snatches, till the final confidential
burst: . . . glad if you would express an opinion.  Look at her, so
charming, such a great favourite, so generally admired!  It would be too
sad.  We all hoped she would make a brilliant marriage with somebody very
rich and of high position, have a house in London and in the country, and
entertain us all splendidly.  Shes so eminently fitted for it.  She has
such hosts of distinguished friends!  And thenthis instead! . . . My
heart really aches.

Her well-bred if anxious whisper was covered by the voice of professor
Moorsom discoursing subtly down the short length of the dinner table on
the Impermanency of the Measurable to his venerable disciple.  It might
have been a chapter in a new and popular book of Moorsomian philosophy.
Patriarchal and delighted, old Dunster leaned forward a little, his eyes
shining youthfully, two spots of colour at the roots of his white beard;
and Renouard, glancing at the senile excitement, recalled the words heard
on those subtle lips, adopted their scorn for his own, saw their truth
before this man ready to be amused by the side of the grave.  Yes!
Intellectual debauchery in the froth of existence!  Froth and fraud!

On the same side of the table Miss Moorsom never once looked towards her
father, all her grace as if frozen, her red lips compressed, the faintest
rosiness under her dazzling complexion, her black eyes burning
motionless, and the very coppery gleams of light lying still on the waves
and undulation of her hair.  Renouard fancied himself overturning the
table, smashing crystal and china, treading fruit and flowers under foot,
seizing her in his arms, carrying her off in a tumult of shrieks from all
these people, a silent frightened mortal, into some profound retreat as
in the age of Cavern men.  Suddenly everybody got up, and he hastened to
rise too, finding himself out of breath and quite unsteady on his feet.

On the terrace the philosopher, after lighting a cigar, slipped his hand
condescendingly under his dear young friends arm.  Renouard regarded
him now with the profoundest mistrust.  But the great man seemed really
to have a liking for his young friendone of those mysterious sympathies,
disregarding the differences of age and position, which in this case
might have been explained by the failure of philosophy to meet a very
real worry of a practical kind.

After a turn or two and some casual talk the professor said suddenly: My
late son was in your schooldo you know?  I can imagine that had he lived
and you had ever met you would have understood each other.  He too was
inclined to action.

He sighed, then, shaking off the mournful thought and with a nod at the
dusky part of the terrace where the dress of his daughter made a luminous
stain: I really wish you would drop in that quarter a few sensible,
discouraging words.

Renouard disengaged himself from that most perfidious of men under the
pretence of astonishment, and stepping back a pace

Surely you are making fun of me, Professor Moorsom, he said with a low
laugh, which was really a sound of rage.

My dear young friend!  Its no subject for jokes, to me. . . You dont
seem to have any notion of your prestige, he added, walking away towards
the chairs.

Humbug! thought Renouard, standing still and looking after him.  And
yet!  And yet!  What if it were true?

He advanced then towards Miss Moorsom.  Posed on the seat on which they
had first spoken to each other, it was her turn to watch him coming on.
But many of the windows were not lighted that evening.  It was dark over
there.  She appeared to him luminous in her clear dress, a figure without
shape, a face without features, awaiting his approach, till he got quite
near to her, sat down, and they had exchanged a few insignificant words.
Gradually she came out like a magic painting of charm, fascination, and
desire, glowing mysteriously on the dark background.  Something
imperceptible in the lines of her attitude, in the modulations of her
voice, seemed to soften that suggestion of calm unconscious pride which
enveloped her always like a mantle.  He, sensitive like a bond slave to
the moods of the master, was moved by the subtle relenting of her grace
to an infinite tenderness.  He fought down the impulse to seize her by
the hand, lead her down into the garden away under the big trees, and
throw himself at her feet uttering words of love.  His emotion was so
strong that he had to cough slightly, and not knowing what to talk to her
about he began to tell her of his mother and sisters.  All the family
were coming to London to live there, for some little time at least.

I hope you will go and tell them something of me.  Something seen, he
said pressingly.

By this miserable subterfuge, like a man about to part with his life, he
hoped to make her remember him a little longer.

Certainly, she said.  Ill be glad to call when I get back.  But that
when may be a long time.

He heard a light sigh.  A cruel jealous curiosity made him ask

Are you growing weary, Miss Moorsom?

A silence fell on his low spoken question.

Do you mean heart-weary? sounded Miss Moorsoms voice.  You dont know
me, I see.

Ah!  Never despair, he muttered.

This, Mr. Renouard, is a work of reparation.  I stand for truth here.  I
cant think of myself.

He could have taken her by the throat for every word seemed an insult to
his passion; but he only said

I never doubted thethenobility of your purpose.

And to hear the word weariness pronounced in this connection surprises
me.  And from a man too who, I understand, has never counted the cost.

You are pleased to tease me, he said, directly he had recovered his
voice and had mastered his anger.  It was as if Professor Moorsom had
dropped poison in his ear which was spreading now and tainting his
passion, his very jealousy.  He mistrusted every word that came from
those lips on which his life hung.  How can you know anything of men who
do not count the cost? he asked in his gentlest tones.

From hearsaya little.

Well, I assure you they are like the others, subject to suffering,
victims of spells. . . .

One of them, at least, speaks very strangely.

She dismissed the subject after a short silence.  Mr. Renouard, I had a
disappointment this morning.  This mail brought me a letter from the
widow of the old butleryou know.  I expected to learn that she had heard
fromfrom here.  But no.  No letter arrived home since we left.

Her voice was calm.  His jealousy couldnt stand much more of this sort
of talk; but he was glad that nothing had turned up to help the search;
glad blindly, unreasonablyonly because it would keep her longer in his
sightsince she wouldnt give up.

I am too near her, he thought, moving a little further on the seat.  He
was afraid in the revulsion of feeling of flinging himself on her hands,
which were lying on her lap, and covering them with kisses.  He was
afraid.  Nothing, nothing could shake that spellnot if she were ever so
false, stupid, or degraded.  She was fate itself.  The extent of his
misfortune plunged him in such a stupor that he failed at first to hear
the sound of voices and footsteps inside the drawing-room.  Willie had
come homeand the Editor was with him.

They burst out on the terrace babbling noisily, and then pulling
themselves together stood still, surprisingand as if themselves
surprised.



CHAPTER VII


They had been feasting a poet from the bush, the latest discovery of the
Editor.  Such discoveries were the business, the vocation, the pride and
delight of the only apostle of letters in the hemisphere, the solitary
patron of culture, the Slave of the Lampas he subscribed himself at the
bottom of the weekly literary page of his paper.  He had had no
difficulty in persuading the virtuous Willie (who had festive instincts)
to help in the good work, and now they had left the poet lying asleep on
the hearthrug of the editorial room and had rushed to the Dunster mansion
wildly.  The Editor had another discovery to announce.  Swaying a little
where he stood he opened his mouth very wide to shout the one word
Found!  Behind him Willie flung both his hands above his head and let
them fall dramatically.  Renouard saw the four white-headed people at the
end of the terrace rise all together from their chairs with an effect of
sudden panic.

I tell youheisfound, the patron of letters shouted emphatically.

What is this! exclaimed Renouard in a choked voice.  Miss Moorsom
seized his wrist suddenly, and at that contact fire ran through all his
veins, a hot stillness descended upon him in which he heard the bloodor
the firebeating in his ears.  He made a movement as if to rise, but was
restrained by the convulsive pressure on his wrist.

No, no.  Miss Moorsoms eyes stared black as night, searching the space
before her.  Far away the Editor strutted forward, Willie following with
his ostentatious manner of carrying his bulky and oppressive carcass
which, however, did not remain exactly perpendicular for two seconds
together.

The innocent Arthur . . . Yes.  Weve got him, the Editor became very
business-like.  Yes, this letter has done it.

He plunged into an inside pocket for it, slapped the scrap of paper with
his open palm.  From that old woman.  William had it in his pocket since
this morning when Miss Moorsom gave it to him to show me.  Forgot all
about it till an hour ago.  Thought it was of no importance.  Well, no!
Not till it was properly read.

Renouard and Miss Moorsom emerged from the shadows side by side, a
well-matched couple, animated yet statuesque in their calmness and in
their pallor.  She had let go his wrist.  On catching sight of Renouard
the Editor exclaimed:

Whatyou here! in a quite shrill voice.

There came a dead pause.  All the faces had in them something dismayed
and cruel.

Hes the very man we want, continued the Editor.  Excuse my
excitement.  You are the very man, Renouard.  Didnt you tell me that
your assistant called himself Walter?  Yes?  Thought so.  But heres that
old womanthe butlers wifelisten to this.  She writes: All I can tell
you, Miss, is that my poor husband directed his letters to the name of H.
Walter.

Renouards violent but repressed exclamation was lost in a general murmur
and shuffle of feet.  The Editor made a step forward, bowed with
creditable steadiness.

Miss Moorsom, allow me to congratulate you from the bottom of my heart
on the happyerissue. . . 

Wait, muttered Renouard irresolutely.

The Editor jumped on him in the manner of their old friendship.  Ah,
you!  You are a fine fellow too.  With your solitary ways of life you
will end by having no more discrimination than a savage.  Fancy living
with a gentleman for months and never guessing.  A man, I am certain,
accomplished, remarkable, out of the common, since he had been
distinguished (he bowed again) by Miss Moorsom, whom we all admire.

She turned her back on him.

I hope to goodness you havent been leading him a dogs life, Geoffrey,
the Editor addressed his friend in a whispered aside.

Renouard seized a chair violently, sat down, and propping his elbow on
his knee leaned his head on his hand.  Behind him the sister of the
professor looked up to heaven and wrung her hands stealthily.  Mrs.
Dunsters hands were clasped forcibly under her chin, but she, dear soul,
was looking sorrowfully at Willie.  The model nephew!  In this strange
state!  So very much flushed!  The careful disposition of the thin hairs
across Willies bald spot was deplorably disarranged, and the spot itself
was red and, as it were, steaming.

Whats the matter, Geoffrey?  The Editor seemed disconcerted by the
silent attitudes round him, as though he had expected all these people to
shout and dance.  You have him on the islandhavent you?

Oh, yes: I have him there, said Renouard, without looking up.

Well, then!  The Editor looked helplessly around as if begging for
response of some sort.  But the only response that came was very
unexpected.  Annoyed at being left in the background, and also because
very little drink made him nasty, the emotional Willie turned malignant
all at once, and in a bibulous tone surprising in a man able to keep his
balance so well

Aha!  But you havent got him herenot yet! he sneered.  No!  You
havent got him yet.

This outrageous exhibition was to the Editor like the lash to a jaded
horse.  He positively jumped.

What of that?  What do you mean?  Wehaventgothimhere.  Of course he
isnt here!  But Geoffreys schooner is here.  She can be sent at once to
fetch him here.  No!  Stay!  Theres a better plan.  Why shouldnt you
all sail over to Malata, professor?  Save time!  I am sure Miss Moorsom
would prefer. . .

With a gallant flourish of his arm he looked for Miss Moorsom.  She had
disappeared.  He was taken aback somewhat.

Ah!  Hm.  Yes. . . . Why not.  A pleasure cruise, delightful ship,
delightful season, delightful errand, del . . . No!  There are no
objections.  Geoffrey, I understand, has indulged in a bungalow three
sizes too large for him.  He can put you all up.  It will be a pleasure
for him.  It will be the greatest privilege.  Any man would be proud of
being an agent of this happy reunion.  I am proud of the little part Ive
played.  He will consider it the greatest honour.  Geoff, my boy, you had
better be stirring to-morrow bright and early about the preparations for
the trip.  It would be criminal to lose a single day.

He was as flushed as Willie, the excitement keeping up the effect of the
festive dinner.  For a time Renouard, silent, as if he had not heard a
word of all that babble, did not stir.  But when he got up it was to
advance towards the Editor and give him such a hearty slap on the back
that the plump little man reeled in his tracks and looked quite
frightened for a moment.

You are a heaven-born discoverer and a first-rate manager. . . Hes
right.  Its the only way.  You cant resist the claim of sentiment, and
you must even risk the voyage to Malata. . .  Renouards voice sank.  A
lonely spot, he added, and fell into thought under all these eyes
converging on him in the sudden silence.  His slow glance passed over all
the faces in succession, remaining arrested on Professor Moorsom, stony
eyed, a smouldering cigar in his fingers, and with his sister standing by
his side.

I shall be infinitely gratified if you consent to come.  But, of course,
you will.  We shall sail to-morrow evening then.  And now let me leave
you to your happiness.

He bowed, very grave, pointed suddenly his finger at Willie who was
swaying about with a sleepy frown. . . . Look at him.  Hes overcome
with happiness.  You had better put him to bed . . .  and disappeared
while every head on the terrace was turned to Willie with varied
expressions.

Renouard ran through the house.  Avoiding the carriage road he fled down
the steep short cut to the shore, where his gig was waiting.  At his loud
shout the sleeping Kanakas jumped up.  He leaped in.  Shove off.  Give
way! and the gig darted through the water.  Give way!  Give way!  She
flew past the wool-clippers sleeping at their anchors each with the open
unwinking eye of the lamp in the rigging; she flew past the flagship of
the Pacific squadron, a great mass all dark and silent, heavy with the
slumbers of five hundred men, and where the invisible sentries heard his
urgent Give way!  Give way! in the night.  The Kanakas, panting, rose
off the thwarts at every stroke.  Nothing could be fast enough for him!
And he ran up the side of his schooner shaking the ladder noisily with
his rush.

On deck he stumbled and stood still.

Wherefore this haste?  To what end, since he knew well before he started
that he had a pursuer from whom there was no escape.

As his foot touched the deck his will, his purpose he had been hurrying
to save, died out within.  It had been nothing less than getting the
schooner under-way, letting her vanish silently in the night from amongst
these sleeping ships.  And now he was certain he could not do it.  It was
impossible!  And he reflected that whether he lived or died such an act
would lay him under a dark suspicion from which he shrank.  No, there was
nothing to be done.

He went down into the cabin and, before even unbuttoning his overcoat,
took out of the drawer the letter addressed to his assistant; that letter
which he had found in the pigeon-hole labelled Malata in young
Dunsters outer office, where it had been waiting for three months some
occasion for being forwarded.  From the moment of dropping it in the
drawer he had utterly forgotten its existencetill now, when the mans
name had come out so clamorously.  He glanced at the common envelope,
noted the shaky and laborious handwriting: H. Walter, Esqre.  Undoubtedly
the very last letter the old butler had posted before his illness, and in
answer clearly to one from Master Arthur instructing him to address in
the future: Care of Messrs. W. Dunster and Co.  Renouard made as if to
open the envelope, but paused, and, instead, tore the letter deliberately
in two, in four, in eight.  With his hand full of pieces of paper he
returned on deck and scattered them overboard on the dark water, in which
they vanished instantly.

He did it slowly, without hesitation or remorse.  H. Walter, Esqre, in
Malata.  The innocent ArthurWhat was his name?  The man sought for by
that woman who as she went by seemed to draw all the passion of the earth
to her, without effort, not deigning to notice, naturally, as other women
breathed the air.  But Renouard was no longer jealous of her very
existence.  Whatever its meaning it was not for that man he had picked up
casually on obscure impulse, to get rid of the tiresome expostulations of
a so-called friend; a man of whom he really knew nothingand now a dead
man.  In Malata.  Oh, yes!  He was there secure enough, untroubled in his
grave.  In Malata.  To bury him was the last service Renouard had
rendered to his assistant before leaving the island on this trip to town.

Like many men ready enough for arduous enterprises Renouard was inclined
to evade the small complications of existence.  This trait of his
character was composed of a little indolence, some disdain, and a
shrinking from contests with certain forms of vulgaritylike a man who
would face a lion and go out of his way to avoid a toad.  His intercourse
with the meddlesome journalist was that merely outward intimacy without
sympathy some young men get drawn into easily.  It had amused him rather
to keep that friend in the dark about the fate of his assistant.
Renouard had never needed other company than his own, for there was in
him something of the sensitiveness of a dreamer who is easily jarred.  He
had said to himself that the all-knowing one would only preach again
about the evils of solitude and worry his head off in favour of some
forlornly useless protg of his.  Also the inquisitiveness of the Editor
had irritated him and had closed his lips in sheer disgust.

And now he contemplated the noose of consequences drawing tight around
him.

It was the memory of that diplomatic reticence which on the terrace had
stiffled his first cry which would have told them all that the man sought
for was not to be met on earth any more.  He shrank from the absurdity of
hearing the all-knowing one, and not very sober at that, turning on him
with righteous reproaches

You never told me.  You gave me to understand that your assistant was
alive, and now you say hes dead.  Which is it?  Were you lying then or
are you lying now?  No! the thought of such a scene was not to be borne.
He had sat down appalled, thinking: What shall I do now?

His courage had oozed out of him.  Speaking the truth meant the Moorsoms
going away at oncewhile it seemed to him that he would give the last
shred of his rectitude to secure a day more of her company.  He sat
onsilent.  Slowly, from confused sensations, from his talk with the
professor, the manner of the girl herself, the intoxicating familiarity
of her sudden hand-clasp, there had come to him a half glimmer of hope.
The other man was dead.  Then! . . . Madness, of coursebut he could not
give it up.  He had listened to that confounded busybody arranging
everythingwhile all these people stood around assenting, under the spell
of that dead romance.  He had listened scornful and silent.  The glimmers
of hope, of opportunity, passed before his eyes.  He had only to sit
still and say nothing.  That and no more.  And what was truth to him in
the face of that great passion which had flung him prostrate in spirit at
her adored feet!

And now it was done!  Fatality had willed it!  With the eyes of a mortal
struck by the maddening thunderbolt of the gods, Renouard looked up to
the sky, an immense black pall dusted over with gold, on which great
shudders seemed to pass from the breath of life affirming its sway.



CHAPTER VIII


At last, one morning, in a clear spot of a glassy horizon charged with
heraldic masses of black vapours, the island grew out from the sea,
showing here and there its naked members of basaltic rock through the
rents of heavy foliage.  Later, in the great spilling of all the riches
of sunset, Malata stood out green and rosy before turning into a violet
shadow in the autumnal light of the expiring day.  Then came the night.
In the faint airs the schooner crept on past a sturdy squat headland, and
it was pitch dark when her headsails ran down, she turned short on her
heel, and her anchor bit into the sandy bottom on the edge of the outer
reef; for it was too dangerous then to attempt entering the little bay
full of shoals.  After the last solemn flutter of the mainsail the
murmuring voices of the Moorsom party lingered, very frail, in the black
stillness.

They were sitting aft, on chairs, and nobody made a move.  Early in the
day, when it had become evident that the wind was failing, Renouard,
basing his advice on the shortcomings of his bachelor establishment, had
urged on the ladies the advisability of not going ashore in the middle of
the night.  Now he approached them in a constrained manner (it was
astonishing the constraint that had reigned between him and his guests
all through the passage) and renewed his arguments.  No one ashore would
dream of his bringing any visitors with him.  Nobody would even think of
coming off.  There was only one old canoe on the plantation.  And landing
in the schooners boats would be awkward in the dark.  There was the risk
of getting aground on some shallow patches.  It would be best to spend
the rest of the night on board.

There was really no opposition.  The professor smoking a pipe, and very
comfortable in an ulster buttoned over his tropical clothes, was the
first to speak from his long chair.

Most excellent advice.

Next to him Miss Moorsom assented by a long silence.  Then in a voice as
of one coming out of a dream

And so this is Malata, she said.  I have often wondered . . .

A shiver passed through Renouard.  She had wondered!  What about?  Malata
was himself.  He and Malata were one.  And she had wondered!  She had . . .

The professors sister leaned over towards Renouard.  Through all these
days at sea the mansthe found mansexistence had not been alluded to
on board the schooner.  That reticence was part of the general constraint
lying upon them all.  She, herself, certainly had not been exactly elated
by this findingpoor Arthur, without money, without prospects.  But she
felt moved by the sentiment and romance of the situation.

Isnt it wonderful, she whispered out of her white wrap, to think of
poor Arthur sleeping there, so near to our dear lovely Felicia, and not
knowing the immense joy in store for him to-morrow.

There was such artificiality in the wax-flower lady that nothing in this
speech touched Renouard.  It was but the simple anxiety of his heart that
he was voicing when he muttered gloomily

No one in the world knows what to-morrow may hold in store.

The mature lady had a recoil as though he had said something impolite.
What a harsh thing to sayinstead of finding something nice and
appropriate.  On board, where she never saw him in evening clothes,
Renouards resemblance to a dukes son was not so apparent to her.
Nothing but hisahbohemianism remained.  She rose with a sort of
ostentation.

Its lateand since we are going to sleep on board to-night . . . she
said.  But it does seem so cruel.

The professor started up eagerly, knocking the ashes out of his pipe.
Infinitely more sensible, my dear Emma.

Renouard waited behind Miss Moorsoms chair.

She got up slowly, moved one step forward, and paused looking at the
shore.  The blackness of the island blotted out the stars with its vague
mass like a low thundercloud brooding over the waters and ready to burst
into flame and crashes.

And sothis is Malata, she repeated dreamily, moving towards the cabin
door.  The clear cloak hanging from her shoulders, the ivory facefor the
night had put out nothing of her but the gleams of her hairmade her
resemble a shining dream-woman uttering words of wistful inquiry.  She
disappeared without a sign, leaving Renouard penetrated to the very
marrow by the sounds that came from her body like a mysterious resonance
of an exquisite instrument.

He stood stock still.  What was this accidental touch which had evoked
the strange accent of her voice?  He dared not answer that question.  But
he had to answer the question of what was to be done now.  Had the moment
of confession come?  The thought was enough to make ones blood run cold.

It was as if those people had a premonition of something.  In the
taciturn days of the passage he had noticed their reserve even amongst
themselves.  The professor smoked his pipe moodily in retired spots.
Renouard had caught Miss Moorsoms eyes resting on himself more than
once, with a peculiar and grave expression.  He fancied that she avoided
all opportunities of conversation.  The maiden lady seemed to nurse a
grievance.  And now what had he to do?

The lights on the deck had gone out one after the other.  The schooner
slept.

About an hour after Miss Moorsom had gone below without a sign or a word
for him, Renouard got out of his hammock slung in the waist under the
midship awningfor he had given up all the accommodation below to his
guests.  He got out with a sudden swift movement, flung off his sleeping
jacket, rolled his pyjamas up his thighs, and stole forward, unseen by
the one Kanaka of the anchor-watch.  His white torso, naked like a
stripped athletes, glimmered, ghostly, in the deep shadows of the deck.
Unnoticed he got out of the ship over the knight-heads, ran along the
back rope, and seizing the dolphin-striker firmly with both hands,
lowered himself into the sea without a splash.

He swam away, noiseless like a fish, and then struck boldly for the land,
sustained, embraced, by the tepid water.  The gentle, voluptuous heave of
its breast swung him up and down slightly; sometimes a wavelet murmured
in his ears; from time to time, lowering his feet, he felt for the bottom
on a shallow patch to rest and correct his direction.  He landed at the
lower end of the bungalow garden, into the dead stillness of the island.
There were no lights.  The plantation seemed to sleep, as profoundly as
the schooner.  On the path a small shell cracked under his naked heel.

The faithful half-caste foreman going his rounds cocked his ears at the
sharp sound.  He gave one enormous start of fear at the sight of the
swift white figure flying at him out of the night.  He crouched in
terror, and then sprang up and clicked his tongue in amazed recognition.

Tse!  Tse!  The master!

Be quiet, Luiz, and listen to what I say.

Yes, it was the master, the strong master who was never known to raise
his voice, the man blindly obeyed and never questioned.  He talked low
and rapidly in the quiet night, as if every minute were precious.  On
learning that three guests were coming to stay Luiz clicked his tongue
rapidly.  These clicks were the uniform, stenographic symbols of his
emotions, and he could give them an infinite variety of meaning.  He
listened to the rest in a deep silence hardly affected by the low, Yes,
master, whenever Renouard paused.

You understand? the latter insisted.  No preparations are to be made
till we land in the morning.  And you are to say that Mr. Walter has gone
off in a trading schooner on a round of the islands.

Yes, master.

No mistakesmind!

No, master.

Renouard walked back towards the sea.  Luiz, following him, proposed to
call out half a dozen boys and man the canoe.

Imbecile!

Tse!  Tse!  Tse!

Dont you understand that you havent seen me?

Yes, master.  But what a long swim.  Suppose you drown.

Then you can say of me and of Mr. Walter what you like.  The dead dont
mind.

Renouard entered the sea and heard a faint Tse! Tse! Tse! of concern
from the half-caste, who had already lost sight of the masters dark head
on the overshadowed water.

Renouard set his direction by a big star that, dipping on the horizon,
seemed to look curiously into his face.  On this swim back he felt the
mournful fatigue of all that length of the traversed road, which brought
him no nearer to his desire.  It was as if his love had sapped the
invisible supports of his strength.  There came a moment when it seemed
to him that he must have swum beyond the confines of life.  He had a
sensation of eternity close at hand, demanding no effortoffering its
peace.  It was easy to swim like this beyond the confines of life looking
at a star.  But the thought: They will think I dared not face them and
committed suicide, caused a revolt of his mind which carried him on.  He
returned on board, as he had left, unheard and unseen.  He lay in his
hammock utterly exhausted and with a confused feeling that he had been
beyond the confines of life, somewhere near a star, and that it was very
quiet there.



CHAPTER IX


Sheltered by the squat headland from the first morning sparkle of the sea
the little bay breathed a delicious freshness.  The party from the
schooner landed at the bottom of the garden.  They exchanged
insignificant words in studiously casual tones.  The professors sister
put up a long-handled eye-glass as if to scan the novel surroundings, but
in reality searching for poor Arthur anxiously.  Having never seen him
otherwise than in his town clothes she had no idea what he would look
like.  It had been left to the professor to help his ladies out of the
boat because Renouard, as if intent on giving directions, had stepped
forward at once to meet the half-caste Luiz hurrying down the path.  In
the distance, in front of the dazzlingly sunlit bungalow, a row of
dark-faced house-boys unequal in stature and varied in complexion
preserved the immobility of a guard of honour.

Luiz had taken off his soft felt hat before coming within earshot.
Renouard bent his head to his rapid talk of domestic arrangements he
meant to make for the visitors; another bed in the masters room for the
ladies and a cot for the gentleman to be hung in the room opposite
wherewhere Mr. Walterhere he gave a scared look all roundMr.
Walterhad died.

Very good, assented Renouard in an even undertone.  And remember what
you have to say of him.

Yes, master.  Onlyhe wriggled slightly and put one bare foot on the
other for a moment in apologetic embarrassmentonly IIdont like to
say it.

Renouard looked at him without anger, without any sort of expression.
Frightened of the dead?  Eh?  Wellall right.  I will say it myselfI
suppose once for all. . . .  Immediately he raised his voice very much.

Send the boys down to bring up the luggage.

Yes, master.

Renouard turned to his distinguished guests who, like a personally
conducted party of tourists, had stopped and were looking about them.

I am sorry, he began with an impassive face.  My man has just told me
that Mr. Walter . . . he managed to smile, but didnt correct himself .
. . has gone in a trading schooner on a short tour of the islands, to
the westward.

This communication was received in profound silence.

Renouard forgot himself in the thought: Its done!  But the sight of
the string of boys marching up to the house with suit-cases and
dressing-bags rescued him from that appalling abstraction.

All I can do is to beg you to make yourselves at home . . . with what
patience you may.

This was so obviously the only thing to do that everybody moved on at
once.  The professor walked alongside Renouard, behind the two ladies.

Rather unexpectedthis absence.

Not exactly, muttered Renouard.  A trip has to be made every year to
engage labour.

I see . . . And he . . . How vexingly elusive the poor fellow has
become!  Ill begin to think that some wicked fairy is favouring this
love tale with unpleasant attentions.

Renouard noticed that the party did not seem weighed down by this new
disappointment.  On the contrary they moved with a freer step.  The
professors sister dropped her eye-glass to the end of its chain.  Miss
Moorsom took the lead.  The professor, his lips unsealed, lingered in the
open: but Renouard did not listen to that mans talk.  He looked after
that mans daughterif indeed that creature of irresistible seductions
were a daughter of mortals.  The very intensity of his desire, as if his
soul were streaming after her through his eyes, defeated his object of
keeping hold of her as long as possible with, at least, one of his
senses.  Her moving outlines dissolved into a misty coloured shimmer of a
woman made of flame and shadows, crossing the threshold of his house.

The days which followed were not exactly such as Renouard had fearedyet
they were not better than his fears.  They were accursed in all the moods
they brought him.  But the general aspect of things was quiet.  The
professor smoked innumerable pipes with the air of a worker on his
holiday, always in movement and looking at things with that mysteriously
sagacious aspect of men who are admittedly wiser than the rest of the
world.  His white head of hairwhiter than anything within the horizon
except the broken water on the reefswas glimpsed in every part of the
plantation always on the move under the white parasol.  And once he
climbed the headland and appeared suddenly to those below, a white speck
elevated in the blue, with a diminutive but statuesque effect.

Felicia Moorsom remained near the house.  Sometimes she could be seen
with a despairing expression scribbling rapidly in her lock-up dairy.
But only for a moment.  At the sound of Renouards footsteps she would
turn towards him her beautiful face, adorable in that calm which was like
a wilful, like a cruel ignoring of her tremendous power.  Whenever she
sat on the verandah, on a chair more specially reserved for her use,
Renouard would stroll up and sit on the steps near her, mostly silent,
and often not trusting himself to turn his glance on her.  She, very
still with her eyes half-closed, looked down on his headso that to a
beholder (such as Professor Moorsom, for instance) she would appear to be
turning over in her mind profound thoughts about that man sitting at her
feet, his shoulders bowed a little, his hands listlessas if vanquished.
And, indeed, the moral poison of falsehood has such a decomposing power
that Renouard felt his old personality turn to dead dust.  Often, in the
evening, when they sat outside conversing languidly in the dark, he felt
that he must rest his forehead on her feet and burst into tears.

The professors sister suffered from some little strain caused by the
unstability of her own feelings toward Renouard.  She could not tell
whether she really did dislike him or not.  At times he appeared to her
most fascinating; and, though he generally ended by saying something
shockingly crude, she could not resist her inclination to talk with
himat least not always.  One day when her niece had left them alone on
the verandah she leaned forward in her chairspeckless, resplendent, and,
in her way, almost as striking a personality as her niece, who did not
resemble her in the least.  Dear Felicia has inherited her hair and the
greatest part of her appearance from her mother, the maiden lady used to
tell people.

She leaned forward then, confidentially.

Oh!  Mr. Renouard!  Havent you something comforting to say?

He looked up, as surprised as if a voice from heaven had spoken with this
perfect society intonation, and by the puzzled profundity of his blue
eyes fluttered the wax-flower of refined womanhood.  She continued.
ForI can speak to you openly on this tiresome subjectonly think what a
terrible strain this hope deferred must be for Felicias heartfor her
nerves.

Why speak to me about it, he muttered feeling half choked suddenly.

Why!  As a frienda well-wisherthe kindest of hosts.  I am afraid we
are really eating you out of house and home.  She laughed a little.
Ah!  When, when will this suspense be relieved!  That poor lost Arthur!
I confess that I am almost afraid of the great moment.  It will be like
seeing a ghost.

Have you ever seen a ghost? asked Renouard, in a dull voice.

She shifted her hands a little.  Her pose was perfect in its ease and
middle-aged grace.

Not actually.  Only in a photograph.  But we have many friends who had
the experience of apparitions.

Ah!  They see ghosts in London, mumbled Renouard, not looking at her.

Frequentlyin a certain very interesting set.  But all sorts of people
do.  We have a friend, a very famous authorhis ghost is a girl.  One of
my brothers intimates is a very great man of science.  He is friendly
with a ghost . . . Of a girl too, she added in a voice as if struck for
the first time by the coincidence.  It is the photograph of that
apparition which I have seen.  Very sweet.  Most interesting.  A little
cloudy naturally. . . . Mr. Renouard!  I hope you are not a sceptic.
Its so consoling to think. . .

Those plantation boys of mine see ghosts too, said Renouard grimly.

The sister of the philosopher sat up stiffly.  What crudeness!  It was
always so with this strange young man.

Mr. Renouard!  How can you compare the superstitious fancies of your
horrible savages with the manifestations . . . 

Words failed her.  She broke off with a very faint primly angry smile.
She was perhaps the more offended with him because of that flutter at the
beginning of the conversation.  And in a moment with perfect tact and
dignity she got up from her chair and left him alone.

Renouard didnt even look up.  It was not the displeasure of the lady
which deprived him of his sleep that night.  He was beginning to forget
what simple, honest sleep was like.  His hammock from the ship had been
hung for him on a side verandah, and he spent his nights in it on his
back, his hands folded on his chest, in a sort of half conscious,
oppressed stupor.  In the morning he watched with unseeing eyes the
headland come out a shapeless inkblot against the thin light of the false
dawn, pass through all the stages of daybreak to the deep purple of its
outlined mass nimbed gloriously with the gold of the rising sun.  He
listened to the vague sounds of waking within the house: and suddenly he
became aware of Luiz standing by the hammockobviously troubled.

Whats the matter?

Tse!  Tse!  Tse!

Well, what now?  Trouble with the boys?

No, master.  The gentleman when I take him his bath water he speak to
me.  He ask mehe askwhen, when, I think Mr. Walter, he come back.

The half-castes teeth chattered slightly.  Renouard got out of the
hammock.

And he is here all the timeeh?

Luiz nodded a scared affirmative, but at once protested, I no see him.
I never.  Not I!  The ignorant wild boys say they see . . . Something!
Ough!

He clapped his teeth on another short rattle, and stood there, shrunk,
blighted, like a man in a freezing blast.

And what did you say to the gentleman?

I say I dont knowand I clear out.  II dont like to speak of him.

All right.  We shall try to lay that poor ghost, said Renouard
gloomily, going off to a small hut near by to dress.  He was saying to
himself: This fellow will end by giving me away.  The last thing that I
. . . No!  That mustnt be.  And feeling his hand being forced he
discovered the whole extent of his cowardice.



CHAPTER X


That morning wandering about his plantation, more like a frightened soul
than its creator and master, he dodged the white parasol bobbing up here
and there like a buoy adrift on a sea of dark-green plants.  The crop
promised to be magnificent, and the fashionable philosopher of the age
took other than a merely scientific interest in the experiment.  His
investments were judicious, but he had always some little money lying by,
for experiments.

After lunch, being left alone with Renouard, he talked a little of
cultivation and such matters.  Then suddenly:

By the way, is it true what my sister tells me, that your plantation
boys have been disturbed by a ghost?

Renouard, who since the ladies had left the table was not keeping such a
strict watch on himself, came out of his abstraction with a start and a
stiff smile.

My foreman had some trouble with them during my absence.  They funk
working in a certain field on the slope of the hill.

A ghost here! exclaimed the amused professor.  Then our whole
conception of the psychology of ghosts must be revised.  This island has
been uninhabited probably since the dawn of ages.  How did a ghost come
here.  By air or water?  And why did it leave its native haunts.  Was it
from misanthropy?  Was he expelled from some community of spirits?

Renouard essayed to respond in the same tone.  The words died on his
lips.  Was it a man or a woman ghost, the professor inquired.

I dont know.  Renouard made an effort to appear at ease.  He had, he
said, a couple of Tahitian amongst his boysa ghost-ridden race.  They
had started the scare.  They had probably brought their ghost with them.

Let us investigate the matter, Renouard, proposed the professor half in
earnest.  We may make some interesting discoveries as to the state of
primitive minds, at any rate.

This was too much.  Renouard jumped up and leaving the room went out and
walked about in front of the house.  He would allow no one to force his
hand.  Presently the professor joined him outside.  He carried his
parasol, but had neither his book nor his pipe with him.  Amiably serious
he laid his hand on his dear young friends arm.

We are all of us a little strung up, he said.  For my part I have been
like sister Anne in the story.  But I cannot see anything coming.
Anything that would be the least good for anybodyI mean.

Renouard had recovered sufficiently to murmur coldly his regret of this
waste of time.  For that was what, he supposed, the professor had in his
mind.

Time, mused Professor Moorsom.  I dont know that time can be wasted.
But I will tell you, my dear friend, what this is: it is an awful waste
of life.  I mean for all of us.  Even for my sister, who has got a
headache and is gone to lie down.

He shook gently Renouards arm.  Yes, for all of us!  One may meditate
on life endlessly, one may even have a poor opinion of itbut the fact
remains that we have only one life to live.  And it is short.  Think of
that, my young friend.

He released Renouards arm and stepped out of the shade opening his
parasol.  It was clear that there was something more in his mind than
mere anxiety about the date of his lectures for fashionable audiences.
What did the man mean by his confounded platitudes?  To Renouard, scared
by Luiz in the morning (for he felt that nothing could be more fatal than
to have his deception unveiled otherwise than by personal confession),
this talk sounded like encouragement or a warning from that man who
seemed to him to be very brazen and very subtle.  It was like being
bullied by the dead and cajoled by the living into a throw of dice for a
supreme stake.

Renouard went away to some distance from the house and threw himself down
in the shade of a tree.  He lay there perfectly still with his forehead
resting on his folded arms, light-headed and thinking.  It seemed to him
that he must be on fire, then that he had fallen into a cool whirlpool, a
smooth funnel of water swirling about with nauseating rapidity.  And then
(it must have been a reminiscence of his boyhood) he was walking on the
dangerous thin ice of a river, unable to turn back. . . . Suddenly it
parted from shore to shore with a loud crack like the report of a gun.

With one leap he found himself on his feet.  All was peace, stillness,
sunshine.  He walked away from there slowly.  Had he been a gambler he
would have perhaps been supported in a measure by the mere excitement.
But he was not a gambler.  He had always disdained that artificial manner
of challenging the fates.  The bungalow came into view, bright and
pretty, and all about everything was peace, stillness, sunshine. . . .

While he was plodding towards it he had a disagreeable sense of the dead
mans company at his elbow.  The ghost!  He seemed to be everywhere but
in his grave.  Could one ever shake him off? he wondered.  At that moment
Miss Moorsom came out on the verandah; and at once, as if by a mystery of
radiating waves, she roused a great tumult in his heart, shook earth and
sky togetherbut he plodded on.  Then like a grave song-note in the storm
her voice came to him ominously.

Ah!  Mr. Renouard. . .   He came up and smiled, but she was very
serious.  I cant keep still any longer.  Is there time to walk up this
headland and back before dark?

The shadows were lying lengthened on the ground; all was stillness and
peace.  No, said Renouard, feeling suddenly as steady as a rock.  But
I can show you a view from the central hill which your father has not
seen.  A view of reefs and of broken water without end, and of great
wheeling clouds of sea-birds.

She came down the verandah steps at once and they moved off.  You go
first, he proposed, and Ill direct you.  To the left.

She was wearing a short nankin skirt, a muslin blouse; he could see
through the thin stuff the skin of her shoulders, of her arms.  The noble
delicacy of her neck caused him a sort of transport.  The path begins
where these three palms are.  The only palms on the island.

I see.

She never turned her head.  After a while she observed: This path looks
as if it had been made recently.

Quite recently, he assented very low.

They went on climbing steadily without exchanging another word; and when
they stood on the top she gazed a long time before her.  The low evening
mist veiled the further limit of the reefs.  Above the enormous and
melancholy confusion, as of a fleet of wrecked islands, the restless
myriads of sea-birds rolled and unrolled dark ribbons on the sky,
gathered in clouds, soared and stooped like a play of shadows, for they
were too far for them to hear their cries.

Renouard broke the silence in low tones.

Theyll be settling for the night presently.  She made no sound.  Round
them all was peace and declining sunshine.  Near by, the topmost pinnacle
of Malata, resembling the top of a buried tower, rose a rock,
weather-worn, grey, weary of watching the monotonous centuries of the
Pacific.  Renouard leaned his shoulders against it.  Felicia Moorsom
faced him suddenly, her splendid black eyes full on his face as though
she had made up her mind at last to destroy his wits once and for all.
Dazzled, he lowered his eyelids slowly.

Mr. Renouard!  There is something strange in all this.  Tell me where he
is?

He answered deliberately.

On the other side of this rock.  I buried him there myself.

She pressed her hands to her breast, struggled for her breath for a
moment, then: Ohhh! . . . You buried him! . . . What sort of man are
you? . . . You dared not tell! . . . He is another of your victims? . . .
You dared not confess that evening. . . . You must have killed him.  What
could he have done to you? . . . You fastened on him some atrocious
quarrel and . . .

Her vengeful aspect, her poignant cries left him as unmoved as the weary
rock against which he leaned.  He only raised his eyelids to look at her
and lowered them slowly.  Nothing more.  It silenced her.  And as if
ashamed she made a gesture with her hand, putting away from her that
thought.  He spoke, quietly ironic at first.

Ha! the legendary Renouard of sensitive idiotsthe ruthless
adventurerthe ogre with a future.  That was a parrot cry, Miss Moorsom.
I dont think that the greatest fool of them all ever dared hint such a
stupid thing of me that I killed men for nothing.  No, I had noticed this
man in a hotel.  He had come from up country I was told, and was doing
nothing.  I saw him sitting there lonely in a corner like a sick crow,
and I went over one evening to talk to him.  Just on impulse.  He wasnt
impressive.  He was pitiful.  My worst enemy could have told you he
wasnt good enough to be one of Renouards victims.  It didnt take me
long to judge that he was drugging himself.  Not drinking.  Drugs.

Ah!  Its now that you are trying to murder him, she cried.

Really.  Always the Renouard of shopkeepers legend.  Listen!  I would
never have been jealous of him.  And yet I am jealous of the air you
breathe, of the soil you tread on, of the world that sees youmoving
freenot mine.  But never mind.  I rather liked him.  For a certain
reason I proposed he should come to be my assistant here.  He said he
believed this would save him.  It did not save him from death.  It came
to him as it were from nothingjust a fall.  A mere slip and tumble of
ten feet into a ravine.  But it seems he had been hurt before
up-countryby a horse.  He ailed and ailed.  No, he was not a
steel-tipped man.  And his poor soul seemed to have been damaged too.  It
gave way very soon.

This is tragic! Felicia Moorsom whispered with feeling.  Renouards
lips twitched, but his level voice continued mercilessly.

Thats the story.  He rallied a little one night and said he wanted to
tell me something.  I, being a gentleman, he said, he could confide in
me.  I told him that he was mistaken.  That there was a good deal of a
plebeian in me, that he couldnt know.  He seemed disappointed.  He
muttered something about his innocence and something that sounded like a
curse on some woman, then turned to the wall andjust grew cold.

On a woman, cried Miss Moorsom indignantly.  What woman?

I wonder! said Renouard, raising his eyes and noting the crimson of her
ear-lobes against the live whiteness of her complexion, the sombre, as if
secret, night-splendour of her eyes under the writhing flames of her
hair.  Some woman who wouldnt believe in that poor innocence of his. .
. Yes.  You probably.  And now you will not believe in menot even in me
who must in truth be what I ameven to death.  No!  You wont.  And yet,
Felicia, a woman like you and a man like me do not often come together on
this earth.

The flame of her glorious head scorched his face.  He flung his hat far
away, and his suddenly lowered eyelids brought out startlingly his
resemblance to antique bronze, the profile of Pallas, still, austere,
bowed a little in the shadow of the rock.  Oh!  If you could only
understand the truth that is in me! he added.

She waited, as if too astounded to speak, till he looked up again, and
then with unnatural force as if defending herself from some unspoken
aspersion, Its I who stand for truth here!  Believe in you!  In you,
who by a heartless falsehoodand nothing else, nothing else, do you
hear?have brought me here, deceived, cheated, as in some abominable
farce!  She sat down on a boulder, rested her chin in her hands, in the
pose of simple griefmourning for herself.

It only wanted this.  Why!  Oh!  Why is it that ugliness, ridicule, and
baseness must fall across my path.

On that height, alone with the sky, they spoke to each other as if the
earth had fallen away from under their feet.

Are you grieving for your dignity?  He was a mediocre soul and could
have given you but an unworthy existence.

She did not even smile at those words, but, superb, as if lifting a
corner of the veil, she turned on him slowly.

And do you imagine I would have devoted myself to him for such a
purpose!  Dont you know that reparation was due to him from me?  A
sacred debta fine duty.  To redeem him would not have been in my powerI
know it.  But he was blameless, and it was for me to come forward.  Dont
you see that in the eyes of the world nothing could have rehabilitated
him so completely as his marriage with me?  No word of evil could be
whispered of him after I had given him my hand.  As to giving myself up
to anything less than the shaping of a mans destinyif I thought I could
do it I would abhor myself. . . .  She spoke with authority in her deep
fascinating, unemotional voice.  Renouard meditated, gloomy, as if over
some sinister riddle of a beautiful sphinx met on the wild road of his
life.

Yes.  Your father was right.  You are one of these aristocrats . . .

She drew herself up haughtily.

What do you say?  My father! . . . I an aristocrat.

Oh!  I dont mean that you are like the men and women of the time of
armours, castles, and great deeds.  Oh, no!  They stood on the naked
soil, had traditions to be faithful to, had their feet on this earth of
passions and death which is not a hothouse.  They would have been too
plebeian for you since they had to lead, to suffer with, to understand
the commonest humanity.  No, you are merely of the topmost layer,
disdainful and superior, the mere pure froth and bubble on the
inscrutable depths which some day will toss you out of existence.  But
you are you!  You are you!  You are the eternal love itselfonly, O
Divinity, it isnt your body, it is your soul that is made of foam.

She listened as if in a dream.  He had succeeded so well in his effort to
drive back the flood of his passion that his life itself seemed to run
with it out of his body.  At that moment he felt as one dead speaking.
But the headlong wave returning with tenfold force flung him on her
suddenly, with open arms and blazing eyes.  She found herself like a
feather in his grasp, helpless, unable to struggle, with her feet off the
ground.  But this contact with her, maddening like too much felicity,
destroyed its own end.  Fire ran through his veins, turned his passion to
ashes, burnt him out and left him empty, without forcealmost without
desire.  He let her go before she could cry out.  And she was so used to
the forms of repression enveloping, softening the crude impulses of old
humanity that she no longer believed in their existence as if it were an
exploded legend.  She did not recognise what had happened to her.  She
came safe out of his arms, without a struggle, not even having felt
afraid.

Whats the meaning of this? she said, outraged but calm in a scornful
way.

He got down on his knees in silence, bent low to her very feet, while she
looked down at him, a little surprised, without animosity, as if merely
curious to see what he would do.  Then, while he remained bowed to the
ground pressing the hem of her skirt to his lips, she made a slight
movement.  He got up.

No, he said.  Were you ever so much mine what could I do with you
without your consent?  No.  You dont conquer a wraith, cold mist, stuff
of dreams, illusion.  It must come to you and cling to your breast.  And
then!  Oh!  And then!

All ecstasy, all expression went out of his face.

Mr. Renouard, she said, though you can have no claim on my
consideration after having decoyed me here for the vile purpose,
apparently, of gloating over me as your possible prey, I will tell you
that I am not perhaps the extraordinary being you think I am.  You may
believe me.  Here I stand for truth itself.

Whats that to me what you are? he answered.  At a sign from you I
would climb up to the seventh heaven to bring you down to earth for my
ownand if I saw you steeped to the lips in vice, in crime, in mud, I
would go after you, take you to my armswear you for an incomparable
jewel on my breast.  And thats lovetrue lovethe gift and the curse of
the gods.  There is no other.

The truth vibrating in his voice made her recoil slightly, for she was
not fit to hear itnot even a littlenot even one single time in her
life.  It was revolting to her; and in her trouble, perhaps prompted by
the suggestion of his name or to soften the harshness of expression, for
she was obscurely moved, she spoke to him in French.

_Assez_!  _Jai horreur de tout cela_, she said.

He was white to his very lips, but he was trembling no more.  The dice
had been cast, and not even violence could alter the throw.  She passed
by him unbendingly, and he followed her down the path.  After a time she
heard him saying:

And your dream is to influence a human destiny?

Yes! she answered curtly, unabashed, with a womans complete assurance.

Then you may rest content.  You have done it.

She shrugged her shoulders slightly.  But just before reaching the end of
the path she relented, stopped, and went back to him.

I dont suppose you are very anxious for people to know how near you
came to absolute turpitude.  You may rest easy on that point.  I shall
speak to my father, of course, and we will agree to say that he has
diednothing more.

Yes, said Renouard in a lifeless voice.  He is dead.  His very ghost
shall be done with presently.

She went on, but he remained standing stock still in the dusk.  She had
already reached the three palms when she heard behind her a loud peal of
laughter, cynical and joyless, such as is heard in smoking-rooms at the
end of a scandalous story.  It made her feel positively faint for a
moment.



CHAPTER XI


Slowly a complete darkness enveloped Geoffrey Renouard.  His resolution
had failed him.  Instead of following Felicia into the house, he had
stopped under the three palms, and leaning against a smooth trunk had
abandoned himself to a sense of an immense deception and the feeling of
extreme fatigue.  This walk up the hill and down again was like the
supreme effort of an explorer trying to penetrate the interior of an
unknown country, the secret of which is too well defended by its cruel
and barren nature.  Decoyed by a mirage, he had gone too farso far that
there was no going back.  His strength was at an end.  For the first time
in his life he had to give up, and with a sort of despairing
self-possession he tried to understand the cause of the defeat.  He did
not ascribe it to that absurd dead man.

The hesitating shadow of Luiz approached him unnoticed till it spoke
timidly.  Renouard started.

Eh?  What?  Dinner waiting?  You must say I beg to be excused.  I cant
come.  But I shall see them to-morrow morning, at the landing place.
Take your orders from the professor as to the sailing of the schooner.
Go now.

Luiz, dumbfounded, retreated into the darkness.  Renouard did not move,
but hours afterwards, like the bitter fruit of his immobility, the words:
I had nothing to offer to her vanity, came from his lips in the silence
of the island.  And it was then only that he stirred, only to wear the
night out in restless tramping up and down the various paths of the
plantation.  Luiz, whose sleep was made light by the consciousness of
some impending change, heard footsteps passing by his hut, the firm tread
of the master; and turning on his mats emitted a faint Tse! Tse! Tse! of
deep concern.

Lights had been burning in the bungalow almost all through the night; and
with the first sign of day began the bustle of departure.  House boys
walked processionally carrying suit-cases and dressing-bags down to the
schooners boat, which came to the landing place at the bottom of the
garden.  Just as the rising sun threw its golden nimbus around the purple
shape of the headland, the Planter of Malata was perceived pacing
bare-headed the curve of the little bay.  He exchanged a few words with
the sailing-master of the schooner, then remained by the boat, standing
very upright, his eyes on the ground, waiting.

He had not long to wait.  Into the cool, overshadowed garden the
professor descended first, and came jauntily down the path in a lively
cracking of small shells.  With his closed parasol hooked on his forearm,
and a book in his hand, he resembled a banal tourist more than was
permissible to a man of his unique distinction.  He waved the disengaged
arm from a distance, but at close quarters, arrested before Renouards
immobility, he made no offer to shake hands.  He seemed to appraise the
aspect of the man with a sharp glance, and made up his mind.

We are going back by Suez, he began almost boisterously.  I have been
looking up the sailing lists.  If the zephirs of your Pacific are only
moderately propitious I think we are sure to catch the mail boat due in
Marseilles on the 18th of March.  This will suit me excellently. . . .
He lowered his tone.  My dear young friend, Im deeply grateful to you.

Renouards set lips moved.

Why are you grateful to me?

Ah!  Why?  In the first place you might have made us miss the next boat,
mightnt you? . . . I dont thank you for your hospitality.  You cant be
angry with me for saying that I am truly thankful to escape from it.  But
I am grateful to you for what you have done, andfor being what you are.

It was difficult to define the flavour of that speech, but Renouard
received it with an austerely equivocal smile.  The professor stepping
into the boat opened his parasol and sat down in the stern-sheets waiting
for the ladies.  No sound of human voice broke the fresh silence of the
morning while they walked the broad path, Miss Moorsom a little in
advance of her aunt.

When she came abreast of him Renouard raised his head.

Good-bye, Mr. Renouard, she said in a low voice, meaning to pass on;
but there was such a look of entreaty in the blue gleam of his sunken
eyes that after an imperceptible hesitation she laid her hand, which was
ungloved, in his extended palm.

Will you condescend to remember me? he asked, while an emotion with
which she was angry made her pale cheeks flush and her black eyes
sparkle.

This is a strange request for you to make, she said, exaggerating the
coldness of her tone.

Is it?  Impudent perhaps.  Yet I am not so guilty as you think; and bear
in mind that to me you can never make reparation.

Reparation?  To you!  It is you who can offer me no reparation for the
offence against my feelingsand my person; for what reparation can be
adequate for your odious and ridiculous plot so scornful in its
implication, so humiliating to my pride.  No!  I dont want to remember
you.

Unexpectedly, with a tightening grip, he pulled her nearer to him, and
looking into her eyes with fearless despair

Youll have to.  I shall haunt you, he said firmly.

Her hand was wrenched out of his grasp before he had time to release it.
Felicia Moorsom stepped into the boat, sat down by the side of her
father, and breathed tenderly on her crushed fingers.

The professor gave her a sidelong looknothing more.  But the professors
sister, yet on shore, had put up her long-handle double eye-glass to look
at the scene.  She dropped it with a faint rattle.

Ive never in my life heard anything so crude said to a lady, she
murmured, passing before Renouard with a perfectly erect head.  When, a
moment afterwards, softening suddenly, she turned to throw a good-bye to
that young man, she saw only his back in the distance moving towards the
bungalow.  She watched him go inamazedbefore she too left the soil of
Malata.

Nobody disturbed Renouard in that room where he had shut himself in to
breathe the evanescent perfume of her who for him was no more, till late
in the afternoon when the half-caste was heard on the other side of the
door.

He wanted the master to know that the trader _Janet_ was just entering
the cove.

Renouards strong voice on his side of the door gave him most unexpected
instructions.  He was to pay off the boys with the cash in the office and
arrange with the captain of the _Janet_ to take every worker away from
Malata, returning them to their respective homes.  An order on the
Dunster firm would be given to him in payment.

And again the silence of the bungalow remained unbroken till, next
morning, the half-caste came to report that everything was done.  The
plantation boys were embarking now.

Through a crack in the door a hand thrust at him a piece of paper, and
the door slammed to so sharply that Luiz stepped back.  Then approaching
cringingly the keyhole, in a propitiatory tone he asked:

Do I go too, master?

Yes.  You too.  Everybody.

Master stop here alone?

Silence.  And the half-castes eyes grew wide with wonder.  But he also,
like those ignorant savages, the plantation boys, was only too glad to
leave an island haunted by the ghost of a white man.  He backed away
noiselessly from the mysterious silence in the closed room, and only in
the very doorway of the bungalow allowed himself to give vent to his
feelings by a deprecatory and pained

Tse!  Tse!  Tse!



CHAPTER XII


The Moorsoms did manage to catch the homeward mail boat all right, but
had only twenty-four hours in town.  Thus the sentimental Willie could
not see very much of them.  This did not prevent him afterwards from
relating at great length, with manly tears in his eyes, how poor Miss
Moorsomthe fashionable and clever beautyfound her betrothed in Malata
only to see him die in her arms.  Most people were deeply touched by the
sad story.  It was the talk of a good many days.

But the all-knowing Editor, Renouards only friend and crony, wanted to
know more than the rest of the world.  From professional incontinence,
perhaps, he thirsted for a full cup of harrowing detail.  And when he
noticed Renouards schooner lying in port day after day he sought the
sailing master to learn the reason.  The man told him that such were his
instructions.  He had been ordered to lie there a month before returning
to Malata.  And the month was nearly up.  I will ask you to give me a
passage, said the Editor.

He landed in the morning at the bottom of the garden and found peace,
stillness, sunshine reigning everywhere, the doors and windows of the
bungalow standing wide open, no sight of a human being anywhere, the
plants growing rank and tall on the deserted fields.  For hours the
Editor and the schooners crew, excited by the mystery, roamed over the
island shouting Renouards name; and at last set themselves in grim
silence to explore systematically the uncleared bush and the deeper
ravines in search of his corpse.  What had happened?  Had he been
murdered by the boys?  Or had he simply, capricious and secretive,
abandoned his plantation taking the people with him.  It was impossible
to tell what had happened.  At last, towards the decline of the day, the
Editor and the sailing master discovered a track of sandals crossing a
strip of sandy beach on the north shore of the bay.  Following this track
fearfully, they passed round the spur of the headland, and there on a
large stone found the sandals, Renouards white jacket, and the Malay
sarong of chequered pattern which the planter of Malata was well known to
wear when going to bathe.  These things made a little heap, and the
sailor remarked, after gazing at it in silence

Birds have been hovering over this for many a day.

Hes gone bathing and got drowned, cried the Editor in dismay.

I doubt it, sir.  If he had been drowned anywhere within a mile from the
shore the body would have been washed out on the reefs.  And our boats
have found nothing so far.

Nothing was ever foundand Renouards disappearance remained in the main
inexplicable.  For to whom could it have occurred that a man would set
out calmly to swim beyond the confines of lifewith a steady strokehis
eyes fixed on a star!

Next evening, from the receding schooner, the Editor looked back for the
last time at the deserted island.  A black cloud hung listlessly over the
high rock on the middle hill; and under the mysterious silence of that
shadow Malata lay mournful, with an air of anguish in the wild sunset, as
if remembering the heart that was broken there.

                                * * * * *

_Dec._ 1913.




THE PARTNER


And that be hanged for a silly yarn.  The boatmen here in Westport have
been telling this lie to the summer visitors for years.  The sort that
gets taken out for a row at a shilling a headand asks foolish
questionsmust be told something to pass the time away.  Dye know
anything more silly than being pulled in a boat along a beach? . . . Its
like drinking weak lemonade when you arent thirsty.  I dont know why
they do it!  They dont even get sick.

A forgotten glass of beer stood at his elbow; the locality was a small
respectable smoking-room of a small respectable hotel, and a taste for
forming chance acquaintances accounts for my sitting up late with him.
His great, flat, furrowed cheeks were shaven; a thick, square wisp of
white hairs hung from his chin; its waggling gave additional point to his
deep utterance; and his general contempt for mankind with its activities
and moralities was expressed in the rakish set of his big soft hat of
black felt with a large rim, which he kept always on his head.

His appearance was that of an old adventurer, retired after many unholy
experiences in the darkest parts of the earth; but I had every reason to
believe that he had never been outside England.  From a casual remark
somebody dropped I gathered that in his early days he must have been
somehow connected with shippingwith ships in docks.  Of individuality he
had plenty.  And it was this which attracted my attention at first.  But
he was not easy to classify, and before the end of the week I gave him up
with the vague definition, an imposing old ruffian.

One rainy afternoon, oppressed by infinite boredom, I went into the
smoking-room.  He was sitting there in absolute immobility, which was
really fakir-like and impressive.  I began to wonder what could be the
associations of that sort of man, his milieu, his private connections,
his views, his morality, his friends, and even his wifewhen to my
surprise he opened a conversation in a deep, muttering voice.

I must say that since he had learned from somebody that I was a writer of
stories he had been acknowledging my existence by means of some vague
growls in the morning.

He was essentially a taciturn man.  There was an effect of rudeness in
his fragmentary sentences.  It was some time before I discovered that
what he would be at was the process by which storiesstories for
periodicalswere produced.

What could one say to a fellow like that?  But I was bored to death; the
weather continued impossible; and I resolved to be amiable.

And so you make these tales up on your own.  How do they ever come into
your head? he rumbled.

I explained that one generally got a hint for a tale.

What sort of hint?

Well, for instance, I said, I got myself rowed out to the rocks the
other day.  My boatman told me of the wreck on these rocks nearly twenty
years ago.  That could be used as a hint for a mainly descriptive bit of
story with some such title as In the Channel, for instance.

It was then that he flew out at the boatmen and the summer visitors who
listen to their tales.  Without moving a muscle of his face he emitted a
powerful Rot, from somewhere out of the depths of his chest, and went
on in his hoarse, fragmentary mumble.  Stare at the silly rocksnod
their silly heads [the visitors, I presume].  What do they think a man
isblown-out paper bag or what?go off pop like that when hes hitDamn
silly yarnHint indeed! . . . A lie?

You must imagine this statuesque ruffian enhaloed in the black rim of his
hat, letting all this out as an old dog growls sometimes, with his head
up and staring-away eyes.

Indeed! I exclaimed.  Well, but even if untrue it _is_ a hint,
enabling me to see these rocks, this gale they speak of, the heavy seas,
etc., etc., in relation to mankind.  The struggle against natural forces
and the effect of the issue on at least one, say, exalted

He interrupted me by an aggressive

Would truth be any good to you?

I shouldnt like to say, I answered, cautiously.  Its said that truth
is stranger than fiction.

Who says that? he mouthed.

Oh!  Nobody in particular.

I turned to the window; for the contemptuous beggar was oppressive to
look at, with his immovable arm on the table.  I suppose my unceremonious
manner provoked him to a comparatively long speech.

Did you ever see such a silly lot of rocks?  Like plums in a slice of
cold pudding.

I was looking at theman acre or more of black dots scattered on the
steel-grey shades of the level sea, under the uniform gossamer grey mist
with a formless brighter patch in one placethe veiled whiteness of the
cliff coming through, like a diffused, mysterious radiance.  It was a
delicate and wonderful picture, something expressive, suggestive, and
desolate, a symphony in grey and blacka Whistler.  But the next thing
said by the voice behind me made me turn round.  It growled out contempt
for all associated notions of roaring seas with concise energy, then went
on

Ino such foolishnesslooking at the rocks out theremore likely call to
mind an officeI used to look in sometimes at one timeoffice in
Londonone of them small streets behind Cannon Street Station. . . 

He was very deliberate; not jerky, only fragmentary; at times profane.

Thats a rather remote connection, I observed, approaching him.

Connection?  To Hades with your connections.  It was an accident.

Still, I said, an accident has its backward and forward connections,
which, if they could be set forth

Without moving he seemed to lend an attentive ear.

Aye!  Set forth.  Thats perhaps what you could do.  Couldnt you now?
Theres no sea life in this connection.  But you can put it in out of
your headif you like.

Yes.  I could, if necessary, I said.  Sometimes it pays to put in a
lot out of ones head, and sometimes it doesnt.  I mean that the story
isnt worth it.  Everythings in that.

It amused me to talk to him like this.  He reflected audibly that he
guessed story-writers were out after money like the rest of the world
which had to live by its wits: and that it was extraordinary how far
people who were out after money would go. . . Some of them.

Then he made a sally against sea life.  Silly sort of life, he called it.
No opportunities, no experience, no variety, nothing.  Some fine men came
out of ithe admittedbut no more chance in the world if put to it than
fly.  Kids.  So Captain Harry Dunbar.  Good sailor.  Great name as a
skipper.  Big man; short side-whiskers going grey, fine face, loud voice.
A good fellow, but no more up to peoples tricks than a baby.

Thats the captain of the _Sagamore_ youre talking about, I said,
confidently.

After a low, scornful Of course he seemed now to hold on the wall with
his fixed stare the vision of that city office, at the back of Cannon
Street Station, while he growled and mouthed a fragmentary description,
jerking his chin up now and then, as if angry.

It was, according to his account, a modest place of business, not shady
in any sense, but out of the way, in a small street now rebuilt from end
to end.  Seven doors from the Cheshire Cat public house under the
railway bridge.  I used to take my lunch there when my business called me
to the city.  Cloete would come in to have his chop and make the girl
laugh.  No need to talk much, either, for that.  Nothing but the way he
would twinkle his spectacles on you and give a twitch of his thick mouth
was enough to start you off before he began one of his little tales.
Funny fellow, Cloete.  C-l-o-e-t-eCloete.

What was hea Dutchman? I asked, not seeing in the least what all this
had to do with the Westport boatmen and the Westport summer visitors and
this extraordinary old fellows irritable view of them as liars and
fools.  Devil knows, he grunted, his eyes on the wall as if not to miss
a single movement of a cinematograph picture.  Spoke nothing but
English, anyway.  First I saw himcomes off a ship in dock from the
Statespassenger.  Asks me for a small hotel near by.  Wanted to be quiet
and have a look round for a few days.  I took him to a placefriend of
mine. . . Next timein the CityHallo!  Youre very obliginghave a
drink.  Talks plenty about himself.  Been years in the States.  All sorts
of business all over the place.  With some patent medicine people, too.
Travels.  Writes advertisements and all that.  Tells me funny stories.
Tall, loose-limbed fellow.  Black hair up on end, like a brush; long
face, long legs, long arms, twinkle in his specs, jocular way of
speakingin a low voice. . . See that?

I nodded, but he was not looking at me.

Never laughed so much in my life.  The beggarwould make you laugh
telling you how he skinned his own father.  He was up to that, too.  A
man whos been in the patent-medicine trade will be up to anything from
pitch-and-toss to wilful murder.  And thats a bit of hard truth for you.
Dont mind what they dothink they can carry off anything and talk
themselves out of anythingall the worlds a fool to them.  Business man,
too, Cloete.  Came over with a few hundred pounds.  Looking for something
to doin a quiet way.  Nothing like the old country, after all, says he. . .
And so we partI with more drinks in me than I was used to.  After a
time, perhaps six months or so, I run up against him again in Mr. George
Dunbars office.  Yes, _that_ office.  It wasnt often that I . . .
However, there was a bit of his cargo in a ship in dock that I wanted to
ask Mr. George about.  In comes Cloete out of the room at the back with
some papers in his hand.  Partner.  You understand?

Aha! I said.  The few hundred pounds.

And that tongue of his, he growled.  Dont forget that tongue.  Some
of his tales must have opened George Dunbars eyes a bit as to what
business means.

A plausible fellow, I suggested.

Hm!  You must have it in your own wayof course.  Well.  Partner.
George Dunbar puts his top-hat on and tells me to wait a moment. . .
George always looked as though he were making a few thousands a yeara
city swell. . . Come along, old man!  And he and Captain Harry go out
togethersome business with a solicitor round the corner.  Captain Harry,
when he was in England, used to turn up in his brothers office regularly
about twelve.  Sat in a corner like a good boy, reading the paper and
smoking his pipe.  So they go out. . . Model brothers, says Cloetetwo
love-birdsI am looking after the tinned-fruit side of this cozy little
show. . . Gives me that sort of talk.  Then by-and-by: What sort of old
thing is that _Sagamore_? Finest ship outeh?  I dare say all ships are
fine to you.  You live by them.  I tell you what; I would just as soon
put my money into an old stocking.  Sooner!

                                * * * * *

He drew a breath, and I noticed his hand, lying loosely on the table,
close slowly into a fist.  In that immovable man it was startling,
ominous, like the famed nod of the Commander.

So, already at that timenotealready, he growled.

But hold on, I interrupted.  The _Sagamore_ belonged to Mundy and
Rogers, Ive been told.

He snorted contemptuously.  Damn boatmenknow no better.  Flew the
firms _house-flag_.  Thats another thing.  Favour.  It was like this:
When old man Dunbar died, Captain Harry was already in command with the
firm.  George chucked the bank he was clerking into go on his own with
what there was to share after the old chap.  George was a smart man.
Started warehousing; then two or three things at a time: wood-pulp,
preserved-fruit trade, and so on.  And Captain Harry let him have his
share to work with. . . I am provided for in my ship, he says. . . But
by-and-by Mundy and Rogers begin to sell out to foreigners all their
shipsgo into steam right away.  Captain Harry gets very upsetlose
command, part with the ship he was fond ofvery wretched.  Just then, so
it happened, the brothers came in for some moneyan old woman died or
something.  Quite a tidy bit.  Then young George says: Theres enough
between us two to buy the _Sagamore_ with. . . But youll need more money
for your business, cries Captain Harryand the other laughs at him: My
business is going on all right.  Why, I can go out and make a handful of
sovereigns while you are trying to get your pipe to draw, old man. . .
Mundy and Rogers very friendly about it: Certainly, Captain.  And we will
manage her for you, if you like, as if she were still our own. . . Why,
with a connection like that it was good investment to buy that ship.
Good!  Aye, at the time.

The turning of his head slightly toward me at this point was like a sign
of strong feeling in any other man.

Youll mind that this was long before Cloete came into it at all, he
muttered, warningly.

Yes.  I will mind, I said.  We generally say: some years passed.
Thats soon done.

He eyed me for a while silently in an unseeing way, as if engrossed in
the thought of the years so easily dealt with; his own years, too, they
were, the years before and the years (not so many) after Cloete came upon
the scene.  When he began to speak again, I discerned his intention to
point out to me, in his obscure and graphic manner, the influence on
George Dunbar of long association with Cloetes easy moral standards,
unscrupulously persuasive gift of humour (funny fellow), and
adventurously reckless disposition.  He desired me anxiously to elaborate
this view, and I assured him it was quite within my powers.  He wished me
also to understand that Georges business had its ups and downs (the
other brother was meantime sailing to and fro serenely); that he got into
low water at times, which worried him rather, because he had married a
young wife with expensive tastes.  He was having a pretty anxious time of
it generally; and just then Cloete ran up in the city somewhere against a
man working a patent medicine (the fellows old trade) with some success,
but which, with capital, capital to the tune of thousands to be spent
with both hands on advertising, could be turned into a great
thinginfinitely better-paying than a gold-mine.  Cloete became excited
at the possibilities of that sort of business, in which he was an expert.
I understood that Georges partner was all on fire from the contact with
this unique opportunity.

So he goes in every day into Georges room about eleven, and sings that
tune till George gnashes his teeth with rage.  Do shut up.  Whats the
good?  No money.  Hardly any to go on with, let alone pouring thousands
into advertising.  Never dare propose to his brother Harry to sell the
ship.  Couldnt think of it.  Worry him to death.  It would be like the
end of the world coming.  And certainly not for a business of that kind!
. . . Do you think it would be a swindle? asks Cloete, twitching his
mouth. . . George owns up: Nowould be no better than a squeamish ass if
he thought that, after all these years in business.

Cloete looks at him hardNever thought of _selling_ the ship.  Expected
the blamed old thing wouldnt fetch half her insured value by this time.
Then George flies out at him.  Whats the meaning, then, of these silly
jeers at ship-owning for the last three weeks?  Had enough of them,
anyhow.

Angry at having his mouth made to water, see.  Cloete dont get excited. . .
I am no squeamish ass, either, says he, very slowly.  Tisnt selling
your old _Sagamore_ wants.  The blamed thing wants tomahawking (seems the
name _Sagamore_ means an Indian chief or something.  The figure-head was
a half-naked savage with a feather over one ear and a hatchet in his
belt).  Tomahawking, says he.

What do you mean? asks George. . . Wreckingit could be managed with
perfect safety, goes on Cloeteyour brother would then put in his share
of insurance money.  Neednt tell him exactly what for.  He thinks youre
the smartest business man that ever lived.  Make his fortune, too. . .
George grips the desk with both hands in his rage. . . You think my
brothers a man to cast away his ship on purpose.  I wouldnt even dare
think of such a thing in the same room with himthe finest fellow that
ever lived. . . Dont make such noise; theyll hear you outside, says
Cloete; and he tells him that his brother is the salted pattern of all
virtues, but all thats necessary is to induce him to stay ashore for a
voyagefor a holidaytake a restwhy not? . . . In fact, I have in view
somebody up to that sort of gameCloete whispers.

George nearly chokes. . . So you think I am of that sortyou think _me_
capableWhat do you take me for? . . . He almost loses his head, while
Cloete keeps cool, only gets white about the gills. . . I take you for a
man who will be most cursedly hard up before long. . . He goes to the
door and sends away the clerksthere were only twoto take their lunch
hour.  Comes back . . . What are you indignant about?  Do I want you to
rob the widow and orphan?  Why, man!  Lloyds a corporation, it hasnt
got a body to starve.  Theres forty or more of them perhaps who
underwrote the lines on that silly ship of yours.  Not one human being
would go hungry or cold for it.  They take every risk into consideration.
Everything I tell you. . . That sort of talk.  Hm!  George too upset to
speakonly gurgles and waves his arms; so sudden, you see.  The other,
warming his back at the fire, goes on.  Wood-pulp business next door to a
failure.  Tinned-fruit trade nearly played out. . . Youre frightened, he
says; but the law is only meant to frighten fools away. . . And he shows
how safe casting away that ship would be.  Premiums paid for so many,
many years.  No shadow of suspicion could arise.  And, dash it all! a
ship must meet her end some day. . .

I am not frightened.  I am indignant, says George Dunbar.

Cloete boiling with rage inside.  Chance of a lifetimehis chance!  And
he says kindly: Your wifell be much more indignant when you ask her to
get out of that pretty house of yours and pile in into a two-pair
backwith kids perhaps, too. . .

George had no children.  Married a couple of years; looked forward to a
kid or two very much.  Feels more upset than ever.  Talks about an honest
man for father, and so on.  Cloete grins: You be quick before they come,
and theyll have a rich man for father, and no one the worse for it.
Thats the beauty of the thing.

George nearly cries.  I believe he did cry at odd times.  This went on
for weeks.  He couldnt quarrel with Cloete.  Couldnt pay off his few
hundreds; and besides, he was used to have him about.  Weak fellow,
George.  Cloete generous, too. . . Dont think of my little pile, says
he.  Of course its gone when we have to shut up.  But I dont care, he
says. . . And then there was Georges new wife.  When Cloete dines there,
the beggar puts on a dress suit; little woman liked it; . . . Mr. Cloete,
my husbands partner; such a clever man, man of the world, so amusing! . . .
When he dines there and they are alone: Oh, Mr. Cloete, I wish George
would do something to improve our prospects.  Our position is really so
mediocre. . . And Cloete smiles, but isnt surprised, because he had put
all these notions himself into her empty head. . . What your husband
wants is enterprise, a little audacity.  You can encourage him best, Mrs.
Dunbar. . . She was a silly, extravagant little fool.  Had made George
take a house in Norwood.  Live up to a lot of people better off than
themselves.  I saw her once; silk dress, pretty boots, all feathers and
scent, pink face.  More like the Promenade at the Alhambra than a decent
home, it looked to me.  But some women do get a devil of a hold on a
man.

Yes, some do, I assented.  Even when the man is the husband.

My missis, he addressed me unexpectedly, in a solemn, surprisingly
hollow tone, could wind me round her little finger.  I didnt find it
out till she was gone.  Aye.  But she was a woman of sense, while that
piece of goods ought to have been walking the streets, and thats all I
can say. . . You must make her up out of your head.  You will know the
sort.

Leave all that to me, I said.

Hm! he grunted, doubtfully, then going back to his scornful tone: A
month or so afterwards the _Sagamore_ arrives home.  All very jolly at
first. . . Hallo, George boy!  Hallo, Harry, old man! . . . But by and by
Captain Harry thinks his clever brother is not looking very well.  And
George begins to look worse.  He cant get rid of Cloetes notion.  It
has stuck in his head. . . Theres nothing wrongquite well. . . Captain
Harry still anxious.  Business going all right, eh?  Quite right.  Lots
of business.  Good business. . . Of course Captain Harry believes that
easily.  Starts chaffing his brother in his jolly way about rolling in
money.  Georges shirt sticks to his back with perspiration, and he feels
quite angry with the captain. . . The fool, he says to himself.  Rolling
in money, indeed!  And then he thinks suddenly: Why not? . . . Because
Cloetes notion has got hold of his mind.

But next day he weakens and says to Cloete . . . Perhaps it would be
best to sell.  Couldnt you talk to my brother? and Cloete explains to
him over again for the twentieth time why selling wouldnt do, anyhow.
No!  The _Sagamore_ must be tomahawkedas he would call it; to spare
Georges feelings, maybe.  But every time he says the word, George
shudders. . . Ive got a man at hand competent for the job who will do
the trick for five hundred, and only too pleased at the chance, says
Cloete. . . George shuts his eyes tight at that sort of talkbut at the
same time he thinks: Humbug!  There can be no such man.  And yet if there
was such a man it would be safe enoughperhaps.

And Cloete always funny about it.  He couldnt talk about anything
without it seeming there was a great joke in it somewhere. . . Now, says
he, I know you are a moral citizen, George.  Morality is mostly funk, and
I think youre the funkiest man I ever came across in my travels.  Why,
you are afraid to speak to your brother.  Afraid to open your mouth to
him with a fortune for us all in sight. . . George flares up at this: no,
he aint afraid; he will speak; bangs fist on the desk.  And Cloete pats
him on the back. . . Well be made men presently, he says.

But the first time George attempts to speak to Captain Harry his heart
slides down into his boots.  Captain Harry only laughs at the notion of
staying ashore.  He wants no holiday, not he.  But Jane thinks of
remaining in England this trip.  Go about a bit and see some of her
people.  Jane was the Captains wife; round-faced, pleasant lady.  George
gives up that time; but Cloete wont let him rest.  So he tries again;
and the Captain frowns.  He frowns because hes puzzled.  He cant make
it out.  He has no notion of living away from his _Sagamore_. . .

Ah! I cried.  Now I understand.

No, you dont, he growled, his black, contemptuous stare turning on me
crushingly.

I beg your pardon, I murmured.

Hm!  Very well, then.  Captain Harry looks very stern, and George
crumples all up inside. . . He sees through me, he thinks. . . Of course
it could not be; but George, by that time, was scared at his own shadow.
He is shirking it with Cloete, too.  Gives his partner to understand that
his brother has half a mind to try a spell on shore, and so on.  Cloete
waits, gnawing his fingers; so anxious.  Cloete really had found a man
for the job.  Believe it or not, he had found him inside the very
boarding-house he lodged insomewhere about Tottenham Court Road.  He had
noticed down-stairs a fellowa boarder and not a boarderhanging about
the darkpart of the passage mostly; sort of man of the house, a
slinking chap.  Black eyes.  White face.  The woman of the housea widow
lady, she called herselfvery full of Mr. Stafford; Mr. Stafford this and
Mr. Stafford that. . . Anyhow, Cloete one evening takes him out to have a
drink.  Cloete mostly passed away his evenings in saloon bars.  No
drunkard, though, Cloete; for company; liked to talk to all sorts there;
just habit; American fashion.

So Cloete takes that chap out more than once.  Not very good company,
though.  Little to say for himself.  Sits quiet and drinks whats given
to him, eyes always half closed, speaks sort of demure. . . Ive had
misfortunes, he says.  The truth was they had kicked him out of a big
steam-ship company for disgraceful conduct; nothing to affect his
certificate, you understand; and he had gone down quite easily.  Liked
it, I expect.  Anythings better than work.  Lived on the widow lady who
kept that boarding-house.

Thats almost incredible, I ventured to interrupt.  A man with a
masters certificate, do you mean?

I do; Ive known them bus cads, he growled, contemptuously.  Yes.
Swing on the tail-board by the strap and yell, tuppence all the way.
Through drink.  But this Stafford was of another kind.  Hells full of
such Staffords; Cloete would make fun of him, and then there would be a
nasty gleam in the fellows half-shut eye.  But Cloete was generally kind
to him.  Cloete was a fellow that would be kind to a mangy dog.  Anyhow,
he used to stand drinks to that object, and now and then gave him half a
crownbecause the widow lady kept Mr. Stafford short of pocket-money.
They had rows almost every day down in the basement. . .

It was the fellow being a sailor that put into Cloetes mind the first
notion of doing away with the _Sagamore_.  He studies him a bit, thinks
theres enough devil in him yet to be tempted, and one evening he says to
him . . . I suppose you wouldnt mind going to sea again, for a spell? . . .
The other never raises his eyes; says its scarcely worth ones while
for the miserable salary one gets. . . Well, but what do you say to
captains wages for a time, and a couple of hundred extra if you are
compelled to come home without the ship.  Accidents will happen, says
Cloete. . . Oh! sure to, says that Stafford; and goes on taking sips of
his drink as if he had no interest in the matter.

Cloete presses him a bit; but the other observes, impudent and languid
like: You see, theres no future in a thing like thatis there? . . Oh!
no, says Cloete.  Certainly not.  I dont mean this to have any futureas
far as you are concerned.  Its a once for all transaction.  Well, what
do you estimate your future at? he asks. . . The fellow more listless
than evernearly asleep.I believe the skunk was really too lazy to care.
Small cheating at cards, wheedling or bullying his living out of some
woman or other, was more his style.  Cloete swears at him in whispers
something awful.  All this in the saloon bar of the Horse Shoe, Tottenham
Court Road.  Finally they agree, over the second sixpennyworth of Scotch
hot, on five hundred pounds as the price of tomahawking the _Sagamore_.
And Cloete waits to see what George can do.

A week or two goes by.  The other fellow loafs about the house as if
there had been nothing, and Cloete begins to doubt whether he really
means ever to tackle that job.  But one day he stops Cloete at the door,
with his downcast eyes: What about that employment you wished to give me?
he asks. . . You see, he had played some more than usual dirty trick on
the woman and expected awful ructions presently; and to be fired out for
sure.  Cloete very pleased.  George had been prevaricating to him such a
lot that he really thought the thing was as well as settled.  And he
says: Yes.  Its time I introduced you to my friend.  Just get your hat
and we will go now. . .

The two come into the office, and George at his desk sits up in a sudden
panicstaring.  Sees a tallish fellow, sort of nasty-handsome face, heavy
eyes, half shut; short drab overcoat, shabby bowler hat, very
carefullike in his movements.  And he thinks to himself, Is that how
such a man looks!  No, the things impossible. . . Cloete does the
introduction, and the fellow turns round to look behind him at the chair
before he sits down. . . A thoroughly competent man, Cloete goes on . . .
The man says nothing, sits perfectly quiet.  And George cant speak,
throat too dry.  Then he makes an effort: Hm!  Hm!  Oh
yesunfortunatelysorry to disappointmy brothermade other
arrangementsgoing himself.

The fellow gets up, never raising his eyes off the ground, like a modest
girl, and goes out softly, right out of the office without a sound.
Cloete sticks his chin in his hand and bites all his fingers at once.
Georges heart slows down and he speaks to Cloete. . . This cant be
done.  How can it be?  Directly the ship is lost Harry would see through
it.  You know he is a man to go to the underwriters himself with his
suspicions.  And he would break his heart over me.  How can I play that
on him?  Theres only two of us in the world belonging to each other. . .

Cloete lets out a horrid cuss-word, jumps up, bolts away into his room,
and George hears him there banging things around.  After a while he goes
to the door and says in a trembling voice: You ask me for an
impossibility. . . Cloete inside ready to fly out like a tiger and rend
him; but he opens the door a little way and says softly: Talking of
hearts, yours is no bigger than a mouses, let me tell you. . . But
George doesnt careload off the heart, anyhow.  And just then Captain
Harry comes in. . . Hallo, George boy.  I am little late.  What about a
chop at the Cheshire, now? . . . Right you are, old man. . . And off they
go to lunch together.  Cloete has nothing to eat that day.

George feels a new man for a time; but all of a sudden that fellow
Stafford begins to hang about the street, in sight of the house door.
The first time George sees him he thinks he made a mistake.  But no; next
time he has to go out, there is the very fellow skulking on the other
side of the road.  It makes George nervous; but he must go out on
business, and when the fellow cuts across the road-way he dodges him.  He
dodges him once, twice, three times; but at last he gets nabbed in his
very doorway. . . What do you want? he says, trying to look fierce.

It seems that ructions had come in the basement of that boarding-house,
and the widow lady had turned on him (being jealous mad), to the extent
of talking of the police.  _That_ Mr. Stafford couldnt stand; so he
cleared out like a scared stag, and there he was, chucked into the
streets, so to speak.  Cloete looked so savage as he went to and fro that
he hadnt the spunk to tackle him; but George seemed a softer kind to his
eye.  He would have been glad of half a quid, anything. . . Ive had
misfortunes, he says softly, in his demure way, which frightens George
more than a row would have done. . . Consider the severity of my
disappointment, he says. . .

George, instead of telling him to go to the devil, loses his head. . . I
dont know you.  What do you want? he cries, and bolts up-stairs to
Cloete. . . . Look whats come of it, he gasps; now we are at the mercy
of that horrid fellow. . . Cloete tries to show him that the fellow can
do nothing; but George thinks that some sort of scandal may be forced on,
anyhow.  Says that he cant live with that horror haunting him.  Cloete
would laugh if he werent too weary of it all.  Then a thought strikes
him and he changes his tune. . . Well, perhaps!  I will go down-stairs
and send him away to begin with. . . He comes back. . . Hes gone.  But
perhaps you are right.  The fellows hard up, and thats what makes
people desperate.  The best thing would be to get him out of the country
for a time.  Look here, the poor devil is really in want of employment.
I wont ask you much this time: only to hold your tongue; and I shall try
to get your brother to take him as chief officer.  At this George lays
his arms and his head on his desk, so that Cloete feels sorry for him.
But altogether Cloete feels more cheerful because he has shaken the ghost
a bit into that Stafford.  That very afternoon he buys him a suit of blue
clothes, and tells him that he will have to turn to and work for his
living now.  Go to sea as mate of the _Sagamore_.  The skunk wasnt very
willing, but what with having nothing to eat and no place to sleep in,
and the woman having frightened him with the talk of some prosecution or
other, he had no choice, properly speaking.  Cloete takes care of him for
a couple of days. . . Our arrangement still stands, says he.  Heres the
ship bound for Port Elizabeth; not a safe anchorage at all.  Should she
by chance part from her anchors in a north-east gale and get lost on the
beach, as many of them do, why, its five hundred in your pocketand a
quick return home.  You are up to the job, aint you?

Our Mr. Stafford takes it all in with downcast eyes. . . I am a
competent seaman, he says, with his sly, modest air.  A ships chief mate
has no doubt many opportunities to manipulate the chains and anchors to
some purpose. . . At this Cloete thumps him on the back: Youll do, my
noble sailor.  Go in and win. . .

Next thing George knows, his brother tells him that he had occasion to
oblige his partner.  And glad of it, too.  Likes the partner no end.
Took a friend of his as mate.  Man had his troubles, been ashore a year
nursing a dying wife, it seems.  Down on his luck. . . George protests
earnestly that he knows nothing of the person.  Saw him once.  Not very
attractive to look at. . . And Captain Harry says in his hearty way,
Thats so, but must give the poor devil a chance. . .

So Mr. Stafford joins in dock.  And it seems that he did manage to
monkey with one of the cableskeeping his mind on Port Elizabeth.  The
riggers had all the cable ranged on deck to clean lockers.  The new mate
watches them go ashoredinner hourand sends the ship-keeper out of the
ship to fetch him a bottle of beer.  Then he goes to work whittling away
the forelock of the forty-five-fathom shackle-pin, gives it a tap or two
with a hammer just to make it loose, and of course that cable wasnt safe
any more.  Riggers come backyou know what riggers are: come day, go day,
and God send Sunday.  Down goes the chain into the locker without their
foreman looking at the shackles at all.  What does he care?  He aint
going in the ship.  And two days later the ship goes to sea. . . 

                                * * * * *

At this point I was incautious enough to breathe out another I see,
which gave offence again, and brought on me a rude No, you dontas
before.  But in the pause he remembered the glass of beer at his elbow.
He drank half of it, wiped his mustaches, and remarked grimly

Dont you think that there will be any sea life in this, because there
aint.  If youre going to put in any out of your own head, nows your
chance.  I suppose you know what ten days of bad weather in the Channel
are like?  I dont.  Anyway, ten whole days go by.  One Monday Cloete
comes to the office a little latehears a womans voice in Georges room
and looks in.  Newspapers on the desk, on the floor; Captain Harrys wife
sitting with red eyes and a bag on the chair near her. . . Look at this,
says George, in great excitement, showing him a paper.  Cloetes heart
gives a jump.  Ha!  Wreck in Westport Bay.  The _Sagamore_ gone ashore
early hours of Sunday, and so the newspaper men had time to put in some
of their work.  Columns of it.  Lifeboat out twice.  Captain and crew
remain by the ship.  Tugs summoned to assist.  If the weather improves,
this well-known fine ship may yet be saved. . . You know the way these
chaps put it. . . Mrs. Harry there on her way to catch a train from
Cannon Street.  Got an hour to wait.

Cloete takes George aside and whispers: Ship saved yet!  Oh, damn!  That
must never be; you hear?  But George looks at him dazed, and Mrs. Harry
keeps on sobbing quietly: . . . I ought to have been with him.  But I am
going to him. . . We are all going together, cries Cloete, all of a
sudden.  He rushes out, sends the woman a cup of hot bovril from the shop
across the road, buys a rug for her, thinks of everything; and in the
train tucks her in and keeps on talking, thirteen to the dozen, all the
way, to keep her spirits up, as it were; but really because he cant hold
his peace for very joy.  Heres the thing done all at once, and nothing
to pay.  Done.  Actually done.  His head swims now and again when he
thinks of it.  What enormous luck!  It almost frightens him.  He would
like to yell and sing.  Meantime George Dunbar sits in his corner,
looking so deadly miserable that at last poor Mrs. Harry tries to comfort
him, and so cheers herself up at the same time by talking about how her
Harry is a prudent man; not likely to risk his crews life or his own
unnecessarilyand so on.

First thing they hear at Westport station is that the life-boat has been
out to the ship again, and has brought off the second officer, who had
hurt himself, and a few sailors.  Captain and the rest of the crew, about
fifteen in all, are still on board.  Tugs expected to arrive every
moment.

They take Mrs. Harry to the inn, nearly opposite the rocks; she bolts
straight up-stairs to look out of the window, and she lets out a great
cry when she sees the wreck.  She wont rest till she gets on board to
her Harry.  Cloete soothes her all he can. . . All right; you try to eat
a mouthful, and we will go to make inquiries.

He draws George out of the room: Look here, she cant go on board, but I
shall.  Ill see to it that he doesnt stop in the ship too long.  Lets
go and find the coxswain of the life-boat. . . George follows him,
shivering from time to time.  The waves are washing over the old pier;
not much wind, a wild, gloomy sky over the bay.  In the whole world only
one tug away off, heading to the seas, tossed in and out of sight every
minute as regular as clockwork.

They meet the coxswain and he tells them: Yes!  Hes going out again.
No, they aint in danger on boardnot yet.  But the ships chance is very
poor.  Still, if the wind doesnt pipe up again and the sea goes down
something might be tried.  After some talk he agrees to take Cloete on
board; supposed to be with an urgent message from the owners to the
captain.

Whenever Cloete looks at the sky he feels comforted; it looks so
threatening.  George Dunbar follows him about with a white face and
saying nothing.  Cloete takes him to have a drink or two, and by and by
he begins to pick up. . . Thats better, says Cloete; dash me if it
wasnt like walking about with a dead man before.  You ought to be
throwing up your cap, man.  I feel as if I wanted to stand in the street
and cheer.  Your brother is safe, the ship is lost, and we are made men.

Are you certain shes lost? asks George.  It would be an awful blow
after all the agonies I have gone through in my mind, since you first
spoke to me, if she were to be got offandandall this temptation to
begin over again. . . For we had nothing to do with this; had we?

Of course not, says Cloete.  Wasnt your brother himself in charge?
Its providential. . . Oh! cries George, shocked. . . Well, say its the
devil, says Cloete, cheerfully.  I dont mind!  You had nothing to do
with it any more than a baby unborn, you great softy, you. . . Cloete has
got so that he almost loved George Dunbar.  Well.  Yes.  That was so.  I
dont mean he respected him.  He was just fond of his partner.

They go back, you may say fairly skipping, to the hotel, and find the
wife of the captain at the open window, with her eyes on the ship as if
she wanted to fly across the bay over there. . . Now then, Mrs. Dunbar,
cries Cloete, you cant go, but I am going.  Any messages?  Dont be shy.
Ill deliver every word faithfully.  And if you would like to give me a
kiss for him, Ill deliver that too, dash me if I dont.

He makes Mrs. Harry laugh with his patter. . . Oh, dear Mr. Cloete, you
are a calm, reasonable man.  Make him behave sensibly.  Hes a bit
obstinate, you know, and hes so fond of the ship, too.  Tell him I am
herelooking on. . . Trust me, Mrs. Dunbar.  Only shut that window,
thats a good girl.  You will be sure to catch cold if you dont, and the
Captain wont be pleased coming off the wreck to find you coughing and
sneezing so that you cant tell him how happy you are.  And now if you
can get me a bit of tape to fasten my glasses on good to my ears, I will
be going. . .

How he gets on board I dont know.  All wet and shaken and excited and
out of breath, he does get on board.  Ship lying over, smothered in
sprays, but not moving very much; just enough to jag ones nerve a bit.
He finds them all crowded on the deck-house forward, in their shiny
oilskins, with faces like sick men.  Captain Harry cant believe his
eyes.  What!  Mr. Cloete!  What are you doing here, in Gods name? . . .
Your wifes ashore there, looking on, gasps out Cloete; and after they
had talked a bit, Captain Harry thinks its uncommonly plucky and kind of
his brothers partner to come off to him like this.  Man glad to have
somebody to talk to. . . Its a bad business, Mr. Cloete, he says.  And
Cloete rejoices to hear that.  Captain Harry thinks he had done his best,
but the cable had parted when he tried to anchor her.  It was a great
trial to lose the ship.  Well, he would have to face it.  He fetches a
deep sigh now and then.  Cloete almost sorry he had come on board,
because to be on that wreck keeps his chest in a tight band all the time.
They crouch out of the wind under the port boat, a little apart from the
men.  The life-boat had gone away after putting Cloete on board, but was
coming back next high water to take off the crew if no attempt at getting
the ship afloat could be made.  Dusk was falling; winters day; black
sky; wind rising.  Captain Harry felt melancholy.  Gods will be done.
If she must be left on the rockswhy, she must.  A man should take what
God sends him standing up. . . Suddenly his voice breaks, and he squeezes
Cloetes arm: It seems as if I couldnt leave her, he whispers.  Cloete
looks round at the men like a lot of huddled sheep and thinks to himself:
They wont stay. . . Suddenly the ship lifts a little and sets down with
a thump.  Tide rising.  Everybody beginning to look out for the
life-boat.  Some of the men made her out far away and also two more tugs.
But the gale has come on again, and everybody knows that no tug will ever
dare come near the ship.

Thats the end, Captain Harry says, very low. . . . Cloete thinks he
never felt so cold in all his life. . . And I feel as if I didnt care to
live on just now, mutters Captain Harry . . . Your wifes ashore, looking
on, says Cloete . . . Yes.  Yes.  It must be awful for her to look at the
poor old ship lying here done for.  Why, thats our home.

Cloete thinks that as long as the _Sagamores_ done for he doesnt care,
and only wishes himself somewhere else.  The slightest movement of the
ship cuts his breath like a blow.  And he feels excited by the danger,
too.  The captain takes him aside. . . The life-boat cant come near us
for more than an hour.  Look here, Cloete, since you are here, and such a
plucky onedo something for me. . . He tells him then that down in his
cabin aft in a certain drawer there is a bundle of important papers and
some sixty sovereigns in a small canvas bag.  Asks Cloete to go and get
these things out.  He hasnt been below since the ship struck, and it
seems to him that if he were to take his eyes off her she would fall to
pieces.  And then the mena scared lot by this timeif he were to leave
them by themselves they would attempt to launch one of the ships boats
in a panic at some heavier thumpand then some of them bound to get
drowned. . . There are two or three boxes of matches about my shelves in
my cabin if you want a light, says Captain Harry.  Only wipe your wet
hands before you begin to feel for them. . .

Cloete doesnt like the job, but doesnt like to show funk, eitherand
he goes.  Lots of water on the main-deck, and he splashes along; it was
getting dark, too.  All at once, by the mainmast, somebody catches him by
the arm.  Stafford.  He wasnt thinking of Stafford at all.  Captain
Harry had said something as to the mate not being quite satisfactory, but
it wasnt much.  Cloete doesnt recognise him in his oilskins at first.
He sees a white face with big eyes peering at him. . . Are you pleased,
Mr. Cloete . . . ?

Cloete is moved to laugh at the whine, and shakes him off.  But the
fellow scrambles on after him on the poop and follows him down into the
cabin of that wrecked ship.  And there they are, the two of them; can
hardly see each other. . . You dont mean to make me believe you have had
anything to do with this, says Cloete. . .

They both shiver, nearly out of their wits with the excitement of being
on board that ship.  She thumps and lurches, and they stagger together,
feeling sick.  Cloete again bursts out laughing at that wretched creature
Stafford pretending to have been up to something so desperate. . . Is
that how you think you can treat me now? yells the other man all of a
sudden. . .

A sea strikes the stern, the ship trembles and groans all round them,
theres the noise of the seas about and overhead, confusing Cloete, and
he hears the other screaming as if crazy. . . Ah, you dont believe me!
Go and look at the port chain.  Parted?  Eh?  Go and see if its parted.
Go and find the broken link.  You cant.  Theres no broken link.  That
means a thousand pounds for me.  No less.  A thousand the day after we
get ashoreprompt.  I wont wait till she breaks up, Mr. Cloete.  To the
underwriters I go if Ive to walk to London on my bare feet.  Port cable!
Look at her port cable, I will say to them.  I doctored itfor the
ownerstempted by a low rascal called Cloete.

Cloete does not understand what it means exactly.  All he sees is that
the fellow means to make mischief.  He sees trouble ahead. . . Do you
think you can scare me? he asks,you poor miserable skunk. . . And
Stafford faces him outboth holding on to the cabin table: No, damn you,
you are only a dirty vagabond; but I can scare the other, the chap in the
black coat. . .

Meaning George Dunbar.  Cloetes brain reels at the thought.  He doesnt
imagine the fellow can do any real harm, but he knows what George is;
give the show away; upset the whole business he had set his heart on.  He
says nothing; he hears the other, what with the funk and strain and
excitement, panting like a dogand then a snarl. . . A thousand down,
twenty-four hours after we get ashore; day after to-morrow.  Thats my
last word, Mr. Cloete. . . A thousand pounds, day after to-morrow, says
Cloete.  Oh yes.  And to-day take this, you dirty cur. . . He hits
straight from the shoulder in sheer rage, nothing else.  Stafford goes
away spinning along the bulk-head.  Seeing this, Cloete steps out and
lands him another one somewhere about the jaw.  The fellow staggers
backward right into the captains cabin through the open door.  Cloete,
following him up, hears him fall down heavily and roll to leeward, then
slams the door to and turns the key. . . There! says he to himself, that
will stop you from making trouble.

By Jove! I murmured.

The old fellow departed from his impressive immobility to turn his
rakishly hatted head and look at me with his old, black, lack-lustre
eyes.

He did leave him there, he uttered, weightily, returning to the
contemplation of the wall.  Cloete didnt mean to allow anybody, let
alone a thing like Stafford, to stand in the way of his great notion of
making George and himself, and Captain Harry, too, for that matter, rich
men.  And he didnt think much of consequences.  These patent-medicine
chaps dont care what they say or what they do.  They think the worlds
bound to swallow any story they like to tell. . . He stands listening for
a bit.  And it gives him quite a turn to hear a thump at the door and a
sort of muffled raving screech inside the captains room.  He thinks he
hears his own name, too, through the awful crash as the old _Sagamore_
rises and falls to a sea.  That noise and that awful shock make him clear
out of the cabin.  He collects his senses on the poop.  But his heart
sinks a little at the black wildness of the night.  Chances that he will
get drowned himself before long.  Puts his head down the companion.
Through the wind and breaking seas he can hear the noise of Staffords
beating against the door and cursing.  He listens and says to himself:
No.  Cant trust him now. . .

When he gets back to the top of the deck-house he says to Captain Harry,
who asks him if he got the things, that he is very sorry.  There was
something wrong with the door.  Couldnt open it.  And to tell you the
truth, says he, I didnt like to stop any longer in that cabin.  There
are noises there as if the ship were going to pieces. . . Captain Harry
thinks: Nervous; cant be anything wrong with the door.  But he says:
Thanksnever mind, never mind. . . All hands looking out now for the
life-boat.  Everybody thinking of himself rather.  Cloete asks himself,
will they miss him?  But the fact is that Mr. Stafford had made such poor
show at sea that after the ship struck nobody ever paid any attention to
him.  Nobody cared what he did or where he was.  Pitch dark, toono
counting of heads.  The light of the tug with the lifeboat in tow is seen
making for the ship, and Captain Harry asks: Are we all there? . . .
Somebody answers: All here, sir. . . Stand by to leave the ship, then,
says Captain Harry; and two of you help the gentleman over first. . .
Aye, aye, sir. . . Cloete was moved to ask Captain Harry to let him stay
till last, but the life-boat drops on a grapnel abreast the fore-rigging,
two chaps lay hold of him, watch their chance, and drop him into her, all
safe.

Hes nearly exhausted; not used to that sort of thing, you see.  He sits
in the stern-sheets with his eyes shut.  Dont want to look at the white
water boiling all around.  The men drop into the boat one after another.
Then he hears Captain Harrys voice shouting in the wind to the coxswain,
to hold on a moment, and some other words he cant catch, and the
coxswain yelling back: Dont be long, sir. . . What is it?  Cloete asks
feeling faint. . . Something about the ships papers, says the coxswain,
very anxious.  Its no time to be fooling about alongside, you
understand.  They haul the boat off a little and wait.  The water flies
over her in sheets.  Cloetes senses almost leave him.  He thinks of
nothing.  Hes numb all over, till theres a shout: Here he is! . . .
They see a figure in the fore-rigging waitingthey slack away on the
grapnel-line and get him in the boat quite easy.  There is a little
shoutingits all mixed up with the noise of the sea.  Cloete fancies
that Staffords voice is talking away quite close to his ear.  Theres a
lull in the wind, and Staffords voice seems to be speaking very fast to
the coxswain; he tells him that of course he was near his skipper, was
all the time near him, till the old man said at the last moment that he
must go and get the ships papers from aft; would insist on going
himself; told him, Stafford, to get into the life-boat. . . He had meant
to wait for his skipper, only there came this smooth of the seas, and he
thought he would take his chance at once.

Cloete opens his eyes.  Yes.  Theres Stafford sitting close by him in
that crowded life-boat.  The coxswain stoops over Cloete and cries: Did
you hear what the mate said, sir? . . . Cloetes face feels as if it were
set in plaster, lips and all.  Yes, I did, he forces himself to answer.
The coxswain waits a moment, then says: I dont like it. . . And he turns
to the mate, telling him it was a pity he did not try to run along the
deck and hurry up the captain when the lull came.  Stafford answers at
once that he did think of it, only he was afraid of missing him on the
deck in the dark.  For, says he, the captain might have got over at once,
thinking I was already in the life-boat, and you would have hauled off
perhaps, leaving me behind. . . True enough, says the coxswain.  A minute
or so passes.  This wont do, mutters the coxswain.  Suddenly Stafford
speaks up in a sort of hollow voice: I was by when he told Mr. Cloete
here that he didnt know how he would ever have the courage to leave the
old ship; didnt he, now? . . . And Cloete feels his arm being gripped
quietly in the dark. . . Didnt he now?  We were standing together just
before you went over, Mr. Cloete? . . .

Just then the coxswain cries out: Im going on board to see. . . Cloete
tears his arm away: I am going with you. . .

When they get aboard, the coxswain tells Cloete to go aft along one side
of the ship and he would go along the other so as not to miss the
captain. . . And feel about with your hands, too, says he; he might have
fallen and be lying insensible somewhere on the deck. . . When Cloete
gets at last to the cabin companion on the poop the coxswain is already
there, peering down and sniffing.  I detect a smell of smoke down there,
says he.  And he yells: Are you there, sir? . . . This is not a case for
shouting, says Cloete, feeling his heart go stony, as it were. . . Down
they go.  Pitch dark; the inclination so sharp that the coxswain, groping
his way into the captains room, slips and goes tumbling down.  Cloete
hears him cry out as though he had hurt himself, and asks whats the
matter.  And the coxswain answers quietly that he had fallen on the
captain, lying there insensible.  Cloete without a word begins to grope
all over the shelves for a box of matches, finds one, and strikes a
light.  He sees the coxswain in his cork jacket kneeling over Captain
Harry. . . Blood, says the coxswain, looking up, and the match goes out.
. .

Wait a bit, says Cloete; Ill make paper spills. . . He had felt the
back of books on the shelves.  And so he stands lighting one spill from
another while the coxswain turns poor Captain Harry over.  Dead, he says.
Shot through the heart.  Heres the revolver. . . He hands it up to
Cloete, who looks at it before putting it in his pocket, and sees a plate
on the butt with _H. Dunbar_ on it. . . His own, he mutters. . . Whose
else revolver did you expect to find? snaps the coxswain.  And look, he
took off his long oilskin in the cabin before he went in.  But whats
this lot of burnt paper?  What could he want to burn the ships papers
for? . . .

Cloete sees all, the little drawers drawn out, and asks the coxswain to
look well into them. . . Theres nothing, says the man.  Cleaned out.
Seems to have pulled out all he could lay his hands on and set fire to
the lot.  Madthats what it iswent mad.  And now hes dead.  Youll
have to break it to his wife. . .

I feel as if I were going mad myself, says Cloete, suddenly, and the
coxswain begs him for Gods sake to pull himself together, and drags him
away from the cabin.  They had to leave the body, and as it was they were
just in time before a furious squall came on.  Cloete is dragged into the
life-boat and the coxswain tumbles in.  Haul away on the grapnel, he
shouts; the captain has shot himself. . .

Cloete was like a dead mandidnt care for anything.  He let that
Stafford pinch his arm twice without making a sign.  Most of Westport was
on the old pier to see the men out of the life-boat, and at first there
was a sort of confused cheery uproar when she came alongside; but after
the coxswain has shouted something the voices die out, and everybody is
very quiet.  As soon as Cloete has set foot on something firm he becomes
himself again.  The coxswain shakes hands with him: Poor woman, poor
woman, Id rather you had the job than I. . .

Wheres the mate? asks Cloete.  Hes the last man who spoke to the
master. . . Somebody ran alongthe crew were being taken to the Mission
Hall, where there was a fire and shake-downs ready for themsomebody ran
along the pier and caught up with Stafford. . . Here!  The owners agent
wants you. . . Cloete tucks the fellows arm under his own and walks away
with him to the left, where the fishing-harbour is. . . I suppose I
havent misunderstood you.  You wish me to look after you a bit, says he.
The other hangs on him rather limp, but gives a nasty little laugh: You
had better, he mumbles; but mind, no tricks; no tricks, Mr. Cloete; we
are on land now.

Theres a police office within fifty yards from here, says Cloete.  He
turns into a little public house, pushes Stafford along the passage.  The
landlord runs out of the bar. . . This is the mate of the ship on the
rocks, Cloete explains; I wish you would take care of him a bit to-night. . .
Whats the matter with him? asks the man.  Stafford leans against the
wall in the passage, looking ghastly.  And Cloete says its nothingdone
up, of course. . . I will be responsible for the expense; I am the
owners agent.  Ill be round in an hour or two to see him.

And Cloete gets back to the hotel.  The news had travelled there already,
and the first thing he sees is George outside the door as white as a
sheet waiting for him.  Cloete just gives him a nod and they go in.  Mrs.
Harry stands at the head of the stairs, and, when she sees only these two
coming up, flings her arms above her head and runs into her room.  Nobody
had dared tell her, but not seeing her husband was enough.  Cloete hears
an awful shriek. . . Go to her, he says to George.

While hes alone in the private parlour Cloete drinks a glass of brandy
and thinks it all out.  Then George comes in. . . The landladys with
her, he says.  And he begins to walk up and down the room, flinging his
arms about and talking, disconnected like, his face set hard as Cloete
has never seen it before. . . What must be, must be.  Deadonly brother.
Well, deadhis troubles over.  But we are living, he says to Cloete; and
I suppose, says he, glaring at him with hot, dry eyes, that you wont
forget to wire in the morning to your friend that we are coming in for
certain. . .

Meaning the patent-medicine fellow. . . Death is death and business is
business, George goes on; and lookmy hands are clean, he says, showing
them to Cloete.  Cloete thinks: Hes going crazy.  He catches hold of him
by the shoulders and begins to shake him: Damn youif you had had the
sense to know what to say to your brother, if you had had the spunk to
speak to him at all, you moral creature you, he would be alive now, he
shouts.

At this George stares, then bursts out weeping with a great bellow.  He
throws himself on the couch, buries his face in a cushion, and howls like
a kid. . . Thats better, thinks Cloete, and he leaves him, telling the
landlord that he must go out, as he has some little business to attend to
that night.  The landlords wife, weeping herself, catches him on the
stairs: Oh, sir, that poor lady will go out of her mind. . .

Cloete shakes her off, thinking to himself: Oh no!  She wont.  She will
get over it.  Nobody will go mad about this affair unless I do.  It isnt
sorrow that makes people go mad, but worry.

There Cloete was wrong.  What affected Mrs. Harry was that her husband
should take his own life, with her, as it were, looking on.  She brooded
over it so that in less than a year they had to put her into a Home.  She
was very, very quiet; just gentle melancholy.  She lived for quite a long
time.

Well, Cloete splashes along in the wind and rain.  Nobody in the
streetsall the excitement over.  The publican runs out to meet him in
the passage and says to him: Not this way.  He isnt in his room.  We
couldnt get him to go to bed nohow.  Hes in the little parlour there.
Weve lighted him a fire. . . You have been giving him drinks too, says
Cloete; I never said I would be responsible for drinks.  How many? . . .
Two, says the other.  Its all right.  I dont mind doing that much for a
shipwrecked sailor. . . Cloete smiles his funny smile: Eh?  Come.  He
paid for them. . . The publican just blinks. . . Gave you gold, didnt
he?  Speak up! . . . What of that! cries the man.  What are you after,
anyway?  He had the right change for his sovereign.

Just so, says Cloete.  He walks into the parlour, and there he sees our
Stafford; hair all up on end, landlords shirt and pants on, bare feet in
slippers, sitting by the fire.  When he sees Cloete he casts his eyes
down.

You didnt mean us ever to meet again, Mr. Cloete, Stafford says,
demurely. . . That fellow, when he had the drink he wantedhe wasnt a
drunkardwould put on this sort of sly, modest air. . . But since the
captain committed suicide, he says, I have been sitting here thinking it
out.  All sorts of things happen.  Conspiracy to lose the shipattempted
murderand this suicide.  For if it was not suicide, Mr. Cloete, then I
know of a victim of the most cruel, cold-blooded attempt at murder;
somebody who has suffered a thousand deaths.  And that makes the thousand
pounds of which we spoke once a quite insignificant sum.  Look how very
convenient this suicide is. . .

He looks up at Cloete then, who smiles at him and comes quite close to
the table.

You killed Harry Dunbar, he whispers. . . The fellow glares at him and
shows his teeth: Of course I did!  I had been in that cabin for an hour
and a half like a rat in a trap. . . Shut up and left to drown in that
wreck.  Let flesh and blood judge.  Of course I shot him!  I thought it
was you, you murdering scoundrel, come back to settle me.  He opens the
door flying and tumbles right down upon me; I had a revolver in my hand,
and I shot him.  I was crazy.  Men have gone crazy for less.

Cloete looks at him without flinching.  Aha!  Thats your story, is it?
. . . And he shakes the table a little in his passion as he speaks. . .
Now listen to mine.  Whats this conspiracy?  Whos going to prove it?
You were there to rob.  You were rifling his cabin; he came upon you
unawares with your hands in the drawer; and you shot him with his own
revolver.  You killed to stealto steal!  His brother and the clerks in
the office know that he took sixty pounds with him to sea.  Sixty pounds
in gold in a canvas bag.  He told me where they were.  The coxswain of
the life-boat can swear to it that the drawers were all empty.  And you
are such a fool that before youre half an hour ashore you change a
sovereign to pay for a drink.  Listen to me.  If you dont turn up day
after to-morrow at George Dunbars solicitors, to make the proper
deposition as to the loss of the ship, I shall set the police on your
track.  Day after to-morrow. . .

And then what do you think?  That Stafford begins to tear his hair.
Just so.  Tugs at it with both hands without saying anything.  Cloete
gives a push to the table which nearly sends the fellow off his chair,
tumbling inside the fender; so that he has got to catch hold of it to
save himself. . .

You know the sort of man I am, Cloete says, fiercely.  Ive got to a
point that I dont care what happens to me.  I would shoot you now for
tuppence.

At this the cur dodges under the table.  Then Cloete goes out, and as he
turns in the streetyou know, little fishermens cottages, all dark;
raining in torrents, toothe other opens the window of the parlour and
speaks in a sort of crying voice

You low Yankee fiendIll pay you off some day.

Cloete passes by with a damn bitter laugh, because he thinks that the
fellow in a way has paid him off already, if he only knew it.

                                * * * * *

My impressive ruffian drank what remained of his beer, while his black,
sunken eyes looked at me over the rim.

I dont quite understand this, I said.  In what way?

He unbent a little and explained without too much scorn that Captain
Harry being dead, his half of the insurance money went to his wife, and
her trustees of course bought consols with it.  Enough to keep her
comfortable.  George Dunbars half, as Cloete feared from the first, did
not prove sufficient to launch the medicine well; other moneyed men
stepped in, and these two had to go out of that business, pretty nearly
shorn of everything.

I am curious, I said, to learn what the motive force of this tragic
affair wasI mean the patent medicine.  Do you know?

He named it, and I whistled respectfully.  Nothing less than Parkers
Lively Lumbago Pills.  Enormous property!  You know it; all the world
knows it.  Every second man, at least, on this globe of ours has tried
it.

Why! I cried, they missed an immense fortune.

Yes, he mumbled, by the price of a revolver-shot.

He told me also that eventually Cloete returned to the States, passenger
in a cargo-boat from Albert Dock.  The night before he sailed he met him
wandering about the quays, and took him home for a drink.  Funny chap,
Cloete.  We sat all night drinking grogs, till it was time for him to go
on board.

It was then that Cloete, unembittered but weary, told him this story,
with that utterly unconscious frankness of a patent-medicine man stranger
to all moral standards.  Cloete concluded by remarking that he, had had
enough of the old country.  George Dunbar had turned on him, too, in the
end.  Cloete was clearly somewhat disillusioned.

As to Stafford, he died, professed loafer, in some East End hospital or
other, and on his last day clamoured for a parson, because his
conscience worried him for killing an innocent man.  Wanted somebody to
tell him it was all right, growled my old ruffian, contemptuously.  He
told the parson that I knew this Cloete who had tried to murder him, and
so the parson (he worked among the dock labourers) once spoke to me about
it.  That skunk of a fellow finding himself trapped yelled for mercy. . .
Promised to be good and so on. . . Then he went crazy . . . screamed and
threw himself about, beat his head against the bulkheads . . . you can
guess all thateh? . . . till he was exhausted.  Gave up.  Threw himself
down, shut his eyes, and wanted to pray.  So he says.  Tried to think of
some prayer for a quick deathhe was that terrified.  Thought that if he
had a knife or something he would cut his throat, and be done with it.
Then he thinks: No!  Would try to cut away the wood about the lock. . .
He had no knife in his pocket. . . he was weeping and calling on God to
send him a tool of some kind when suddenly he thinks: Axe!  In most ships
there is a spare emergency axe kept in the masters room in some locker
or other. . . Up he jumps. . . Pitch dark.  Pulls at the drawers to find
matches and, groping for them, the first thing he comes uponCaptain
Harrys revolver.  Loaded too.  He goes perfectly quiet all over.  Can
shoot the lock to pieces.  See?  Saved!  Gods providence!  There are
boxes of matches too.  Thinks he: I may just as well see what I am about.

Strikes a light and sees the little canvas bag tucked away at the back
of the drawer.  Knew at once what that was.  Rams it into his pocket
quick.  Aha! says he to himself: this requires more light.  So he pitches
a lot of paper on the floor, set fire to it, and starts in a hurry
rummaging for more valuables.  Did you ever?  He told that East-End
parson that the devil tempted him.  First Gods mercythen devils work.
Turn and turn about. . .

Any squirming skunk can talk like that.  He was so busy with the drawers
that the first thing he heard was a shout, Great Heavens.  He looks up
and there was the door open (Cloete had left the key in the lock) and
Captain Harry holding on, well above him, very fierce in the light of the
burning papers.  His eyes were starting out of his head.  Thieving, he
thunders at him.  A sailor!  An officer!  No!  A wretch like you deserves
no better than to be left here to drown.

This Staffordon his death-bedtold the parson that when he heard these
words he went crazy again.  He snatched his hand with the revolver in it
out of the drawer, and fired without aiming.  Captain Harry fell right in
with a crash like a stone on top of the burning papers, putting the blaze
out.  All dark.  Not a sound.  He listened for a bit then dropped the
revolver and scrambled out on deck like mad.

The old fellow struck the table with his ponderous fist.

What makes me sick is to hear these silly boat-men telling people the
captain committed suicide.  Pah!  Captain Harry was a man that could face
his Maker any time up there, and here below, too.  He wasnt the sort to
slink out of life.  Not he!  He was a good man down to the ground.  He
gave me my first job as stevedore only three days after I got married.

As the vindication of Captain Harry from the charge of suicide seemed to
be his only object, I did not thank him very effusively for his material.
And then it was not worth many thanks in any case.

For it is too startling even to think of such things happening in our
respectable Channel in full view, so to speak, of the luxurious
continental traffic to Switzerland and Monte Carlo.  This story to be
acceptable should have been transposed to somewhere in the South Seas.
But it would have been too much trouble to cook it for the consumption of
magazine readers.  So here it is raw, so to speakjust as it was told to
mebut unfortunately robbed of the striking effect of the narrator; the
most imposing old ruffian that ever followed the unromantic trade of
master stevedore in the port of London.

                                * * * * *

_Oct._ 1910.




THE INN OF THE TWO WITCHES
A FIND


This tale, episode, experiencecall it how you willwas related in the
fifties of the last century by a man who, by his own confession, was
sixty years old at the time.  Sixty is not a bad ageunless in
perspective, when no doubt it is contemplated by the majority of us with
mixed feelings.  It is a calm age; the game is practically over by then;
and standing aside one begins to remember with a certain vividness what a
fine fellow one used to be.  I have observed that, by an amiable
attention of Providence, most people at sixty begin to take a romantic
view of themselves.  Their very failures exhale a charm of peculiar
potency.  And indeed the hopes of the future are a fine company to live
with, exquisite forms, fascinating if you like, butso to speaknaked,
stripped for a run.  The robes of glamour are luckily the property of the
immovable past which, without them, would sit, a shivery sort of thing,
under the gathering shadows.

I suppose it was the romanticism of growing age which set our man to
relate his experience for his own satisfaction or for the wonder of his
posterity.  It could not have been for his glory, because the experience
was simply that of an abominable frightterror he calls it.  You would
have guessed that the relation alluded to in the very first lines was in
writing.

This writing constitutes the Find declared in the sub-title.  The title
itself is my own contrivance, (cant call it invention), and has the
merit of veracity.  We will be concerned with an inn here.  As to the
witches thats merely a conventional expression, and we must take our
mans word for it that it fits the case.

The Find was made in a box of books bought in London, in a street which
no longer exists, from a second-hand bookseller in the last stage of
decay.  As to the books themselves they were at least twentieth-hand, and
on inspection turned out not worth the very small sum of money I
disbursed.  It might have been some premonition of that fact which made
me say: But I must have the box too.  The decayed bookseller assented
by the careless, tragic gesture of a man already doomed to extinction.

A litter of loose pages at the bottom of the box excited my curiosity but
faintly.  The close, neat, regular handwriting was not attractive at
first sight.  But in one place the statement that in A.D. 1813 the writer
was twenty-two years old caught my eye.  Two and twenty is an interesting
age in which one is easily reckless and easily frightened; the faculty of
reflection being weak and the power of imagination strong.

In another place the phrase: At night we stood in again, arrested my
languid attention, because it was a sea phrase.  Lets see what it is
all about, I thought, without excitement.

Oh! but it was a dull-faced MS., each line resembling every other line in
their close-set and regular order.  It was like the drone of a monotonous
voice.  A treatise on sugar-refining (the dreariest subject I can think
of) could have been given a more lively appearance.  In A.D. 1813, I was
twenty-two years old, he begins earnestly and goes on with every
appearance of calm, horrible industry.  Dont imagine, however, that
there is anything archaic in my find.  Diabolic ingenuity in invention
though as old as the world is by no means a lost art.  Look at the
telephones for shattering the little peace of mind given to us in this
world, or at the machine guns for letting with dispatch life out of our
bodies.  Now-a-days any blear-eyed old witch if only strong enough to
turn an insignificant little handle could lay low a hundred young men of
twenty in the twinkling of an eye.

If this isnt progress! . . . Why immense!  We have moved on, and so you
must expect to meet here a certain naiveness of contrivance and
simplicity of aim appertaining to the remote epoch.  And of course no
motoring tourist can hope to find such an inn anywhere, now.  This one,
the one of the title, was situated in Spain.  That much I discovered only
from internal evidence, because a good many pages of that relation were
missingperhaps not a great misfortune after all.  The writer seemed to
have entered into a most elaborate detail of the why and wherefore of his
presence on that coastpresumably the north coast of Spain.  His
experience has nothing to do with the sea, though.  As far as I can make
it out, he was an officer on board a sloop-of-war.  Theres nothing
strange in that.  At all stages of the long Peninsular campaign many of
our men-of-war of the smaller kind were cruising off the north coast of
Spainas risky and disagreeable a station as can be well imagined.

It looks as though that ship of his had had some special service to
perform.  A careful explanation of all the circumstances was to be
expected from our man, only, as Ive said, some of his pages (good tough
paper too) were missing: gone in covers for jampots or in wadding for the
fowling-pieces of his irreverent posterity.  But it is to be seen clearly
that communication with the shore and even the sending of messengers
inland was part of her service, either to obtain intelligence from or to
transmit orders or advice to patriotic Spaniards, guerilleros or secret
juntas of the province.  Something of the sort.  All this can be only
inferred from the preserved scraps of his conscientious writing.

Next we come upon the panegyric of a very fine sailor, a member of the
ships company, having the rating of the captains coxswain.  He was
known on board as Cuba Tom; not because he was Cuban however; he was
indeed the best type of a genuine British tar of that time, and a
man-of-wars man for years.  He came by the name on account of some
wonderful adventures he had in that island in his young days, adventures
which were the favourite subject of the yarns he was in the habit of
spinning to his shipmates of an evening on the forecastle head.  He was
intelligent, very strong, and of proved courage.  Incidentally we are
told, so exact is our narrator, that Tom had the finest pigtail for
thickness and length of any man in the Navy.  This appendage, much cared
for and sheathed tightly in a porpoise skin, hung half way down his broad
back to the great admiration of all beholders and to the great envy of
some.

Our young officer dwells on the manly qualities of Cuba Tom with
something like affection.  This sort of relation between officer and man
was not then very rare.  A youngster on joining the service was put under
the charge of a trustworthy seaman, who slung his first hammock for him
and often later on became a sort of humble friend to the junior officer.
The narrator on joining the sloop had found this man on board after some
years of separation.  There is something touching in the warm pleasure he
remembers and records at this meeting with the professional mentor of his
boyhood.

We discover then that, no Spaniard being forthcoming for the service,
this worthy seaman with the unique pigtail and a very high character for
courage and steadiness had been selected as messenger for one of these
missions inland which have been mentioned.  His preparations were not
elaborate.  One gloomy autumn morning the sloop ran close to a shallow
cove where a landing could be made on that iron-bound shore.  A boat was
lowered, and pulled in with Tom Corbin (Cuba Tom) perched in the bow, and
our young man (Mr. Edgar Byrne was his name on this earth which knows him
no more) sitting in the stern sheets.

A few inhabitants of a hamlet, whose grey stone houses could be seen a
hundred yards or so up a deep ravine, had come down to the shore and
watched the approach of the boat.  The two Englishmen leaped ashore.
Either from dullness or astonishment the peasants gave no greeting, and
only fell back in silence.

Mr. Byrne had made up his mind to see Tom Corbin started fairly on his
way.  He looked round at the heavy surprised faces.

There isnt much to get out of them, he said.  Let us walk up to the
village.  There will be a wine shop for sure where we may find somebody
more promising to talk to and get some information from.

Aye, aye, sir, said Tom falling into step behind his officer.  A bit
of palaver as to courses and distances can do no harm; I crossed the
broadest part of Cuba by the help of my tongue tho knowing far less
Spanish than I do now.  As they say themselves it was four words and no
more with me, that time when I got left behind on shore by the
_Blanche_, frigate.

He made light of what was before him, which was but a days journey into
the mountains.  It is true that there was a full days journey before
striking the mountain path, but that was nothing for a man who had
crossed the island of Cuba on his two legs, and with no more than four
words of the language to begin with.

The officer and the man were walking now on a thick sodden bed of dead
leaves, which the peasants thereabouts accumulate in the streets of their
villages to rot during the winter for field manure.  Turning his head Mr.
Byrne perceived that the whole male population of the hamlet was
following them on the noiseless springy carpet.  Women stared from the
doors of the houses and the children had apparently gone into hiding.
The village knew the ship by sight, afar off, but no stranger had landed
on that spot perhaps for a hundred years or more.  The cocked hat of Mr.
Byrne, the bushy whiskers and the enormous pigtail of the sailor, filled
them with mute wonder.  They pressed behind the two Englishmen staring
like those islanders discovered by Captain Cook in the South Seas.

It was then that Byrne had his first glimpse of the little cloaked man in
a yellow hat.  Faded and dingy as it was, this covering for his head made
him noticeable.

The entrance to the wine shop was like a rough hole in a wall of flints.
The owner was the only person who was not in the street, for he came out
from the darkness at the back where the inflated forms of wine skins hung
on nails could be vaguely distinguished.  He was a tall, one-eyed
Asturian with scrubby, hollow cheeks; a grave expression of countenance
contrasted enigmatically with the roaming restlessness of his solitary
eye.  On learning that the matter in hand was the sending on his way of
that English mariner toward a certain Gonzales in the mountains, he
closed his good eye for a moment as if in meditation.  Then opened it,
very lively again.

Possibly, possibly.  It could be done.

A friendly murmur arose in the group in the doorway at the name of
Gonzales, the local leader against the French.  Inquiring as to the
safety of the road Byrne was glad to learn that no troops of that nation
had been seen in the neighbourhood for months.  Not the smallest little
detachment of these impious _polizones_.  While giving these answers the
owner of the wine-shop busied himself in drawing into an earthenware jug
some wine which he set before the heretic English, pocketing with grave
abstraction the small piece of money the officer threw upon the table in
recognition of the unwritten law that none may enter a wine-shop without
buying drink.  His eye was in constant motion as if it were trying to do
the work of the two; but when Byrne made inquiries as to the possibility
of hiring a mule, it became immovably fixed in the direction of the door
which was closely besieged by the curious.  In front of them, just within
the threshold, the little man in the large cloak and yellow hat had taken
his stand.  He was a diminutive person, a mere homunculus, Byrne
describes him, in a ridiculously mysterious, yet assertive attitude, a
corner of his cloak thrown cavalierly over his left shoulder, muffling
his chin and mouth; while the broad-brimmed yellow hat hung on a corner
of his square little head.  He stood there taking snuff, repeatedly.

A mule, repeated the wine-seller, his eyes fixed on that quaint and
snuffy figure. . . No, seor officer!  Decidedly no mule is to be got in
this poor place.

The coxswain, who stood by with the true sailors air of unconcern in
strange surroundings, struck in quietly

If your honour will believe me Shanks ponys the best for this job.  I
would have to leave the beast somewhere, anyhow, since the captain has
told me that half my way will be along paths fit only for goats.

The diminutive man made a step forward, and speaking through the folds of
the cloak which seemed to muffle a sarcastic intention

Si, seor.  They are too honest in this village to have a single mule
amongst them for your worships service.  To that I can bear testimony.
In these times its only rogues or very clever men who can manage to have
mules or any other four-footed beasts and the wherewithal to keep them.
But what this valiant mariner wants is a guide; and here, seor, behold
my brother-in-law, Bernardino, wine-seller, and alcade of this most
Christian and hospitable village, who will find you one.

This, Mr. Byrne says in his relation, was the only thing to do.  A youth
in a ragged coat and goat-skin breeches was produced after some more
talk.  The English officer stood treat to the whole village, and while
the peasants drank he and Cuba Tom took their departure accompanied by
the guide.  The diminutive man in the cloak had disappeared.

Byrne went along with the coxswain out of the village.  He wanted to see
him fairly on his way; and he would have gone a greater distance, if the
seaman had not suggested respectfully the advisability of return so as
not to keep the ship a moment longer than necessary so close in with the
shore on such an unpromising looking morning.  A wild gloomy sky hung
over their heads when they took leave of each other, and their
surroundings of rank bushes and stony fields were dreary.

In four days time, were Byrnes last words, the ship will stand in
and send a boat on shore if the weather permits.  If not youll have to
make it out on shore the best you can till we come along to take you
off.

Right you are, sir, answered Tom, and strode on.  Byrne watched him
step out on a narrow path.  In a thick pea-jacket with a pair of pistols
in his belt, a cutlass by his side, and a stout cudgel in his hand, he
looked a sturdy figure and well able to take care of himself.  He turned
round for a moment to wave his hand, giving to Byrne one more view of his
honest bronzed face with bushy whiskers.  The lad in goatskin breeches
looking, Byrne says, like a faun or a young satyr leaping ahead, stopped
to wait for him, and then went off at a bound.  Both disappeared.

Byrne turned back.  The hamlet was hidden in a fold of the ground, and
the spot seemed the most lonely corner of the earth and as if accursed in
its uninhabited desolate barrenness.  Before he had walked many yards,
there appeared very suddenly from behind a bush the muffled up diminutive
Spaniard.  Naturally Byrne stopped short.

The other made a mysterious gesture with a tiny hand peeping from under
his cloak.  His hat hung very much at the side of his head.  Seor, he
said without any preliminaries.  Caution!  It is a positive fact that
one-eyed Bernardino, my brother-in-law, has at this moment a mule in his
stable.  And why he who is not clever has a mule there?  Because he is a
rogue; a man without conscience.  Because I had to give up the _macho_ to
him to secure for myself a roof to sleep under and a mouthful of _olla_
to keep my soul in this insignificant body of mine.  Yet, seor, it
contains a heart many times bigger than the mean thing which beats in the
breast of that brute connection of mine of which I am ashamed, though I
opposed that marriage with all my power.  Well, the misguided woman
suffered enough.  She had her purgatory on this earthGod rest her soul.

Byrne says he was so astonished by the sudden appearance of that
sprite-like being, and by the sardonic bitterness of the speech, that he
was unable to disentangle the significant fact from what seemed but a
piece of family history fired out at him without rhyme or reason.  Not at
first.  He was confounded and at the same time he was impressed by the
rapid forcible delivery, quite different from the frothy excited
loquacity of an Italian.  So he stared while the homunculus letting his
cloak fall about him, aspired an immense quantity of snuff out of the
hollow of his palm.

A mule, exclaimed Byrne seizing at last the real aspect of the
discourse.  You say he has got a mule?  Thats queer!  Why did he refuse
to let me have it?

The diminutive Spaniard muffled himself up again with great dignity.

_Quien sabe_, he said coldly, with a shrug of his draped shoulders.
He is a great _politico_ in everything he does.  But one thing your
worship may be certain ofthat his intentions are always rascally.  This
husband of my _defunta_ sister ought to have been married a long time ago
to the widow with the wooden legs. {188}

I see.  But remember that, whatever your motives, your worship
countenanced him in this lie.

The bright unhappy eyes on each side of a predatory nose confronted Byrne
without wincing, while with that testiness which lurks so often at the
bottom of Spanish dignity

No doubt the seor officer would not lose an ounce of blood if I were
stuck under the fifth rib, he retorted.  But what of this poor sinner
here?  Then changing his tone.  Seor, by the necessities of the times
I live here in exile, a Castilian and an old Christian, existing
miserably in the midst of these brute Asturians, and dependent on the
worst of them all, who has less conscience and scruples than a wolf.  And
being a man of intelligence I govern myself accordingly.  Yet I can
hardly contain my scorn.  You have heard the way I spoke.  A caballero of
parts like your worship might have guessed that there was a cat in
there.

What cat? said Byrne uneasily.  Oh, I see.  Something suspicious.  No,
seor.  I guessed nothing.  My nation are not good guessers at that sort
of thing; and, therefore, I ask you plainly whether that wine-seller has
spoken the truth in other particulars?

There are certainly no Frenchmen anywhere about, said the little man
with a return to his indifferent manner.

Or robbers_ladrones_?

_Ladrones en grande_no!  Assuredly not, was the answer in a cold
philosophical tone.  What is there left for them to do after the French?
And nobody travels in these times.  But who can say!  Opportunity makes
the robber.  Still that mariner of yours has a fierce aspect, and with
the son of a cat rats will have no play.  But there is a saying, too,
that where honey is there will soon be flies.

This oracular discourse exasperated Byrne.  In the name of God, he
cried, tell me plainly if you think my man is reasonably safe on his
journey.

The homunculus, undergoing one of his rapid changes, seized the officers
arm.  The grip of his little hand was astonishing.

Seor!  Bernardino had taken notice of him.  What more do you want?  And
listenmen have disappeared on this roadon a certain portion of this
road, when Bernardino kept a _meson_, an inn, and I, his brother-in-law,
had coaches and mules for hire.  Now there are no travellers, no coaches.
The French have ruined me.  Bernardino has retired here for reasons of
his own after my sister died.  They were three to torment the life out of
her, he and Erminia and Lucilla, two aunts of hisall affiliated to the
devil.  And now he has robbed me of my last mule.  You are an armed man.
Demand the _macho_ from him, with a pistol to his head, seorit is not
his, I tell youand ride after your man who is so precious to you.  And
then you shall both be safe, for no two travellers have been ever known
to disappear together in these days.  As to the beast, I, its owner, I
confide it to your honour.

They were staring hard at each other, and Byrne nearly burst into a laugh
at the ingenuity and transparency of the little mans plot to regain
possession of his mule.  But he had no difficulty to keep a straight face
because he felt deep within himself a strange inclination to do that very
extraordinary thing.  He did not laugh, but his lip quivered; at which
the diminutive Spaniard, detaching his black glittering eyes from Byrnes
face, turned his back on him brusquely with a gesture and a fling of the
cloak which somehow expressed contempt, bitterness, and discouragement
all at once.  He turned away and stood still, his hat aslant, muffled up
to the ears.  But he was not offended to the point of refusing the silver
_duro_ which Byrne offered him with a non-committal speech as if nothing
extraordinary had passed between them.

I must make haste on board now, said Byrne, then.

_Vaya usted con Dios_, muttered the gnome.  And this interview ended
with a sarcastic low sweep of the hat which was replaced at the same
perilous angle as before.

Directly the boat had been hoisted the ships sails were filled on the
off-shore tack, and Byrne imparted the whole story to his captain, who
was but a very few years older than himself.  There was some amused
indignation at itbut while they laughed they looked gravely at each
other.  A Spanish dwarf trying to beguile an officer of his majestys
navy into stealing a mule for himthat was too funny, too ridiculous, too
incredible.  Those were the exclamations of the captain.  He couldnt get
over the grotesqueness of it.

Incredible.  Thats just it, murmured Byrne at last in a significant
tone.

They exchanged a long stare.  Its as clear as daylight, affirmed the
captain impatiently, because in his heart he was not certain.  And Tom
the best seaman in the ship for one, the good-humouredly deferential
friend of his boyhood for the other, was becoming endowed with a
compelling fascination, like a symbolic figure of loyalty appealing to
their feelings and their conscience, so that they could not detach their
thoughts from his safety.  Several times they went up on deck, only to
look at the coast, as if it could tell them something of his fate.  It
stretched away, lengthening in the distance, mute, naked, and savage,
veiled now and then by the slanting cold shafts of rain.  The westerly
swell rolled its interminable angry lines of foam and big dark clouds
flew over the ship in a sinister procession.

I wish to goodness you had done what your little friend in the yellow
hat wanted you to do, said the commander of the sloop late in the
afternoon with visible exasperation.

Do you, sir? answered Byrne, bitter with positive anguish.  I wonder
what you would have said afterwards?  Why!  I might have been kicked out
of the service for looting a mule from a nation in alliance with His
Majesty.  Or I might have been battered to a pulp with flails and
pitch-forksa pretty tale to get abroad about one of your officerswhile
trying to steal a mule.  Or chased ignominiously to the boatfor you
would not have expected me to shoot down unoffending people for the sake
of a mangy mule. . . And yet, he added in a low voice, I almost wish
myself I had done it.

Before dark those two young men had worked themselves up into a highly
complex psychological state of scornful scepticism and alarmed credulity.
It tormented them exceedingly; and the thought that it would have to last
for six days at least, and possibly be prolonged further for an
indefinite time, was not to be borne.  The ship was therefore put on the
inshore tack at dark.  All through the gusty dark night she went towards
the land to look for her man, at times lying over in the heavy puffs, at
others rolling idle in the swell, nearly stationary, as if she too had a
mind of her own to swing perplexed between cool reason and warm impulse.

Then just at daybreak a boat put off from her and went on tossed by the
seas towards the shallow cove where, with considerable difficulty, an
officer in a thick coat and a round hat managed to land on a strip of
shingle.

It was my wish, writes Mr. Byrne, a wish of which my captain approved,
to land secretly if possible.  I did not want to be seen either by my
aggrieved friend in the yellow hat, whose motives were not clear, or by
the one-eyed wine-seller, who may or may not have been affiliated to the
devil, or indeed by any other dweller in that primitive village.  But
unfortunately the cove was the only possible landing place for miles; and
from the steepness of the ravine I couldnt make a circuit to avoid the
houses.

Fortunately, he goes on, all the people were yet in their beds.  It
was barely daylight when I found myself walking on the thick layer of
sodden leaves filling the only street.  No soul was stirring abroad, no
dog barked.  The silence was profound, and I had concluded with some
wonder that apparently no dogs were kept in the hamlet, when I heard a
low snarl, and from a noisome alley between two hovels emerged a vile cur
with its tail between its legs.  He slunk off silently showing me his
teeth as he ran before me, and he disappeared so suddenly that he might
have been the unclean incarnation of the Evil One.  There was, too,
something so weird in the manner of its coming and vanishing, that my
spirits, already by no means very high, became further depressed by the
revolting sight of this creature as if by an unlucky presage.

He got away from the coast unobserved, as far as he knew, then struggled
manfully to the west against wind and rain, on a barren dark upland,
under a sky of ashes.  Far away the harsh and desolate mountains raising
their scarped and denuded ridges seemed to wait for him menacingly.  The
evening found him fairly near to them, but, in sailor language, uncertain
of his position, hungry, wet, and tired out by a day of steady tramping
over broken ground during which he had seen very few people, and had been
unable to obtain the slightest intelligence of Tom Corbins passage.
On! on! I must push on, he had been saying to himself through the hours
of solitary effort, spurred more by incertitude than by any definite fear
or definite hope.

The lowering daylight died out quickly, leaving him faced by a broken
bridge.  He descended into the ravine, forded a narrow stream by the last
gleam of rapid water, and clambering out on the other side was met by the
night which fell like a bandage over his eyes.  The wind sweeping in the
darkness the broadside of the sierra worried his ears by a continuous
roaring noise as of a maddened sea.  He suspected that he had lost the
road.  Even in daylight, with its ruts and mud-holes and ledges of
outcropping stone, it was difficult to distinguish from the dreary waste
of the moor interspersed with boulders and clumps of naked bushes.  But,
as he says, he steered his course by the feel of the wind, his hat
rammed low on his brow, his head down, stopping now and again from mere
weariness of mind rather than of bodyas if not his strength but his
resolution were being overtaxed by the strain of endeavour half suspected
to be vain, and by the unrest of his feelings.

In one of these pauses borne in the wind faintly as if from very far away
he heard a sound of knocking, just knocking on wood.  He noticed that the
wind had lulled suddenly.

His heart started beating tumultuously because in himself he carried the
impression of the desert solitudes he had been traversing for the last
six hoursthe oppressive sense of an uninhabited world.  When he raised
his head a gleam of light, illusory as it often happens in dense
darkness, swam before his eyes.  While he peered, the sound of feeble
knocking was repeatedand suddenly he felt rather than saw the existence
of a massive obstacle in his path.  What was it?  The spur of a hill?  Or
was it a house!  Yes.  It was a house right close, as though it had risen
from the ground or had come gliding to meet him, dumb and pallid; from
some dark recess of the night.  It towered loftily.  He had come up under
its lee; another three steps and he could have touched the wall with his
hand.  It was no doubt a _posada_ and some other traveller was trying for
admittance.  He heard again the sound of cautious knocking.

Next moment a broad band of light fell into the night through the opened
door.  Byrne stepped eagerly into it, whereupon the person outside leaped
with a stifled cry away into the night.  An exclamation of surprise was
heard too, from within.  Byrne, flinging himself against the half closed
door, forced his way in against some considerable resistance.

A miserable candle, a mere rushlight, burned at the end of a long deal
table.  And in its light Byrne saw, staggering yet, the girl he had
driven from the door.  She had a short black skirt, an orange shawl, a
dark complexionand the escaped single hairs from the mass, sombre and
thick like a forest and held up by a comb, made a black mist about her
low forehead.  A shrill lamentable howl of: Misericordia! came in two
voices from the further end of the long room, where the fire-light of an
open hearth played between heavy shadows.  The girl recovering herself
drew a hissing breath through her set teeth.

It is unnecessary to report the long process of questions and answers by
which he soothed the fears of two old women who sat on each side of the
fire, on which stood a large earthenware pot.  Byrne thought at once of
two witches watching the brewing of some deadly potion.  But all the
same, when one of them raising forward painfully her broken form lifted
the cover of the pot, the escaping steam had an appetising smell.  The
other did not budge, but sat hunched up, her head trembling all the time.

They were horrible.  There was something grotesque in their decrepitude.
Their toothless mouths, their hooked noses, the meagreness of the active
one, and the hanging yellow cheeks of the other (the still one, whose
head trembled) would have been laughable if the sight of their dreadful
physical degradation had not been appalling to ones eyes, had not
gripped ones heart with poignant amazement at the unspeakable misery of
age, at the awful persistency of life becoming at last an object of
disgust and dread.

To get over it Byrne began to talk, saying that he was an Englishman, and
that he was in search of a countryman who ought to have passed this way.
Directly he had spoken the recollection of his parting with Tom came up
in his mind with amazing vividness: the silent villagers, the angry
gnome, the one-eyed wine-seller, Bernardino.  Why!  These two unspeakable
frights must be that mans auntsaffiliated to the devil.

Whatever they had been once it was impossible to imagine what use such
feeble creatures could be to the devil, now, in the world of the living.
Which was Lucilla and which was Erminia?  They were now things without a
name.  A moment of suspended animation followed Byrnes words.  The
sorceress with the spoon ceased stirring the mess in the iron pot, the
very trembling of the others head stopped for the space of breath.  In
this infinitesimal fraction of a second Byrne had the sense of being
really on his quest, of having reached the turn of the path, almost
within hail of Tom.

They have seen him, he thought with conviction.  Here was at last
somebody who had seen him.  He made sure they would deny all knowledge of
the Ingles; but on the contrary they were eager to tell him that he had
eaten and slept the night in the house.  They both started talking
together, describing his appearance and behaviour.  An excitement quite
fierce in its feebleness possessed them.  The doubled-up sorceress
flourished aloft her wooden spoon, the puffy monster got off her stool
and screeched, stepping from one foot to the other, while the trembling
of her head was accelerated to positive vibration.  Byrne was quite
disconcerted by their excited behaviour. . . Yes!  The big, fierce Ingles
went away in the morning, after eating a piece of bread and drinking some
wine.  And if the caballero wished to follow the same path nothing could
be easierin the morning.

You will give me somebody to show me the way? said Byrne.

Si, seor.  A proper youth.  The man the caballero saw going out.

But he was knocking at the door, protested Byrne.  He only bolted when
he saw me.  He was coming in.

No!  No! the two horrid witches screamed out together.  Going out.
Going out!

After all it may have been true. The sound of knocking had been faint,
elusive, reflected Byrne.  Perhaps only the effect of his fancy.  He
asked

Who is that man?

Her _novio_.  They screamed pointing to the girl.  He is gone home to
a village far away from here.  But he will return in the morning.  Her
_novio_!  And she is an orphanthe child of poor Christian people.  She
lives with us for the love of God, for the love of God.

The orphan crouching on the corner of the hearth had been looking at
Byrne.  He thought that she was more like a child of Satan kept there by
these two weird harridans for the love of the Devil.  Her eyes were a
little oblique, her mouth rather thick, but admirably formed; her dark
face had a wild beauty, voluptuous and untamed.  As to the character of
her steadfast gaze attached upon him with a sensuously savage attention,
to know what it was like, says Mr. Byrne, you have only to observe a
hungry cat watching a bird in a cage or a mouse inside a trap.

It was she who served him the food, of which he was glad; though with
those big slanting black eyes examining him at close range, as if he had
something curious written on his face, she gave him an uncomfortable
sensation.  But anything was better than being approached by these
blear-eyed nightmarish witches.  His apprehensions somehow had been
soothed; perhaps by the sensation of warmth after severe exposure and the
ease of resting after the exertion of fighting the gale inch by inch all
the way.  He had no doubt of Toms safety.  He was now sleeping in the
mountain camp having been met by Gonzales men.

Byrne rose, filled a tin goblet with wine out of a skin hanging on the
wall, and sat down again.  The witch with the mummy face began to talk to
him, ramblingly of old times; she boasted of the inns fame in those
better days.  Great people in their own coaches stopped there.  An
archbishop slept once in the _casa_, a long, long time ago.

The witch with the puffy face seemed to be listening from her stool,
motionless, except for the trembling of her head.  The girl (Byrne was
certain she was a casual gipsy admitted there for some reason or other)
sat on the hearth stone in the glow of the embers.  She hummed a tune to
herself, rattling a pair of castanets slightly now and then.  At the
mention of the archbishop she chuckled impiously and turned her head to
look at Byrne, so that the red glow of the fire flashed in her black eyes
and on her white teeth under the dark cowl of the enormous overmantel.
And he smiled at her.

He rested now in the ease of security.  His advent not having been
expected there could be no plot against him in existence.  Drowsiness
stole upon his senses.  He enjoyed it, but keeping a hold, so he thought
at least, on his wits; but he must have been gone further than he thought
because he was startled beyond measure by a fiendish uproar.  He had
never heard anything so pitilessly strident in his life.  The witches had
started a fierce quarrel about something or other.  Whatever its origin
they were now only abusing each other violently, without arguments; their
senile screams expressed nothing but wicked anger and ferocious dismay.
The gipsy girls black eyes flew from one to the other.  Never before had
Byrne felt himself so removed from fellowship with human beings.  Before
he had really time to understand the subject of the quarrel, the girl
jumped up rattling her castanets loudly.  A silence fell.  She came up to
the table and bending over, her eyes in his

Seor, she said with decision, You shall sleep in the archbishops
room.

Neither of the witches objected.  The dried-up one bent double was
propped on a stick.  The puffy faced one had now a crutch.

Byrne got up, walked to the door, and turning the key in the enormous
lock put it coolly in his pocket.  This was clearly the only entrance,
and he did not mean to be taken unawares by whatever danger there might
have been lurking outside.

When he turned from the door he saw the two witches affiliated to the
Devil and the Satanic girl looking at him in silence.  He wondered if
Tom Corbin took the same precaution last might.  And thinking of him he
had again that queer impression of his nearness.  The world was perfectly
dumb.  And in this stillness he heard the blood beating in his ears with
a confused rushing noise, in which there seemed to be a voice uttering
the words: Mr. Byrne, look out, sir.  Toms voice.  He shuddered; for
the delusions of the senses of hearing are the most vivid of all, and
from their nature have a compelling character.

It seemed impossible that Tom should not be there.  Again a slight chill
as of stealthy draught penetrated through his very clothes and passed
over all his body.  He shook off the impression with an effort.

It was the girl who preceded him upstairs carrying an iron lamp from the
naked flame of which ascended a thin thread of smoke.  Her soiled white
stockings were full of holes.

With the same quiet resolution with which he had locked the door below,
Byrne threw open one after another the doors in the corridor.  All the
rooms were empty except for some nondescript lumber in one or two.  And
the girl seeing what he would be at stopped every time, raising the smoky
light in each doorway patiently.  Meantime she observed him with
sustained attention.  The last door of all she threw open herself.

You sleep here, seor, she murmured in a voice light like a childs
breath, offering him the lamp.

_Buenos noches_, _senorita_, he said politely, taking it from her.

She didnt return the wish audibly, though her lips did move a little,
while her gaze black like a starless night never for a moment wavered
before him.  He stepped in, and as he turned to close the door she was
still there motionless and disturbing, with her voluptuous mouth and
slanting eyes, with the expression of expectant sensual ferocity of a
baffled cat.  He hesitated for a moment, and in the dumb house he heard
again the blood pulsating ponderously in his ears, while once more the
illusion of Toms voice speaking earnestly somewhere near by was
specially terrifying, because this time he could not make out the words.

He slammed the door in the girls face at last, leaving her in the dark;
and he opened it again almost on the instant.  Nobody.  She had vanished
without the slightest sound.  He closed the door quickly and bolted it
with two heavy bolts.

A profound mistrust possessed him suddenly.  Why did the witches quarrel
about letting him sleep here?  And what meant that stare of the girl as
if she wanted to impress his features for ever in her mind?  His own
nervousness alarmed him.  He seemed to himself to be removed very far
from mankind.

He examined his room.  It was not very high, just high enough to take the
bed which stood under an enormous baldaquin-like canopy from which fell
heavy curtains at foot and head; a bed certainly worthy of an archbishop.
There was a heavy table carved all round the edges, some arm-chairs of
enormous weight like the spoils of a grandees palace; a tall shallow
wardrobe placed against the wall and with double doors.  He tried them.
Locked.  A suspicion came into his mind, and he snatched the lamp to make
a closer examination.  No, it was not a disguised entrance.  That heavy,
tall piece of furniture stood clear of the wall by quite an inch.  He
glanced at the bolts of his room door.  No!  No one could get at him
treacherously while he slept.  But would he be able to sleep? he asked
himself anxiously.  If only he had Tom therethe trusty seaman who had
fought at his right hand in a cutting out affair or two, and had always
preached to him the necessity to take care of himself.  For its no
great trick, he used to say, to get yourself killed in a hot fight.
Any fool can do that.  The proper pastime is to fight the Frenchies and
then live to fight another day.

Byrne found it a hard matter not to fall into listening to the silence.
Somehow he had the conviction that nothing would break it unless he heard
again the haunting sound of Toms voice.  He had heard it twice before.
Odd!  And yet no wonder, he argued with himself reasonably, since he had
been thinking of the man for over thirty hours continuously and, whats
more, inconclusively.  For his anxiety for Tom had never taken a definite
shape.  Disappear, was the only word connected with the idea of Toms
danger.  It was very vague and awful.  Disappear!  What did that mean?

Byrne shuddered, and then said to himself that he must be a little
feverish.  But Tom had not disappeared.  Byrne had just heard of him.
And again the young man felt the blood beating in his ears.  He sat still
expecting every moment to hear through the pulsating strokes the sound of
Toms voice.  He waited straining his ears, but nothing came.  Suddenly
the thought occurred to him: He has not disappeared, but he cannot make
himself heard.

He jumped up from the arm-chair.  How absurd!  Laying his pistol and his
hanger on the table he took off his boots and, feeling suddenly too tired
to stand, flung himself on the bed which he found soft and comfortable
beyond his hopes.

He had felt very wakeful, but he must have dozed off after all, because
the next thing he knew he was sitting up in bed and trying to recollect
what it was that Toms voice had said.  Oh!  He remembered it now.  It
had said: Mr. Byrne!  Look out, sir!  A warning this.  But against
what?

He landed with one leap in the middle of the floor, gasped once, then
looked all round the room.  The window was shuttered and barred with an
iron bar.  Again he ran his eyes slowly all round the bare walls, and
even looked up at the ceiling, which was rather high.  Afterwards he went
to the door to examine the fastenings.  They consisted of two enormous
iron bolts sliding into holes made in the wall; and as the corridor
outside was too narrow to admit of any battering arrangement or even to
permit an axe to be swung, nothing could burst the door openunless
gunpowder.  But while he was still making sure that the lower bolt was
pushed well home, he received the impression of somebodys presence in
the room.  It was so strong that he spun round quicker than lightning.
There was no one.  Who could there be?  And yet . . .

It was then that he lost the decorum and restraint a man keeps up for his
own sake.  He got down on his hands and knees, with the lamp on the
floor, to look under the bed, like a silly girl.  He saw a lot of dust
and nothing else.  He got up, his cheeks burning, and walked about
discontented with his own behaviour and unreasonably angry with Tom for
not leaving him alone.  The words: Mr. Byrne!  Look out, sir, kept on
repeating themselves in his head in a tone of warning.

Hadnt I better just throw myself on the bed and try to go to sleep, he
asked himself.  But his eyes fell on the tall wardrobe, and he went
towards it feeling irritated with himself and yet unable to desist.  How
he could explain to-morrow the burglarious misdeed to the two odious
witches he had no idea.  Nevertheless he inserted the point of his hanger
between the two halves of the door and tried to prize them open.  They
resisted.  He swore, sticking now hotly to his purpose.  His mutter: I
hope you will be satisfied, confound you, was addressed to the absent
Tom.  Just then the doors gave way and flew open.

He was there.

Hethe trusty, sagacious, and courageous Tom was there, drawn up shadowy
and stiff, in a prudent silence, which his wide-open eyes by their fixed
gleam seemed to command Byrne to respect.  But Byrne was too startled to
make a sound.  Amazed, he stepped back a littleand on the instant the
seaman flung himself forward headlong as if to clasp his officer round
the neck.  Instinctively Byrne put out his faltering arms; he felt the
horrible rigidity of the body and then the coldness of death as their
heads knocked together and their faces came into contact.  They reeled,
Byrne hugging Tom close to his breast in order not to let him fall with a
crash.  He had just strength enough to lower the awful burden gently to
the floorthen his head swam, his legs gave way, and he sank on his
knees, leaning over the body with his hands resting on the breast of that
man once full of generous life, and now as insensible as a stone.

Dead! my poor Tom, dead, he repeated mentally.  The light of the lamp
standing near the edge of the table fell from above straight on the stony
empty stare of these eyes which naturally had a mobile and merry
expression.

Byrne turned his own away from them.  Toms black silk neckerchief was
not knotted on his breast.  It was gone.  The murderers had also taken
off his shoes and stockings.  And noticing this spoliation, the exposed
throat, the bare up-turned feet, Byrne felt his eyes run full of tears.
In other respects the seaman was fully dressed; neither was his clothing
disarranged as it must have been in a violent struggle.  Only his checked
shirt had been pulled a little out the waistband in one place, just
enough to ascertain whether he had a money belt fastened round his body.
Byrne began to sob into his handkerchief.

It was a nervous outburst which passed off quickly.  Remaining on his
knees he contemplated sadly the athletic body of as fine a seaman as ever
had drawn a cutlass, laid a gun, or passed the weather earring in a gale,
lying stiff and cold, his cheery, fearless spirit departedperhaps
turning to him, his boy chum, to his ship out there rolling on the grey
seas off an iron-bound coast, at the very moment of its flight.

He perceived that the six brass buttons of Toms jacket had been cut off.
He shuddered at the notion of the two miserable and repulsive witches
busying themselves ghoulishly about the defenceless body of his friend.
Cut off.  Perhaps with the same knife which . . . The head of one
trembled; the other was bent double, and their eyes were red and bleared,
their infamous claws unsteady. . . It must have been in this very room
too, for Tom could not have been killed in the open and brought in here
afterwards.  Of that Byrne was certain.  Yet those devilish crones could
not have killed him themselves even by taking him unawaresand Tom would
be always on his guard of course.  Tom was a very wide awake wary man
when engaged on any service. . . And in fact how did they murder him?
Who did?  In what way?

Byrne jumped up, snatched the lamp off the table, and stooped swiftly
over the body.  The light revealed on the clothing no stain, no trace, no
spot of blood anywhere.  Byrnes hands began to shake so that he had to
set the lamp on the floor and turn away his head in order to recover from
this agitation.

Then he began to explore that cold, still, and rigid body for a stab, a
gunshot wound, for the trace of some killing blow.  He felt all over the
skull anxiously.  It was whole.  He slipped his hand under the neck.  It
was unbroken.  With terrified eyes he peered close under the chin and saw
no marks of strangulation on the throat.

There were no signs anywhere.  He was just dead.

Impulsively Byrne got away from the body as if the mystery of an
incomprehensible death had changed his pity into suspicion and dread.
The lamp on the floor near the set, still face of the seaman showed it
staring at the ceiling as if despairingly.  In the circle of light Byrne
saw by the undisturbed patches of thick dust on the floor that there had
been no struggle in that room.  He has died outside, he thought.  Yes,
outside in that narrow corridor, where there was hardly room to turn, the
mysterious death had come to his poor dear Tom.  The impulse of snatching
up his pistols and rushing out of the room abandoned Byrne suddenly.  For
Tom, too, had been armedwith just such powerless weapons as he himself
possessedpistols, a cutlass!  And Tom had died a nameless death, by
incomprehensible means.

A new thought came to Byrne.  That stranger knocking at the door and
fleeing so swiftly at his appearance had come there to remove the body.
Aha!  That was the guide the withered witch had promised would show the
English officer the shortest way of rejoining his man.  A promise, he saw
it now, of dreadful import.  He who had knocked would have two bodies to
deal with.  Man and officer would go forth from the house together.  For
Byrne was certain now that he would have to die before the morningand in
the same mysterious manner, leaving behind him an unmarked body.

The sight of a smashed head, of a throat cut, of a gaping gunshot wound,
would have been an inexpressible relief.  It would have soothed all his
fears.  His soul cried within him to that dead man whom he had never
found wanting in danger.  Why dont you tell me what I am to look for,
Tom?  Why dont you?  But in rigid immobility, extended on his back, he
seemed to preserve an austere silence, as if disdaining in the finality
of his awful knowledge to hold converse with the living.

Suddenly Byrne flung himself on his knees by the side of the body, and
dry-eyed, fierce, opened the shirt wide on the breast, as if to tear the
secret forcibly from that cold heart which had been so loyal to him in
life!  Nothing!  Nothing!  He raised the lamp, and all the sign
vouchsafed to him by that face which used to be so kindly in expression
was a small bruise on the foreheadthe least thing, a mere mark.  The
skin even was not broken.  He stared at it a long time as if lost in a
dreadful dream.  Then he observed that Toms hands were clenched as
though he had fallen facing somebody in a fight with fists.  His
knuckles, on closer view, appeared somewhat abraded.  Both hands.

The discovery of these slight signs was more appalling to Byrne than the
absolute absence of every mark would have been.  So Tom had died striking
against something which could be hit, and yet could kill one without
leaving a woundby a breath.

Terror, hot terror, began to play about Byrnes heart like a tongue of
flame that touches and withdraws before it turns a thing to ashes.  He
backed away from the body as far as he could, then came forward
stealthily casting fearful glances to steal another look at the bruised
forehead.  There would perhaps be such a faint bruise on his own
foreheadbefore the morning.

I cant bear it, he whispered to himself.  Tom was for him now an
object of horror, a sight at once tempting and revolting to his fear.  He
couldnt bear to look at him.

At last, desperation getting the better of his increasing horror, he
stepped forward from the wall against which he had been leaning, seized
the corpse under the armpits, and began to lug it over to the bed.  The
bare heels of the seaman trailed on the floor noiselessly.  He was heavy
with the dead weight of inanimate objects.  With a last effort Byrne
landed him face downwards on the edge of the bed, rolled him over,
snatched from under this stiff passive thing a sheet with which he
covered it over.  Then he spread the curtains at head and foot so that
joining together as he shook their folds they hid the bed altogether from
his sight.

He stumbled towards a chair, and fell on it.  The perspiration poured
from his face for a moment, and then his veins seemed to carry for a
while a thin stream of half, frozen blood.  Complete terror had
possession of him now, a nameless terror which had turned his heart to
ashes.

He sat upright in the straight-backed chair, the lamp burning at his
feet, his pistols and his hanger at his left elbow on the end of the
table, his eyes turning incessantly in their sockets round the walls,
over the ceiling, over the floor, in the expectation of a mysterious and
appalling vision.  The thing which could deal death in a breath was
outside that bolted door.  But Byrne believed neither in walls nor bolts
now.  Unreasoning terror turning everything to account, his old time
boyish admiration of the athletic Tom, the undaunted Tom (he had seemed
to him invincible), helped to paralyse his faculties, added to his
despair.

He was no longer Edgar Byrne.  He was a tortured soul suffering more
anguish than any sinners body had ever suffered from rack or boot.  The
depth of his torment may be measured when I say that this young man, as
brave at least as the average of his kind, contemplated seizing a pistol
and firing into his own head.  But a deadly, chilly, langour was
spreading over his limbs.  It was as if his flesh had been wet plaster
stiffening slowly about his ribs.  Presently, he thought, the two witches
will be coming in, with crutch and stickhorrible, grotesque,
monstrousaffiliated to the devilto put a mark on his forehead, the tiny
little bruise of death.  And he wouldnt be able to do anything.  Tom had
struck out at something, but he was not like Tom.  His limbs were dead
already.  He sat still, dying the death over and over again; and the only
part of him which moved were his eyes, turning round and round in their
sockets, running over the walls, the floor, the ceiling, again and again
till suddenly they became motionless and stonystarting out of his head
fixed in the direction of the bed.

He had seen the heavy curtains stir and shake as if the dead body they
concealed had turned over and sat up.  Byrne, who thought the world could
hold no more terrors in store, felt his hair stir at the roots.  He
gripped the arms of the chair, his jaw fell, and the sweat broke out on
his brow while his dry tongue clove suddenly to the roof of his mouth.
Again the curtains stirred, but did not open.  Dont, Tom! Byrne made
effort to shout, but all he heard was a slight moan such as an uneasy
sleeper may make.  He felt that his brain was going, for, now, it seemed
to him that the ceiling over the bed had moved, had slanted, and came
level againand once more the closed curtains swayed gently as if about
to part.

Byrne closed his eyes not to see the awful apparition of the seamans
corpse coming out animated by an evil spirit.  In the profound silence of
the room he endured a moment of frightful agony, then opened his eyes
again.  And he saw at once that the curtains remained closed still, but
that the ceiling over the bed had risen quite a foot.  With the last
gleam of reason left to him he understood that it was the enormous
baldaquin over the bed which was coming down, while the curtains attached
to it swayed softly, sinking gradually to the floor.  His drooping jaw
snapped toand half rising in his chair he watched mutely the noiseless
descent of the monstrous canopy.  It came down in short smooth rushes
till lowered half way or more, when it took a run and settled swiftly its
turtle-back shape with the deep border piece fitting exactly the edge of
the bedstead.  A slight crack or two of wood were heard, and the
overpowering stillness of the room resumed its sway.

Byrne stood up, gasped for breath, and let out a cry of rage and dismay,
the first sound which he is perfectly certain did make its way past his
lips on this night of terrors.  This then was the death he had escaped!
This was the devilish artifice of murder poor Toms soul had perhaps
tried from beyond the border to warn him of.  For this was how he had
died.  Byrne was certain he had heard the voice of the seaman, faintly
distinct in his familiar phrase, Mr. Byrne!  Look out, sir! and again
uttering words he could not make out.  But then the distance separating
the living from the dead is so great!  Poor Tom had tried.  Byrne ran to
the bed and attempted to lift up, to push off the horrible lid smothering
the body.  It resisted his efforts, heavy as lead, immovable like a
tombstone.  The rage of vengeance made him desist; his head buzzed with
chaotic thoughts of extermination, he turned round the room as if he
could find neither his weapons nor the way out; and all the time he
stammered awful menaces. . .

A violent battering at the door of the inn recalled him to his soberer
senses.  He flew to the window pulled the shutters open, and looked out.
In the faint dawn he saw below him a mob of men.  Ha!  He would go and
face at once this murderous lot collected no doubt for his undoing.
After his struggle with nameless terrors he yearned for an open fray with
armed enemies.  But he must have remained yet bereft of his reason,
because forgetting his weapons he rushed downstairs with a wild cry,
unbarred the door while blows were raining on it outside, and flinging it
open flew with his bare hands at the throat of the first man he saw
before him.  They rolled over together.  Byrnes hazy intention was to
break through, to fly up the mountain path, and come back presently with
Gonzales men to exact an exemplary vengeance.  He fought furiously till
a tree, a house, a mountain, seemed to crash down upon his headand he
knew no more.

                                * * * * *

Here Mr. Byrne describes in detail the skilful manner in which he found
his broken head bandaged, informs us that he had lost a great deal of
blood, and ascribes the preservation of his sanity to that circumstance.
He sets down Gonzales profuse apologies in full too.  For it was
Gonzales who, tired of waiting for news from the English, had come down
to the inn with half his band, on his way to the sea.  His excellency,
he explained, rushed out with fierce impetuosity, and, moreover, was not
known to us for a friend, and so we . . . etc., etc.  When asked what had
become of the witches, he only pointed his finger silently to the ground,
then voiced calmly a moral reflection: The passion for gold is pitiless
in the very old, seor, he said.  No doubt in former days they have put
many a solitary traveller to sleep in the archbishops bed.

There was also a gipsy girl there, said Byrne feebly from the
improvised litter on which he was being carried to the coast by a squad
of guerilleros.

It was she who winched up that infernal machine, and it was she too who
lowered it that night, was the answer.

But why?  Why? exclaimed Byrne.  Why should she wish for my death?

No doubt for the sake of your excellencys coat buttons, said politely
the saturnine Gonzales.  We found those of the dead mariner concealed on
her person.  But your excellency may rest assured that everything that is
fitting has been done on this occasion.

Byrne asked no more questions.  There was still another death which was
considered by Gonzales as fitting to the occasion.  The one-eyed
Bernardino stuck against the wall of his wine-shop received the charge of
six escopettas into his breast.  As the shots rang out the rough bier
with Toms body on it went past carried by a bandit-like gang of Spanish
patriots down the ravine to the shore, where two boats from the ship were
waiting for what was left on earth of her best seaman.

Mr. Byrne, very pale and weak, stepped into the boat which carried the
body of his humble friend.  For it was decided that Tom Corbin should
rest far out in the bay of Biscay.  The officer took the tiller and,
turning his head for the last look at the shore, saw on the grey hillside
something moving, which he made out to be a little man in a yellow hat
mounted on a mulethat mule without which the fate of Tom Corbin would
have remained mysterious for ever.

                                * * * * *

_June_, 1913.




BECAUSE OF THE DOLLARS


CHAPTER I


While we were hanging about near the waters edge, as sailors idling
ashore will do (it was in the open space before the Harbour Office of a
great Eastern port), a man came towards us from the front of business
houses, aiming obliquely at the landing steps.  He attracted my attention
because in the movement of figures in white drill suits on the pavement
from which he stepped, his costume, the usual tunic and trousers, being
made of light grey flannel, made him noticeable.

I had time to observe him.  He was stout, but he was not grotesque.  His
face was round and smooth, his complexion very fair.  On his nearer
approach I saw a little moustache made all the fairer by a good many
white hairs.  And he had, for a stout man, quite a good chin.  In passing
us he exchanged nods with the friend I was with and smiled.

My friend was Hollis, the fellow who had so many adventures and had known
so many queer people in that part of the (more or less) gorgeous East in
the days of his youth.  He said: Thats a good man.  I dont mean good
in the sense of smart or skilful in his trade.  I mean a really _good_
man.

I turned round at once to look at the phenomenon.  The really _good_
man had a very broad back.  I saw him signal a sampan to come alongside,
get into it, and go off in the direction of a cluster of local steamers
anchored close inshore.

I said: Hes a seaman, isnt he?

Yes.  Commands that biggish dark-green steamer: _Sissie_Glasgow.  He
has never commanded anything else but the _Sissie_Glasgow, only it
wasnt always the same _Sissie_.  The first he had was about half the
length of this one, and we used to tell poor Davidson that she was a size
too small for him.  Even at that time Davidson had bulk.  We warned him
he would get callosities on his shoulders and elbows because of the tight
fit of his command.  And Davidson could well afford the smiles he gave us
for our chaff.  He made lots of money in her.  She belonged to a portly
Chinaman resembling a mandarin in a picture-book, with goggles and thin
drooping moustaches, and as dignified as only a Celestial knows how to
be.

The best of Chinamen as employers is that they have such gentlemanly
instincts.  Once they become convinced that you are a straight man, they
give you their unbounded confidence.  You simply cant do wrong, then.
And they are pretty quick judges of character, too.  Davidsons Chinaman
was the first to find out his worth, on some theoretical principle.  One
day in his counting-house, before several white men he was heard to
declare: Captain Davidson is a good man.  And that settled it.  After
that you couldnt tell if it was Davidson who belonged to the Chinaman or
the Chinaman who belonged to Davidson.  It was he who, shortly before he
died, ordered in Glasgow the new _Sissie_ for Davidson to command.

We walked into the shade of the Harbour Office and leaned our elbows on
the parapet of the quay.

She was really meant to comfort poor Davidson, continued Hollis.  Can
you fancy anything more navely touching than this old mandarin spending
several thousand pounds to console his white man?  Well, there she is.
The old mandarins sons have inherited her, and Davidson with her; and he
commands her; and what with his salary and trading privileges he makes a
lot of money; and everything is as before; and Davidson even smilesyou
have seen it?  Well, the smiles the only thing which isnt as before.

Tell me, Hollis, I asked, what do you mean by good in this
connection?

Well, there are men who are born good just as others are born witty.
What I mean is his nature.  No simpler, more scrupulously delicate soul
had ever lived in such aacomfortable envelope.  How we used to laugh at
Davidsons fine scruples!  In short, hes thoroughly humane, and I dont
imagine there can be much of any other sort of goodness that counts on
this earth.  And as hes that with a shade of particular refinement, I
may well call him a _really_ good man.

I knew from old that Hollis was a firm believer in the final value of
shades.  And I said: I seebecause I really did see Holliss Davidson
in the sympathetic stout man who had passed us a little while before.
But I remembered that at the very moment he smiled his placid face
appeared veiled in melancholya sort of spiritual shadow.  I went on.

Who on earth has paid him off for being so fine by spoiling his smile?

Thats quite a story, and I will tell it to you if you like.  Confound
it!  Its quite a surprising one, too.  Surprising in every way, but
mostly in the way it knocked over poor Davidsonand apparently only
because he is such a good sort.  He was telling me all about it only a
few days ago.  He said that when he saw these four fellows with their
heads in a bunch over the table, he at once didnt like it.  He didnt
like it at all.  You mustnt suppose that Davidson is a soft fool.  These
men

But I had better begin at the beginning.  We must go back to the first
time the old dollars had been called in by our Government in exchange for
a new issue.  Just about the time when I left these parts to go home for
a long stay.  Every trader in the islands was thinking of getting his old
dollars sent up here in time, and the demand for empty French wine
casesyou know the dozen of vermouth or claret sizewas something
unprecedented.  The custom was to pack the dollars in little bags of a
hundred each.  I dont know how many bags each case would hold.  A good
lot.  Pretty tidy sums must have been moving afloat just then.  But let
us get away from here.  Wont do to stay in the sun.  Where could we?  I
know! let us go to those tiffin-rooms over there.

We moved over accordingly.  Our appearance in the long empty room at that
early hour caused visible consternation amongst the China boys.  But
Hollis led the way to one of the tables between the windows screened by
rattan blinds.  A brilliant half-light trembled on the ceiling, on the
whitewashed walls, bathed the multitude of vacant chairs and tables in a
peculiar, stealthy glow.

All right.  We will get something to eat when its ready, he said,
waving the anxious Chinaman waiter aside.  He took his temples touched
with grey between his hands, leaning over the table to bring his face,
his dark, keen eyes, closer to mine.

Davidson then was commanding the steamer _Sissie_the little one which
we used to chaff him about.  He ran her alone, with only the Malay serang
for a deck officer.  The nearest approach to another white man on board
of her was the engineer, a Portuguese half-caste, as thin as a lath and
quite a youngster at that.  For all practical purposes Davidson was
managing that command of his single-handed; and of course this was known
in the port.  I am telling you of it because the fact had its influence
on the developments you shall hear of presently.

His steamer, being so small, could go up tiny creeks and into shallow
bays and through reefs and over sand-banks, collecting produce, where no
other vessel but a native craft would think of venturing.  It is a paying
game, often.  Davidson was known to visit in her places that no one else
could find and that hardly anybody had ever heard of.

The old dollars being called in, Davidsons Chinaman thought that the
_Sissie_ would be just the thing to collect them from small traders in
the less frequented parts of the Archipelago.  Its a good business.
Such cases of dollars are dumped aft in the ships lazarette, and you get
good freight for very little trouble and space.

Davidson, too, thought it was a good idea; and together they made up a
list of his calls on his next trip.  Then Davidson (he had naturally the
chart of his voyages in his head) remarked that on his way back he might
look in at a certain settlement up a mere creek, where a poor sort of
white man lived in a native village.  Davidson pointed out to his
Chinaman that the fellow was certain to have some rattans to ship.

Probably enough to fill her forward, said Davidson.  And thatll be
better than bringing her back with empty holds.  A day more or less
doesnt matter.

This was sound talk, and the Chinaman owner could not but agree.  But if
it hadnt been sound it would have been just the same.  Davidson did what
he liked.  He was a man that could do no wrong.  However, this suggestion
of his was not merely a business matter.  There was in it a touch of
Davidsonian kindness.  For you must know that the man could not have
continued to live quietly up that creek if it had not been for Davidsons
willingness to call there from time to time.  And Davidsons Chinaman
knew this perfectly well, too.  So he only smiled his dignified, bland
smile, and said: All right, Captain.  You do what you like.

I will explain presently how this connection between Davidson and that
fellow came about.  Now I want to tell you about the part of this affair
which happened herethe preliminaries of it.

You know as well as I do that these tiffin-rooms where we are sitting
now have been in existence for many years.  Well, next day about twelve
oclock, Davidson dropped in here to get something to eat.

And here comes the only moment in this story where accidentmere
accidentplays a part.  If Davidson had gone home that day for tiffin,
there would be now, after twelve years or more, nothing changed in his
kindly, placid smile.

But he came in here; and perhaps it was sitting at this very table that
he remarked to a friend of mine that his next trip was to be a
dollar-collecting trip.  He added, laughing, that his wife was making
rather a fuss about it.  She had begged him to stay ashore and get
somebody else to take his place for a voyage.  She thought there was some
danger on account of the dollars.  He told her, he said, that there were
no Java-sea pirates nowadays except in boys books.  He had laughed at
her fears, but he was very sorry, too; for when she took any notion in
her head it was impossible to argue her out of it.  She would be worrying
herself all the time he was away.  Well, he couldnt help it.  There was
no one ashore fit to take his place for the trip.

This friend of mine and I went home together in the same mail-boat, and
he mentioned that conversation one evening in the Red Sea while we were
talking over the things and people we had just left, with more or less
regret.

I cant say that Davidson occupied a very prominent place.  Moral
excellence seldom does.  He was quietly appreciated by those who knew him
well; but his more obvious distinction consisted in this, that he was
married.  Ours, as you remember, was a bachelor crowd; in spirit anyhow,
if not absolutely in fact.  There might have been a few wives in
existence, but if so they were invisible, distant, never alluded to.  For
what would have been the good?  Davidson alone was visibly married.

Being married suited him exactly.  It fitted him so well that the
wildest of us did not resent the fact when it was disclosed.  Directly he
had felt his feet out here, Davidson sent for his wife.  She came out
(from West Australia) in the _Somerset_, under the care of Captain
Ritchieyou know, Monkey-face Ritchiewho couldnt praise enough her
sweetness, her gentleness, and her charm.  She seemed to be the
heaven-born mate for Davidson.  She found on arrival a very pretty
bungalow on the hill, ready for her and the little girl they had.  Very
soon he got for her a two-wheeled trap and a Burmah pony, and she used to
drive down of an evening to pick up Davidson, on the quay.  When
Davidson, beaming, got into the trap, it would become very full all at
once.

We used to admire Mrs. Davidson from a distance.  It was a girlish head
out of a keepsake.  From a distance.  We had not many opportunities for a
closer view, because she did not care to give them to us.  We would have
been glad to drop in at the Davidson bungalow, but we were made to feel
somehow that we were not very welcome there.  Not that she ever said
anything ungracious.  She never had much to say for herself.  I was
perhaps the one who saw most of the Davidsons at home.  What I noticed
under the superficial aspect of vapid sweetness was her convex, obstinate
forehead, and her small, red, pretty, ungenerous mouth.  But then I am an
observer with strong prejudices.  Most of us were fetched by her white,
swan-like neck, by that drooping, innocent profile.  There was a lot of
latent devotion to Davidsons wife hereabouts, at that time, I can tell
you.  But my idea was that she repaid it by a profound suspicion of the
sort of men we were; a mistrust which extendedI fanciedto her very
husband at times.  And I thought then she was jealous of him in a way;
though there were no women that she could be jealous about.  She had no
womens society.  Its difficult for a shipmasters wife unless there are
other shipmasters wives about, and there were none here then.  I know
that the dock managers wife called on her; but that was all.  The
fellows here formed the opinion that Mrs. Davidson was a meek, shy little
thing.  She looked it, I must say.  And this opinion was so universal
that the friend I have been telling you of remembered his conversation
with Davidson simply because of the statement about Davidsons wife.  He
even wondered to me: Fancy Mrs. Davidson making a fuss to that extent.
She didnt seem to me the sort of woman that would know how to make a
fuss about anything.

I wondered, toobut not so much.  That bumpy foreheadeh?  I had always
suspected her of being silly.  And I observed that Davidson must have
been vexed by this display of wifely anxiety.

My friend said: No.  He seemed rather touched and distressed.  There
really was no one he could ask to relieve him; mainly because he intended
to make a call in some God-forsaken creek, to look up a fellow of the
name of Bamtz who apparently had settled there.

And again my friend wondered.  Tell me, he cried, what connection can
there be between Davidson and such a creature as Bamtz?

I dont remember now what answer I made.  A sufficient one could have
been given in two words: Davidsons goodness.  _That_ never boggled at
unworthiness if there was the slightest reason for compassion.  I dont
want you to think that Davidson had no discrimination at all.  Bamtz
could not have imposed on him.  Moreover, everybody knew what Bamtz was.
He was a loafer with a beard.  When I think of Bamtz, the first thing I
see is that long black beard and a lot of propitiatory wrinkles at the
corners of two little eyes.  There was no such beard from here to
Polynesia, where a beard is a valuable property in itself.  Bamtzs beard
was valuable to him in another way.  You know how impressed Orientals are
by a fine beard.  Years and years ago, I remember, the grave Abdullah,
the great trader of Sambir, unable to repress signs of astonishment and
admiration at the first sight of that imposing beard.  And its very well
known that Bamtz lived on Abdullah off and on for several years.  It was
a unique beard, and so was the bearer of the same.  A unique loafer.  He
made a fine art of it, or rather a sort of craft and mystery.  One can
understand a fellow living by cadging and small swindles in towns, in
large communities of people; but Bamtz managed to do that trick in the
wilderness, to loaf on the outskirts of the virgin forest.

He understood how to ingratiate himself with the natives.  He would
arrive in some settlement up a river, make a present of a cheap carbine
or a pair of shoddy binoculars, or something of that sort, to the Rajah,
or the head-man, or the principal trader; and on the strength of that
gift, ask for a house, posing mysteriously as a very special trader.  He
would spin them no end of yarns, live on the fat of the land, for a
while, and then do some mean swindle or otheror else they would get
tired of him and ask him to quit.  And he would go off meekly with an air
of injured innocence.  Funny life.  Yet, he never got hurt somehow.  Ive
heard of the Rajah of Dongala giving him fifty dollars worth of trade
goods and paying his passage in a prau only to get rid of him.  Fact.
And observe that nothing prevented the old fellow having Bamtzs throat
cut and the carcase thrown into deep water outside the reefs; for who on
earth would have inquired after Bamtz?

He had been known to loaf up and down the wilderness as far north as the
Gulf of Tonkin.  Neither did he disdain a spell of civilisation from time
to time.  And it was while loafing and cadging in Saigon, bearded and
dignified (he gave himself out there as a bookkeeper), that he came
across Laughing Anne.

The less said of her early history the better, but something must be
said.  We may safely suppose there was very little heart left in her
famous laugh when Bamtz spoke first to her in some low caf.  She was
stranded in Saigon with precious little money and in great trouble about
a kid she had, a boy of five or six.

A fellow I just remember, whom they called Pearler Harry, brought her
out first into these partsfrom Australia, I believe.  He brought her out
and then dropped her, and she remained knocking about here and there,
known to most of us by sight, at any rate.  Everybody in the Archipelago
had heard of Laughing Anne.  She had really a pleasant silvery laugh
always at her disposal, so to speak, but it wasnt enough apparently to
make her fortune.  The poor creature was ready to stick to any
half-decent man if he would only let her, but she always got dropped, as
it might have been expected.

She had been left in Saigon by the skipper of a German ship with whom
she had been going up and down the China coast as far as Vladivostok for
near upon two years.  The German said to her: This is all over, _mein
Taubchen_.  I am going home now to get married to the girl I got engaged
to before coming out here.  And Anne said: All right, Im ready to go.
We part friends, dont we?

She was always anxious to part friends.  The German told her that of
course they were parting friends.  He looked rather glum at the moment of
parting.  She laughed and went ashore.

But it was no laughing matter for her.  She had some notion that this
would be her last chance.  What frightened her most was the future of her
child.  She had left her boy in Saigon before going off with the German,
in the care of an elderly French couple.  The husband was a doorkeeper in
some Government office, but his time was up, and they were returning to
France.  She had to take the boy back from them; and after she had got
him back, she did not like to part with him any more.

That was the situation when she and Bamtz got acquainted casually.  She
could not have had any illusions about that fellow.  To pick up with
Bamtz was coming down pretty low in the world, even from a material point
of view.  She had always been decent, in her way; whereas Bamtz was, not
to mince words, an abject sort of creature.  On the other hand, that
bearded loafer, who looked much more like a pirate than a bookkeeper, was
not a brute.  He was gentlerathereven in his cups.  And then, despair,
like misfortune, makes us acquainted with strange bed-fellows.  For she
may well have despaired.  She was no longer youngyou know.

On the mans side this conjunction is more difficult to explain,
perhaps.  One thing, however, must be said of Bamtz; he had always kept
clear of native women.  As one cant suspect him of moral delicacy, I
surmise that it must have been from prudence.  And he, too, was no longer
young.  There were many white hairs in his valuable black beard by then.
He may have simply longed for some kind of companionship in his queer,
degraded existence.  Whatever their motives, they vanished from Saigon
together.  And of course nobody cared what had become of them.

Six months later Davidson came into the Mirrah Settlement.  It was the
very first time he had been up that creek, where no European vessel had
ever been seen before.  A Javanese passenger he had on board offered him
fifty dollars to call in thereit must have been some very particular
businessand Davidson consented to try.  Fifty dollars, he told me, were
neither here nor there; but he was curious to see the place, and the
little _Sissie_ could go anywhere where there was water enough to float a
soup-plate.

Davidson landed his Javanese plutocrat, and, as he had to wait a couple
of hours for the tide, he went ashore himself to stretch his legs.

It was a small settlement.  Some sixty houses, most of them built on
piles over the river, the rest scattered in the long grass; the usual
pathway at the back; the forest hemming in the clearing and smothering
what there might have been of air into a dead, hot stagnation.

All the population was on the river-bank staring silently, as Malays
will do, at the _Sissie_ anchored in the stream.  She was almost as
wonderful to them as an angels visit.  Many of the old people had only
heard vaguely of fire-ships, and not many of the younger generation had
seen one.  On the back path Davidson strolled in perfect solitude.  But
he became aware of a bad smell and concluded he would go no farther.

While he stood wiping his forehead, he heard from somewhere the
exclamation: My God!  Its Davy!

Davidsons lower jaw, as he expressed it, came unhooked at the crying of
this excited voice.  Davy was the name used by the associates of his
young days; he hadnt heard it for many years.  He stared about with his
mouth open and saw a white woman issue from the long grass in which a
small hut stood buried nearly up to the roof.

Try to imagine the shock: in that wild place that you couldnt find on a
map, and more squalid than the most poverty-stricken Malay settlement had
a right to be, this European woman coming swishing out of the long grass
in a fanciful tea-gown thing, dingy pink satin, with a long train and
frayed lace trimmings; her eyes like black coals in a pasty-white face.
Davidson thought that he was asleep, that he was delirious.  From the
offensive village mudhole (it was what Davidson had sniffed just before)
a couple of filthy buffaloes uprose with loud snorts and lumbered off
crashing through the bushes, panic-struck by this apparition.

The woman came forward, her arms extended, and laid her hands on
Davidsons shoulders, exclaiming: Why!  You have hardly changed at all.
The same good Davy.  And she laughed a little wildly.

This sound was to Davidson like a galvanic shock to a corpse.  He
started in every muscle.  Laughing Anne, he said in an awe-struck
voice.

All thats left of her, Davy.  All thats left of her.

Davidson looked up at the sky; but there was to be seen no balloon from
which she could have fallen on that spot.  When he brought his distracted
gaze down, it rested on a child holding on with a brown little paw to the
pink satin gown.  He had run out of the grass after her.  Had Davidson
seen a real hobgoblin his eyes could not have bulged more than at this
small boy in a dirty white blouse and ragged knickers.  He had a round
head of tight chestnut curls, very sunburnt legs, a freckled face, and
merry eyes.  Admonished by his mother to greet the gentleman, he finished
off Davidson by addressing him in French.

_Bonjour_.

Davidson, overcome, looked up at the woman in silence.  She sent the
child back to the hut, and when he had disappeared in the grass, she
turned to Davidson, tried to speak, but after getting out the words,
Thats my Tony, burst into a long fit of crying.  She had to lean on
Davidsons shoulder.  He, distressed in the goodness of his heart, stood
rooted to the spot where she had come upon him.

What a meetingeh?  Bamtz had sent her out to see what white man it was
who had landed.  And she had recognised him from that time when Davidson,
who had been pearling himself in his youth, had been associating with
Harry the Pearler and others, the quietest of a rather rowdy set.

Before Davidson retraced his steps to go on board the steamer, he had
heard much of Laughing Annes story, and had even had an interview, on
the path, with Bamtz himself.  She ran back to the hut to fetch him, and
he came out lounging, with his hands in his pockets, with the detached,
casual manner under which he concealed his propensity to cringe.
Ya-a-as-as.  He thought he would settle here permanentlywith her.  This
with a nod at Laughing Anne, who stood by, a haggard, tragically anxious
figure, her black hair hanging over her shoulders.

No more paint and dyes for me, Davy, she struck in, if only you will
do what he wants you to do.  You know that I was always ready to stand by
my menif they had only let me.

Davidson had no doubt of her earnestness.  It was of Bamtzs good faith
that he was not at all sure.  Bamtz wanted Davidson to promise to call at
Mirrah more or less regularly.  He thought he saw an opening to do
business with rattans there, if only he could depend on some craft to
bring out trading goods and take away his produce.

I have a few dollars to make a start on.  The people are all right.

He had come there, where he was not known, in a native prau, and had
managed, with his sedate manner and the exactly right kind of yarn he
knew how to tell to the natives, to ingratiate himself with the chief
man.

The Orang Kaya has given me that empty house there to live in as long
as I will stay, added Bamtz.

Do it, Davy, cried the woman suddenly.  Think of that poor kid.

Seen him?  Cute little customer, said the reformed loafer in such a
tone of interest as to surprise Davidson into a kindly glance.

I certainly can do it, he declared.  He thought of at first making
some stipulation as to Bamtz behaving decently to the woman, but his
exaggerated delicacy and also the conviction that such a fellows
promises were worth nothing restrained him.  Anne went a little distance
down the path with him talking anxiously.

Its for the kid.  How could I have kept him with me if I had to knock
about in towns?  Here he will never know that his mother was a painted
woman.  And this Bamtz likes him.  Hes real fond of him.  I suppose I
ought to thank God for that.

Davidson shuddered at any human creature being brought so low as to have
to thank God for the favours or affection of a Bamtz.

And do you think that you can make out to live here? he asked gently.

Cant I?  You know I have always stuck to men through thick and thin
till they had enough of me.  And now look at me!  But inside I am as I
always was.  I have acted on the square to them all one after another.
Only they do get tired somehow.  Oh, Davy!  Harry ought not to have cast
me off.  It was he that led me astray.

Davidson mentioned to her that Harry the Pearler had been dead now for
some years.  Perhaps she had heard?

She made a sign that she had heard; and walked by the side of Davidson
in silence nearly to the bank.  Then she told him that her meeting with
him had brought back the old times to her mind.  She had not cried for
years.  She was not a crying woman either.  It was hearing herself called
Laughing Anne that had started her sobbing like a fool.  Harry was the
only man she had loved.  The others

She shrugged her shoulders.  But she prided herself on her loyalty to
the successive partners of her dismal adventures.  She had never played
any tricks in her life.  She was a pal worth having.  But men did get
tired.  They did not understand women.  She supposed it had to be.

Davidson was attempting a veiled warning as to Bamtz, but she
interrupted him.  She knew what men were.  She knew what this man was
like.  But he had taken wonderfully to the kid.  And Davidson desisted
willingly, saying to himself that surely poor Laughing Anne could have no
illusions by this time.  She wrung his hand hard at parting.

Its for the kid, Davyits for the kid.  Isnt he a bright little
chap?



CHAPTER II


All this happened about two years before the day when Davidson, sitting
in this very room, talked to my friend.  You will see presently how this
room can get full.  Every seatll be occupied, and as you notice, the
tables are set close, so that the backs of the chairs are almost
touching.  There is also a good deal of noisy talk here about one
oclock.

I dont suppose Davidson was talking very loudly; but very likely he had
to raise his voice across the table to my friend.  And here accident,
mere accident, put in its work by providing a pair of fine ears close
behind Davidsons chair.  It was ten to one against, the owner of the
same having enough change in his pockets to get his tiffin here.  But he
had.  Most likely had rooked somebody of a few dollars at cards
overnight.  He was a bright creature of the name of Fector, a spare,
short, jumpy fellow with a red face and muddy eyes.  He described himself
as a journalist, as certain kind of women give themselves out as
actresses in the dock of a police-court.

He used to introduce himself to strangers as a man with a mission to
track out abuses and fight them whenever found.  He would also hint that
he was a martyr.  And its a fact that he had been kicked, horsewhipped,
imprisoned, and hounded with ignominy out of pretty well every place
between Ceylon and Shanghai, for a professional blackmailer.

I suppose, in that trade, youve got to have active wits and sharp ears.
Its not likely that he overheard every word Davidson said about his
dollar collecting trip, but he heard enough to set his wits at work.

He let Davidson go out, and then hastened away down to the native slums
to a sort of lodging-house kept in partnership by the usual sort of
Portuguese and a very disreputable Chinaman.  Macao Hotel, it was called,
but it was mostly a gambling den that one used to warn fellows against.
Perhaps you remember?

There, the evening before, Fector had met a precious couple, a
partnership even more queer than the Portuguese and the Chinaman.  One of
the two was Niclausyou know.  Why! the fellow with a Tartar moustache
and a yellow complexion, like a Mongolian, only that his eyes were set
straight and his face was not so flat.  One couldnt tell what breed he
was.  A nondescript beggar.  From a certain angle you would think a very
bilious white man.  And I daresay he was.  He owned a Malay prau and
called himself The Nakhoda, as one would say: The Captain.  Aha!  Now you
remember.  He couldnt, apparently, speak any other European language
than English, but he flew the Dutch flag on his prau.

The other was the Frenchman without hands.  Yes.  The very same we used
to know in 79 in Sydney, keeping a little tobacco shop at the lower end
of George Street.  You remember the huge carcase hunched up behind the
counter, the big white face and the long black hair brushed back off a
high forehead like a bards.  He was always trying to roll cigarettes on
his knee with his stumps, telling endless yarns of Polynesia and whining
and cursing in turn about _mon malheur_.  His hands had been blown away
by a dynamite cartridge while fishing in some lagoon.  This accident, I
believe, had made him more wicked than before, which is saying a good
deal.

He was always talking about resuming his activities some day, whatever
they were, if he could only get an intelligent companion.  It was evident
that the little shop was no field for his activities, and the sickly
woman with her face tied up, who used to look in sometimes through the
back door, was no companion for him.

And, true enough, he vanished from Sydney before long, after some
trouble with the Excise fellows about his stock.  Goods stolen out of a
warehouse or something similar.  He left the woman behind, but he must
have secured some sort of companionhe could not have shifted for
himself; but whom he went away with, and where, and what other companions
he might have picked up afterwards, it is impossible to make the remotest
guess about.

Why exactly he came this way I cant tell.  Towards the end of my time
here we began to hear talk of a maimed Frenchman who had been seen here
and there.  But no one knew then that he had foregathered with Niclaus
and lived in his prau.  I daresay he put Niclaus up to a thing or two.
Anyhow, it was a partnership.  Niclaus was somewhat afraid of the
Frenchman on account of his tempers, which were awful.  He looked then
like a devil; but a man without hands, unable to load or handle a weapon,
can at best go for one only with his teeth.  From that danger Niclaus
felt certain he could always defend himself.

The couple were alone together loafing in the common-room of that
infamous hotel when Fector turned up.  After some beating about the bush,
for he was doubtful how far he could trust these two, he repeated what he
had overheard in the tiffin-rooms.

His tale did not have much success till he came to mention the creek and
Bamtzs name.  Niclaus, sailing about like a native in a prau, was, in
his own words, familiar with the locality.  The huge Frenchman, walking
up and down the room with his stumps in the pockets of his jacket,
stopped short in surprise.  _Comment_?  _Bamtz_!  _Bamtz_!

He had run across him several times in his life.  He exclaimed:
_Bamtz_!  _Mais je ne connais que ca_!  And he applied such a
contemptuously indecent epithet to Bamtz that when, later, he alluded to
him as _une chiffe_ (a mere rag) it sounded quite complimentary.  We
can do with him what we like, he asserted confidently.  Oh, yes.
Certainly we must hasten to pay a visit to that (another awful
descriptive epithet quite unfit for repetition).  Devil take me if we
dont pull off a coup that will set us all up for a long time.

He saw all that lot of dollars melted into bars and disposed of
somewhere on the China coast.  Of the escape after the _coup_ he never
doubted.  There was Niclauss prau to manage that in.

In his enthusiasm he pulled his stumps out of his pockets and waved them
about.  Then, catching sight of them, as it were, he held them in front
of his eyes, cursing and blaspheming and bewailing his misfortune and his
helplessness, till Niclaus quieted him down.

But it was his mind that planned out the affair and it was his spirit
which carried the other two on.  Neither of them was of the bold
buccaneer type; and Fector, especially, had never in his adventurous life
used other weapons than slander and lies.

That very evening they departed on a visit to Bamtz in Niclauss prau,
which had been lying, emptied of her cargo of cocoanuts, for a day or two
under the canal bridge.  They must have crossed the bows of the anchored
_Sissie_, and no doubt looked at her with interest as the scene of their
future exploit, the great haul, _le grand coup_!

Davidsons wife, to his great surprise, sulked with him for several days
before he left.  I dont know whether it occurred to him that, for all
her angelic profile, she was a very stupidly obstinate girl.  She didnt
like the tropics.  He had brought her out there, where she had no
friends, and now, she said, he was becoming inconsiderate.  She had a
presentiment of some misfortune, and notwithstanding Davidsons
painstaking explanations, she could not see why her presentiments were to
be disregarded.  On the very last evening before Davidson went away she
asked him in a suspicious manner:

Why is it that you are so anxious to go this time?

I am not anxious, protested the good Davidson.  I simply cant help
myself.  Theres no one else to go in my place.

Oh!  Theres no one, she said, turning away slowly.

She was so distant with him that evening that Davidson from a sense of
delicacy made up his mind to say good-bye to her at once and go and sleep
on board.  He felt very miserable and, strangely enough, more on his own
account than on account of his wife.  She seemed to him much more
offended than grieved.

Three weeks later, having collected a good many cases of old dollars
(they were stowed aft in the lazarette with an iron bar and a padlock
securing the hatch under his cabin-table), yes, with a bigger lot than he
had expected to collect, he found himself homeward bound and off the
entrance of the creek where Bamtz lived and even, in a sense, flourished.

It was so late in the day that Davidson actually hesitated whether he
should not pass by this time.  He had no regard for Bamtz, who was a
degraded but not a really unhappy man.  His pity for Laughing Anne was no
more than her case deserved.  But his goodness was of a particularly
delicate sort.  He realised how these people were dependent on him, and
how they would feel their dependence (if he failed to turn up) through a
long month of anxious waiting.  Prompted by his sensitive humanity,
Davidson, in the gathering dusk, turned the _Sissies_ head towards the
hardly discernible coast, and navigated her safety through a maze of
shallow patches.  But by the time he got to the mouth of the creek the
night had come.

The narrow waterway lay like a black cutting through the forest.  And as
there were always grounded snaggs in the channel which it would be
impossible to make out, Davidson very prudently turned the _Sissie_
round, and with only enough steam on the boilers to give her a touch
ahead if necessary, let her drift up stern first with the tide, silent
and invisible in the impenetrable darkness and in the dumb stillness.

It was a long job, and when at the end of two hours Davidson thought he
must be up to the clearing, the settlement slept already, the whole land
of forests and rivers was asleep.

Davidson, seeing a solitary light in the massed darkness of the shore,
knew that it was burning in Bamtzs house.  This was unexpected at this
time of the night, but convenient as a guide.  By a turn of the screw and
a touch of the helm he sheered the _Sissie_ alongside Bamtzs wharfa
miserable structure of a dozen piles and a few planks, of which the
ex-vagabond was very proud.  A couple of Kalashes jumped down on it, took
a turn with the ropes thrown to them round the posts, and the _Sissie_
came to rest without a single loud word or the slightest noise.  And just
in time too, for the tide turned even before she was properly moored.

Davidson had something to eat, and then, coming on deck for a last look
round, noticed that the light was still burning in the house.

This was very unusual, but since they were awake so late, Davidson
thought that he would go up to say that he was in a hurry to be off and
to ask that what rattans there were in store should be sent on board with
the first sign of dawn.

He stepped carefully over the shaky planks, not being anxious to get a
sprained ankle, and picked his way across the waste ground to the foot of
the house ladder.  The house was but a glorified hut on piles, unfenced
and lonely.

Like many a stout man, Davidson is very lightfooted.  He climbed the
seven steps or so, stepped across the bamboo platform quietly, but what
he saw through the doorway stopped him short.

Four men were sitting by the light of a solitary candle.  There was a
bottle, a jug and glasses on the table, but they were not engaged in
drinking.  Two packs of cards were lying there too, but they were not
preparing to play.  They were talking together in whispers, and remained
quite unaware of him.  He himself was too astonished to make a sound for
some time.  The world was still, except for the sibilation of the
whispering heads bunched together over the table.

And Davidson, as I have quoted him to you before, didnt like it.  He
didnt like it at all.

The situation ended with a scream proceeding from the dark, interior
part of the room.  O Davy! youve given me a turn.

Davidson made out beyond the table Annes very pale face.  She laughed a
little hysterically, out of the deep shadows between the gloomy mat
walls.  Ha! ha! ha!

The four heads sprang apart at the first sound, and four pairs of eyes
became fixed stonily on Davidson.  The woman came forward, having little
more on her than a loose chintz wrapper and straw slippers on her bare
feet.  Her head was tied up Malay fashion in a red handkerchief, with a
mass of loose hair hanging under it behind.  Her professional, gay,
European feathers had literally dropped off her in the course of these
two years, but a long necklace of amber beads hung round her uncovered
neck.  It was the only ornament she had left; Bamtz had sold all her
poor-enough trinkets during the flight from Saigonwhen their association
began.

She came forward, past the table, into the light, with her usual groping
gesture of extended arms, as though her soul, poor thing! had gone blind
long ago, her white cheeks hollow, her eyes darkly wild, distracted, as
Davidson thought.  She came on swiftly, grabbed him by the arm, dragged
him in.  Its heaven itself that sends you to-night.  My Tonys so
badcome and see him.  Come alongdo!

Davidson submitted.  The only one of the men to move was Bamtz, who made
as if to get up but dropped back in his chair again.  Davidson in passing
heard him mutter confusedly something that sounded like poor little
beggar.

The child, lying very flushed in a miserable cot knocked up out of
gin-cases, stared at Davidson with wide, drowsy eyes.  It was a bad bout
of fever clearly.  But while Davidson was promising to go on board and
fetch some medicines, and generally trying to say reassuring things, he
could not help being struck by the extraordinary manner of the woman
standing by his side.  Gazing with despairing expression down at the cot,
she would suddenly throw a quick, startled glance at Davidson and then
towards the other room.

Yes, my poor girl, he whispered, interpreting her distraction in his
own way, though he had nothing precise in his mind.  Im afraid this
bodes no good to you.  How is it they are here?

She seized his forearm and breathed out forcibly: No good to me!  Oh,
no!  But what about you!  They are after the dollars you have on board.

Davidson let out an astonished How do they know there are any dollars?

She clapped her hands lightly, in distress.  So its true!  You have
them on board?  Then look out for yourself.

They stood gazing down at the boy in the cot, aware that they might be
observed from the other room.

We must get him to perspire as soon as possible, said Davidson in his
ordinary voice.  Youll have to give him hot drink of some kind.  I will
go on board and bring you a spirit-kettle amongst other things.  And he
added under his breath: Do they actually mean murder?

She made no sign, she had returned to her desolate contemplation of the
boy.  Davidson thought she had not heard him even, when with an unchanged
expression she spoke under her breath.

The Frenchman would, in a minute.  The others shirk itunless you
resist.  Hes a devil.  He keeps them going.  Without him they would have
done nothing but talk.  Ive got chummy with him. What can you do when
you are with a man like the fellow I am with now.  Bamtz is terrified of
them, and they know it.  Hes in it from funk.  Oh, Davy! take your ship
awayquick!

Too late, said Davidson.  Shes on the mud already.

If the kid hadnt been in this state I would have run off with himto
youinto the woodsanywhere.  Oh, Davy! will he die? she cried aloud
suddenly.

Davidson met three men in the doorway.  They made way for him without
actually daring to face his glance.  But Bamtz was the only one who
looked down with an air of guilt.  The big Frenchman had remained lolling
in his chair; he kept his stumps in his pockets and addressed Davidson.

Isnt it unfortunate about that child!  The distress of that woman
there upsets me, but I am of no use in the world.  I couldnt smooth the
sick pillow of my dearest friend.  I have no hands.  Would you mind
sticking one of those cigarettes there into the mouth of a poor, harmless
cripple?  My nerves want soothingupon my honour, they do.

Davidson complied with his naturally kind smile.  As his outward
placidity becomes only more pronounced, if possible, the more reason
there is for excitement; and as Davidsons eyes, when his wits are hard
at work, get very still and as if sleepy, the huge Frenchman might have
been justified in concluding that the man there was a mere sheepa sheep
ready for slaughter.  With a _merci bien_ he uplifted his huge carcase
to reach the light of the candle with his cigarette, and Davidson left
the house.

Going down to the ship and returning, he had time to consider his
position.  At first he was inclined to believe that these men
(Niclausthe white Nakhodawas the only one he knew by sight before,
besides Bamtz) were not of the stamp to proceed to extremities.  This was
partly the reason why he never attempted to take any measures on board.
His pacific Kalashes were not to be thought of as against white men.  His
wretched engineer would have had a fit from fright at the mere idea of
any sort of combat.  Davidson knew that he would have to depend on
himself in this affair if it ever came off.

Davidson underestimated naturally the driving power of the Frenchmans
character and the force of the actuating motive.  To that man so
hopelessly crippled these dollars were an enormous opportunity.  With his
share of the robbery he would open another shop in Vladivostok, Haphong,
Manilasomewhere far away.

Neither did it occur to Davidson, who is a man of courage, if ever there
was one, that his psychology was not known to the world at large, and
that to this particular lot of ruffians, who judged him by his
appearance, he appeared an unsuspicious, inoffensive, soft creature, as
he passed again through the room, his hands full of various objects and
parcels destined for the sick boy.

All the four were sitting again round the table.  Bamtz not having the
pluck to open his mouth, it was Niclaus who, as a collective voice,
called out to him thickly to come out soon and join in a drink.

I think Ill have to stay some little time in there, to help her look
after the boy, Davidson answered without stopping.

This was a good thing to say to allay a possible suspicion.  And, as it
was, Davidson felt he must not stay very long.

He sat down on an old empty nail-keg near the improvised cot and looked
at the child; while Laughing Anne, moving to and fro, preparing the hot
drink, giving it to the boy in spoonfuls, or stopping to gaze motionless
at the flushed face, whispered disjointed bits of information.  She had
succeeded in making friends with that French devil.  Davy would
understand that she knew how to make herself pleasant to a man.

And Davidson nodded without looking at her.

The big beast had got to be quite confidential with her.  She held his
cards for him when they were having a game.  Bamtz!  Oh!  Bamtz in his
funk was only too glad to see the Frenchman humoured.  And the Frenchman
had come to believe that she was a woman who didnt care what she did.
Thats how it came about they got to talk before her openly.  For a long
time she could not make out what game they were up to.  The new arrivals,
not expecting to find a woman with Bamtz, had been very startled and
annoyed at first, she explained.

She busied herself in attending to the boy; and nobody looking into that
room would have seen anything suspicious in those two people exchanging
murmurs by the sick-bedside.

But now they think I am a better man than Bamtz ever was, she said
with a faint laugh.

The child moaned.  She went down on her knees, and, bending low,
contemplated him mournfully.  Then raising her head, she asked Davidson
whether he thought the child would get better.  Davidson was sure of it.
She murmured sadly: Poor kid.  Theres nothing in life for such as he.
Not a dogs chance.  But I couldnt let him go, Davy!  I couldnt.

Davidson felt a profound pity for the child.  She laid her hand on his
knee and whispered an earnest warning against the Frenchman.  Davy must
never let him come to close quarters.  Naturally Davidson wanted to know
the reason, for a man without hands did not strike him as very formidable
under any circumstances.

Mind you dont let himthats all, she insisted anxiously, hesitated,
and then confessed that the Frenchman had got her away from the others
that afternoon and had ordered her to tie a seven-pound iron weight (out
of the set of weights Bamtz used in business) to his right stump.  She
had to do it for him.  She had been afraid of his savage temper.  Bamtz
was such a craven, and neither of the other men would have cared what
happened to her.  The Frenchman, however, with many awful threats had
warned her not to let the others know what she had done for him.
Afterwards he had been trying to cajole her.  He had promised her that if
she stood by him faithfully in this business he would take her with him
to Haphong or some other place.  A poor cripple needed somebody to take
care of himalways.

Davidson asked her again if they really meant mischief.  It was, he told
me, the hardest thing to believe he had run up against, as yet, in his
life.  Anne nodded.  The Frenchmans heart was set on this robbery.  Davy
might expect them, about midnight, creeping on board his ship, to steal
anyhowto murder, perhaps.  Her voice sounded weary, and her eyes
remained fastened on her child.

And still Davidson could not accept it somehow; his contempt for these
men was too great.

Look here, Davy, she said.  Ill go outside with them when they
start, and it will be hard luck if I dont find something to laugh at.
They are used to that from me.  Laugh or crywhats the odds.  You will
be able to hear me on board on this quiet night.  Dark it is too.  Oh!
its dark, Davy!its dark!

Dont you run any risks, said Davidson.  Presently he called her
attention to the boy, who, less flushed now, had dropped into a sound
sleep.  Look.  Hell be all right.

She made as if to snatch the child up to her breast, but restrained
herself.  Davidson prepared to go.  She whispered hurriedly:

Mind, Davy!  Ive told them that you generally sleep aft in the hammock
under the awning over the cabin.  They have been asking me about your
ways and about your ship, too.  I told them all I knew.  I had to keep in
with them.  And Bamtz would have told them if I hadntyou understand?

He made a friendly sign and went out.  The men about the table (except
Bamtz) looked at him.  This time it was Fector who spoke.  Wont you
join us in a quiet game, Captain?

Davidson said that now the child was better he thought he would go on
board and turn in.  Fector was the only one of the four whom he had, so
to speak, never seen, for he had had a good look at the Frenchman
already.  He observed Fectors muddy eyes, his mean, bitter mouth.
Davidsons contempt for those men rose in his gorge, while his placid
smile, his gentle tones and general air of innocence put heart into them.
They exchanged meaning glances.

We shall be sitting late over the cards, Fector said in his harsh, low
voice.

Dont make more noise than you can help.

Oh! we are a quiet lot.  And if the invalid shouldnt be so well, she
will be sure to send one of us down to call you, so that you may play the
doctor again.  So dont shoot at sight.

He isnt a shooting man, struck in Niclaus.

I never shoot before making sure theres a reason for itat any rate,
said Davidson.

Bamtz let out a sickly snigger.  The Frenchman alone got up to make a
bow to Davidsons careless nod.  His stumps were stuck immovably in his
pockets.  Davidson understood now the reason.

He went down to the ship.  His wits were working actively, and he was
thoroughly angry.  He smiled, he says (it must have been the first grim
smile of his life), at the thought of the seven-pound weight lashed to
the end of the Frenchmans stump.  The ruffian had taken that precaution
in case of a quarrel that might arise over the division of the spoil.  A
man with an unsuspected power to deal killing blows could take his own
part in a sudden scrimmage round a heap of money, even against
adversaries armed with revolvers, especially if he himself started the
row.

Hes ready to face any of his friends with that thing.  But he will
have no use for it.  There will be no occasion to quarrel about these
dollars here, thought Davidson, getting on board quietly.  He never
paused to look if there was anybody about the decks.  As a matter of
fact, most of his crew were on shore, and the rest slept, stowed away in
dark corners.

He had his plan, and he went to work methodically.

He fetched a lot of clothing from below and disposed it in his hammock
in such a way as to distend it to the shape of a human body; then he
threw over all the light cotton sheet he used to draw over himself when
sleeping on deck.  Having done this, he loaded his two revolvers and
clambered into one of the boats the _Sissie_ carried right aft, swung out
on their davits.  Then he waited.

And again the doubt of such a thing happening to him crept into his
mind.  He was almost ashamed of this ridiculous vigil in a boat.  He
became bored.  And then he became drowsy.  The stillness of the black
universe wearied him.  There was not even the lapping of the water to
keep him company, for the tide was out and the _Sissie_ was lying on soft
mud.  Suddenly in the breathless, soundless, hot night an argus pheasant
screamed in the woods across the stream.  Davidson started violently, all
his senses on the alert at once.

The candle was still burning in the house.  Everything was quiet again,
but Davidson felt drowsy no longer.  An uneasy premonition of evil
oppressed him.

Surely I am not afraid, he argued with himself.

The silence was like a seal on his ears, and his nervous inward
impatience grew intolerable.  He commanded himself to keep still.  But
all the same he was just going to jump out of the boat when a faint
ripple on the immensity of silence, a mere tremor in the air, the ghost
of a silvery laugh, reached his ears.

Illusion!

He kept very still.  He had no difficulty now in emulating the stillness
of the mousea grimly determined mouse.  But he could not shake off that
premonition of evil unrelated to the mere danger of the situation.
Nothing happened.  It had been an illusion!

A curiosity came to him to learn how they would go to work.  He wondered
and wondered, till the whole thing seemed more absurd than ever.

He had left the hanging lamp in the cabin burning as usual.  It was part
of his plan that everything should be as usual.  Suddenly in the dim glow
of the skylight panes a bulky shadow came up the ladder without a sound,
made two steps towards the hammock (it hung right over the skylight), and
stood motionless.  The Frenchman!

The minutes began to slip away.  Davidson guessed that the Frenchmans
part (the poor cripple) was to watch his (Davidsons) slumbers while the
others were no doubt in the cabin busy forcing off the lazarette hatch.

What was the course they meant to pursue once they got hold of the
silver (there were ten cases, and each could be carried easily by two
men) nobody can tell now.  But so far, Davidson was right.  They were in
the cabin.  He expected to hear the sounds of breaking-in every moment.
But the fact was that one of them (perhaps Fector, who had stolen papers
out of desks in his time) knew how to pick a lock, and apparently was
provided with the tools.  Thus while Davidson expected every moment to
hear them begin down there, they had the bar off already and two cases
actually up in the cabin out of the lazarette.

In the diffused faint glow of the skylight the Frenchman moved no more
than a statue.  Davidson could have shot him with the greatest easebut
he was not homicidally inclined.  Moreover, he wanted to make sure before
opening fire that the others had gone to work.  Not hearing the sounds he
expected to hear, he felt uncertain whether they all were on board yet.

While he listened, the Frenchman, whose immobility might have but
cloaked an internal struggle; moved forward a pace, then another.
Davidson, entranced, watched him advance one leg, withdraw his right
stump, the armed one, out of his pocket, and swinging his body to put
greater force into the blow, bring the seven-pound weight down on the
hammock where the head of the sleeper ought to have been.

Davidson admitted to me that his hair stirred at the roots then.  But
for Anne, his unsuspecting head would have been there.  The Frenchmans
surprise must have been simply overwhelming.  He staggered away from the
lightly swinging hammock, and before Davidson could make a movement he
had vanished, bounding down the ladder to warn and alarm the other
fellows.

Davidson sprang instantly out of the boat, threw up the skylight flap,
and had a glimpse of the men down there crouching round the hatch.  They
looked up scared, and at that moment the Frenchman outside the door
bellowed out _Trahison__trahison_!  They bolted out of the cabin,
falling over each other and swearing awfully.  The shot Davidson let off
down the skylight had hit no one; but he ran to the edge of the cabin-top
and at once opened fire at the dark shapes rushing about the deck.  These
shots were returned, and a rapid fusillade burst out, reports and
flashes, Davidson dodging behind a ventilator and pulling the trigger
till his revolver clicked, and then throwing it down to take the other in
his right hand.

He had been hearing in the din the Frenchmans infuriated yells
_Tuez-le_! _tuez-le_! above the fierce cursing of the others.  But
though they fired at him they were only thinking of clearing out.  In the
flashes of the last shots Davidson saw them scrambling over the rail.
That he had hit more than one he was certain.  Two different voices had
cried out in pain.  But apparently none of them were disabled.

Davidson leaned against the bulwark reloading his revolver without
haste.  He had not the slightest apprehension of their coming back.  On
the other hand, he had no intention of pursuing them on shore in the
dark.  What they were doing he had no idea.  Looking to their hurts
probably.  Not very far from the bank the invisible Frenchman was
blaspheming and cursing his associates, his luck, and all the world.  He
ceased; then with a sudden, vengeful yell, Its that woman!its that
woman that has sold us, was heard running off in the night.

Davidson caught his breath in a sudden pang of remorse.  He perceived
with dismay that the stratagem of his defence had given Anne away.  He
did not hesitate a moment.  It was for him to save her now.  He leaped
ashore.  But even as he landed on the wharf he heard a shrill shriek
which pierced his very soul.

The light was still burning in the house.  Davidson, revolver in hand,
was making for it when another shriek, away to his left, made him change
his direction.

He changed his directionbut very soon he stopped.  It was then that he
hesitated in cruel perplexity.  He guessed what had happened.  The woman
had managed to escape from the house in some way, and now was being
chased in the open by the infuriated Frenchman.  He trusted she would try
to run on board for protection.

All was still around Davidson.  Whether she had run on board or not,
this silence meant that the Frenchman had lost her in the dark.

Davidson, relieved, but still very anxious, turned towards the
river-side.  He had not made two steps in that direction when another
shriek burst out behind him, again close to the house.

He thinks that the Frenchman had lost sight of the poor woman right
enough.  Then came that period of silence.  But the horrible ruffian had
not given up his murderous purpose.  He reasoned that she would try to
steal back to her child, and went to lie in wait for her near the house.

It must have been something like that.  As she entered the light falling
about the house-ladder, he had rushed at her too soon, impatient for
vengeance.  She had let out that second scream of mortal fear when she
caught sight of him, and turned to run for life again.

This time she was making for the river, but not in a straight line.  Her
shrieks circled about Davidson.  He turned on his heels, following the
horrible trail of sound in the darkness.  He wanted to shout This way,
Anne!  I am here! but he couldnt.  At the horror of this chase, more
ghastly in his imagination than if he could have seen it, the
perspiration broke out on his forehead, while his throat was as dry as
tinder.  A last supreme scream was cut short suddenly.

The silence which ensued was even more dreadful.  Davidson felt sick.
He tore his feet from the spot and walked straight before him, gripping
the revolver and peering into the obscurity fearfully.  Suddenly a bulky
shape sprang from the ground within a few yards of him and bounded away.
Instinctively he fired at it, started to run in pursuit, and stumbled
against something soft which threw him down headlong.

Even as he pitched forward on his head he knew it could be nothing else
but Laughing Annes body.  He picked himself up and, remaining on his
knees, tried to lift her in his arms.  He felt her so limp that he gave
it up.  She was lying on her face, her long hair scattered on the ground.
Some of it was wet.  Davidson, feeling about her head, came to a place
where the crushed bone gave way under his fingers.  But even before that
discovery he knew that she was dead.  The pursuing Frenchman had flung
her down with a kick from behind, and, squatting on her back, was
battering in her skull with the weight she herself had fastened to his
stump, when the totally unexpected Davidson loomed up in the night and
scared him away.

Davidson, kneeling by the side of that woman done so miserably to death,
was overcome by remorse.  She had died for him.  His manhood was as if
stunned.  For the first time he felt afraid.  He might have been pounced
upon in the dark at any moment by the murderer of Laughing Anne.  He
confesses to the impulse of creeping away from that pitiful corpse on his
hands and knees to the refuge of the ship.  He even says that he actually
began to do so. . .

One can hardly picture to oneself Davidson crawling away on all fours
from the murdered womanDavidson unmanned and crushed by the idea that
she had died for him in a sense.  But he could not have gone very far.
What stopped him was the thought of the boy, Laughing Annes child, that
(Davidson remembered her very words) would not have a dogs chance.

This life the woman had left behind her appeared to Davidsons
conscience in the light of a sacred trust.  He assumed an erect attitude
and, quaking inwardly still, turned about and walked towards the house.

For all his tremors he was very determined; but that smashed skull had
affected his imagination, and he felt very defenceless in the darkness,
in which he seemed to hear faintly now here, now there, the prowling
footsteps of the murderer without hands.  But he never faltered in his
purpose.  He got away with the boy safely after all.  The house he found
empty.  A profound silence encompassed him all the time, except once,
just as he got down the ladder with Tony in his arms, when a faint groan
reached his ears.  It seemed to come from the pitch-black space between
the posts on which the house was built, but he did not stop to
investigate.

Its no use telling you in detail how Davidson got on board with the
burden Annes miserably cruel fate had thrust into his arms; how next
morning his scared crew, after observing from a distance the state of
affairs on board, rejoined with alacrity; how Davidson went ashore and,
aided by his engineer (still half dead with fright), rolled up Laughing
Annes body in a cotton sheet and brought it on board for burial at sea
later.  While busy with this pious task, Davidson, glancing about,
perceived a huge heap of white clothes huddled up against the corner-post
of the house.  That it was the Frenchman lying there he could not doubt.
Taking it in connection with the dismal groan he had heard in the night,
Davidson is pretty sure that his random shot gave a mortal hurt to the
murderer of poor Anne.

As to the others, Davidson never set eyes on a single one of them.
Whether they had concealed themselves in the scared settlement, or bolted
into the forest, or were hiding on board Niclauss prau, which could be
seen lying on the mud a hundred yards or so higher up the creek, the fact
is that they vanished; and Davidson did not trouble his head about them.
He lost no time in getting out of the creek directly the _Sissie_
floated.  After steaming some twenty miles clear of the coast, he (in his
own words) committed the body to the deep.  He did everything himself.
He weighted her down with a few fire-bars, he read the service, he lifted
the plank, he was the only mourner.  And while he was rendering these
last services to the dead, the desolation of that life and the atrocious
wretchedness of its end cried aloud to his compassion, whispered to him
in tones of self-reproach.

He ought to have handled the warning she had given him in another way.
He was convinced now that a simple display of watchfulness would have
been enough to restrain that vile and cowardly crew.  But the fact was
that he had not quite believed that anything would be attempted.

The body of Laughing Anne having been committed to the deep some
twenty miles S.S.W. from Cape Selatan, the task before Davidson was to
commit Laughing Annes child to the care of his wife.  And there poor,
good Davidson made a fatal move.  He didnt want to tell her the whole
awful story, since it involved the knowledge of the danger from which he,
Davidson, had escaped.  And this, too, after he had been laughing at her
unreasonable fears only a short time before.

I thought that if I told her everything, Davidson explained to me,
she would never have a moments peace while I was away on my trips.

He simply stated that the boy was an orphan, the child of some people to
whom he, Davidson, was under the greatest obligation, and that he felt
morally bound to look after him.  Some day he would tell her more, he
said, and meantime he trusted in the goodness and warmth of her heart, in
her womans natural compassion.

He did not know that her heart was about the size of a parched pea, and
had the proportional amount of warmth; and that her faculty of compassion
was mainly directed to herself.  He was only startled and disappointed at
the air of cold surprise and the suspicious look with which she received
his imperfect tale.  But she did not say much.  She never had much to
say.  She was a fool of the silent, hopeless kind.

What story Davidsons crew thought fit to set afloat in Malay town is
neither here nor there.  Davidson himself took some of his friends into
his confidence, besides giving the full story officially to the Harbour
Master.

The Harbour Master was considerably astonished.  He didnt think,
however, that a formal complaint should be made to the Dutch Government.
They would probably do nothing in the end, after a lot of trouble and
correspondence.  The robbery had not come off, after all.  Those
vagabonds could be trusted to go to the devil in their own way.  No
amount of fuss would bring the poor woman to life again, and the actual
murderer had been done justice to by a chance shot from Davidson.  Better
let the matter drop.

This was good common sense.  But he was impressed.

Sounds a terrible affair, Captain Davidson.

Aye, terrible enough, agreed the remorseful Davidson.  But the most
terrible thing for him, though he didnt know it yet then, was that his
wifes silly brain was slowly coming to the conclusion that Tony was
Davidsons child, and that he had invented that lame story to introduce
him into her pure home in defiance of decency, of virtueof her most
sacred feelings.

Davidson was aware of some constraint in his domestic relations.  But at
the best of times she was not demonstrative; and perhaps that very
coldness was part of her charm in the placid Davidsons eyes.  Women are
loved for all sorts of reasons and even for characteristics which one
would think repellent.  She was watching him and nursing her suspicions.

Then, one day, Monkey-faced Ritchie called on that sweet, shy Mrs.
Davidson.  She had come out under his care, and he considered himself a
privileged personher oldest friend in the tropics.  He posed for a great
admirer of hers.  He was always a great chatterer.  He had got hold of
the story rather vaguely, and he started chattering on that subject,
thinking she knew all about it.  And in due course he let out something
about Laughing Anne.

Laughing Anne, says Mrs. Davidson with a start.  Whats that?

Ritchie plunged into circumlocution at once, but she very soon stopped
him.  Is that creature dead? she asks.

I believe so, stammered Ritchie.  Your husband says so.

But you dont know for certain?

No!  How could I, Mrs. Davidson!

Thats all wanted to know, says she, and goes out of the room.

When Davidson came home she was ready to go for him, not with common
voluble indignation, but as if trickling a stream of cold clear water
down his back.  She talked of his base intrigue with a vile woman, of
being made a fool of, of the insult to her dignity.

Davidson begged her to listen to him and told her all the story,
thinking that it would move a heart of stone.  He tried to make her
understand his remorse.  She heard him to the end, said Indeed! and
turned her back on him.

Dont you believe me? he asked, appalled.

She didnt say yes or no.  All she said was, Send that brat away at
once.

I cant throw him out into the street, cried Davidson.  You dont
mean it.

I dont care.  There are charitable institutions for such children, I
suppose.

That I will never do, said Davidson.

Very well.  Thats enough for me.

Davidsons home after this was like a silent, frozen hell for him.  A
stupid woman with a sense of grievance is worse than an unchained devil.
He sent the boy to the White Fathers in Malacca.  This was not a very
expensive sort of education, but she could not forgive him for not
casting the offensive child away utterly.  She worked up her sense of her
wifely wrongs and of her injured purity to such a pitch that one day,
when poor Davidson was pleading with her to be reasonable and not to make
an impossible existence for them both, she turned on him in a chill
passion and told him that his very sight was odious to her.

Davidson, with his scrupulous delicacy of feeling, was not the man to
assert his rights over a woman who could not bear the sight of him.  He
bowed his head; and shortly afterwards arranged for her to go back to her
parents.  That was exactly what she wanted in her outraged dignity.  And
then she had always disliked the tropics and had detested secretly the
people she had to live amongst as Davidsons wife.  She took her pure,
sensitive, mean little soul away to Fremantle or somewhere in that
direction.  And of course the little girl went away with her too.  What
could poor Davidson have done with a little girl on his hands, even if
she had consented to leave her with himwhich is unthinkable.

This is the story that has spoiled Davidsons smile for himwhich
perhaps it wouldnt have done so thoroughly had he been less of a good
fellow.

Hollis ceased.  But before we rose from the table I asked him if he knew
what had become of Laughing Annes boy.

He counted carefully the change handed him by the Chinaman waiter, and
raised his head.

Oh! thats the finishing touch.  He was a bright, taking little chap, as
you know, and the Fathers took very special pains in his bringing up.
Davidson expected in his heart to have some comfort out of him.  In his
placid way hes a man who needs affection.  Well, Tony has grown into a
fine youthbut there you are!  He wants to be a priest; his one dream is
to be a missionary.  The Fathers assure Davidson that it is a serious
vocation.  They tell him he has a special disposition for mission work,
too.  So Laughing Annes boy will lead a saintly life in China somewhere;
he may even become a martyr; but poor Davidson is left out in the cold.
He will have to go downhill without a single human affection near him
because of these old dollars.

                                * * * * *

_Jan._ 1914

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

    THE LONDON AND NORWICH PRESS LIMITED, LONDON AND NORWICH, ENGLAND




Footnotes


{188}  The gallows, supposed to be widowed of the last executed criminal
and waiting for another.




YOUTH

A NARRATIVE


By Joseph Conrad



  "... But the Dwarf answered: No; something human is dearer to me
  than the wealth of all the world." GRIMM'S TALES.



TO MY WIFE




YOUTH


This could have occurred nowhere but in England, where men and sea
interpenetrate, so to speak--the sea entering into the life of most men,
and the men knowing something or everything about the sea, in the way of
amusement, of travel, or of bread-winning.

We were sitting round a mahogany table that reflected the bottle, the
claret-glasses, and our faces as we leaned on our elbows. There was a
director of companies, an accountant, a lawyer, Marlow, and myself. The
director had been a _Conway_ boy, the accountant had served four years at
sea, the lawyer--a fine crusted Tory, High Churchman, the best of old
fellows, the soul of honour--had been chief officer in the P. & O.
service in the good old days when mail-boats were square-rigged at least
on two masts, and used to come down the China Sea before a fair monsoon
with stun'-sails set alow and aloft. We all began life in the merchant
service. Between the five of us there was the strong bond of the sea,
and also the fellowship of the craft, which no amount of enthusiasm for
yachting, cruising, and so on can give, since one is only the amusement
of life and the other is life itself.

Marlow (at least I think that is how he spelt his name) told the story,
or rather the chronicle, of a voyage:

"Yes, I have seen a little of the Eastern seas; but what I remember best
is my first voyage there. You fellows know there are those voyages that
seem ordered for the illustration of life, that might stand for a symbol
of existence. You fight, work, sweat, nearly kill yourself, sometimes do
kill yourself, trying to accomplish something--and you can't. Not
from any fault of yours. You simply can do nothing, neither great nor
little--not a thing in the world--not even marry an old maid, or get a
wretched 600-ton cargo of coal to its port of destination.

"It was altogether a memorable affair. It was my first voyage to the
East, and my first voyage as second mate; it was also my skipper's first
command. You'll admit it was time. He was sixty if a day; a little man,
with a broad, not very straight back, with bowed shoulders and one leg
more bandy than the other, he had that queer twisted-about appearance
you see so often in men who work in the fields. He had a nut-cracker
face--chin and nose trying to come together over a sunken mouth--and it
was framed in iron-grey fluffy hair, that looked like a chin strap of
cotton-wool sprinkled with coal-dust. And he had blue eyes in that
old face of his, which were amazingly like a boy's, with that candid
expression some quite common men preserve to the end of their days by
a rare internal gift of simplicity of heart and rectitude of soul.
What induced him to accept me was a wonder. I had come out of a crack
Australian clipper, where I had been third officer, and he seemed to
have a prejudice against crack clippers as aristocratic and high-toned.
He said to me, 'You know, in this ship you will have to work.' I said
I had to work in every ship I had ever been in. 'Ah, but this is
different, and you gentlemen out of them big ships;... but there! I
dare say you will do. Join to-morrow.'

"I joined to-morrow. It was twenty-two years ago; and I was just twenty.
How time passes! It was one of the happiest days of my life. Fancy!
Second mate for the first time--a really responsible officer! I wouldn't
have thrown up my new billet for a fortune. The mate looked me over
carefully. He was also an old chap, but of another stamp. He had a Roman
nose, a snow-white, long beard, and his name was Mahon, but he insisted
that it should be pronounced Mann. He was well connected; yet there was
something wrong with his luck, and he had never got on.

"As to the captain, he had been for years in coasters, then in the
Mediterranean, and last in the West Indian trade. He had never been
round the Capes. He could just write a kind of sketchy hand, and didn't
care for writing at all. Both were thorough good seamen of course,
and between those two old chaps I felt like a small boy between two
grandfathers.

"The ship also was old. Her name was the _Judea_. Queer name, isn't it?
She belonged to a man Wilmer, Wilcox--some name like that; but he has
been bankrupt and dead these twenty years or more, and his name don't
matter. She had been laid up in Shadwell basin for ever so long. You may
imagine her state. She was all rust, dust, grime--soot aloft, dirt on
deck. To me it was like coming out of a palace into a ruined cottage.
She was about 400 tons, had a primitive windlass, wooden latches to the
doors, not a bit of brass about her, and a big square stern. There was
on it, below her name in big letters, a lot of scroll work, with the
gilt off, and some sort of a coat of arms, with the motto 'Do or Die'
underneath. I remember it took my fancy immensely. There was a touch of
romance in it, something that made me love the old thing--something that
appealed to my youth!

"We left London in ballast--sand ballast--to load a cargo of coal in a
northern port for Bankok. Bankok! I thrilled. I had been six years at
sea, but had only seen Melbourne and Sydney, very good places, charming
places in their way--but Bankok!

"We worked out of the Thames under canvas, with a North Sea pilot on
board. His name was Jermyn, and he dodged all day long about the galley
drying his handkerchief before the stove. Apparently he never slept.
He was a dismal man, with a perpetual tear sparkling at the end of his
nose, who either had been in trouble, or was in trouble, or expected
to be in trouble--couldn't be happy unless something went wrong. He
mistrusted my youth, my common-sense, and my seamanship, and made a
point of showing it in a hundred little ways. I dare say he was right.
It seems to me I knew very little then, and I know not much more now;
but I cherish a hate for that Jermyn to this day.

"We were a week working up as far as Yarmouth Roads, and then we got
into a gale--the famous October gale of twenty-two years ago. It was
wind, lightning, sleet, snow, and a terrific sea. We were flying light,
and you may imagine how bad it was when I tell you we had smashed
bulwarks and a flooded deck. On the second night she shifted her ballast
into the lee bow, and by that time we had been blown off somewhere on
the Dogger Bank. There was nothing for it but go below with shovels and
try to right her, and there we were in that vast hold, gloomy like a
cavern, the tallow dips stuck and flickering on the beams, the gale
howling above, the ship tossing about like mad on her side; there we
all were, Jermyn, the captain, everyone, hardly able to keep our feet,
engaged on that gravedigger's work, and trying to toss shovelfuls of wet
sand up to windward. At every tumble of the ship you could see vaguely
in the dim light men falling down with a great flourish of shovels.
One of the ship's boys (we had two), impressed by the weirdness of the
scene, wept as if his heart would break. We could hear him blubbering
somewhere in the shadows.

"On the third day the gale died out, and by-and-by a north-country tug
picked us up. We took sixteen days in all to get from London to the
Tyne! When we got into dock we had lost our turn for loading, and they
hauled us off to a tier where we remained for a month. Mrs. Beard (the
captain's name was Beard) came from Colchester to see the old man. She
lived on board. The crew of runners had left, and there remained only
the officers, one boy, and the steward, a mulatto who answered to the
name of Abraham. Mrs. Beard was an old woman, with a face all wrinkled
and ruddy like a winter apple, and the figure of a young girl. She
caught sight of me once, sewing on a button, and insisted on having my
shirts to repair. This was something different from the captains' wives
I had known on board crack clippers. When I brought her the shirts, she
said: 'And the socks? They want mending, I am sure, and John's--Captain
Beard's--things are all in order now. I would be glad of something to
do.' Bless the old woman! She overhauled my outfit for me, and meantime
I read for the first time _Sartor Resartus_ and Burnaby's _Ride to
Khiva_. I didn't understand much of the first then; but I remember I
preferred the soldier to the philosopher at the time; a preference
which life has only confirmed. One was a man, and the other was either
more--or less. However, they are both dead, and Mrs. Beard is dead, and
youth, strength, genius, thoughts, achievements, simple hearts--all dies
.... No matter.

"They loaded us at last. We shipped a crew. Eight able seamen and two
boys. We hauled off one evening to the buoys at the dock-gates, ready to
go out, and with a fair prospect of beginning the voyage next day. Mrs.
Beard was to start for home by a late train. When the ship was fast
we went to tea. We sat rather silent through the meal--Mahon, the old
couple, and I. I finished first, and slipped away for a smoke, my cabin
being in a deck-house just against the poop. It was high water, blowing
fresh with a drizzle; the double dock-gates were opened, and the steam
colliers were going in and out in the darkness with their lights burning
bright, a great plashing of propellers, rattling of winches, and a lot
of hailing on the pier-heads. I watched the procession of head-lights
gliding high and of green lights gliding low in the night, when suddenly
a red gleam flashed at me, vanished, came into view again, and remained.
The fore-end of a steamer loomed up close. I shouted down the cabin,
'Come up, quick!' and then heard a startled voice saying afar in the
dark, 'Stop her, sir.' A bell jingled. Another voice cried warningly,
'We are going right into that barque, sir.' The answer to this was a
gruff 'All right,' and the next thing was a heavy crash as the steamer
struck a glancing blow with the bluff of her bow about our fore-rigging.
There was a moment of confusion, yelling, and running about. Steam
roared. Then somebody was heard saying, 'All clear, sir.'... 'Are
you all right?' asked the gruff voice. I had jumped forward to see the
damage, and hailed back, 'I think so.' 'Easy astern,' said the gruff
voice. A bell jingled. 'What steamer is that?' screamed Mahon. By that
time she was no more to us than a bulky shadow maneuvering a little
way off. They shouted at us some name--a woman's name, Miranda or
Melissa--or some such thing. 'This means another month in this beastly
hole,' said Mahon to me, as we peered with lamps about the splintered
bulwarks and broken braces. 'But where's the captain?'

"We had not heard or seen anything of him all that time. We went aft to
look. A doleful voice arose hailing somewhere in the middle of the dock,
'_Judea_ ahoy!'... How the devil did he get there?... 'Hallo!' we
shouted. 'I am adrift in our boat without oars,' he cried. A belated
waterman offered his services, and Mahon struck a bargain with him for
half-a-crown to tow our skipper alongside; but it was Mrs. Beard that
came up the ladder first. They had been floating about the dock in that
mizzly cold rain for nearly an hour. I was never so surprised in my
life.

"It appears that when he heard my shout 'Come up,' he understood at once
what was the matter, caught up his wife, ran on deck, and across,
and down into our boat, which was fast to the ladder. Not bad for a
sixty-year-old. Just imagine that old fellow saving heroically in his
arms that old woman--the woman of his life. He set her down on a thwart,
and was ready to climb back on board when the painter came adrift
somehow, and away they went together. Of course in the confusion we
did not hear him shouting. He looked abashed. She said cheerfully, 'I
suppose it does not matter my losing the train now?' 'No, Jenny--you go
below and get warm,' he growled. Then to us: 'A sailor has no business
with a wife--I say. There I was, out of the ship. Well, no harm done
this time. Let's go and look at what that fool of a steamer smashed.'

"It wasn't much, but it delayed us three weeks. At the end of that time,
the captain being engaged with his agents, I carried Mrs. Beard's bag to
the railway-station and put her all comfy into a third-class carriage.
She lowered the window to say, 'You are a good young man. If you see
John--Captain Beard--without his muffler at night, just remind him from
me to keep his throat well wrapped up.' 'Certainly, Mrs. Beard,' I said.
'You are a good young man; I noticed how attentive you are to John--to
Captain--' The train pulled out suddenly; I took my cap off to the old
woman: I never saw her again... Pass the bottle.

"We went to sea next day. When we made that start for Bankok we had been
already three months out of London. We had expected to be a fortnight or
so--at the outside.

"It was January, and the weather was beautiful--the beautiful sunny
winter weather that has more charm than in the summer-time, because it
is unexpected, and crisp, and you know it won't, it can't, last long.
It's like a windfall, like a godsend, like an unexpected piece of luck.

"It lasted all down the North Sea, all down Channel; and it lasted till
we were three hundred miles or so to the westward of the Lizards: then
the wind went round to the sou'west and began to pipe up. In two days it
blew a gale. The _Judea_, hove to, wallowed on the Atlantic like an old
candlebox. It blew day after day: it blew with spite, without interval,
without mercy, without rest. The world was nothing but an immensity of
great foaming waves rushing at us, under a sky low enough to touch
with the hand and dirty like a smoked ceiling. In the stormy space
surrounding us there was as much flying spray as air. Day after day and
night after night there was nothing round the ship but the howl of the
wind, the tumult of the sea, the noise of water pouring over her deck.
There was no rest for her and no rest for us. She tossed, she pitched,
she stood on her head, she sat on her tail, she rolled, she groaned, and
we had to hold on while on deck and cling to our bunks when below, in a
constant effort of body and worry of mind.

"One night Mahon spoke through the small window of my berth. It opened
right into my very bed, and I was lying there sleepless, in my boots,
feeling as though I had not slept for years, and could not if I tried.
He said excitedly--

"'You got the sounding-rod in here, Marlow? I can't get the pumps to
suck. By God! it's no child's play.'

"I gave him the sounding-rod and lay down again, trying to think of
various things--but I thought only of the pumps. When I came on deck
they were still at it, and my watch relieved at the pumps. By the light
of the lantern brought on deck to examine the sounding-rod I caught a
glimpse of their weary, serious faces. We pumped all the four hours.
We pumped all night, all day, all the week,--watch and watch. She was
working herself loose, and leaked badly--not enough to drown us at once,
but enough to kill us with the work at the pumps. And while we pumped
the ship was going from us piecemeal: the bulwarks went, the stanchions
were torn out, the ventilators smashed, the cabin-door burst in. There
was not a dry spot in the ship. She was being gutted bit by bit. The
long-boat changed, as if by magic, into matchwood where she stood in her
gripes. I had lashed her myself, and was rather proud of my handiwork,
which had withstood so long the malice of the sea. And we pumped. And
there was no break in the weather. The sea was white like a sheet of
foam, like a caldron of boiling milk; there was not a break in the
clouds, no--not the size of a man's hand--no, not for so much as ten
seconds. There was for us no sky, there were for us no stars, no sun,
no universe--nothing but angry clouds and an infuriated sea. We pumped
watch and watch, for dear life; and it seemed to last for months, for
years, for all eternity, as though we had been dead and gone to a hell
for sailors. We forgot the day of the week, the name of the month, what
year it was, and whether we had ever been ashore. The sails blew away,
she lay broadside on under a weather-cloth, the ocean poured over
her, and we did not care. We turned those handles, and had the eyes of
idiots. As soon as we had crawled on deck I used to take a round turn
with a rope about the men, the pumps, and the mainmast, and we turned,
we turned incessantly, with the water to our waists, to our necks, over
our heads. It was all one. We had forgotten how it felt to be dry.

"And there was somewhere in me the thought: By Jove! this is the deuce
of an adventure--something you read about; and it is my first voyage as
second mate--and I am only twenty--and here I am lasting it out as well
as any of these men, and keeping my chaps up to the mark. I was pleased.
I would not have given up the experience for worlds. I had moments of
exultation. Whenever the old dismantled craft pitched heavily with her
counter high in the air, she seemed to me to throw up, like an appeal,
like a defiance, like a cry to the clouds without mercy, the words
written on her stern: '_Judea_, London. Do or Die.'

"O youth! The strength of it, the faith of it, the imagination of it! To
me she was not an old rattle-trap carting about the world a lot of coal
for a freight--to me she was the endeavour, the test, the trial of life.
I think of her with pleasure, with affection, with regret--as you would
think of someone dead you have loved. I shall never forget her....
Pass the bottle.

"One night when tied to the mast, as I explained, we were pumping
on, deafened with the wind, and without spirit enough in us to wish
ourselves dead, a heavy sea crashed aboard and swept clean over us. As
soon as I got my breath I shouted, as in duty bound, 'Keep on, boys!'
when suddenly I felt something hard floating on deck strike the calf of
my leg. I made a grab at it and missed. It was so dark we could not see
each other's faces within a foot--you understand.

"After that thump the ship kept quiet for a while, and the thing,
whatever it was, struck my leg again. This time I caught it--and it was
a saucepan. At first, being stupid with fatigue and thinking of nothing
but the pumps, I did not understand what I had in my hand. Suddenly it
dawned upon me, and I shouted, 'Boys, the house on deck is gone. Leave
this, and let's look for the cook.'

"There was a deck-house forward, which contained the galley, the cook's
berth, and the quarters of the crew. As we had expected for days to see
it swept away, the hands had been ordered to sleep in the cabin--the
only safe place in the ship. The steward, Abraham, however, persisted
in clinging to his berth, stupidly, like a mule--from sheer fright
I believe, like an animal that won't leave a stable falling in an
earthquake. So we went to look for him. It was chancing death, since
once out of our lashings we were as exposed as if on a raft. But we
went. The house was shattered as if a shell had exploded inside. Most
of it had gone overboard--stove, men's quarters, and their property,
all was gone; but two posts, holding a portion of the bulkhead to which
Abraham's bunk was attached, remained as if by a miracle. We groped in
the ruins and came upon this, and there he was, sitting in his bunk,
surrounded by foam and wreckage, jabbering cheerfully to himself. He
was out of his mind; completely and for ever mad, with this sudden shock
coming upon the fag-end of his endurance. We snatched him up, lugged him
aft, and pitched him head-first down the cabin companion. You understand
there was no time to carry him down with infinite precautions and wait
to see how he got on. Those below would pick him up at the bottom of
the stairs all right. We were in a hurry to go back to the pumps. That
business could not wait. A bad leak is an inhuman thing.

"One would think that the sole purpose of that fiendish gale had been to
make a lunatic of that poor devil of a mulatto. It eased before morning,
and next day the sky cleared, and as the sea went down the leak took up.
When it came to bending a fresh set of sails the crew demanded to put
back--and really there was nothing else to do. Boats gone, decks swept
clean, cabin gutted, men without a stitch but what they stood in, stores
spoiled, ship strained. We put her head for home, and--would you believe
it? The wind came east right in our teeth. It blew fresh, it blew
continuously. We had to beat up every inch of the way, but she did
not leak so badly, the water keeping comparatively smooth. Two hours'
pumping in every four is no joke--but it kept her afloat as far as
Falmouth.

"The good people there live on casualties of the sea, and no doubt were
glad to see us. A hungry crowd of shipwrights sharpened their chisels
at the sight of that carcass of a ship. And, by Jove! they had pretty
pickings off us before they were done. I fancy the owner was already in
a tight place. There were delays. Then it was decided to take part
of the cargo out and calk her topsides. This was done, the repairs
finished, cargo re-shipped; a new crew came on board, and we went
out--for Bankok. At the end of a week we were back again. The crew said
they weren't going to Bankok--a hundred and fifty days' passage--in a
something hooker that wanted pumping eight hours out of the twenty-four;
and the nautical papers inserted again the little paragraph: _'Judea_.
Barque. Tyne to Bankok; coals; put back to Falmouth leaky and with crew
refusing duty.'

"There were more delays--more tinkering. The owner came down for a day,
and said she was as right as a little fiddle. Poor old Captain Beard
looked like the ghost of a Geordie skipper--through the worry and
humiliation of it. Remember he was sixty, and it was his first command.
Mahon said it was a foolish business, and would end badly. I loved the
ship more than ever, and wanted awfully to get to Bankok. To Bankok!
Magic name, blessed name. Mesopotamia wasn't a patch on it. Remember I
was twenty, and it was my first second mate's billet, and the East was
waiting for me.

"We went out and anchored in the outer roads with a fresh crew--the
third. She leaked worse than ever. It was as if those confounded
shipwrights had actually made a hole in her. This time we did not even
go outside. The crew simply refused to man the windlass.

"They towed us back to the inner harbour, and we became a fixture, a
feature, an institution of the place. People pointed us out to visitors
as 'That 'ere bark that's going to Bankok--has been here six months--put
back three times.' On holidays the small boys pulling about in boats
would hail, '_Judea_, ahoy!' and if a head showed above the rail
shouted, 'Where you bound to?--Bankok?' and jeered. We were only three
on board. The poor old skipper mooned in the cabin. Mahon undertook
the cooking, and unexpectedly developed all a Frenchman's genius for
preparing nice little messes. I looked languidly after the rigging. We
became citizens of Falmouth. Every shopkeeper knew us. At the barber's
or tobacconist's they asked familiarly, 'Do you think you will ever get
to Bankok?' Meantime the owner, the underwriters, and the charterers
squabbled amongst themselves in London, and our pay went on.... Pass
the bottle.

"It was horrid. Morally it was worse than pumping for life. It seemed as
though we had been forgotten by the world, belonged to nobody, would get
nowhere; it seemed that, as if bewitched, we would have to live for ever
and ever in that inner harbour, a derision and a by-word to generations
of long-shore loafers and dishonest boatmen. I obtained three months'
pay and a five days' leave, and made a rush for London. It took me a day
to get there and pretty well another to come back--but three months'
pay went all the same. I don't know what I did with it. I went to a
music-hall, I believe, lunched, dined, and supped in a swell place in
Regent Street, and was back to time, with nothing but a complete set of
Byron's works and a new railway rug to show for three months' work. The
boatman who pulled me off to the ship said: 'Hallo! I thought you had
left the old thing. _She_ will never get to Bankok.' 'That's all _you_
know about it,' I said scornfully--but I didn't like that prophecy at
all.

"Suddenly a man, some kind of agent to somebody, appeared with full
powers. He had grog-blossoms all over his face, an indomitable energy,
and was a jolly soul. We leaped into life again. A hulk came alongside,
took our cargo, and then we went into dry dock to get our copper
stripped. No wonder she leaked. The poor thing, strained beyond
endurance by the gale, had, as if in disgust, spat out all the oakum of
her lower seams. She was recalked, new coppered, and made as tight as a
bottle. We went back to the hulk and re-shipped our cargo.

"Then on a fine moonlight night, all the rats left the ship.

"We had been infested with them. They had destroyed our sails, consumed
more stores than the crew, affably shared our beds and our dangers, and
now, when the ship was made seaworthy, concluded to clear out. I called
Mahon to enjoy the spectacle. Rat after rat appeared on our rail, took
a last look over his shoulder, and leaped with a hollow thud into the
empty hulk. We tried to count them, but soon lost the tale. Mahon said:
'Well, well! don't talk to me about the intelligence of rats. They ought
to have left before, when we had that narrow squeak from foundering.
There you have the proof how silly is the superstition about them. They
leave a good ship for an old rotten hulk, where there is nothing to eat,
too, the fools!... I don't believe they know what is safe or what is
good for them, any more than you or I.'

"And after some more talk we agreed that the wisdom of rats had been
grossly overrated, being in fact no greater than that of men.

"The story of the ship was known, by this, all up the Channel from
Land's End to the Forelands, and we could get no crew on the south
coast. They sent us one all complete from Liverpool, and we left once
more--for Bankok.

"We had fair breezes, smooth water right into the tropics, and the
old Judea lumbered along in the sunshine. When she went eight knots
everything cracked aloft, and we tied our caps to our heads; but mostly
she strolled on at the rate of three miles an hour. What could you
expect? She was tired--that old ship. Her youth was where mine is--where
yours is--you fellows who listen to this yarn; and what friend would
throw your years and your weariness in your face? We didn't grumble at
her. To us aft, at least, it seemed as though we had been born in her,
reared in her, had lived in her for ages, had never known any other
ship. I would just as soon have abused the old village church at home
for not being a cathedral.

"And for me there was also my youth to make me patient. There was all
the East before me, and all life, and the thought that I had been tried
in that ship and had come out pretty well. And I thought of men of old
who, centuries ago, went that road in ships that sailed no better, to
the land of palms, and spices, and yellow sands, and of brown nations
ruled by kings more cruel than Nero the Roman and more splendid than
Solomon the Jew. The old bark lumbered on, heavy with her age and the
burden of her cargo, while I lived the life of youth in ignorance and
hope. She lumbered on through an interminable procession of days; and
the fresh gilding flashed back at the setting sun, seemed to cry out
over the darkening sea the words painted on her stern, '_Judea_, London.
Do or Die.'

"Then we entered the Indian Ocean and steered northerly for Java Head.
The winds were light. Weeks slipped by. She crawled on, do or die, and
people at home began to think of posting us as overdue.

"One Saturday evening, I being off duty, the men asked me to give them
an extra bucket of water or so--for washing clothes. As I did not wish
to screw on the fresh-water pump so late, I went forward whistling, and
with a key in my hand to unlock the forepeak scuttle, intending to serve
the water out of a spare tank we kept there.

"The smell down below was as unexpected as it was frightful. One would
have thought hundreds of paraffin-lamps had been flaring and smoking in
that hole for days. I was glad to get out. The man with me coughed and
said, 'Funny smell, sir.' I answered negligently, 'It's good for the
health, they say,' and walked aft.

"The first thing I did was to put my head down the square of the midship
ventilator. As I lifted the lid a visible breath, something like a thin
fog, a puff of faint haze, rose from the opening. The ascending air was
hot, and had a heavy, sooty, paraffiny smell. I gave one sniff, and
put down the lid gently. It was no use choking myself. The cargo was on
fire.

"Next day she began to smoke in earnest. You see it was to be expected,
for though the coal was of a safe kind, that cargo had been so handled,
so broken up with handling, that it looked more like smithy coal than
anything else. Then it had been wetted--more than once. It rained all
the time we were taking it back from the hulk, and now with this
long passage it got heated, and there was another case of spontaneous
combustion.

"The captain called us into the cabin. He had a chart spread on the
table, and looked unhappy. He said, 'The coast of West Australia is
near, but I mean to proceed to our destination. It is the hurricane
month too; but we will just keep her head for Bankok, and fight the
fire. No more putting back anywhere, if we all get roasted. We will try
first to stifle this 'ere damned combustion by want of air.'

"We tried. We battened down everything, and still she smoked. The smoke
kept coming out through imperceptible crevices; it forced itself through
bulkheads and covers; it oozed here and there and everywhere in slender
threads, in an invisible film, in an incomprehensible manner. It made
its way into the cabin, into the forecastle; it poisoned the sheltered
places on the deck, it could be sniffed as high as the main-yard. It
was clear that if the smoke came out the air came in. This was
disheartening. This combustion refused to be stifled.

"We resolved to try water, and took the hatches off. Enormous volumes
of smoke, whitish, yellowish, thick, greasy, misty, choking, ascended as
high as the trucks. All hands cleared out aft. Then the poisonous cloud
blew away, and we went back to work in a smoke that was no thicker now
than that of an ordinary factory chimney.

"We rigged the force pump, got the hose along, and by-and-by it burst.
Well, it was as old as the ship--a prehistoric hose, and past repair.
Then we pumped with the feeble head-pump, drew water with buckets, and
in this way managed in time to pour lots of Indian Ocean into the main
hatch. The bright stream flashed in sunshine, fell into a layer of
white crawling smoke, and vanished on the black surface of coal. Steam
ascended mingling with the smoke. We poured salt water as into a barrel
without a bottom. It was our fate to pump in that ship, to pump out
of her, to pump into her; and after keeping water out of her to save
ourselves from being drowned, we frantically poured water into her to
save ourselves from being burnt.

"And she crawled on, do or die, in the serene weather. The sky was a
miracle of purity, a miracle of azure. The sea was polished, was blue,
was pellucid, was sparkling like a precious stone, extending on all
sides, all round to the horizon--as if the whole terrestrial globe had
been one jewel, one colossal sapphire, a single gem fashioned into a
planet. And on the luster of the great calm waters the _Judea_ glided
imperceptibly, enveloped in languid and unclean vapours, in a lazy cloud
that drifted to leeward, light and slow: a pestiferous cloud defiling
the splendour of sea and sky.

"All this time of course we saw no fire. The cargo smoldered at the
bottom somewhere. Once Mahon, as we were working side by side, said to
me with a queer smile: 'Now, if she only would spring a tidy leak--like
that time when we first left the Channel--it would put a stopper on this
fire. Wouldn't it?' I remarked irrelevantly, 'Do you remember the rats?'

"We fought the fire and sailed the ship too as carefully as though
nothing had been the matter. The steward cooked and attended on us. Of
the other twelve men, eight worked while four rested. Everyone took
his turn, captain included. There was equality, and if not exactly
fraternity, then a deal of good feeling. Sometimes a man, as he dashed
a bucketful of water down the hatchway, would yell out, 'Hurrah for
Bankok!' and the rest laughed. But generally we were taciturn and
serious--and thirsty. Oh! how thirsty! And we had to be careful with the
water. Strict allowance. The ship smoked, the sun blazed.... Pass the
bottle.

"We tried everything. We even made an attempt to dig down to the fire.
No good, of course. No man could remain more than a minute below. Mahon,
who went first, fainted there, and the man who went to fetch him out
did likewise. We lugged them out on deck. Then I leaped down to show
how easily it could be done. They had learned wisdom by that time,
and contented themselves by fishing for me with a chain-hook tied to a
broom-handle, I believe. I did not offer to go and fetch up my shovel,
which was left down below.

"Things began to look bad. We put the long-boat into the water. The
second boat was ready to swing out. We had also another, a fourteen-foot
thing, on davits aft, where it was quite safe.

"Then behold, the smoke suddenly decreased. We re-doubled our efforts
to flood the bottom of the ship. In two days there was no smoke at all.
Everybody was on the broad grin. This was on a Friday. On Saturday no
work, but sailing the ship of course was done. The men washed their
clothes and their faces for the first time in a fortnight, and had a
special dinner given them. They spoke of spontaneous combustion with
contempt, and implied _they_ were the boys to put out combustions.
Somehow we all felt as though we each had inherited a large fortune. But
a beastly smell of burning hung about the ship. Captain Beard had hollow
eyes and sunken cheeks. I had never noticed so much before how twisted
and bowed he was. He and Mahon prowled soberly about hatches and
ventilators, sniffing. It struck me suddenly poor Mahon was a very, very
old chap. As to me, I was as pleased and proud as though I had helped to
win a great naval battle. O! Youth!

"The night was fine. In the morning a homeward-bound ship passed us hull
down,--the first we had seen for months; but we were nearing the land at
last, Java Head being about 190 miles off, and nearly due north.

"Next day it was my watch on deck from eight to twelve. At breakfast the
captain observed, 'It's wonderful how that smell hangs about the cabin.'
About ten, the mate being on the poop, I stepped down on the main-deck
for a moment. The carpenter's bench stood abaft the mainmast: I leaned
against it sucking at my pipe, and the carpenter, a young chap, came to
talk to me. He remarked, 'I think we have done very well, haven't we?'
and then I perceived with annoyance the fool was trying to tilt the
bench. I said curtly, 'Don't, Chips,' and immediately became aware of a
queer sensation, of an absurd delusion,--I seemed somehow to be in
the air. I heard all round me like a pent-up breath released--as if
a thousand giants simultaneously had said Phoo!--and felt a dull
concussion which made my ribs ache suddenly. No doubt about it--I was
in the air, and my body was describing a short parabola. But short as
it was, I had the time to think several thoughts in, as far as I can
remember, the following order: 'This can't be the carpenter--What is
it?--Some accident--Submarine volcano?--Coals, gas!--By Jove! we are
being blown up--Everybody's dead--I am falling into the after-hatch--I
see fire in it.'

"The coal-dust suspended in the air of the hold had glowed dull-red
at the moment of the explosion. In the twinkling of an eye, in an
infinitesimal fraction of a second since the first tilt of the bench, I
was sprawling full length on the cargo. I picked myself up and scrambled
out. It was quick like a rebound. The deck was a wilderness of smashed
timber, lying crosswise like trees in a wood after a hurricane; an
immense curtain of soiled rags waved gently before me--it was the
mainsail blown to strips. I thought, The masts will be toppling over
directly; and to get out of the way bolted on all-fours towards the
poop-ladder. The first person I saw was Mahon, with eyes like saucers,
his mouth open, and the long white hair standing straight on end round
his head like a silver halo. He was just about to go down when the
sight of the main-deck stirring, heaving up, and changing into splinters
before his eyes, petrified him on the top step. I stared at him in
unbelief, and he stared at me with a queer kind of shocked curiosity.
I did not know that I had no hair, no eyebrows, no eyelashes, that my
young moustache was burnt off, that my face was black, one cheek laid
open, my nose cut, and my chin bleeding. I had lost my cap, one of my
slippers, and my shirt was torn to rags. Of all this I was not aware. I
was amazed to see the ship still afloat, the poop-deck whole--and, most
of all, to see anybody alive. Also the peace of the sky and the serenity
of the sea were distinctly surprising. I suppose I expected to see them
convulsed with horror.... Pass the bottle.

"There was a voice hailing the ship from somewhere--in the air, in the
sky--I couldn't tell. Presently I saw the captain--and he was mad. He
asked me eagerly, 'Where's the cabin-table?' and to hear such a question
was a frightful shock. I had just been blown up, you understand, and
vibrated with that experience,--I wasn't quite sure whether I was alive.
Mahon began to stamp with both feet and yelled at him, 'Good God! don't
you see the deck's blown out of her?' I found my voice, and stammered
out as if conscious of some gross neglect of duty, 'I don't know where
the cabin-table is.' It was like an absurd dream.

"Do you know what he wanted next? Well, he wanted to trim the yards.
Very placidly, and as if lost in thought, he insisted on having the
foreyard squared. 'I don't know if there's anybody alive,' said Mahon,
almost tearfully. 'Surely,' he said gently, 'there will be enough left
to square the foreyard.'

"The old chap, it seems, was in his own berth, winding up the
chronometers, when the shock sent him spinning. Immediately it occurred
to him--as he said afterwards--that the ship had struck something, and
he ran out into the cabin. There, he saw, the cabin-table had vanished
somewhere. The deck being blown up, it had fallen down into the
lazarette of course. Where we had our breakfast that morning he saw only
a great hole in the floor. This appeared to him so awfully mysterious,
and impressed him so immensely, that what he saw and heard after he got
on deck were mere trifles in comparison. And, mark, he noticed directly
the wheel deserted and his barque off her course--and his only thought
was to get that miserable, stripped, undecked, smouldering shell of
a ship back again with her head pointing at her port of destination.
Bankok! That's what he was after. I tell you this quiet, bowed,
bandy-legged, almost deformed little man was immense in the singleness
of his idea and in his placid ignorance of our agitation. He motioned us
forward with a commanding gesture, and went to take the wheel himself.

"Yes; that was the first thing we did--trim the yards of that wreck! No
one was killed, or even disabled, but everyone was more or less hurt.
You should have seen them! Some were in rags, with black faces, like
coal-heavers, like sweeps, and had bullet heads that seemed closely
cropped, but were in fact singed to the skin. Others, of the watch
below, awakened by being shot out from their collapsing bunks, shivered
incessantly, and kept on groaning even as we went about our work. But
they all worked. That crew of Liverpool hard cases had in them the right
stuff. It's my experience they always have. It is the sea that gives
it--the vastness, the loneliness surrounding their dark stolid souls.
Ah! Well! we stumbled, we crept, we fell, we barked our shins on the
wreckage, we hauled. The masts stood, but we did not know how much they
might be charred down below. It was nearly calm, but a long swell ran
from the west and made her roll. They might go at any moment. We looked
at them with apprehension. One could not foresee which way they would
fall.

"Then we retreated aft and looked about us. The deck was a tangle of
planks on edge, of planks on end, of splinters, of ruined woodwork. The
masts rose from that chaos like big trees above a matted undergrowth.
The interstices of that mass of wreckage were full of something whitish,
sluggish, stirring--of something that was like a greasy fog. The
smoke of the invisible fire was coming up again, was trailing, like a
poisonous thick mist in some valley choked with dead wood. Already lazy
wisps were beginning to curl upwards amongst the mass of splinters. Here
and there a piece of timber, stuck upright, resembled a post. Half of a
fife-rail had been shot through the foresail, and the sky made a patch
of glorious blue in the ignobly soiled canvas. A portion of several
boards holding together had fallen across the rail, and one end
protruded overboard, like a gangway leading upon nothing, like a gangway
leading over the deep sea, leading to death--as if inviting us to walk
the plank at once and be done with our ridiculous troubles. And still
the air, the sky--a ghost, something invisible was hailing the ship.

"Someone had the sense to look over, and there was the helmsman, who had
impulsively jumped overboard, anxious to come back. He yelled and swam
lustily like a merman, keeping up with the ship. We threw him a
rope, and presently he stood amongst us streaming with water and very
crestfallen. The captain had surrendered the wheel, and apart, elbow on
rail and chin in hand, gazed at the sea wistfully. We asked ourselves,
What next? I thought, Now, this is something like. This is great. I
wonder what will happen. O youth!

"Suddenly Mahon sighted a steamer far astern. Captain Beard said, 'We
may do something with her yet.' We hoisted two flags, which said in the
international language of the sea, 'On fire. Want immediate assistance.'
The steamer grew bigger rapidly, and by-and-by spoke with two flags on
her foremast, 'I am coming to your assistance.'

"In half an hour she was abreast, to windward, within hail, and rolling
slightly, with her engines stopped. We lost our composure, and yelled
all together with excitement, 'We've been blown up.' A man in a white
helmet, on the bridge, cried, 'Yes! All right! all right!' and he nodded
his head, and smiled, and made soothing motions with his hand as though
at a lot of frightened children. One of the boats dropped in the water,
and walked towards us upon the sea with her long oars. Four Calashes
pulled a swinging stroke. This was my first sight of Malay seamen. I've
known them since, but what struck me then was their unconcern: they
came alongside, and even the bowman standing up and holding to our
main-chains with the boat-hook did not deign to lift his head for a
glance. I thought people who had been blown up deserved more attention.

"A little man, dry like a chip and agile like a monkey, clambered up. It
was the mate of the steamer. He gave one look, and cried, 'O boys--you
had better quit.'

"We were silent. He talked apart with the captain for a time,--seemed to
argue with him. Then they went away together to the steamer.

"When our skipper came back we learned that the steamer was the
_Sommerville_, Captain Nash, from West Australia to Singapore via
Batavia with mails, and that the agreement was she should tow us to
Anjer or Batavia, if possible, where we could extinguish the fire by
scuttling, and then proceed on our voyage--to Bankok! The old man seemed
excited. 'We will do it yet,' he said to Mahon, fiercely. He shook his
fist at the sky. Nobody else said a word.

"At noon the steamer began to tow. She went ahead slim and high, and
what was left of the Judea followed at the end of seventy fathom of
tow-rope,--followed her swiftly like a cloud of smoke with mastheads
protruding above. We went aloft to furl the sails. We coughed on the
yards, and were careful about the bunts. Do you see the lot of us there,
putting a neat furl on the sails of that ship doomed to arrive nowhere?
There was not a man who didn't think that at any moment the masts would
topple over. From aloft we could not see the ship for smoke, and
they worked carefully, passing the gaskets with even turns. 'Harbour
furl--aloft there!' cried Mahon from below.

"You understand this? I don't think one of those chaps expected to get
down in the usual way. When we did I heard them saying to each other,
'Well, I thought we would come down overboard, in a lump--sticks and
all--blame me if I didn't.' 'That's what I was thinking to myself,'
would answer wearily another battered and bandaged scarecrow. And, mind,
these were men without the drilled-in habit of obedience. To an onlooker
they would be a lot of profane scallywags without a redeeming
point. What made them do it--what made them obey me when I, thinking
consciously how fine it was, made them drop the bunt of the foresail
twice to try and do it better? What? They had no professional
reputation--no examples, no praise. It wasn't a sense of duty; they all
knew well enough how to shirk, and laze, and dodge--when they had a mind
to it--and mostly they had. Was it the two pounds ten a month that sent
them there? They didn't think their pay half good enough. No; it was
something in them, something inborn and subtle and everlasting. I don't
say positively that the crew of a French or German merchantman wouldn't
have done it, but I doubt whether it would have been done in the same
way. There was a completeness in it, something solid like a principle,
and masterful like an instinct--a disclosure of something secret--of
that hidden something, that gift, of good or evil that makes racial
difference, that shapes the fate of nations.

"It was that night at ten that, for the first time since we had been
fighting it, we saw the fire. The speed of the towing had fanned the
smoldering destruction. A blue gleam appeared forward, shining below the
wreck of the deck. It wavered in patches, it seemed to stir and creep
like the light of a glowworm. I saw it first, and told Mahon. 'Then the
game's up,' he said. 'We had better stop this towing, or she will burst
out suddenly fore and aft before we can clear out.' We set up a yell;
rang bells to attract their attention; they towed on. At last Mahon and
I had to crawl forward and cut the rope with an ax. There was no time to
cast off the lashings. Red tongues could be seen licking the wilderness
of splinters under our feet as we made our way back to the poop.

"Of course they very soon found out in the steamer that the rope
was gone. She gave a loud blast of her whistle, her lights were seen
sweeping in a wide circle, she came up ranging close alongside, and
stopped. We were all in a tight group on the poop looking at her. Every
man had saved a little bundle or a bag. Suddenly a conical flame with
a twisted top shot up forward and threw upon the black sea a circle
of light, with the two vessels side by side and heaving gently in its
center. Captain Beard had been sitting on the gratings still and mute
for hours, but now he rose slowly and advanced in front of us, to the
mizzen-shrouds. Captain Nash hailed: 'Come along! Look sharp. I have
mail-bags on board. I will take you and your boats to Singapore.'

"'Thank you! No!' said our skipper. 'We must see the last of the ship.'

"'I can't stand by any longer,' shouted the other. 'Mails--you know.'

"'Ay! ay! We are all right.'

"'Very well! I'll report you in Singapore.... Good-bye!'

"He waved his hand. Our men dropped their bundles quietly. The steamer
moved ahead, and passing out of the circle of light, vanished at once
from our sight, dazzled by the fire which burned fiercely. And then I
knew that I would see the East first as commander of a small boat. I
thought it fine; and the fidelity to the old ship was fine. We should
see the last of her. Oh the glamour of youth! Oh the fire of it, more
dazzling than the flames of the burning ship, throwing a magic light on
the wide earth, leaping audaciously to the sky, presently to be quenched
by time, more cruel, more pitiless, more bitter than the sea--and like
the flames of the burning ship surrounded by an impenetrable night."

*****

"The old man warned us in his gentle and inflexible way that it was part
of our duty to save for the under-writers as much as we could of the
ship's gear. According we went to work aft, while she blazed forward to
give us plenty of light. We lugged out a lot of rubbish. What didn't we
save? An old barometer fixed with an absurd quantity of screws nearly
cost me my life: a sudden rush of smoke came upon me, and I just got
away in time. There were various stores, bolts of canvas, coils of rope;
the poop looked like a marine bazaar, and the boats were lumbered to the
gunwales. One would have thought the old man wanted to take as much as
he could of his first command with him. He was very very quiet, but off
his balance evidently. Would you believe it? He wanted to take a length
of old stream-cable and a kedge-anchor with him in the long-boat. We
said, 'Ay, ay, sir,' deferentially, and on the quiet let the thing slip
overboard. The heavy medicine-chest went that way, two bags of green
coffee, tins of paint--fancy, paint!--a whole lot of things. Then I was
ordered with two hands into the boats to make a stowage and get them
ready against the time it would be proper for us to leave the ship.

"We put everything straight, stepped the long-boat's mast for our
skipper, who was in charge of her, and I was not sorry to sit down for a
moment. My face felt raw, every limb ached as if broken, I was aware
of all my ribs, and would have sworn to a twist in the back-bone. The
boats, fast astern, lay in a deep shadow, and all around I could see the
circle of the sea lighted by the fire. A gigantic flame arose forward
straight and clear. It flared there, with noises like the whir of wings,
with rumbles as of thunder. There were cracks, detonations, and from
the cone of flame the sparks flew upwards, as man is born to trouble, to
leaky ships, and to ships that burn.

"What bothered me was that the ship, lying broadside to the swell and to
such wind as there was--a mere breath--the boats would not keep astern
where they were safe, but persisted, in a pig-headed way boats have,
in getting under the counter and then swinging alongside. They were
knocking about dangerously and coming near the flame, while the ship
rolled on them, and, of course, there was always the danger of the masts
going over the side at any moment. I and my two boat-keepers kept them
off as best we could with oars and boat-hooks; but to be constantly
at it became exasperating, since there was no reason why we should not
leave at once. We could not see those on board, nor could we imagine
what caused the delay. The boat-keepers were swearing feebly, and I had
not only my share of the work, but also had to keep at it two men who
showed a constant inclination to lay themselves down and let things
slide.

"At last I hailed 'On deck there,' and someone looked over. 'We're ready
here,' I said. The head disappeared, and very soon popped up again. 'The
captain says, All right, sir, and to keep the boats well clear of the
ship.'

"Half an hour passed. Suddenly there was a frightful racket, rattle,
clanking of chain, hiss of water, and millions of sparks flew up into
the shivering column of smoke that stood leaning slightly above the
ship. The cat-heads had burned away, and the two red-hot anchors had
gone to the bottom, tearing out after them two hundred fathom of red-hot
chain. The ship trembled, the mass of flame swayed as if ready to
collapse, and the fore top-gallant-mast fell. It darted down like
an arrow of fire, shot under, and instantly leaping up within an
oar's-length of the boats, floated quietly, very black on the luminous
sea. I hailed the deck again. After some time a man in an unexpectedly
cheerful but also muffled tone, as though he had been trying to speak
with his mouth shut, informed me, 'Coming directly, sir,' and vanished.
For a long time I heard nothing but the whir and roar of the fire. There
were also whistling sounds. The boats jumped, tugged at the painters,
ran at each other playfully, knocked their sides together, or, do what
we would, swung in a bunch against the ship's side. I couldn't stand it
any longer, and swarming up a rope, clambered aboard over the stern.

"It was as bright as day. Coming up like this, the sheet of fire facing
me, was a terrifying sight, and the heat seemed hardly bearable at
first. On a settee cushion dragged out of the cabin, Captain Beard,
with his legs drawn up and one arm under his head, slept with the light
playing on him. Do you know what the rest were busy about? They were
sitting on deck right aft, round an open case, eating bread and cheese
and drinking bottled stout.

"On the background of flames twisting in fierce tongues above their
heads they seemed at home like salamanders, and looked like a band
of desperate pirates. The fire sparkled in the whites of their eyes,
gleamed on patches of white skin seen through the torn shirts. Each
had the marks as of a battle about him--bandaged heads, tied-up arms, a
strip of dirty rag round a knee--and each man had a bottle between his
legs and a chunk of cheese in his hand. Mahon got up. With his handsome
and disreputable head, his hooked profile, his long white beard, and
with an uncorked bottle in his hand, he resembled one of those reckless
sea-robbers of old making merry amidst violence and disaster. 'The last
meal on board,' he explained solemnly. 'We had nothing to eat all
day, and it was no use leaving all this.' He flourished the bottle and
indicated the sleeping skipper. 'He said he couldn't swallow anything,
so I got him to lie down,' he went on; and as I stared, 'I don't know
whether you are aware, young fellow, the man had no sleep to speak of
for days--and there will be dam' little sleep in the boats.' 'There
will be no boats by-and-by if you fool about much longer,' I said,
indignantly. I walked up to the skipper and shook him by the shoulder.
At last he opened his eyes, but did not move. 'Time to leave her, sir,'
I said, quietly.

"He got up painfully, looked at the flames, at the sea sparkling round
the ship, and black, black as ink farther away; he looked at the stars
shining dim through a thin veil of smoke in a sky black, black as
Erebus.

"'Youngest first,' he said.

"And the ordinary seaman, wiping his mouth with the back of his hand,
got up, clambered over the taffrail, and vanished. Others followed. One,
on the point of going over, stopped short to drain his bottle, and with
a great swing of his arm flung it at the fire. 'Take this!' he cried.

"The skipper lingered disconsolately, and we left him to commune alone
for awhile with his first command. Then I went up again and brought
him away at last. It was time. The ironwork on the poop was hot to the
touch.

"Then the painter of the long-boat was cut, and the three boats, tied
together, drifted clear of the ship. It was just sixteen hours after the
explosion when we abandoned her. Mahon had charge of the second boat,
and I had the smallest--the 14-foot thing. The long-boat would have
taken the lot of us; but the skipper said we must save as much property
as we could--for the under-writers--and so I got my first command. I had
two men with me, a bag of biscuits, a few tins of meat, and a breaker of
water. I was ordered to keep close to the long-boat, that in case of bad
weather we might be taken into her.

"And do you know what I thought? I thought I would part company as soon
as I could. I wanted to have my first command all to myself. I wasn't
going to sail in a squadron if there were a chance for independent
cruising. I would make land by myself. I would beat the other boats.
Youth! All youth! The silly, charming, beautiful youth.

"But we did not make a start at once. We must see the last of the ship.
And so the boats drifted about that night, heaving and setting on the
swell. The men dozed, waked, sighed, groaned. I looked at the burning
ship.

"Between the darkness of earth and heaven she was burning fiercely upon
a disc of purple sea shot by the blood-red play of gleams; upon a disc
of water glittering and sinister. A high, clear flame, an immense and
lonely flame, ascended from the ocean, and from its summit the black
smoke poured continuously at the sky. She burned furiously, mournful
and imposing like a funeral pile kindled in the night, surrounded by
the sea, watched over by the stars. A magnificent death had come like
a grace, like a gift, like a reward to that old ship at the end of her
laborious days. The surrender of her weary ghost to the keeping of stars
and sea was stirring like the sight of a glorious triumph. The masts
fell just before daybreak, and for a moment there was a burst and
turmoil of sparks that seemed to fill with flying fire the night patient
and watchful, the vast night lying silent upon the sea. At daylight
she was only a charred shell, floating still under a cloud of smoke and
bearing a glowing mass of coal within.

"Then the oars were got out, and the boats forming in a line moved round
her remains as if in procession--the long-boat leading. As we pulled
across her stern a slim dart of fire shot out viciously at us, and
suddenly she went down, head first, in a great hiss of steam. The
unconsumed stern was the last to sink; but the paint had gone, had
cracked, had peeled off, and there were no letters, there was no word,
no stubborn device that was like her soul, to flash at the rising sun
her creed and her name.

"We made our way north. A breeze sprang up, and about noon all the boats
came together for the last time. I had no mast or sail in mine, but I
made a mast out of a spare oar and hoisted a boat-awning for a sail,
with a boat-hook for a yard. She was certainly over-masted, but I had
the satisfaction of knowing that with the wind aft I could beat the
other two. I had to wait for them. Then we all had a look at the
captain's chart, and, after a sociable meal of hard bread and water, got
our last instructions. These were simple: steer north, and keep together
as much as possible. 'Be careful with that jury rig, Marlow,' said the
captain; and Mahon, as I sailed proudly past his boat, wrinkled his
curved nose and hailed, 'You will sail that ship of yours under water,
if you don't look out, young fellow.' He was a malicious old man--and
may the deep sea where he sleeps now rock him gently, rock him tenderly
to the end of time!

"Before sunset a thick rain-squall passed over the two boats, which were
far astern, and that was the last I saw of them for a time. Next day I
sat steering my cockle-shell--my first command--with nothing but water
and sky around me. I did sight in the afternoon the upper sails of a
ship far away, but said nothing, and my men did not notice her. You see
I was afraid she might be homeward bound, and I had no mind to turn back
from the portals of the East. I was steering for Java--another blessed
name--like Bankok, you know. I steered many days.

"I need not tell you what it is to be knocking about in an open boat. I
remember nights and days of calm when we pulled, we pulled, and the
boat seemed to stand still, as if bewitched within the circle of the sea
horizon. I remember the heat, the deluge of rain-squalls that kept us
baling for dear life (but filled our water-cask), and I remember sixteen
hours on end with a mouth dry as a cinder and a steering-oar over the
stern to keep my first command head on to a breaking sea. I did not know
how good a man I was till then. I remember the drawn faces, the dejected
figures of my two men, and I remember my youth and the feeling that
will never come back any more--the feeling that I could last for ever,
outlast the sea, the earth, and all men; the deceitful feeling that
lures us on to joys, to perils, to love, to vain effort--to death; the
triumphant conviction of strength, the heat of life in the handful of
dust, the glow in the heart that with every year grows dim, grows cold,
grows small, and expires--and expires, too soon--before life itself.

"And this is how I see the East. I have seen its secret places and have
looked into its very soul; but now I see it always from a small boat, a
high outline of mountains, blue and afar in the morning; like faint mist
at noon; a jagged wall of purple at sunset. I have the feel of the oar
in my hand, the vision of a scorching blue sea in my eyes. And I see a
bay, a wide bay, smooth as glass and polished like ice, shimmering in
the dark. A red light burns far off upon the gloom of the land, and
the night is soft and warm. We drag at the oars with aching arms, and
suddenly a puff of wind, a puff faint and tepid and laden with strange
odors of blossoms, of aromatic wood, comes out of the still night--the
first sigh of the East on my face. That I can never forget. It was
impalpable and enslaving, like a charm, like a whispered promise of
mysterious delight.

"We had been pulling this finishing spell for eleven hours. Two pulled,
and he whose turn it was to rest sat at the tiller. We had made out the
red light in that bay and steered for it, guessing it must mark some
small coasting port. We passed two vessels, outlandish and high-sterned,
sleeping at anchor, and, approaching the light, now very dim, ran the
boat's nose against the end of a jutting wharf. We were blind with
fatigue. My men dropped the oars and fell off the thwarts as if dead. I
made fast to a pile. A current rippled softly. The scented obscurity of
the shore was grouped into vast masses, a density of colossal clumps of
vegetation, probably--mute and fantastic shapes. And at their foot the
semicircle of a beach gleamed faintly, like an illusion. There was not
a light, not a stir, not a sound. The mysterious East faced me, perfumed
like a flower, silent like death, dark like a grave.

"And I sat weary beyond expression, exulting like a conqueror, sleepless
and entranced as if before a profound, a fateful enigma.

"A splashing of oars, a measured dip reverberating on the level of
water, intensified by the silence of the shore into loud claps, made me
jump up. A boat, a European boat, was coming in. I invoked the name of
the dead; I hailed: _Judea_ ahoy! A thin shout answered.

"It was the captain. I had beaten the flagship by three hours, and I
was glad to hear the old man's voice, tremulous and tired. 'Is it you,
Marlow?' 'Mind the end of that jetty, sir,' I cried.

"He approached cautiously, and brought up with the deep-sea lead-line
which we had saved--for the under-writers. I eased my painter and fell
alongside. He sat, a broken figure at the stern, wet with dew, his hands
clasped in his lap. His men were asleep already. 'I had a terrible time
of it,' he murmured. 'Mahon is behind--not very far.' We conversed
in whispers, in low whispers, as if afraid to wake up the land. Guns,
thunder, earthquakes would not have awakened the men just then.

"Looking around as we talked, I saw away at sea a bright light traveling
in the night. 'There's a steamer passing the bay,' I said. She was not
passing, she was entering, and she even came close and anchored. 'I
wish,' said the old man, 'you would find out whether she is English.
Perhaps they could give us a passage somewhere.' He seemed nervously
anxious. So by dint of punching and kicking I started one of my men into
a state of somnambulism, and giving him an oar, took another and pulled
towards the lights of the steamer.

"There was a murmur of voices in her, metallic hollow clangs of the
engine-room, footsteps on the deck. Her ports shone, round like dilated
eyes. Shapes moved about, and there was a shadowy man high up on the
bridge. He heard my oars.

"And then, before I could open my lips, the East spoke to me, but it was
in a Western voice. A torrent of words was poured into the enigmatical,
the fateful silence; outlandish, angry words, mixed with words and even
whole sentences of good English, less strange but even more surprising.
The voice swore and cursed violently; it riddled the solemn peace of the
bay by a volley of abuse. It began by calling me Pig, and from that went
crescendo into unmentionable adjectives--in English. The man up there
raged aloud in two languages, and with a sincerity in his fury that
almost convinced me I had, in some way, sinned against the harmony of
the universe. I could hardly see him, but began to think he would work
himself into a fit.

"Suddenly he ceased, and I could hear him snorting and blowing like a
porpoise. I said--

"'What steamer is this, pray?'

"'Eh? What's this? And who are you?'

"'Castaway crew of an English barque burnt at sea. We came here
to-night. I am the second mate. The captain is in the long-boat, and
wishes to know if you would give us a passage somewhere.'

"'Oh, my goodness! I say... This is the Celestial from Singapore on
her return trip. I'll arrange with your captain in the morning...
and,... I say... did you hear me just now?'

"'I should think the whole bay heard you.'

"'I thought you were a shore-boat. Now, look here--this infernal lazy
scoundrel of a caretaker has gone to sleep again--curse him. The light
is out, and I nearly ran foul of the end of this damned jetty. This is
the third time he plays me this trick. Now, I ask you, can anybody stand
this kind of thing? It's enough to drive a man out of his mind. I'll
report him.... I'll get the Assistant Resident to give him the
sack, by... See--there's no light. It's out, isn't it? I take you to
witness the light's out. There should be a light, you know. A red light
on the--'

"'There was a light,' I said, mildly.

"'But it's out, man! What's the use of talking like this? You can see
for yourself it's out--don't you? If you had to take a valuable steamer
along this God-forsaken coast you would want a light too. I'll kick him
from end to end of his miserable wharf. You'll see if I don't. I will--'

"'So I may tell my captain you'll take us?' I broke in.

"'Yes, I'll take you. Good night,' he said, brusquely.

"I pulled back, made fast again to the jetty, and then went to sleep
at last. I had faced the silence of the East. I had heard some of its
languages. But when I opened my eyes again the silence was as complete
as though it had never been broken. I was lying in a flood of light, and
the sky had never looked so far, so high, before. I opened my eyes and
lay without moving.

"And then I saw the men of the East--they were looking at me. The whole
length of the jetty was full of people. I saw brown, bronze, yellow
faces, the black eyes, the glitter, the colour of an Eastern crowd.
And all these beings stared without a murmur, without a sigh, without
a movement. They stared down at the boats, at the sleeping men who at
night had come to them from the sea. Nothing moved. The fronds of palms
stood still against the sky. Not a branch stirred along the shore,
and the brown roofs of hidden houses peeped through the green foliage,
through the big leaves that hung shining and still like leaves forged
of heavy metal. This was the East of the ancient navigators, so old, so
mysterious, resplendent and somber, living and unchanged, full of
danger and promise. And these were the men. I sat up suddenly. A wave
of movement passed through the crowd from end to end, passed along
the heads, swayed the bodies, ran along the jetty like a ripple on the
water, like a breath of wind on a field--and all was still again. I see
it now--the wide sweep of the bay, the glittering sands, the wealth of
green infinite and varied, the sea blue like the sea of a dream,
the crowd of attentive faces, the blaze of vivid colour--the water
reflecting it all, the curve of the shore, the jetty, the high-sterned
outlandish craft floating still, and the three boats with tired men
from the West sleeping unconscious of the land and the people and of the
violence of sunshine. They slept thrown across the thwarts, curled on
bottom-boards, in the careless attitudes of death. The head of the old
skipper, leaning back in the stern of the long-boat, had fallen on his
breast, and he looked as though he would never wake. Farther out old
Mahon's face was upturned to the sky, with the long white beard spread
out on his breast, as though he had been shot where he sat at the
tiller; and a man, all in a heap in the bows of the boat, slept with
both arms embracing the stem-head and with his cheek laid on the
gunwale. The East looked at them without a sound.

"I have known its fascination since: I have seen the mysterious shores,
the still water, the lands of brown nations, where a stealthy Nemesis
lies in wait, pursues, overtakes so many of the conquering race, who are
proud of their wisdom, of their knowledge, of their strength. But for me
all the East is contained in that vision of my youth. It is all in that
moment when I opened my young eyes on it. I came upon it from a tussle
with the sea--and I was young--and I saw it looking at me. And this is
all that is left of it! Only a moment; a moment of strength, of
romance, of glamour--of youth!... A flick of sunshine upon a strange
shore, the time to remember, the time for a sigh,
and--good-bye!--Night--Good-bye...!"

He drank.

"Ah! The good old time--the good old time. Youth and the sea. Glamour
and the sea! The good, strong sea, the salt, bitter sea, that could
whisper to you and roar at you and knock your breath out of you."

He drank again.

"By all that's wonderful, it is the sea, I believe, the sea itself--or
is it youth alone? Who can tell? But you here--you all had something out
of life: money, love--whatever one gets on shore--and, tell me, wasn't
that the best time, that time when we were young at sea; young and
had nothing, on the sea that gives nothing, except hard knocks--and
sometimes a chance to feel your strength--that only--what you all
regret?"

And we all nodded at him: the man of finance, the man of accounts, the
man of law, we all nodded at him over the polished table that like a
still sheet of brown water reflected our faces, lined, wrinkled; our
faces marked by toil, by deceptions, by success, by love; our weary eyes
looking still, looking always, looking anxiously for something out of
life, that while it is expected is already gone--has passed unseen, in
a sigh, in a flash--together with the youth, with the strength, with the
romance of illusions.






[Illustration: [_To face the Title._]





CAPTAIN SWORD AND CAPTAIN PEN.

=A Poem.=

BY LEIGH HUNT.

WITH SOME REMARKS ON

WAR AND MILITARY STATESMEN.

          --If there be in glory aught of good,
          It may by means far different be attained,
          Without ambition, war, or violence.--MILTON.


          LONDON:

          CHARLES KNIGHT, LUDGATE STREET.

          1835.




          TO

          THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE

          LORD BROUGHAM AND VAUX,

          WITH WHOM THE WRITER HUMBLY DIFFERS ON SOME POINTS,

          BUT DEEPLY RESPECTS FOR HIS MOTIVES ON ALL;

          GREAT IN OFFICE FOR WHAT HE DID FOR THE WORLD,

          GREATER OUT OF IT IN CALMLY AWAITING HIS TIME TO DO MORE;

          THE PROMOTER OF EDUCATION; THE EXPEDITER OF JUSTICE;

          THE LIBERATOR FROM SLAVERY;

          AND (WHAT IS THE RAREST VIRTUE IN A STATESMAN)

          ALWAYS A DENOUNCER OF WAR,

          =These Pages are Inscribed=

          BY HIS EVER AFFECTIONATE SERVANT,

          Jan. 30, 1835.                 LEIGH HUNT.




ADVERTISEMENT.


This Poem is the result of a sense of duty, which has taken the Author
from quieter studies during a great public crisis. He obeyed the impulse
with joy, because it took the shape of verse; but with more pain, on
some accounts, than he chooses to express. However, he has done what he
conceived himself bound to do; and if every zealous lover of his species
were to express his feelings in like manner, to the best of his ability,
individual opinions, little in themselves, would soon amount to an
overwhelming authority, and hasten the day of reason and beneficence.

The measure is regular with an irregular aspect,--four accents in a
verse,--like that of Christabel, or some of the poems of Sir Walter
Scott:

          Cptain Swrd got p one dy--
          And the flg full of hnour, as thugh it could fel--

He mentions this, not, of course, for readers in general, but for the
sake of those daily acceders to the list of the reading public, whose
knowledge of books is not yet equal to their love of them.

[Illustration:

          STEPPING IN MUSIC AND THUNDER SWEET,
          WHICH HIS DRUMS SENT BEFORE HIM INTO THE STREET.
                                      _Canto_ I. _p._ 1.]




CAPTAIN SWORD AND CAPTAIN PEN.


I.

HOW CAPTAIN SWORD MARCHED TO WAR.

            Captain Sword got up one day,
          Over the hills to march away,
          Over the hills and through the towns,
          They heard him coming across the downs,
          Stepping in music and thunder sweet,
          Which his drums sent before him into the street.
          And lo! 'twas a beautiful sight in the sun;
          For first came his foot, all marching like one,
          With tranquil faces, and bristling steel,
          And the flag full of honour as though it could feel,
          And the officers gentle, the sword that hold
          'Gainst the shoulder heavy with trembling gold,
          And the massy tread, that in passing is heard,
          Though the drums and the music say never a word.

            And then came his horse, a clustering sound
          Of shapely potency, forward bound,
          Glossy black steeds, and riders tall,
          Rank after rank, each looking like all,
          Midst moving repose and a threatening charm,
          With mortal sharpness at each right arm,
          And hues that painters and ladies love,
          And ever the small flag blush'd above.

            And ever and anon the kettle-drums beat
          Hasty power midst order meet;
          And ever and anon the drums and fifes
          Came like motion's voice, and life's;
          Or into the golden grandeurs fell
          Of deeper instruments, mingling well,
          Burdens of beauty for winds to bear;
          And the cymbals kiss'd in the shining air,
          And the trumpets their visible voices rear'd,
          Each looking forth with its tapestried beard,
          Bidding the heavens and earth make way
          For Captain Sword and his battle-array.

            He, nevertheless, rode indifferent-eyed,
          As if pomp were a toy to his manly pride,
          Whilst the ladies lov'd him the more for his scorn,
          And thought him the noblest man ever was born,
          And tears came into the bravest eyes,
          And hearts swell'd after him double their size,
          And all that was weak, and all that was strong,
          Seem'd to think wrong's self in him could not be wrong;
          Such love, though with bosom about to be gored,
          Did sympathy get for brave Captain Sword.

            So, half that night, as he stopp'd in the town,
          'Twas all one dance, going merrily down,
          With lights in windows and love in eyes,
          And a constant feeling of sweet surprise;
          But all the next morning 'twas tears and sighs;
          For the sound of his drums grew less and less,
          Walking like carelessness off from distress;
          And Captain Sword went whistling gay,
          "Over the hills and far away."




II.

HOW CAPTAIN SWORD WON A GREAT VICTORY.


            Through fair and through foul went Captain Sword,
          Pacer of highway and piercer of ford,
          Steady of face in rain or sun,
          He and his merry men, all as one;
          Till they came to a place, where in battle-array
          Stood thousands of faces, firm as they,
          Waiting to see which could best maintain
          Bloody argument, lords of pain;
          And down the throats of their fellow-men
          Thrust the draught never drunk again.

            It was a spot of rural peace,
          Ripening with the year's increase
          And singing in the sun with birds,
          Like a maiden with happy words--
          With happy words which she scarcely hears
          In her own contented ears,
          Such abundance feeleth she
          Of all comfort carelessly,
          Throwing round her, as she goes,
          Sweet half-thoughts on lily and rose,
          Nor guesseth what will soon arouse
          All ears--that murder's in the house;
          And that, in some strange wrong of brain,
          Her father hath her mother slain.

            Steady! steady! The masses of men
          Wheel, and fall in, and wheel again,
          Softly as circles drawn with pen.

            Then a gaze there was, and valour, and fear,
          And the jest that died in the jester's ear,
          And preparation, noble to see,
          Of all-accepting mortality;
          Tranquil Necessity gracing Force;
          And the trumpets danc'd with the stirring horse;
          And lordly voices, here and there,
          Call'd to war through the gentle air;
          When suddenly, with its voice of doom,
          Spoke the cannon 'twixt glare and gloom,
          Making wider the dreadful room:
          On the faces of nations round
          Fell the shadow of that sound.

            Death for death! The storm begins;
          Rush the drums in a torrent of dins;
          Crash the muskets, gash the swords;
          Shoes grow red in a thousand fords;
          Now for the flint, and the cartridge bite;
          Darkly gathers the breath of the fight,
          Salt to the palate and stinging to sight;
          Muskets are pointed they scarce know where,
          No matter: Murder is cluttering there.
          Reel the hollows: close up! close up!
          Death feeds thick, and his food is his cup.
          Down go bodies, snap burst eyes;
          Trod on the ground are tender cries;
          Brains are dash'd against plashing ears;
          Hah! no time has battle for tears;
          Cursing helps better--cursing, that goes
          Slipping through friends' blood, athirst for foes'.
          What have soldiers with tears to do?--
          We, who this mad-house must now go through,
          This twenty-fold Bedlam, let loose with knives--
          To murder, and stab, and grow liquid with lives--
          Gasping, staring, treading red mud,
          Till the drunkenness' self makes us steady of blood?

[Illustration:

          DOWN GO BODIES--SNAP BURST EYES--
          TROD ON THE GROUND ARE TENDER CRIES.
                                  _Canto_ II. _p. 8._]

            [Oh! shrink not thou, reader! Thy part's in it too;
          Has not thy praise made the thing they go through
          Shocking to read of, but noble to do?]

            No time to be "breather of thoughtful breath"
          Has the giver and taker of dreadful death.
          See where comes the horse-tempest again,
          Visible earthquake, bloody of mane!
          Part are upon us, with edges of pain;
          Part burst, riderless, over the plain,
          Crashing their spurs, and twice slaying the slain.
          See, by the living God! see those foot
          Charging down hill--hot, hurried, and mute!
          They loll their tongues out!  Ah-hah! pell-mell!
          Horses roll in a human hell;
          Horse and man they climb one another--
          Which is the beast, and which is the brother?
          Mangling, stifling, stopping shrieks
          With the tread of torn-out cheeks,
          Drinking each other's bloody breath--
          Here's the fleshliest feast of Death.
          An odour, as of a slaughter-house,
          The distant raven's dark eye bows.

            Victory! victory!  Man flies man;
          Cannibal patience hath done what it can--
          Carv'd, and been carv'd, drunk the drinkers down,
          And now there is one that hath won the crown:
          One pale visage stands lord of the board--
          Joy to the trumpets of Captain Sword!

            His trumpets blow strength, his trumpets neigh,
          They and his horse, and waft him away;
          They and his foot, with a tir'd proud flow,
          Tatter'd escapers and givers of woe.
          Open, ye cities!  Hats off! hold breath!
          To see the man who has been with Death;
          To see the man who determineth right
          By the virtue-perplexing virtue of might.
          Sudden before him have ceas'd the drums,
          And lo! in the air of empire he comes!

            All things present, in earth and sky,
          Seem to look at his looking eye.




III.

OF THE BALL THAT WAS GIVEN TO CAPTAIN SWORD.


            But Captain Sword was a man among men,
          And he hath become their playmate again:
          Boot, nor sword, nor stern look hath he,
          But holdeth the hand of a fair ladye,
          And floweth the dance a palace within,
          Half the night, to a golden din,
          Midst lights in windows and love in eyes,
          And a constant feeling of sweet surprise;
          And ever the look of Captain Sword
          Is the look that's thank'd, and the look that's ador'd.

            There was the country-dance, small of taste;
          And the waltz, that loveth the lady's waist;
          And the galopade, strange agreeable tramp,
          Made of a scrape, a hobble, and stamp;
          And the high-stepping minuet, face to face,
          Mutual worship of conscious grace;
          And all the shapes in which beauty goes
          Weaving motion with blithe repose.

            And then a table a feast displayed,
          Like a garden of light without a shade,
          All of gold, and flowers, and sweets,
          With wines of old church-lands, and sylvan meats,
          Food that maketh the blood feel choice;
          Yet all the face of the feast, and the voice,
          And heart, still turn'd to the head of the board;
          For ever the look of Captain Sword
          Is the look that's thank'd, and the look that's ador'd.

[Illustration:

          THERE WAS THE COUNTRY DANCE, SMALL OF TASTE;
          AND THE WALTZ, THAT LOVETH THE LADY'S WAIST.
                                 _Canto_ III. _p._ 14.]

            Well content was Captain Sword;
          At his feet all wealth was pour'd;
          On his head all glory set;
          For his ease all comfort met;
          And around him seem'd entwin'd
          All the arms of womankind.

            And when he had taken his fill
          Thus, of all that pampereth will,
          In his down he sunk to rest,
          Clasp'd in dreams of all its best.




IV.

ON WHAT TOOK PLACE ON THE FIELD OF BATTLE THE NIGHT AFTER THE VICTORY.


            'Tis a wild night out of doors;
          The wind is mad upon the moors,
          And comes into the rocking town,
          Stabbing all things, up and down,
          And then there is a weeping rain
          Huddling 'gainst the window-pane,
          And good men bless themselves in bed;
          The mother brings her infant's head
          Closer, with a joy like tears,
          And thinks of angels in her prayers;
          Then sleeps, with his small hand in hers.

            Two loving women, lingering yet
          Ere the fire is out, are met,
          Talking sweetly, time-beguil'd,
          One of her bridegroom, one her child,
          The bridegroom he. They have receiv'd
          Happy letters, more believ'd
          For public news, and feel the bliss
          The heavenlier on a night like this.
          They think him hous'd, they think him blest,
          Curtain'd in the core of rest,
          Danger distant, all good near;
          Why hath their "Good night" a tear?

            Behold him! By a ditch he lies
          Clutching the wet earth, his eyes
          Beginning to be mad. In vain
          His tongue still thirsts to lick the rain,
          That mock'd but now his homeward tears;
          And ever and anon he rears
          His legs and knees with all their strength,
          And then as strongly thrusts at length.
          Rais'd, or stretch'd, he cannot bear
          The wound that girds him, weltering there:
          And "Water!" he cries, with moonward stare.

            ["I will not read it!" with a start,
          Burning cries some honest heart;
          "I will not read it! Why endure
          Pangs which horror cannot cure?
          Why--Oh why? and rob the brave
          And the bereav'd of all they crave,
          A little hope to gild the grave?"

            Ask'st thou why, thou honest heart?
          'Tis _because_ thou dost ask, and because thou dost start.
          'Tis because thine own praise and fond outward thought
          Have aided the shews which this sorrow have wrought.]

            A wound unutterable--Oh God!
          Mingles his being with the sod.

            ["I'll read no more."--Thou must, thou must:
          In thine own pang doth wisdom trust.]

            His nails are in earth, his eyes in air,
          And "Water!" he crieth--he may not forbear.
          Brave and good was he, yet now he dreams
          The moon looks cruel; and he blasphemes.

            ["No more! no more!" Nay, this is but one;
          Were the whole tale told, it would not be done
          From wonderful setting to rising sun.
          But God's good time is at hand--be calm,
          Thou reader! and steep thee in all thy balm
          Of tears or patience, of thought or good will,
          For the field--the field awaiteth us still.]

            "Water! water!" all over the field:
          To nothing but Death will that wound-voice yield.
          One, as he crieth, is sitting half bent;
          What holds he so close?--his body is rent.
          Another is mouthless, with eyes on cheek;
          Unto the raven he may not speak.
          One would fain kill him; and one half round
          The place where he writhes, hath up beaten the ground.
          Like a mad horse hath he beaten the ground,
          And the feathers and music that litter it round,
          The gore, and the mud, and the golden sound.
          Come hither, ye cities! ye ball-rooms, take breath!
          See what a floor hath the dance of death!

            The floor is alive, though the lights are out;
          What are those dark shapes, flitting about?
          Flitting about, yet no ravens they,
          Not foes, yet not friends--mute creatures of prey;
          Their prey is lucre, their claws a knife,
          Some say they take the beseeching life.
          Horrible pity is theirs for despair,
          And they the love-sacred limbs leave bare.
          Love will come to-morrow, and sadness,
          Patient for the fear of madness,
          And shut its eyes for cruelty,
          So many pale beds to see.
          Turn away, thou Love, and weep
          No more in covering his last sleep;
          Thou hast him--blessed is thine eye!
          Friendless Famine has yet to die.

[Illustration:

          COME HITHER, YE CITIES! YE BALL-ROOMS TAKE BREATH!
          SEE WHAT A FLOOR HATH THE DANCE OF DEATH.
                                      _Canto_ IV. _p._ 22.]

            A shriek!--Great God! what superhuman
          Peal was that? Not man, nor woman,
          Nor twenty madmen, crush'd, could wreak
          Their soul in such a ponderous shriek.
          Dumbly, for an instant, stares
          The field; and creep men's dying hairs.

            O friend of man! O noble creature!
          Patient and brave, and mild by nature,
          Mild by nature, and mute as mild,
          Why brings he to these passes wild
          Thee, gentle horse, thou shape of beauty?
          Could he not do his dreadful duty,
          (If duty it be, which seems mad folly)
          Nor link thee to his melancholy?

            Two noble steeds lay side by side,
          One cropp'd the meek grass ere it died;
          Pang-struck it struck t' other, already torn,
          And out of its bowels that shriek was born.

            Now see what crawleth, well as it may,
          Out of the ditch, and looketh that way.
          What horror all black, in the sick moonlight,
          Kneeling, half human, a burdensome sight;
          Loathly and liquid, as fly from a dish;
          Speak, Horror! thou, for it withereth flesh.

            "The grass caught fire; the wounded were by;
          Writhing till eve did a remnant lie;
          Then feebly this coal abateth his cry;
          But he hopeth! he hopeth! joy lighteth his eye,
          For gold he possesseth, and Murder is nigh!"

            O goodness in horror! O ill not all ill!
          In the worst of the worst may be fierce Hope still.
          To-morrow with dawn will come many a wain,
          And bear away loads of human pain,
          Piles of pale beds for the 'spitals; but some
          Again will awake in home-mornings, and some,
          Dull herds of the war, again follow the drum.
          From others, faint blood shall in families flow,
          With wonder at life, and young oldness in woe,
          Yet hence may the movers of great earth grow.
          Now, even now, I hear them at hand,
          Though again Captain Sword is up in the land,
          Marching anew for more fields like these
          In the health of his flag in the morning breeze.

            Sneereth the trumpet, and stampeth the drum,
          And again Captain Sword in his pride doth come;
          He passeth the fields where his friends lie lorn,
          Feeding the flowers and the feeding corn,
          Where under the sunshine cold they lie,
          And he hasteth a tear from his old grey eye.
          Small thinking is his but of work to be done,
          And onward he marcheth, using the sun:
          He slayeth, he wasteth, he spouteth his fires
          On babes at the bosom, and bed-rid sires;
          He bursteth pale cities, through smoke and through yell,
          And bringeth behind him, hot-blooded, his hell.
          Then the weak door is barr'd, and the soul all sore,
          And hand-wringing helplessness paceth the floor,
          And the lover is slain, and the parents are nigh--

            Oh God! let me breathe, and look up at thy sky!
          Good is as hundreds, evil as one;
          Round about goeth the golden sun.




V.

HOW CAPTAIN SWORD, IN CONSEQUENCE OF HIS GREAT VICTORIES, BECAME INFIRM
IN HIS WITS.


            But to win at the game, whose moves are death,
          It maketh a man draw too proud a breath:
          And to see his force taken for reason and right,
          It tendeth to unsettle his reason quite.
          Never did chief of the line of Sword
          Keep his wits whole at that drunken board.
          He taketh the size, and the roar, and fate,
          Of the field of his action, for soul as great:
          He smiteth and stunneth the cheek of mankind,
          And saith "Lo! I rule both body and mind."

            Captain Sword forgot his own soul,
          Which of aught save itself, resented controul;
          Which whatever his deeds, ordained them still,
          Bodiless monarch, enthron'd in his will:
          He forgot the close thought, and the burning heart,
          And pray'rs, and the mild moon hanging apart,
          Which lifteth the seas with her gentle looks,
          And growth, and death, and immortal books,
          And the Infinite Mildness, the soul of souls,
          Which layeth earth soft 'twixt her silver poles;
          Which ruleth the stars, and saith not a word;
          Whose speed in the hair of no comet is heard;
          Which sendeth the soft sun, day by day,
          Mighty, and genial, and just alway,
          Owning no difference, doing no wrong,
          Loving the orbs and the least bird's song,
          The great, sweet, warm angel, with golden rod,
          Bright with the smile of the distance of God.

            Captain Sword, like a witless thing,
          Of all under heaven must needs be king,
          King of kings, and lord of lords,
          Swayer of souls as well as of swords,
          Ruler of speech, and through speech, of thought;
          And hence to his brain was a madness brought.
          He madden'd in East, he madden'd in West,
          Fiercer for sights of men's unrest,
          Fiercer for talk, amongst awful men,
          Of their new mighty leader, Captain Pen,
          A conqueror strange, who sat in his home
          Like the wizard that plagued the ships of Rome,
          Noiseless, show-less, dealing no death,
          But victories, winged, went forth from his breath.

            Three thousand miles across the waves[A]
          Did Captain Sword cry, bidding souls be slaves:
          Three thousand miles did the echo return
          With a laugh and a blow made his old cheeks burn.

            Then he call'd to a wrong-maddened people, and swore[B]
          Their name in the map should never be more:
          Dire came the laugh, and smote worse than before.
          Were earthquake a giant, up-thrusting his head
          And o'erlooking the nations, not worse were the dread.

            Then, lo! was a wonder, and sadness to see;
          For with that very people, their leader, stood he,
          Incarnate afresh, like a Csar of old;[C]
          But because he look'd back, and his heart was cold,
          Time, hope, and himself for a tale he sold.
          Oh largest occasion, by man ever lost!
          Oh throne of the world, to the war-dogs tost!

            He vanished; and thinly there stood in his place
          The new shape of Sword, with an humbler face,[D]
          Rebuking his brother, and preaching for right,
          Yet aye when it came, standing proud on his might,
          And squaring its claims with his old small sight;
          Then struck up his drums, with ensign furl'd,
          And said, "I will walk through a subject world:
          Earth, just as it is, shall for ever endure,
          The rich be too rich, and the poor too poor;
          And for this I'll stop knowledge. I'll say to it, 'Flow
          Thus far; but presume no farther to flow:
          For me, as I list, shall the free airs blow.'"

[Illustration:

          THEN SUDDENLY CAME HE WITH GOWNED MEN,
          AND SAID, "NOW OBSERVE ME--I'M CAPTAIN PEN."
                                     _Canto V. p. 34._]

            Laugh'd after him loudly that land so fair,[E]
          "The king thou set'st over us, by a free air
          Is swept away, senseless." And old Sword then
          First knew the might of great Captain Pen.
          So strangely it bow'd him, so wilder'd his brain,
          That now he stood, hatless, renouncing his reign;
          Now mutter'd of dust laid in blood; and now
          'Twixt wonder and patience went lifting his brow.
          Then suddenly came he, with gowned men,
          And said, "Now observe me--_I'm_ Captain Pen:
          _I'll_ lead all your changes--I'll write all your books--
          I'm every thing--all things--I'm clergymen, cooks,
          Clerks, carpenters, hosiers--I'm Pitt--I'm Lord Grey."

            'Twas painful to see his extravagant way;
          But heart ne'er so bold, and hand ne'er so strong,
          What are they, when truth and the wits go wrong?

FOOTNOTES:

[A] The American War.

[B] The French War.

[C] Napoleon.

[D] The Duke of Wellington, or existing Military Toryism.

[E] The Glorious Three Days.




VI.

OF CAPTAIN PEN, AND HOW HE FOUGHT WITH CAPTAIN SWORD.


            Now tidings of Captain Sword and his state
          Were brought to the ears of Pen the Great,
          Who rose and said, "His time is come."
          And he sent him, but not by sound of drum,
          Nor trumpet, nor other hasty breath,
          Hot with questions of life and death,
          But only a letter calm and mild;
          And Captain Sword he read it, and smil'd,
          And said, half in scorn, and nothing in fear,
          (Though his wits seem'd restor'd by a danger near,
          For brave was he ever) "Let Captain Pen
          Bring at his back a million men,
          And I'll talk with his wisdom, and not till then."
          Then replied to his messenger Captain Pen,
          "I'll bring at my back a _world_ of men."

            Out laugh'd the captains of Captain Sword,
          But their chief look'd vex'd, and said not a word,
          For thought and trouble had touch'd his ears
          Beyond the bullet-like sense of theirs,
          And wherever he went, he was 'ware of a sound
          Now heard in the distance, now gathering round,
          Which irk'd him to know what the issue might be;
          But the soul of the cause of it well guess'd he.

            Indestructible souls among men
          Were the souls of the line of Captain Pen;
          Sages, patriots, martyrs mild,
          Going to the stake, as child
          Goeth with his prayer to bed;
          Dungeon-beams, from quenchless head;
          Poets, making earth aware
          Of its wealth in good and fair;
          And the benders to their intent,
          Of metal and of element;
          Of flame the enlightener, beauteous,
          And steam, that bursteth his iron house;
          And adamantine giants blind,
          That, without master, have no mind.

            Heir to these, and all their store,
          Was Pen, the power unknown of yore;
          And as their might still created might,
          And each work'd for him by day and by night,
          In wealth and wondrous means he grew,
          Fit to move the earth anew;
          Till his fame began to speak
          Pause, as when the thunders wake,
          Muttering, in the beds of heaven:
          Then, to set the globe more even,
          Water he call'd, and Fire, and Haste,
          Which hath left old Time displac'd--
          And Iron, mightiest now for Pen,
          Each of his steps like an army of men--
          (Sword little knew what was leaving him then)
          And out of the witchcraft of their skill,
          A creature he call'd, to wait on his will--
          Half iron, half vapour, a dread to behold--
          Which evermore panted and evermore roll'd,
          And uttered his words a million fold.
          Forth sprang they in air, down raining like dew,
          And men fed upon them, and mighty they grew.

            Ears giddy with custom that sound might not hear,
          But it woke up the rest, like an earthquake near;
          And that same night of the letter, some strange
          Compulsion of soul brought a sense of change;
          And at midnight the sound grew into a roll
          As the sound of all gath'rings from pole to pole,
          From pole unto pole, and from clime to clime,
          Like the roll of the wheels of the coming of time;--
          A sound as of cities, and sound as of swords
          Sharpening, and solemn and terrible words,
          And laughter as solemn, and thunderous drumming,
          A tread as if all the world were coming.
          And then was a lull, and soft voices sweet
          Call'd into music those terrible feet,
          Which rising on wings, lo! the earth went round
          To the burn of their speed with a golden sound;
          With a golden sound, and a swift repose,
          Such as the blood in the young heart knows;
          Such as Love knows, when his tumults cease;
          When all is quick, and yet all is at peace.

            And when Captain Sword got up next morn,
          Lo! a new-fac'd world was born;
          For not an anger nor pride would it shew,
          Nor aught of the loftiness now found low,
          Nor would his own men strike a single blow:
          Not a blow for their old, unconsidering lord
          Would strike the good soldiers of Captain Sword;
          But weaponless all, and wise they stood,
          In the level dawn, and calm brotherly good;
          Yet bowed to him they, and kiss'd his hands,
          For such were their new lord's commands,
          Lessons rather, and brotherly plea;
          Reverence the past, quoth he;
          Reverence the struggle and mystery,
          And faces human in their pain;
          Nor his the least, that could sustain
          Cares of mighty wars, and guide
          Calmly where the red deaths ride.

            "But how! what now?" cried Captain Sword;
          "Not a blow for your gen'ral? not even a word?
          What! traitors? deserters?"

                                  "Ah no!" cried they;
          "But the 'game's' at an end; the 'wise' wont play."

            "And where's your old spirit?"

                                "The same, though another;
          Man may be strong without maiming his brother."

            "But enemies?"

                    "Enemies! Whence should they come,
          When all interchange what was known but to some?"

            "But famine? but plague? worse evils by far."

            "O last mighty rhet'ric to charm us to war!
          Look round--what has earth, now it equably speeds,
          To do with these foul and calamitous needs?
          Now it equably speeds, and thoughtfully glows,
          And its heart is open, never to close?

[Illustration:

          AND SO, LIKE THE TOOL OF A DISUS'D ART,
          HE STOOD AT HIS WALL, AND RUSTED APART.
                                _Canto_ VI. _p. 44._]

            "Still I can govern," said Captain Sword;
          "Fate I respect; and I stick to my word."
          And in truth so he did; but the word was one
          He had sworn to all vanities under the sun,
          To do, for their conq'rors, the least could be done.
          Besides, what had _he_ with his worn-out story,
          To do with the cause he had wrong'd, and the glory?

            No: Captain Sword a sword was still,
          He could not unteach his lordly will;
          He could not attemper his single thought;
          It might not be bent, nor newly wrought:
          And so, like the tool of a disus'd art,
          He stood at his wall, and rusted apart.

            'Twas only for many-soul'd Captain Pen
          To make a world of swordless men.




POSTSCRIPT;

CONTAINING SOME REMARKS ON WAR AND MILITARY STATESMEN.




POSTSCRIPT;

CONTAINING SOME REMARKS ON WAR AND MILITARY STATESMEN.


The object of this poem is to show the horrors of war, the false ideas
of power produced in the minds of its leaders, and, by inference, the
unfitness of those leaders for the government of the world.

The author intends no more offence to any one than can be helped: he
feels due admiration for that courage and energy, the supposed
misdirection of which it deplores; he heartily acknowledges the
probability, that that supposed misdirection has been hitherto no
misdirection, but a necessity--but he believes that the time is come
when, by encouraging the disposition to question it, its services and
its sufferings may be no longer required, and he would fain tear asunder
the veil from the sore places of war,--would show what has been hitherto
kept concealed, or not shown earnestly, and for the purpose,--would
prove, at all events, that the time has come for putting an end to those
phrases in the narratives of warfare, by which a suspicious delicacy is
palmed upon the reader, who is told, after everything has been done to
excite his admiration of war, that his feelings are "spared" a recital
of its miseries--that "a veil" is drawn over them--a "truce" given to
descriptions which only "harrow up the soul," &c.

Suppose it be necessary to "harrow up the soul," in order that the soul
be no longer harrowed? Moralists and preachers do not deal after this
tender fashion with moral, or even physical consequences, resulting from
other evils. Why should they spare these? Why refuse to look their own
effeminacy in the face,--their own gaudy and overweening encouragement
of what they dare not contemplate in its results? Is a murder in the
streets worth attending to,--a single wounded man worth carrying to the
hospital,--and are all the murders, and massacres, and fields of
wounded, and the madness, the conflagrations, the famines, the miseries
of families, and the rickety frames and melancholy bloods of posterity,
only fit to have an embroidered handkerchief thrown over them? Must
"ladies and gentlemen" be called off, that they may not "look that way,"
the "sight is so shocking"? Does it become us to let others endure,
what we cannot bear even to think of?

Even if nothing else were to come of inquiries into the horrors of war,
surely they would cry aloud for some better provision against their
extremity _after_ battle,--for some regulated and certain assistance to
the wounded and agonized,--so that we might hear no longer of men left
in cold and misery all night, writhing with torture,--of bodies stripped
by prowlers, perhaps murderers,--and of frenzied men, the other day the
darlings of their friends, dying, two and even several days after the
battle, of famine! The field of Waterloo was not completely cleared of
its dead and dying till nearly a week! Surely large companies of men
should be organized for the sole purpose of assisting and clearing away
the field after battle. They should be steady men, not lightly
admitted, nor unpossessed of some knowledge of surgery, and they should
be attached to the surgeon's staff. Both sides would respect them for
their office, and keep them sacred from violence. Their duties would be
too painful and useful to get them disrespected for not joining in the
fight--and possibly, before long, they would help to do away their own
necessity, by detailing what they beheld. Is that the reason why there
is no such establishment? The question is asked, not in bitterness, but
to suggest a self-interrogation to the instincts of war.

I have not thought proper to put notes to the poem, detailing the
horrors which I have touched upon; nor even to quote my authorities,
which are unfortunately too numerous, and contain worse horrors still.
They are furnished by almost every history of a campaign, in all
quarters of the world. Circumstances so painful, in a first attempt to
render them public for their own sakes, would, I thought, even meet with
less attention in prose than in verse, however less fitted they may
appear for it at first sight. Verse, if it has any enthusiasm, at once
demands and conciliates attention; it proposes to say much in little;
and it associates with it the idea of something consolatory, or
otherwise sustaining. But there is one prose specimen of these details,
which I will give, because it made so great an impression on me in my
youth, that I never afterwards could help calling it to mind when war
was spoken of; and as I had a good deal to say on that subject, having
been a public journalist during one of the most interesting periods of
modern history, and never having been blinded into an admiration of war
by the dazzle of victory, the circumstance may help to show how salutary
a record of this kind may be, and what an impression the subject might
be brought to make on society. The passage is in a note to one of Mr
Southey's poems, the "Ode to Horror," and is introduced by another
frightful record, less horrible, because there is not such agony implied
in it, nor is it alive.

"I extract" (says Mr Southey) "the following picture of consummate
horror from notes to a poem written in twelve-syllable verse, upon the
campaign of 1794 and 1795: it was during the retreat to Deventer. 'We
could not proceed a hundred yards without perceiving the dead bodies of
men, women, children, and horses, in every direction. One scene made an
impression upon my memory which time will never be able to efface. Near
another cart we perceived a stout-looking man and a beautiful young
woman, with an infant, about seven months old, at the breast, all three
frozen and dead. The mother had most certainly expired in the act of
suckling her child; as with one breast exposed she lay upon the drifted
snow, the milk to all appearance in a stream drawn from the nipple by
the babe, and instantly congealed. The infant seemed as if its lips had
but just then been disengaged, and it reposed its little head upon the
mother's bosom, with an overflow of milk, frozen as it trickled from the
mouth. Their countenances were perfectly composed and fresh, resembling
those of persons in a sound and tranquil slumber.'"

"The following description (he continues) of a field of battle is in the
words of one who passed over the field of Jemappe, after Doumourier's
victory: 'It was on the third day after the victory obtained by general
Doumourier over the Austrians, that I rode across the field of battle.
The scene lies on a waste common, rendered then more dreary by the
desertion of the miserable hovels before occupied by peasants.
Everything that resembled a human habitation was desolated, and for the
most part they had been burnt or pulled down, to prevent their affording
shelter to the posts of the contending armies. The ground was ploughed
up by the wheels of the artillery and waggons; everything like herbage
was trodden into mire; broken carriages, arms, accoutrements, dead
horses and men, were strewed over the heath. _This was the third day
after the battle: it was the beginning of November, and for three days a
bleak wind and heavy rain had continued incessantly._ There were still
remaining alive several hundreds of horses, and of the human victims of
that dreadful fight. I can speak with certainty of having seen more than
four hundred men _still living_, unsheltered, _without food_, and
without any human assistance, most of them confined to the spot where
they had fallen _by broken limbs_. The two armies had proceeded, and
abandoned these miserable wretches to their fate. _Some of the dead
persons appeared to have expired in the act of embracing each other._
Two young French officers, who were brothers, had crawled under the side
of a dead horse, where they had contrived a kind of shelter by means of
a cloak: they were both mortally wounded, and groaning _for each other_.
One very fine young man had just strength enough to drag himself out of
a hollow partly filled with water, and was laid upon a little hillock
groaning with agony; A GRAPE-SHOT HAD CUT ACROSS THE UPPER PART OF HIS
BELLY, AND HE WAS KEEPING IN HIS BOWELS WITH A HANDKERCHIEF AND HAT. He
begged of me to end his misery! He complained of dreadful thirst. I
filled him the hat of a dead soldier with water, which he nearly drank
off at once, and left him to that end of his wretchedness which could
not be far distant.'"

"I hope (concludes Mr Southey), I have always felt and expressed an
honest and Christian abhorrence of wars, and of the systems that produce
them; but my ideas of their immediate horrors fell infinitely short of
this authentic picture."

Mr Southey, in his subsequent lives of conquerors, and his other
writings, will hardly be thought to have acted up to this "abhorrence of
wars, and of the systems that produce them." Nor is he to be blamed for
qualifying his view of the subject, equally blameless (surely) as they
are to be held who have retained their old views, especially by him who
helped to impress them. His friend Mr Wordsworth, in the vivacity of his
admonitions to hasty complaints of evil, has gone so far as to say that
"Carnage is God's daughter," and thereby subjected himself to the
scoffs of a late noble wit. He is addressing the Deity himself:--

          "But thy most dreaded instrument,
           In working out a pure intent,
           Is man, array'd for mutual slaughter:
           Yea, Carnage is thy daughter."

Mr Wordsworth is a great poet and a philosophical thinker, in spite of
his having here paid a tremendous compliment to a rhyme (for
unquestionably the word "slaughter" provoked him into that imperative
"Yea," and its subsequent venturous affiliation); but the judgment, to
say no more of it, is rash. Whatever the Divine Being intends, by his
permission or use of evil, it becomes us to think the best of it; but
not to affirm the appropriation of the particulars to him under their
worst appellation, seeing that he has implanted in us a horror of them,
and a wish to do them away. What it is right in him to do, is one
thing; what it is proper in us to affirm that he actually does, is
another. And, above all, it is idle to affirm what he intends to do for
ever, and to have us eternally venerate and abstain from questioning an
evil. All good and evil, and vice and virtue themselves, might become
confounded in the human mind by a like daring; and humanity sit down
under every buffet of misfortune, without attempting to resist it:
which, fortunately, is impossible. Plato cut this knotty point better,
by regarding evil as a thing senseless and unmalignant (indeed no
philosopher regards anything as malignant, or malignant for malignity's
sake); out of which, or notwithstanding it, good is worked, and to be
worked, perhaps, finally to the abolition of evil. But whether this
consummation be possible or not, and even if the dark horrors of evil be
necessary towards the enjoyment of the light of good, still the horror
must be maintained, where the object is really horrible; otherwise, we
but the more idly resist the contrast, if necessary--and, what is
worse, endanger the chance of melioration, if possible.

Did war appear to me an inevitable evil, I should be one of the last men
to shew it in any other than its holiday clothes. I can appeal to
writings before the public, to testify whether I am in the habit of
making the worst of anything, or of not making it yield its utmost
amount of good. My inclinations, as well as my reason, lie all that way.
I am a passionate and grateful lover of all the beauties of the
universe, moral and material; and the chief business of my life is to
endeavour to give others the like fortunate affection. But, on the same
principle, I feel it my duty to look evil in the face, in order to
discover if it be capable of amendment; and I do not see why the
miseries of war are to be spared this interrogation, simply because they
are frightful and enormous. Men get rid of smaller evils which lie in
their way--nay, of great ones; and there appears to be no reason why
they should not get rid of the greatest, if they will but have the
courage. We have abolished inquisitions and the rack, burnings for
religion, burnings for witchcraft, hangings for forgery (a great triumph
in a commercial country), much of the punishment of death in some
countries, all of it in others. Why not abolish war? Mr Wordsworth
writes no odes to tell us that the Inquisition was God's daughter;
though Lope de Vega, who was one of its officers, might have done
so--and Mr Wordsworth too, had he lived under its dispensation. Lope de
Vega, like Mr Wordsworth and Mr Southey, was a good man, as well as a
celebrated poet: and we will concede to his memory what the English
poets will, perhaps, not be equally disposed to grant (for they are
severe on the Romish faith) that even the Inquisition, _like War_, might
possibly have had some utility in its evil, were it no other than a
hastening of Christianity by its startling contradictions of it. Yet it
has gone. The Inquisition, as War may be hereafter, is no more. Daughter
if it was of the Supreme Good, it was no immortal daughter. Why should
"Carnage" be,--especially as God has put it in our heads to get rid of
it?

I am aware of what may be said on these occasions, to "puzzle the will;"
and I concede of course, that mankind may entertain false views of their
power to change anything for the better. I concede, that all change may
be only in appearance, and not make any real difference in the general
amount of good and evil; that evil, to a certain invariable amount, may
be necessary to the amount of good (the overbalance of which, with a
most hearty and loving sincerity, I ever acknowledge); and finally, that
all which the wisest of men could utter on any such subject, might
possibly be nothing but a jargon,--the witless and puny voice of what
we take to be a mighty orb, but which, after all, is only a particle in
the starry dust of the universe.

On the other hand, all this may be something very different from what we
take it to be, setting aside even the opinions which consider mind as
everything, and time and space themselves as only modifications of it,
or breathing-room in which it exists, weaving the thoughts which it
calls life, death, and materiality.

But be his metaphysical opinions what they may, who but some fantastic
individual, or ultra-contemplative scholar, ever thinks of subjecting to
them his practical notions of bettering his condition! And how soon is
it likely that men will leave off endeavouring to secure themselves
against the uneasier chances of vicissitude, even if Providence ordains
them to do so for no other end than the preservation of vicissitude
itself, and not in order to help them out of the husks and thorns of
action into the flowers of it, and into the air of heaven? Certain it
is, at all events, that the human being is incited to increase his
amount of good: and that when he is endeavouring to do so, he is at
least not fulfilling the worst part of his necessity. Nobody tells us,
when we attempt to put out a fire and to save the lives of our
neighbours, that Conflagration is God's daughter, or Murder God's
daughter. On the contrary, these are things which Christendom is taught
to think ill off, and to wish to put down; and therefore we should put
down war, which is murder and conflagration by millions.

To those who tell us that nations would grow cowardly and effeminate
without war, we answer, "Try a reasonable condition of peace first, and
then prove it. Try a state of things which mankind have never yet
attained, because they had no press, and no universal comparison of
notes; and consider, in the meanwhile, whether so cheerful, and
intelligent, and just a state, seeing fair play between body and mind,
and educated into habits of activity, would be likely to uneducate
itself into what was neither respected nor customary. Prove, in the
meanwhile, that nations are cowardly and effeminate, that have been long
unaccustomed to war; that the South Americans are so; or that all our
robust countrymen, who do not "go for soldiers," are timid
agriculturists and manufacturers, with not a quoit to throw on the
green, or a saucy word to give to an insult. Moral courage is in
self-respect and the sense of duty; physical courage is a matter of
health or organization. Are these predispositions likely to fail in a
community of instructed freemen? Doubters of advancement are always
arguing from a limited past to an unlimited future; that is to say, from
a past of which they know but a point, to a future of which they know
nothing. They stand on the bridge "between two eternities," seeing a
little bit of it behind them, and nothing at all of what is before; and
uttering those words unfit for mortal tongue, "man ever was" and "man
ever will be." They might as well say what is beyond the stars. It
appears to be a part of the necessity of things, from what we see of the
improvements they make, that all human improvement should proceed by the
co-operation of human means. But what blinker into the night of next
week,--what luckless prophet of the impossibilities of steam-boats and
steam-carriages,--shall presume to say how far those improvements are to
extend? Let no man faint in the co-operation with which God has honoured
him.

As to those superabundances of population which wars and other evils are
supposed to be necessary in order to keep down, there are questions
which have a right to be put, long before any such necessity is assumed:
and till those questions be answered, and the experiments dependent upon
them tried, the interrogators have a right to assume that no such
necessity exists. I do not enter upon them--for I am not bound to do so;
but I have touched upon them in the poem; and the "too rich," and other
disingenuous half-reasoners, know well what they are. All passionate
remedies for evil are themselves evil, and tend to re-produce what they
remedy. It is high time for the world to show that it has come to man's
estate, and can put down what is wrong without violence. Should the
wrong still return, we should have a right to say with the Apostle,
"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof;" for meanwhile we should
"not have done evil that good may come." That "good" may come! nay,
that evil may be perpetuated; for what good, superior to the
alternatives denounced, is achieved by this eternal round of war and its
causes? Let us do good in a good and kind manner, and trust to the
co-operation of Providence for the result. It seems the only real way of
attaining to the very best of which our earth is capable; and at the
very worst, necessity, like the waters, will find its level, and the
equity of things be justified.

I firmly believe, that war, or the sending thousands of our
fellow-creatures to cut one another to bits, often for what they have no
concern in, nor understand, will one day be reckoned far more absurd
than if people were to settle an argument over the dinner-table with
their knives,--a logic indeed, which was once fashionable in some places
during the "good old times." The world has seen the absurdity of that
practice: why should it not come to years of discretion, with respect to
violence on a larger scale? The other day, our own country and the
United States agreed to refer a point in dispute to the arbitration of
the king of Holland; a compliment (if we are to believe the newspapers)
of which his majesty was justly proud. He struck a medal on the strength
of it, which history will show as a set-off against his less creditable
attempts to force his opinions upon the Belgians. Why should not every
national dispute be referred, in like manner, to a third party? There is
reason to suppose, that the judgment would stand a good chance of being
impartial; and it would benefit the character of the judge, and dispose
him to receive judgments of the same kind; till at length the custom
would prevail, like any other custom; and men be astonished at the
customs that preceded it. In private life, none but school-boys and the
vulgar settle disputes by blows; even duelling is losing its dignity.

Two nations, or most likely two governments, have a dispute; they reason
the point backwards and forwards; they cannot determine it; perhaps they
do not wish to determine; so, like two carmen in the street, they fight
it out; first, however, dressing themselves up to look fine, and pluming
themselves on their absurdity; just as if the two carmen were to go and
put on their Sunday clothes, and stick a feather in their hat besides,
in order to be as dignified and fantastic as possible. They then "go at
it," and cover themselves with mud, blood, and glory. Can anything be
more ridiculous? Yet, apart from the habit of thinking otherwise, and
being drummed into the notion by the very toys of infancy, the
similitude is not one atom too ludicrous; no, nor a thousandth part
enough so. I am aware that a sarcasm is but a sarcasm, and need not
imply any argument; never includes all;--but it acquires a more
respectable character when so much is done to keep it out of
sight,--when so many questions are begged against it by "pride, pomp,
and circumstance," and allegations of necessity. Similar allegations may
be, and are brought forward, by other nations of the world, in behalf of
customs which we, for our parts, think very ridiculous, and do our
utmost to put down; never referring them, as we refer our own, to the
mysterious ordinations of Providence; or, if we do, never hesitating to
suppose, that Providence, in moving us to interfere, is varying its
ordinations. Now, all that I would ask of the advocates of war, is to
apply the possible justice of this supposition to their own case, for
the purpose of thoroughly investigating the question.

But they will exultingly say, perhaps, "Is this a time for investigating
the question, when military genius, even for civil purposes, has
regained its ascendancy in the person of the Duke of Wellington? When
the world has shown that it cannot do without him? When whigs, radicals,
liberals of all sorts, have proved to be but idle talkers, in comparison
with this man of few words and many deeds?" I answer, that it remains to
be proved whether the ascendancy be gained or not; that I have no belief
it will be regained; and that, in the meanwhile, never was time fitter
for questioning the merits of war, and, by inference, those of its
leaders. The general peacefulness of the world presents a fair
opportunity for laying the foundations of peaceful opinion; and the
alarm of the moment renders the interrogation desirable for its
immediate sake.

The re-appearance of a military administration, or of an administration
_barely civil_, and military at heart, may not, at first sight, be
thought the most promising one for hastening a just appreciation of
war, and the ascendancy of moral over physical strength. But is it, or
can it be, lasting? Will it not provoke--is it not now provoking--a
re-action still more peremptory against the claims of Toryism, than the
state of things which preceded it? Is it anything but a flash of
success, still more indicative of expiring life, and caused only by its
convulsive efforts?

If it be, this it is easy enough to predict, that Sir Robert Peel,
notwithstanding his abilities, and the better ambition which is natural
to them, and which struggles in him with an inferior one, impatient of
his origin, will turn out to be nothing but a servant of the
aristocracy, and (more or less openly) of a barrack-master. He will be
the servant, not of the King, not of the House of Commons, but of the
House of Lords, and (as long as such influence lasts, which can be but
a short while), of its military leader. He will do nothing whatsoever
contrary to their dictation, upon peril of being treated worse than
Canning; and all the reform which he is permitted to bring about will be
only just as much as will serve to keep off the spirit of it as long as
possible, and to continue the people in that state of comparative
ignorance, which is the only safeguard of monopoly. Every unwilling step
of reform will be accompanied with some retrograde or bye effort in
favour of the abuses reformed: cunning occasion will be seized to
convert boons, demanded by the age, into gifts of party favour, and
bribes for the toleration of what is withheld; and as knowledge proceeds
to extort public education (for extort it it will, and in its own way
too at last), mark, and see what attempts will be made to turn knowledge
against itself, and to catechise the nation back into the schoolboy
acquiescence of the good people of Germany. Much good is there in that
people--I would not be thought to undervalue it--much _bonhommie_--and
in the most despotic districts, as much sensual comfort as can make any
people happy who know no other happiness. But England and France, the
leaders of Europe, the peregrinators of the world, cannot be confined to
those lazy and prospectless paths. They have gone through the feudal
reign; they must now go through the commercial (God forbid that for any
body's sake they should stop there!), and they will continue to advance,
till all are instructed, and all are masters; and government, in however
gorgeous a shape, be truly their servant. The problem of existing
governments is how to prepare for this inevitable period, and to
continue to be its masters, by converting themselves frankly and truly
into its friends. For my part, as one of the people, I confess I like
the colours and shows of feudalism, and would retain as much of them as
would adorn nobler things. I would keep the tiger's skin, though the
beast be killed; the painted window, though the superstition be laid in
the tomb. Nature likes external beauty, and man likes it. It softens the
heart, enriches the imagination, and helps to show us that there are
other goods in the world besides bare utility. I would fain see the
splendours of royalty combined with the cheapness of a republic and the
equal knowledge of all classes. Is such a combination impossible? I
would exhort the lovers of feudal splendour to be the last men to think
so; for a thousand times more impossible will they find its retention
under any other circumstances. Their royalties, their educations, their
accomplishments of all sorts, must go along with the Press and its
irresistible consequences, or they will be set aside like a child in a
corner, who has insisted on keeping the toys and books of his brothers
to himself.

Now, there is nothing that irritates a just cause so much as a
threatening of force; and all impositions of a military chief on a
state, where civil directors will, at least, do as well, is a
threatening of force, disguise it, or pretend to laugh at it, as its
imposers may. This irritation in England will not produce violence.
Public opinion is too strong, and the future too secure. But deeply and
daily will increase the disgust and the ridicule; and individuals will
get laughed at and catechised who cannot easily be sent out of the way
as ambassadors, and who might as well preserve their self-respect a
little better. To attempt, however quietly, to overawe the advance of
improvement, by the aspect of physical force, is as idle as if soldiers
were drawn out to suppress the rising of a flood. The flood rises
quietly, irresistibly, without violence--it cannot help it--the waters
of knowledge are out, and will "cover the earth." Of what use is it to
see the representative of a by-gone influence--a poor individual mortal
(for he is nothing else in the comparison), fretting and fuming on the
shore of this mighty sea, and playing the part of a Canute reversed,--an
antic really taking his flatterers at their word?

The first thirty-five years of the nineteenth century have been rich in
experiences of the sure and certain failure of all soldiership and
Toryism to go heartily along in the cause of the many. There has been
the sovereign instance of Napoleon Bonaparte himself--of the allies
after him--of Charles the Tenth--of Louis Philippe, albeit a
"schoolmaster,"--and lastly, of this strange and most involuntary
Reformer the Duke of Wellington, who refused to do, under Canning, or
for principle's sake, what he consented to do when Canning died, for the
sake of regaining power, and of keeping it with as few concessions as
possible. Canning perished because Toryism, or the principle of power
for its own sake, to which he had been a servant, could not bear to
acknowledge him as its master. His intellect was just great enough (as
his birth was small enough) to render it jealous of him under that
aspect. There is an instinct in Toryism which renders pure intellect
intolerable to it, except in some inferior or mechanical shape, or in
the flattery of voluntary servitude. But, by a like instinct, it is not
so jealous of military renown. It is glad of the doubtful amount of
intellect in military genius, and knows it to be a good ally in the
preservation of power, and in the substitution of noise and show for
qualities fearless of inspection. Is it an ascendancy of this kind which
the present age requires, or will permit? Do we want a soldier at the
head of us, when there is nobody abroad to fight with? when
international as well as national questions can manifestly settle
themselves without him? and when his appearance in the seat of power
can indicate nothing but a hankering after those old substitutions of
force for argument, or at best of "an authority for a reason," which
every step of reform is hoping to do away? Do we want him to serve in
our shops? to preside over our studies? to cultivate "peace and good
will" among nations? wounding no self love--threatening no social?

There never was a soldier, purely brought up as such--and it is of such
only I speak, and not of rare and even then perilous exceptions,--men
educated in philosophy like Epaminondas, or in homely household virtues
and citizenship like Washington--but there never was a soldier such as I
speak of, who did more for the world than was compatible with his
confined and arbitrary breeding. I do not speak, of course, with
reference to the unprofessional part of his character. Circumstances,
especially the participation of dangers and vicissitude, often conspire
with naturally good qualities to render soldiers the most amiable of
men; and nothing is more delightful to contemplate than an old military
veteran, whose tenderness of heart has survived the shocks of the rough
work it has been tried in, till twenty miserable sights of war and
horror start up to the imagination as a set-off against its
attractiveness. But, publicly speaking, the more a soldier succeeds, the
more he looks upon soldiership as something superior to all other kinds
of ascendancy, and qualified to dispense with them. He always ends in
considering the flower of the art of government as consisting in issuing
"orders," and that of popular duty as comprised in "obedience." Cities
with him are barracks, and the nation a conquered country. He is at best
but a pioneer of civilization. When he undertakes to be the civilizer
himself, he makes mistakes that betray him to others, even supposing
him self-deceived. Napoleon, though he was the accidental instrument of
a popular re-action, was one of the educated tools of the system that
provoked it,--an officer brought up at a Royal Military College; and in
spite of his boasted legislation and his real genius, such he ever
remained. He did as much for his own aggrandizement as he could, and no
more for the world than he thought compatible with it. The same military
genius which made him as great as he was, stopped him short of a greater
greatness; because, quick and imposing as he was in acting the part of a
civil ruler, he was in reality a soldier and nothing else, and by the
excess of the soldier's propensity (aggrandizement by force), he
over-toppled himself, and fell to pieces. Soldiership appears to have
narrowed or hardened the public spirit of every man who has spent the
chief part of his life in it, who has died at an age which gives final
proofs of its tendency, and whose history is thoroughly known. We all
know what Cromwell did to an honest parliament. Marlborough ended in
being a miser and the tool of his wife. Even good-natured, heroic Nelson
condescended to become an executioner at Naples. Frederick did much for
Prussia, as a power; but what became of her as a people, or power
either, before the popular power of France? Even Washington seemed not
to comprehend those who thought that negro-slaves ought to be freed.

In the name of common sense then, what do we want with a soldier who was
born and bred in circumstances the most arbitrary; who never advocated a
liberal measure as long as he could help it; and who (without meaning to
speak presumptuously, or in one's own person unauthorized by opinion) is
one of the merest soldiers, though a great one, that ever
existed,--without genius of any other sort,--with scarcely a civil
public quality either commanding or engaging (as far as the world in
general can see),--and with no more to say for himself than the most
mechanical clerk in office? In what respect is the Duke of Wellington
better fitted to be a parliamentary leader, than the Sir Arthur
Wellesley of twenty years back? Or what has re-cast the habits and
character of the Colonel Wellesley of the East Indies, to give him an
unprofessional consideration for the lives and liberties of his
fellow-creatures?

And yet the Duke of Wellington (it is said) _may_, after all, be in
earnest in his professions of reform and advancement. If so, he will be
the most remarkable instance that ever existed, of the triumph of reason
over the habits of a life, and the experience of mankind. I have looked
for some such man through a very remarkable period of the world, when
an honest declaration to this effect would have set him at the top of
mankind, to be worshipped for ever; and I never found the glorious
opportunity seized,--not by Napoleon when he came from Elba,--not by the
allies when they conquered him,--not by Louis Philippe, though he was
educated in adversity. I mean that he has shown himself a prince born,
of the most aristocratic kind; and evidently considers himself as
nothing but the head of a new dynasty. When the Duke of Wellington had
the opportunity of being a reformer, of his own free will, he resisted
it as long as he could. He opposed reform up to the last moment of its
freedom from his dictation; he declared that ruin would follow it; that
the institutions of the country were perfect without it; and that, at
the very least, the less of it the better. And for this enmity, even if
no other reason existed,--even if his new light were sincere,--the Duke
of Wellington ought not to have the _honour_ of leading reform. It is
just as if a man had been doing all he could to prevent another from
entering his own house, and then, when he found that the by-standers
would insist on his having free passage, were to turn to them, smiling,
and say, "Well, since it must be so, allow me to do the honours of the
mansion." Everybody knows what this proposal would be called by the
by-standers. And if the way in which greatness is brought up and spoilt
gives it a right to a less homely style of rebuke (as I grant it does),
still the absurdity of the Duke's claim is not the less evident, nor the
air of it less provoking.

I can imagine but two reasons for the remotest possible permission of
this glaring anomaly--this government of anti-reforming reformers--this
hospital of sick guides for the healthy, supported by involuntary
contributions: first, sheer necessity (which is ludicrous); and second,
a facilitation of church reform through the Lords and the bench of
Bishops; the desirableness of which facilitation appears to be in no
proportion to the compromise it is likely to make with abuses. I have
read, I believe, all the utmost possible things that can be said in its
favour, the articles, for instance, written by the _Times_ newspaper
(admirable, as far as a rotten cause can let them be, and when not
afflicted by some portentous mystery of personal resentment); and though
I trust I may lay claim to as much willingness to be convinced, as most
men who have suffered and reflected, I have not seen a single argument
which did not appear to me fully answered by the above objection alone
(about the "honour"); setting aside the innumerable convincing ones
urged by reasoners on the other side: for as to any dearth of statesmen
in a country like this, it never existed, nor ever can, till education
and public spirit have entirely left it. There have been the same
complaints at every change in the history of administrations; and the
crop has never failed.

Allow me to state here, that any appearance of personality in this book
is involuntary. Public principles are sometimes incarnate in individual
shapes; and, in attacking them, the individual may be seemingly
attacked, where, to eyes which look a little closer, there is evidently
no such intention. I have been obliged to identify, in some measure, the
Power of the Sword with several successive individuals, and with the
Duke of Wellington most, because he is the reigning shape, and includes
all its pretensions. But as an individual who am nothing, except in
connexion with what I humanly feel, I dare to affirm, that I have not
only the consideration that becomes me for all human beings, but a
flesh and blood regard for every body; and that I as truly respect in
the Noble Duke the possession of military science, of a straight-forward
sincerity, and a valour of which no circumstances or years can diminish
the ready firmness, as I doubt the fitness of a man of his education,
habits, and political principles, for the guidance of an intellectual
age.

I dislike Toryism, because I think it an unjust, exacting, and
pernicious thing, which tends to keep the interests of the many in
perpetual subjection to those of the few; but far be it from me, in
common modesty, to dislike those who have been brought up in its
principles, and taught to think them good,--far less such of them as
adorn it by intellectual or moral qualities, and who justly claim for
it, under its best aspect in private life, that ease and urbanity of
behaviour which implies an acknowledgment of its claims to respect,
even where those claims are partly grounded in prejudice. I heartily
grant to the privileged classes, that, enjoying in many respects the
best educations, they have been conservators of polished manners, and of
the other graces of intercourse. My quarrel with them is, that the
inferior part of their education induces them to wish to keep these
manners and graces to themselves, together with a superabundance, good
for nobody, of all other advantages; and that thus, instead of being the
preservers of a beautiful and genial flame, good for all, and in due
season partakeable by all, they would hoard and make an idolatrous
treasure of it, sacred to one class alone, and such as the diffusion of
knowledge renders it alike useless and exasperating to endeavour to
withhold.

I will conclude this Postscript with quotations from three writers of
the present day, who may be fairly taken to represent the three
distinct classes of the leaders of knowledge, and who will show what is
thought of the feasibility of putting an end to war,--the Utilitarian,
or those who are all for the tangible and material--the Metaphysical, or
those who recognize, in addition, the spiritual and imaginative wants of
mankind--and lastly (in no offensive sense), the Men of the World, whose
opinion will have the greatest weight of all with the incredulous, and
whose speaker is a soldier to boot, and a man who evidently sees fair
play to all the weaknesses as well as strengths of our nature.

The first quotation is from the venerable Mr Bentham, a man who
certainly lost sight of no existing or possible phase of society, such
as the ordinary disputants on this subject contemplate. I venture to
think him not thoroughly philosophical on the point, especially in what
he says in reproach of men educated to think differently from himself.
But the passage will show the growth of opinion in a practical and
highly influential quarter.

          "Nothing can be worse," says Mr Bentham, "than the
          general feeling on the subject of war. The Church,
          the State, the ruling few, the subject many, all
          seem to have combined, in order to patronise vice
          and crime in their very widest sphere of evil.
          Dress a man in particular garments, call him by a
          particular name, and he shall have authority, on
          divers occasions, to commit every species of
          offence, to pillage, to murder, to destroy human
          felicity, and, for so doing, he shall be rewarded.

          "Of all that is pernicious in admiration, the
          admiration of heroes is the most pernicious; and
          how delusion should have made us admire what
          virtue should teach us to hate and loathe, is
          among the saddest evidences of human weakness and
          folly. The crimes of heroes seem lost in the
          vastness of the field they occupy. A lively idea
          of the mischief they do, of the misery they
          create, seldom penetrates the mind through the
          delusions with which thoughtlessness and falsehood
          have surrounded their names and deeds. Is it that
          the magnitude of the evil is too gigantic for
          entrance? We read of twenty thousand men killed in
          a battle, with no other feeling than that 'it was
          a glorious victory.' Twenty thousand, or ten
          thousand, what reck we of their sufferings? The
          hosts who perished are evidence of the
          completeness of the triumph; and the completeness
          of the triumph is the measure of merit, and the
          glory of the conqueror. Our schoolmasters, and the
          immoral books they so often put into our hands,
          have inspired us with an affection for heroes; and
          the hero is more heroic in proportion to the
          numbers of the slain--add a cypher, not one iota
          is added to our disapprobation. Four or two
          figures give us no more sentiment of pain than one
          figure, while they add marvellously to the
          grandeur and splendour of the victor. Let us draw
          forth one individual from those thousands, or tens
          of thousands,--his leg has been shivered by one
          ball, his jaw broken by another--he is bathed in
          his own blood, and that of his fellows--yet he
          lives, tortured by thirst, fainting, famishing. He
          is but one of the twenty thousand--one of the
          actors and sufferers in the scene of the hero's
          glory--and of the twenty thousand there is
          scarcely one whose suffering or death will not be
          the centre of a circle of misery. Look again,
          admirers of that hero! Is not this wretchedness?
          Because it is repeated ten, ten hundred, ten
          thousand times, is not this wretchedness?

          "The period will assuredly arrive, when better
          instructed generations will require all the
          evidence of history to credit, that, in times
          deeming themselves enlightened, human beings
          should have been honoured with public approval, in
          the very proportion of the misery they caused, and
          the mischiefs they perpetrated. They will call
          upon all the testimony which incredulity can
          require, to persuade them that, in passed ages,
          men there were--men, too, deemed worthy of popular
          recompense--who, for some small pecuniary
          retribution, hired themselves out to do any deeds
          of pillage, devastation, and murder, which might
          be demanded of them. And, still more will it shock
          their sensibilities to learn, that such men, such
          men-destroyers, were marked out as the eminent and
          the illustrious--as the worthy of laurels and
          monuments--of eloquence and poetry. In that better
          and happier epoch, the wise and the good will be
          busied in hurling into oblivion, or dragging forth
          for exposure to universal ignominy and obloquy,
          many of the heads we deem _heroic_; while the true
          fame and the perdurable glories will be gathered
          around the creators and diffusers of
          happiness."--_Deontology._

Our second quotation is from one of the subtilest and most universal
thinkers now living--Thomas Carlyle--chiefly known to the public as a
German scholar and the friend of Goethe, but deeply respected by other
leading intellects of the day, as a man who sees into the utmost
recognized possibilities of knowledge. See what he thinks of war, and of
the possibility of putting an end to it. We forget whether we got the
extract from the _Edinburgh_ or the _Foreign Quarterly Review_, having
made it sometime back and mislaid the reference; and we take a liberty
with him in mentioning his name as the writer, for which his zeal in the
cause of mankind will assuredly pardon us.

          "The better minds of all countries," observes Mr
          Carlyle, "begin to understand each other, and,
          which follows naturally, to love each other and
          help each other, by whom ultimately all countries
          in all their proceedings are governed.

          "Late in man's history, yet clearly, at length, it
          becomes manifest to the dullest, that mind is
          stronger than matter--that mind is the creator and
          shaper of matter--that not brute force, but only
          persuasion and faith, is the King of this world.
          The true poet, who is but an inspired thinker, is
          still an Orpheus whose lyre tames the savage
          beasts, and evokes the dead rocks to fashion
          themselves into palaces and stately inhabited
          cities. It has been said, and may be repeated,
          that literature is fast becoming all in all to
          us--our Church, our Senate, our whole social
          constitution. The true Pope of Christendom is not
          that feeble old man in Rome, nor is its autocrat
          the Napoleon, the Nicholas, with its half million
          even of obedient bayonets; such autocrat is
          himself but a more cunningly-devised bayonet and
          military engine in the hands of a mightier than
          he. The true autocrat, or Pope, is that man, the
          real or seeming wisest of the last age; crowned
          after death; who finds his hierarchy of gifted
          authors, his clergy of assiduous journalists:
          whose decretals, written, not on parchment, but on
          the living souls of men, it were an inversion of
          the laws of nature to disobey. In these times of
          ours, all intellect has fused itself into
          literature; literature--printed thought, is the
          molten sea and wonder-bearing chaos, in which mind
          after mind casts forth its opinion, its feeling,
          to be molten into the general mass, and to be
          worked there; interest after interest is engulfed
          in it, or embarked in it; higher, higher it rises
          round all the edifices of existence; they must all
          be molten into it, and anew bodied forth from it,
          or stand unconsumed among its fiery surges. Woe to
          him whose edifice is not built of true asbest, and
          on the everlasting rock, but on the false sand and
          the drift-wood of accident, and the paper and
          parchment of antiquated habit! For the power or
          powers exist not on our earth that can say to that
          sea--roll back, or bid its proud waves be still.

          "What form so omnipotent an element will
          assume--how long it will welter to and fro as a
          wild democracy, a wilder anarchy--what
          constitution and organization it will fashion for
          itself, and for what depends on it in the depths
          of time, is a subject for prophetic conjecture,
          wherein brightest hope is not unmingled with
          fearful apprehensions and awe at the boundless
          unknown. The more cheering is this one thing,
          which we do see and know--that its tendency is to
          a universal European commonweal; that the wisest
          in all nations will communicate and co-operate;
          whereby Europe will again have its true Sacred
          College and council of Amphictyons; wars will
          become rarer, less inhuman; and in the course of
          centuries, such delirious ferocity in nations, as
          in individuals it already is, may be proscribed
          and become obsolete for ever."

My last and not least conclusive extract (for it shows the actual hold
which these speculations have taken of the minds of practical men--of
men out in the world, and even of _soldiers_) is from a book popular
among all classes of readers--the _Bubbles from the Brunnens of Nassau_,
written by Major Sir Francis Head. What he says of one country's
educating another, by the natural progress of books and opinion, and of
the effect which this is likely to have upon governments even as remote
and unwilling as Russia, is particularly worthy of attention.

The author is speaking of some bathers at whom he had been looking, and
of a Russian Prince, who lets us into some curious information
respecting the leading-strings in which grown gentlemen are kept by
despotism:--

          "For more than half an hour I had been indolently
          watching this amphibious scene, when the landlord
          entering my room said, that the Russian Prince,
          G----n, wished to speak to me on some business;
          and the information was scarcely communicated,
          when I perceived his Highness standing at the
          threshold of my door. With the attention due to
          his rank, I instantly begged he would do me the
          honour to walk in; and, after we had sufficiently
          bowed to each other, and that I had prevailed on
          my guest to sit down, I gravely requested him, as
          I stood before him, to be so good as to state in
          what way I could have the good fortune to render
          him any service. The Prince very briefly replied,
          that he had called upon me, considering that I was
          the person in the hotel best capable (he politely
          inclined his head) of informing him by what route
          it would be most adviseable for him to proceed to
          London, it being his wish to visit my country.

          "In order at once to solve this very simple
          problem, I silently unfolded and spread out upon
          the table my map of Europe; and each of us, as we
          leant over it, placing a forefinger on or near
          Wiesbaden (our eyes being fixed upon Dover), we
          remained in this reflecting attitude for some
          seconds, until the Prince's finger first solemnly
          began to trace its route. In doing this, I
          observed that his Highness's hand kept swerving
          far into the Netherlands, so, gently pulling it by
          the thumb towards Paris, I used as much force as I
          thought decorous, to induce it to advance in a
          straight line; however, finding my efforts
          ineffectual, I ventured with respectful
          astonishment, to ask, 'Why travel by so
          uninteresting a route'?

          "The Prince at once acknowledged that the route I
          had recommended would, by visiting Paris, afford
          him the greatest pleasure; but he frankly told me
          that no Russian, not even a personage of his rank,
          could enter that capital, without first obtaining
          a written permission from the Emperor.

          "These words were no sooner uttered, than I felt
          my fluent civility suddenly begin to coagulate;
          the attention I paid my guest became forced and
          unnatural. I was no longer at my ease; and though
          I bowed, strained, and endeavoured to be, if
          possible, more respectful than ever, yet I really
          could hardly prevent my lips from muttering aloud,
          that I had sooner die a homely English peasant
          than live to be a Russian prince!--in short, his
          Highness's words acted upon my mind like thunder
          upon beer. And, moreover, I could almost have
          sworn that I was an old lean wolf, contemptuously
          observing a bald ring rubbed by the collar, from
          the neck of a sleek, well-fed mastiff dog;
          however, recovering myself, I managed to give as
          much information as it was in my humble power to
          afford; and my noble guest then taking his
          departure, I returned to my open window, to give
          vent in solitude (as I gazed upon the horse bath)
          to my own reflection upon the subject.

          "Although the petty rule of my life has been never
          to trouble myself about what the world calls
          'politics'--(a fine word, by the by, much easier
          expressed than understood)--yet, I must own, I am
          always happy when I see a nation enjoying itself,
          and melancholy when I observe any large body of
          people suffering pain or imprisonment. But of all
          sorts of imprisonment, that of the mind is, to my
          taste, the most cruel; and, therefore, when I
          consider over what immense dominions the Emperor
          of Russia presides, and how he governs, I cannot
          help sympathizing most sincerely with those
          innocent sufferers, who have the misfortune to be
          born his subjects; for if a Russian Prince be not
          freely permitted to go to Paris, in what a
          melancholy state of slavery and debasement must
          exist the minds of what we call the lower classes?

          "As a sovereign remedy for this lamentable
          political disorder, many very sensible people in
          England prescribe, I know, that we ought to have
          resource to arms. I must confess, however, it
          seems to me that one of the greatest political
          errors England could commit would be to declare,
          or to join in declaring, war with Russia; in
          short, that an appeal to brute force would, at
          this moment, be at once most unscientifically to
          stop an immense moral engine, which, if left to
          its work, is quite powerful enough, without
          bloodshed, to gain for humanity, at no expense at
          all, its object. The individual who is, I
          conceive, to overthrow the Emperor of Russia--who
          is to direct his own legions against himself--who
          is to do what Napoleon had at the head of his
          great army failed to effect, is the little child,
          who, lighted by the single wick of a small lamp,
          sits at this moment perched above the great steam
          press of the 'Penny Magazine,' feeding it, from
          morning till night, with blank papers, which, at
          almost every pulsation of the engine, comes out
          stamped on both sides with engravings, and with
          pages of plain, useful, harmless knowledge, which,
          by making the lower orders acquainted with foreign
          lands, foreign productions, various states of
          society, &c., tend practically to inculcate 'Glory
          to God in the highest, and on earth peace--good
          will towards men.' It has already been stated,
          that what proceeds from this press is now
          greedily devoured by the people of Europe; indeed,
          even at Berlin, we know it can hardly be reprinted
          fast enough.

          "This child, then,--'this sweet little cherub that
          sits up aloft,'--is the only army that an
          enlightened country like ours should, I humbly
          think, deign to oppose to one who reigns in
          darkness--who trembles at day-light, and whose
          throne rests upon ignorance and despotism. Compare
          this mild, peaceful intellectual policy, with the
          dreadful, savage alternative of going to war, and
          the difference must surely be evident to everyone.
          In the former case, we calmly enjoy, first of all,
          the pleasing reflection, that our country is
          generously imparting to the nations of Europe the
          blessing she is tranquilly deriving from the
          purification of civilization to her own mind;--far
          from wishing to exterminate, we are gradually
          illuminating the Russian peasant, we are mildly
          throwing a gleam of light upon the fetters of the
          Russian Prince; and surely every well-disposed
          person must see, that if we will only have
          patience, the result of this noble, temperate
          conduct, must produce all that reasonable beings
          can desire."--_Bubbles from the Brunnens of
          Nassau_, p. 164.

By the 'Penny Magazine,' our author means, of course, not only that
excellent publication, but all cheaply-diffused knowledge--all the
tranquil and enlightening deeds of "Captain Pen" in general--of whom it
is pleasant to see the gallant Major so useful a servant, the more so
from his sympathies with rank and the aristocracy. But "Pen" will make
it a matter of necessity, by and by, for all ranks to agree with him, in
vindication of their own wit and common sense; and when once this
necessity is felt, and fastidiousness shall find out that it will be
considered "absurd" to lag behind in the career of knowledge and the
common good, the cause of the world is secure.

May princes and people alike find it out by the kindliest means, and
without further violence. May they discover that no one set of human
beings, perhaps no single individual, can be thoroughly secure and
content, or enabled to work out his case with equal reasonableness,
_till all are so_,--a subject for reflection, which contains, we hope,
the beneficent reason _why all are restless_. The solution of the
problem is co-operation--the means of solving it is the Press. If the
Greeks had had a press, we should probably have heard nothing of the
inconsiderate question, which demands, why they, with all their
philosophy, did not alter the world. They had not the means. They could
not command a general hearing. Neither had Christianity come up, to
make men think of one another's wants, as well as of their own
accomplishments. Modern times possess those means, and inherit that
divine incitement. May every man exert himself accordingly, and show
himself a worthy inhabitant of this beautiful and most capable world!

THE END.

          LONDON:
          Printed by C. and W. REYNELL,
          Little Pulteney Street.

[Illustration: _P. 112._]

       *       *       *       *       *



STORIES FROM THE ITALIAN POETS: WITH LIVES OF THE WRITERS.


BY LEIGH HUNT.



IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.




MDCCCXLVI.




TO SIR PERCY SHELLEY, BART.


MY DEAR SIR PERCY,

As I know no man who surpasses yourself either in combining a love of
the most romantic fiction with the coolest good sense, or in passing
from the driest metaphysical questions to the heartiest enjoyment of
humour,--I trust that even a modesty so true as yours will not grudge me
the satisfaction of inscribing these volumes with your name.

That you should possess such varieties of taste is no wonder,
considering what an abundance of intellectual honours you inherit; nor
might the world have been the better for it, had they been tastes, and
nothing more. But that you should inherit also that zeal for justice to
mankind, which has become so Christian a feature in the character of the
age, and that you should include in that zeal a special regard for the
welfare of your Father's Friend, are subjects of constant pleasurable
reflection to

Your obliged and affectionate

LEIGH HUNT.



PREFACE.


The purpose of these volumes is, to add to the stock of tales from the
Italian writers; to retain as much of the poetry of the originals as it
is in the power of the writer's prose to compass; and to furnish careful
biographical notices of the authors. There have been several collections
of stories from the Novellists of Italy, but none from the Poets; and it
struck me that prose versions from these, of the kind here offered to
the public, might not be unwillingly received. The stories are selected
from the five principal narrative poets, Dante, Pulci, Boiardo, Ariosto,
and Tasso; they comprise the most popular of such as are fit for
translation; are reduced into one continuous narrative, when diffused
and interrupted, as in the instances of those of Angelica, and Armida;
are accompanied with critical and explanatory notes; and, in the case of
Dante, consist of an abstract of the poet's whole work. The volumes are,
furthermore, interspersed with the most favourite _morceaux_ of the
originals, followed sometimes with attempts to versify them; and in the
Appendix, for the furtherance of the study of the Italian language, are
given entire stories, also in the original, and occasionally rendered
in like manner. The book is particularly intended for such students or
other lovers of the language as are pleased with any fresh endeavours to
recommend it; and, at the same time, for such purely English readers as
wish to know something about Italian poetry, without having leisure to
cultivate its acquaintance.

I did not intend in the first instance to depart from the plan
of selection in the case of Dante; but when I considered what an
extraordinary person he was,--how intense is every thing which he
says,--how widely he has re-attracted of late the attention of the
world,--how willingly perhaps his poem might be regarded by the reader
as being itself one continued story (which, in fact, it is), related
personally of the writer,--and lastly, what a combination of
difficulties have prevented his best translators in verse from giving
the public a just idea of his almost Scriptural simplicity,--I began to
think that an abstract of his entire work might possibly be looked upon
as supplying something of a desideratum. I am aware that nothing but
verse can do perfect justice to verse; but besides the imperfections
which are pardonable, because inevitable, in all such metrical
endeavours, the desire to impress a grand and worshipful idea of Dante
has been too apt to lead his translators into a tone and manner the
reverse of his passionate, practical, and creative style--a style which
may be said to write things instead of words; and thus to render every
word that is put out of its place, or brought in for help and filling
up, a misrepresentation. I do not mean to say, that he himself never
does any thing of the sort, or does not occasionally assume too much
of the oracle and the schoolmaster, in manner as well as matter;
but passion, and the absence of the superfluous, are the chief
characteristics of his poetry. Fortunately, this sincerity of purpose
and utterance in Dante render him the least pervertible of poets in a
sincere prose translation; and, since I ventured on attempting one, I
have had the pleasure of meeting with an express recommendation of such
a version in an early number of the _Edinburgh Review_.[1]

The abstract of Dante, therefore, in these volumes (with every
deprecation that becomes me of being supposed to pretend to give a
thorough idea of any poetry whatsoever, especially without its metrical
form) aspires to be regarded as, at all events, not exhibiting a false
idea of the Dantesque spirit in point of feeling and expression. It is
true, I have omitted long tedious lectures of scholastic divinity, and
other learned absurdities of the time, which are among the bars to the
poem's being read through, even in Italy (which Foscolo tells us is
never the case); and I have compressed the work in other passages not
essentially necessary to the formation of a just idea of the author.
But quite enough remains to suggest it to the intelligent; and in no
instance have I made additions or alterations. There is warrant--I hope
I may say letter--for every thing put down. Dante is the greatest poet
for intensity that ever lived; and he excites a corresponding emotion
in his reader--I wish I could say, always on the poet's side; but his
ferocious hates and bigotries too often tempt us to hate the bigot,
and always compel us to take part with the fellow-creatures whom he
outrages. At least, such is their effect on myself. Nor will he or his
worshippers suffer us to criticise his faults with mere reference to the
age in which he lived. I should have been glad to do so; but the claims
made for him, even by himself, will not allow it. We are called upon to
look on him as a divine, a prophet, an oracle in all respects for all
time. Such a man, however, is the last whom a reporter is inclined to
misrepresent. We respect his sincerity too much, ferocious and arrogant
though it be; and we like to give him the full benefit of the recoil of
his curses and maledictions. I hope I have not omitted one. On the
other hand, as little have I closed my feelings against the lovely
and enchanting sweetness which this great semi-barbarian sometimes so
