it made him smile, 'It was a bargain, sir. I wish to pay my debts; and I
shan't feel happy if Nanny don't have it _all_ for her eyes. Please do!
I'd rather,'--then he took it; and Nanny did have it, not only for her
eyes, but in clothes and food and care, many times over; for it was
invested in a bank that pays good interest on every mite so given.

Jack discovered that fifty dollars was far less than most people would
have had to pay, and begged earnestly to be allowed to work for the
rest. The doctor agreed to this, and Jack became his errand-boy, serving
with a willingness that made a pleasure of duty; soon finding that many
comforts quietly got into his life; that much help was given without
words; and that the days of hunger and rags, heavy burdens and dusty
ash-heaps, were gone by for ever.

The happiest hours of Jack's day were spent in the doctor's chaise, when
he made his round of visits; for while he waited, the boy studied or
read, and while they drove hither and thither, the doctor talked with
him, finding an eager mind as well as a tender heart and a brave spirit
under the rough jacket of his little serving-man. But he never called
him that; for remembering the cheerfulness, self-denial, honesty, and
loyalty to those he loved, shown by the boy, the good doctor proved his
respect for the virtues all men should covet, wherever they are found,
and always spoke of Jack with a smile, as 'My Little Gentleman.'




_BACK WINDOWS._


As I sit working at my back window, I look out on a long row of other
people's back windows; and it is quite impossible for me to help seeing
and being interested in my neighbours. There are a good many children in
those houses; and though I don't know one of their names, I know them a
great deal better than they think I do. I never spoke a word to any of
them, and never expect to do so; yet I have my likes and dislikes among
them, and could tell them things that they have said and done, which
would astonish them very much, I assure you.

First, the babies,--for there are three: the aristocratic baby, the
happy-go-lucky baby, and the forlorn baby. The aristocratic baby lives
in a fine, well-furnished room, has a pretty little mamma, who wears
white gowns, and pink ribbons in her cap; likewise, a fond young papa,
who evidently thinks _this_ the most wonderful baby in Boston. There is
a stout, motherly lady, who is the grandma, I fancy, for she is always
hovering about 'the dear' with cups, blankets, or a gorgeous red worsted
bird to amuse it. Baby is a plump, rosy, sweet-faced little creature,
always smiling and kissing its hand to the world in general. In its
pretty white frocks, with its own little pink or blue ribbons, and its
young mamma proudly holding it up to see and be seen, my aristocratic
neighbour has an easy life of it, and is evidently one of the little
lilies who do nothing but blossom in the sunshine.

The happy-go-lucky baby is just able to toddle; and I seldom pull up my
curtain in the morning without seeing him at his window in his yellow
flannel night-gown, taking a look at the weather. No matter whether it
rains or shines, there he is, smiling and nodding, and looking so merry,
that it is evident he has plenty of sunshine bottled up in his own
little heart for private use. I depend on seeing him, and feel as if the
world was not right until this golden little sun rises to shine upon me.
He don't seem to have any one to take care of him, but trots about all
day, and takes care of himself. Sometimes he is up in the chambers with
the girl, while she makes beds, and he helps; then he takes a stroll
into the parlour, and spins the gay curtain-tassels to his heart's
content; next, he dives into the kitchen (I hope he does not tumble
downstairs, but I dare say he wouldn't mind if he did), and he gets
pushed about by all the busy women, as they 'fly round.' I rather think
it gets too hot for him there about dinner-time; for he often comes out
into the yard for a walk at noon, and seems to find endless wonders and
delights in the ash barrel, the water-but, two old flower-pots, and a
little grass plat, in which he plants a choice variety of articles, in
the firm faith they will come up in full bloom. I hope the big spoon and
his own red shoe _will_ sprout and appear before any trouble is made
about their mysterious disappearance. At night I see a little shadow
bobbing about on the curtain, and watch it, till with a parting glimpse
at a sleepy face at the window, my small sun sets, and I leave him to
his dreams.

The forlorn baby roars all day, and I don't blame him; for he is
trotted, shaken, spanked, and scolded by a very cross nurse, who treats
him like a meal bag. I pity that little neighbour, and don't believe he
will stand it long; for I see him double up his tiny fists, and spar
away at nothing, as if getting ready for a good tussle with the world by
and by, if he lives to try it.

Then the boys,--bless their buttons!--how amusing they are. One young
man, aged about ten, keeps hens; and the trials of that boy are really
pathetic. The biddies get out every day or two, and fly away all over
the neighbourhood, like feathers when you shake a pillow. They cackle
and crow, and get up on sheds and fences, and trot down the streets, all
at once, and that poor fellow spins round after them like a distracted
top. One by one he gets them and comes lugging them back, upside down,
in the most undignified attitude, and shuts them up, and hammers away,
and thinks they are all safe, and sits down to rest, when a triumphant
crow from some neighbouring shed tells him that that rascally black
rooster is out again for another promenade. I'm not blood-thirsty; but I
really do long for Thanksgiving that my neighbour Henry may find rest
for the sole of his foot; for, not till his poultry are safely eaten
will he ever know where they are.

Another boy has a circus about once a week, and tries to break his neck
jumping through hoops, hanging to a rope by his heels, turning
somersaults in the air, and frightening his mother out of her wits by
his pranks. I suspect that he has been to see Leotard, and I admire his
energy, for he is never discouraged; and, after tumbling flat,
half-a-dozen times, he merely rubs his elbows and knees, and then up and
takes another.

There is a good, domestic boy, who brushes and curls his three little
sisters' hair every morning, and must do it very gently, for they seem
to like it; and I often see them watch at the back gate for him, and
clap their hands, and run to meet him, sure of being welcomed as little
sisters like to be met by the big brothers whom they love. I respect
that virtuous boy.

The naughty boy is very funny; and the running fight he keeps up with
the cross cook is as good as a farce. He _is_ a torment, but I think she
could tame him, if she took the right way. The other day she wouldn't
let him in because she had washed up her kitchen and his boots were
muddy. He wiped them on the grass, but that wouldn't do; and, after
going at her with his head down, like a battering ram, he gave it up, or
seemed to; for, the minute she locked the door behind her and came out
to take in her clothes, that sly dog whipped up one of the low windows,
scrambled in, and danced a hornpipe all over the kitchen, while the fat
cook scolded and fumbled for her key, for _she_ couldn't follow through
the window. Of course he was off upstairs by the time she got in; but
I'm afraid he had a shaking, for I saw him glowering fiercely as he came
out later with a basket, going some 'confounded errand.' Occasionally
his father brings him out and whips him for some extra bad offence,
during which performance he howls dismally; but when he is left sitting
despondently and miraculously on an old chair without any seat, he soon
cheers up, boos at a strange cat, whistles to his dog,--who is just like
him,--or falls back on that standing cure for all the ills that boys are
heir to, and whittles vigorously. I know I ought to frown upon this
reprehensible young person, and morally close my eyes to his pranks;
but I really can't do it, and am afraid I find this little black sheep
the most interesting of the flock.

The girls have tea-parties, make calls, and play mother, of course; and
the sisters of the good boy have capital times up in a big nursery, with
such large dollies that I can hardly tell which are the babies and which
the mammas. One little girl plays about at home with a dirty face,
tumbled hair, and an old pinafore on. She won't be made tidy, and I see
her kick and cry when they try to make her neat. Now and then there is a
great dressing and curling; and then I see her prancing away in her
light boots, smart hat, and pretty dress, looking as fresh as a daisy.
But I don't admire her; for I've been behind the scenes, you see, and I
know that she likes to be fine rather than neat.

So is the girl who torments her kitty, slaps her sister, and runs away
when her mother tells her not to go out of the yard. But the
house-wifely little girl who tends the baby, washes the cups, and goes
to school early with a sunshiny face and kiss all round, _she_, now, is
a neighbour worth having, and I'd put a good mark against her name if I
knew it.

I don't know as it would be proper for me to mention the grown-up people
over the way. They go on very much as the children do; for there is the
lazy, dandified man, who gets up late, and drinks; the cross man, who
swears at the shed-door when it won't shut; the fatherly man, who sits
among his children every evening, and the cheery old man up in the
attic, who has a flower in his window, and looks out at the world with
very much the same serene smile as my orange-coloured baby.

The women, too, keep house, make calls, and play mother; and some don't
do it well either. The forlorn baby's mamma never seems to cuddle and
comfort him; and some day, when the little fist lies cold and quiet, I'm
afraid she'll wish she had. Then the naughty boy's mother. I'm very
sure, if she put her arms round him sometimes, and smoothed that rough
head of his, and spoke to him as only mothers can speak, that it would
tame him far better than the scoldings and thrashings: for I know there
is a true boy's heart, warm and tender, somewhere under the jacket that
gets dusted so often. As for the fine lady who lets her children do as
they can, while she trims her bonnet, or makes panniers, I wouldn't be
introduced to her on any account. But as some might think it was
unjustifiable curiosity on my part to see these things, and an
actionable offence to speak of them, I won't mention them.

I sometimes wonder if the kind spirits who feel an interest in mortals
ever take a look at us on the shady side which we don't show the world,
seeing the trouble, vanities, and sins which we think no one knows. If
they love, pity, or condemn us? What records they keep, and what rewards
they prepare for those who are so busy with their work and play that
they forget who may be watching their back windows with clearer eyes and
truer charity than any inquisitive old lady with a pen in her hand?




_LITTLE MARIE OF LEHON._


'Here comes our pretty little girl,' I said to Kate, as we sat resting
on the seat beside the footpath that leads from Dinan on the hill to
Lehon in the valley.

Yes, there she was, trotting toward us in her round cap, blue woollen
gown, white apron, and wooden shoes. On her head was a loaf of buckwheat
bread as big as a small wheel, in one hand a basket full of green stuff,
while the other led an old goat, who seemed in no hurry to get home. We
had often seen this rosy, bright-eyed child, had nodded to her, but
never spoken, for she looked rather shy, and always seemed in haste. Now
the sight of the goat reminded us of an excuse for addressing her, and
as she was about to pass with the respectful little curtsey of the
country, my friend said in French:--

'Stay please. I want to speak to you.' She stopped at once and stood
looking at us under her long eyelashes in a timid yet confiding way,
very pretty to see.

'We want to drink goat's milk every morning: can you let us have it,
little one?'

'Oh, yes, mademoiselle! Nannette gives fine milk, and no one has yet
engaged her,' answered the child, her whole face brightening at the
prospect.

'What name have you?'

'Marie Rosier, mademoiselle.'

'And you live at Lehon?'

'Yes, mademoiselle.'

'Have you parents?'

'Truly, yes, of the best. My father has a loom, my mother works in the
field and mill with brother Yvon, and I go to school and care for
Nannette and nurse little Bebe.'

'What school?'

'At the convent, mademoiselle. The good sisters teach us the catechism,
also to write and read and sew. I like it much,' and Marie glanced at
the little prayer in her apron pocket, as if proud to show she could
read it.

'What age have you?'

'Ten years, mademoiselle.'

'You are young to do so much, for we often see you in the market buying
and selling, and sometimes digging in your garden there below, and
bringing water from the river. Do you love work as well as school?'

'Ah, no; but mademoiselle knows it is necessary to work: every one does,
and I'm glad to do my part. Yvon works much harder than I, and the
father sits all day at his loom, yet he is sick and suffers much. Yes, I
am truly glad to help,' and little Marie settled the big loaf as if
quite ready to bear her share of the burdens.

'Shall we go and see your father about the goat? and if he agrees will
you bring the milk fresh and warm every morning?' I asked, thinking that
a sight of that blooming face would brighten our days for us.

'Oh, yes! I always do it for the ladies, and you will find the milk
quite fresh and warm, hey, Nannette?' and Marie laughed as she pulled
the goat from the hedge where she was nibbling the young leaves.

We followed the child as she went clattering down the stony path, and
soon came into the narrow street bounded on one side by the row of low,
stone houses, and on the other by the green wet meadow full of willows,
and the rapid mill-stream. All along this side of the road sat women and
children, stripping the bark from willow twigs to be used in
basket-making. A busy sight and a cheerful one; for the women gossiped
in their high, clear voices, the children sang and laughed, and the
babies crept about as freely as young lambs.

We found Marie's home a very poor one. Only two rooms in the little hut,
the lower one with its earthen floor, beds in the wall, smoky fire, and
single window where the loom stood. At it sat a pale, dark man who
stopped work as we entered, and seemed glad to rest while we talked to
him, or rather while Kate did, for I could not understand his odd
French, and preferred to watch Marie during the making of the bargain.

Yvon, a stout lad of twelve, was cutting up brush with an old sickle,
and little Bebe, looking like a Dutch doll in her tiny round cap, tight
blue gown, and bits of sabots, clung to Marie as she got the supper.

I wondered what the children at home would have said to such a supper. A
few cabbage leaves made the soup, and this, with the dry black bread and
a sip of sour wine, was all they had. There were no plates or bowls, but
little hollow places in the heavy wooden table near the edge, and into
these fixed cups Marie ladled the soup, giving each a wooden spoon from
a queer rack in the middle; the kettle stood at one end, the big loaf
lay at the other, and all stood round eating out of their little
troughs, with Nannette and a rough dog close by to receive any crusts
that might be left.

Presently the mother came in, a true Breton woman; rosy and robust,
neat and cheery, though her poor clothes were patched all over, her
hands more rough and worn with hard work than any I ever saw, and the
fine hair under her picturesque cap gray at thirty with much care.

I saw then where Marie got the brightness that seemed to shine in every
feature of her little face, for the mother's coming was like a ray of
sunshine in that dark place, and she had a friendly word and look for
every one.

Our little arrangement was soon made, and we left them all smiling and
nodding as if the few francs we were to pay would be a fortune to them.

Early next morning we were wakened by Françoise, the maid, who came up
to announce that the goat's milk had arrived. Then we heard a queer,
quick, tapping sound on the stairs, and to our great amusement,
Nannette walked into the room, straight up to my bedside, and stood
there looking at me with her mild yellow eyes as if she was quite used
to seeing night-caps. Marie followed with a pretty little bowl in her
hand, and said, laughing at our surprise, 'See, dear mademoiselle; in
this way I make sure that the milk is quite fresh and warm;' and
kneeling down, she milked the bowl full in a twinkling, while Nannette
quietly chewed her cud and sniffed at a plate of rolls on the table.

The warm draught was delicious, and we drank each our portion with much
merriment.

'It is our custom,' said Françoise; who stood by with her arms folded,
and looked on in a lofty manner.

'What had you for your own breakfast?' I asked, as I caught Marie's eye
hungrily fixed on the rolls and some tempting little cakes of chocolate
left from our lunch the day before.

'My good bread, as usual, mademoiselle, also sorrel salad and--and
water,' answered Marie, as if trying to make the most of her scanty
meal.

'Will you eat the rolls and put the chocolate in your pocket to nibble
at school? You must be tired with this long walk so early.'

She hesitated, but could not resist; and said in a low tone, as she held
the bread in her hand without eating it,--

'Would mademoiselle be angry if I took it to Bebe? She has never tasted
the beautiful white bread, and it would please her much.'

I emptied the plate into her basket, tucked in the chocolate, and added
a gay picture for baby, which unexpected treasures caused Marie to clasp
her hands and turn quite red with delight.

After that she came daily, and we had merry times with old Nannette and
her little mistress, whom we soon learned to love, so busy, blithe, and
grateful was she.

We soon found a new way to employ her, for the boy who drove our donkey
did not suit us, and we got the donkey-woman to let us have Marie in the
afternoon when her lessons were done. She liked that, and so did we; for
she seemed to understand the nature of donkeys, and could manage them
without so much beating and shouting as the boy thought necessary. Such
pleasant drives as we had, we two big women in the droll wagon, drawn by
the little gray donkey that looked as if made of an old trunk, so rusty
and rough was he as he went trotting along, his long ears wagging, and
his small hoofs clattering over the fine hard road, while Marie sat on
the shaft with a long whip, talking and laughing, and giving Andrè a
poke now and then, crying 'E! E! houp la!' to make him go.

We found her a capital little guide and story-teller, for her
grandmother had told her all the tales and legends of the neighbourhood,
and it was very pleasant to hear her repeat them in pretty peasant
French, as we sat among the ruins, while Kate sketched, I took notes,
and Marie held the big parasol over us.

Some of these stones were charming; at least as _she_ told them, with
her little face changing from gay to sad as she gesticulated most
dramatically.

The romance of 'Gilles de Bretagne' was one of her favourites. How he
carried off his child-wife when she was only twelve, how he was
imprisoned and poisoned, and at last left to starve in a dungeon, and
would stand at his window crying, 'Bread, bread; for the love of God!'
yet no one dared to give him any, till a poor peasant woman went in the
night and gave him half her black loaf. Not once, but every night for
six months, though she robbed her children to do it. And when he was
dying, it was she who took a priest to him, that he might confess
through the bars of his cell.

'So good, ah, so good, this poor woman! It is beautiful to hear of that,
mademoiselle!' little Marie would say, with her black eyes full and her
lips trembling.

But the story she liked best of all was about the peasant girl and her
grandmother.

'See then, dear ladies, it was in this way. In the time of the great war
many poor people were shot because it was feared they would burn the
chateaus. In one of these so sad parties being driven to St. Malo to be
shot, was this young girl. Only fifteen, dear ladies, behold how young
is this! and see the brave thing she did! With her went the old
grandmother whom she loved next the good God. They went slowly, she was
so old, and one of the officers who guarded them had pity on the pretty
girl, and said to her as they were a little apart from the rest, "Come,
you are young, and can run. I will save you; it is a pity so fine a
little girl should be shot."

'Then she was glad and thanked him much, saying, "And the grandmother
also? You will save her with me?" "It is impossible," says the officer.
"She is too old to run. I can save but one, and her life is nearly over;
let her go, and do you fly into the next wood. I will not betray you,
and when we come up with the gang it will be too late to find you."

'Then the great temptation of Satan came to this girl. She had no wish
to suffer, but she could not leave the good old grandmere to die alone.
She wept, she prayed, and the saints gave her courage.

'"No, I will not go," she said; and in the morning at St. Malo she was
shot with the old mother in her arms.'

'Could you do that for your grandmere?' I once asked, as she stopped for
breath, because this tale always excited her. She crossed herself
devoutly, and answered with fire in her eyes, and a resolute gesture of
her little brown hands,--

'I should try, mademoiselle.'

I think she would, and succeed, too, for she was a brave and
tender-hearted child, as she soon after proved.

A long drought parched the whole country that summer, and the gardens
suffered much, especially the little plats in Lehon, for most of them
were on the steep hillside behind the huts; and unless it rained, water
had to be carried up from the stream below. The cabbages and onions on
which these poor people depend, when fresh salads are gone, were dying
in the baked earth, and a hard winter was before them if this little
store failed.

The priests prayed for rain in the churches, and long processions
streamed out of the gates to visit the old stone cross called the 'Croix
de Saint Esprit,' and, kneeling there in crowds, the people implored the
blessing of rain to save their harvest. We felt great pity for them, but
liked little Marie's way of praying best.

She did not come one morning, but sent her brother, who only laughed,
and said Marie had hurt her foot, when we inquired for her. Anxious to
know if she was really ill, we went to see her in the afternoon, and
heard a pretty little story of practical Christianity.

Marie lay asleep on her mother's bed in the wall, and her father,
sitting by her, told the tale in a low voice, pausing now and then to
look at her, as if his little daughter had done something to be proud
of.

It seems that in the village there was an old woman frightfully
disfigured by fire, and not quite sane as the people thought. She was
harmless, but never showed herself by day, and only came out at night to
work in her garden or take the air. Many of the ignorant peasants feared
her, however; for the country abounds in fairy legends, and strange
tales of ghosts and goblins. But the more charitable left bread at her
door, and took in return the hose she knit or the thread she spun.

During the drought it was observed that _her_ garden, though the
steepest and stoniest, was never dry; _her_ cabbages flourished when her
neighbours' withered, and _her_ onions stood up green and tall as if
some special rain-spirit watched over them. People wondered and shook
their heads, but could not explain it, for Mother Lobineau was too
infirm to carry much water up the steep path, and who would help her
unless some of her own goblin friends did it?

This idea was suggested by the story of a peasant returning late at
night, who had seen something white flitting to and fro in the
garden-patch, and when he called to it saw it vanish most mysteriously.
This made quite a stir in the town; others watched also, saw the white
phantom in the starlight, and could not tell where it went when it
vanished behind the chestnut trees on the hill, till one man, braver
than the rest, hid himself behind these trees and discovered the
mystery. The sprite was Marie, in her little shift, who stepped out of
the window of the loft where she slept on to a bough of the tree, and
thence to the hill, for the house was built so close against the bank
that it was 'but a step from garret to garden,' as they say in Morlaix.

In trying to escape from this inquisitive neighbour, Marie hurt her
foot, but was caught, and confessed that it was she who went at night to
water poor Mother Lobineau's cabbages; because if they failed the old
woman might starve, and no one else remembered her destitute and
helpless state.

The good-hearted people were much touched by this silent sermon on
loving one's neighbour as one's self, and Marie was called the 'little
saint,' and tended carefully by all the good women. Just as the story
ended, she woke up, and at first seemed inclined to hide under the
bedclothes. But we had her out in a minute, and presently she was
laughing over her good deed, with a true child's enjoyment of a bit of
roguery, saying in her simple way,--

'Yes; it was so droll to go running about _en chemise_, like the girl in
the tale of the 'Midsummer Eve,' where she pulls the Saint Johns-wort
flower, and has her wish to hear all the creatures talk. I liked it
much, and Yvon slept so like the dormouse that he never heard me creep
in and out. It was hard to bring much water, but the poor cabbages were
_so_ glad, and Mother Lobineau felt that all had not forgotten her.

We took care that little Saint Marie was not forgotten, but quite well,
and all ready for her confirmation when the day came. This is a pretty
sight, and for her sake we went to the old church of St. Sauveur to see
it. It was a bright spring day, and the gardens were full of early
flowers, the quaint streets gay with proud fathers and mothers in
holiday dress, and flocks of strangers pausing to see the long
procession of little girls with white caps and veils, gloves and gowns,
prayer-books and rosaries, winding through the sunny square into the
shadowy church with chanting and candles, garlands and crosses.

The old priest was too ill to perform the service, but the young one who
took his place announced, after it was over, that if they would pass the
house the good old man would bless them from his balcony. That was the
best of all, and a sweet sight, as the feeble fatherly old priest leaned
from his easy-chair to stretch his trembling hands over the little flock
so like a bed of snowdrops, while the bright eyes and rosy faces looked
reverently up at him, and the fresh voices chanted the responses as the
curly heads under the long veils bowed and passed by.

We learned afterwards that our Marie had been called in and praised for
her secret charity--a great honour, because the good priest was much
beloved by all his flock, and took a most paternal interest in the
little ones.

That was almost the last we saw of our little friend, for we left Dinan
soon after, bidding the Lehon family good-bye, and leaving certain warm
souvenirs for winter-time. Marie cried and clung to us at parting, then
smiled like an April day, and waved her hand as we went away, never
expecting to see her any more.

But the next morning, just as we were stepping on board the steamer to
go down the Rance to St. Malo, we saw a little white cap come bobbing
through the market-place, down the steep street, and presently Marie
appeared with two great bunches of pale yellow primroses and wild blue
hyacinths in one hand, while the other held her sabots, that she might
run the faster. Rosy and smiling and breathless with haste she came
racing up to us, crying,--

'Behold my souvenir for the dear ladies. I do not cry now. No; I am glad
the day is so fine. _Bon voyage! bon voyage!_'

We thanked and kissed and left her on the shore, bravely trying not to
cry, as she waved her wooden shoes and kissed her hand till we were out
of sight, and had nothing but the soft colours and sweet breath of our
nosegays to remind us of Little Marie of Lehon.




_MY MAY-DAY AMONG CURIOUS BIRDS AND BEASTS._


Being alone in London, yet wishing to celebrate the day, I decided to
pay my respects to the lions at the Zoological Gardens. A lovely place
it was, and I enjoyed myself immensely; for May-day in England is just
what it should be, mild, sunny, flowery, and spring-like. As I walked
along the well-kept paths, between white and rosy hawthorn hedges, I
kept coming upon new and curious sights; for the birds and beasts are so
skilfully arranged that it is more like travelling through a strange and
pleasant country than visiting a menagerie.

The first thing I saw was a great American bison; and I was so glad to
meet with any one from home, that I'd have patted him with pleasure if
he had shown any cordiality toward me. He didn't, however, but stared
savagely with his fiery eyes, and put down his immense head with a
sullen snort, as if he'd have tossed me with great satisfaction. I did
not blame him, for the poor fellow was homesick, doubtless, for his own
wide prairies and the free life he had lost. So I threw him some fresh
clover, and went on to the pelicans.

I never knew before what handsome birds they were; not graceful, but
with such snowy plumage, tinged with pale pink and faint yellow. They
had just had their bath, and stood arranging their feathers with their
great bills, uttering a queer cry now and then, and nodding to one
another sociably. When fed, they gobbled up the fish, never stopping to
swallow it till the pouches under their bills were full; then they
leisurely emptied them, and seemed to enjoy their lunch with the grave
deliberation of regular Englishmen.

Being in a hurry to see the lions, I went on to the long row of cages,
and there found a splendid sight. Six lions and lionesses, in three or
four different cages, sitting or standing in dignified attitudes, and
eyeing the spectators with a mild expression in their fine eyes. One
lioness was ill, and lay on her bed, looking very pensive, while her
mate moved restlessly about her, evidently anxious to do something for
her, and much afflicted by her suffering. I liked this lion very much,
for, though the biggest, he was very gentle, and had a noble face.

The tigers were rushing about, as tigers usually are; some creeping
noiselessly to and fro, some leaping up and down, and some washing
their faces with their velvet paws. All looked and acted so like cats
that I wasn't at all surprised to hear one of them purr when the keeper
scratched her head. It was a very loud and large purr, but no fireside
pussy could have done it better, and every one laughed at the sound.

There were pretty spotted leopards, panthers, and smaller varieties of
the same species. I sat watching them a long time, longing to let some
of the wild things out for a good run, they seemed so unhappy barred in
those small dens.

Suddenly the lions began to roar, the tigers to snarl, and all to get
very much excited about something, sniffing at the openings, thrusting
their paws through the bars, and lashing their tails impatiently. I
couldn't imagine what the trouble was, till, far down the line, I saw a
man with a barrowful of lumps of raw meat. This was their dinner, and
as they were fed but once a day they were ravenous. Such roars and howls
and cries as arose while the man went slowly down the line, gave one a
good idea of the sounds to be heard in Indian forests and jungles. The
lions behaved best, for they only paced up and down, with an occasional
cry; but the tigers were quite frantic; for they tumbled one over the
other, shook the cages, and tried to reach the bystanders, just out of
reach behind the bar that kept us at a safe distance. One lady had a
fright, for the wind blew the end of her shawl within reach of a tiger's
great claw, and he clutched it, trying to drag her nearer. The shawl
came off, and the poor lady ran away screaming, as if a whole family of
wild beasts were after her.

When the lumps of meat were thrown in, it was curious to see how
differently the animals behaved. The tigers snarled and fought and tore
and got so savage I was very grateful that they were safely shut up. In
a few minutes, nothing but white bones remained, and then they howled
for more. One little leopard was better bred than the others, for he
went up on a shelf in the cage, and ate his dinner in a quiet, proper
manner, which was an example to the rest. The lions ate in dignified
silence, all but my favourite, who carried his share to his sick mate,
and by every gentle means in his power tried to make her eat. She was
too ill, however, and turned away with a plaintive moan which seemed to
grieve him sadly. He wouldn't touch his dinner, but lay down near her,
with the lump between his paws, as if guarding it for her; and there I
left him patiently waiting, in spite of his hunger, till his mate could
share it with him. As I took a last look at his fine old face, I named
him Douglas, and walked away, humming to myself the lines of the
ballad,--

  Douglas, Douglas,
  Tender and true.

As a contrast to the wild beasts, I went to see the monkeys, who lived
in a fine large house all to themselves. Here was every variety, from
the great ugly chimpanzee to the funny little fellows who played like
boys, and cut up all sorts of capers. A mamma sat tending her baby, and
looking so like a little old woman that I laughed till the gray monkey
with the blue nose scolded at me. He was a cross old party, and sat
huddled up in the straw, scowling at every one, like an ill-tempered old
bachelor. Half-a-dozen little ones teased him capitally by dropping bits
of bread, nut-shells, and straws down on him from above, as they climbed
about the perches, or swung by their tails. One poor little chap had
lost the curly end of his tail,--I'm afraid the gray one bit it
off,--and kept trying to swing like the others, forgetting that the
strong, curly end was what he held on with. He would run up the bare
boughs, and give a jump, expecting to catch and swing, but the lame tail
wouldn't hold him, and down he'd go, bounce on to the straw. At first
he'd sit and stare about him, as if much amazed to find himself there;
then he'd scratch his little round head and begin to scold violently,
which seemed to delight the other monkeys; and, finally, he'd examine
his poor little tail, and appear to understand the misfortune which had
befallen him. The funny expression of his face was irresistible, and I
enjoyed seeing him very much, and gave him a bun to comfort him when I
went away.

The snake-house came next, and I went in, on my way to visit the
rhinoceros family. I rather like snakes, since I had a tame green one,
who lived under the door-step, and would come out and play with me on
sunny days. These snakes I found very interesting, only they got under
their blankets and wouldn't come out, and I wasn't allowed to poke them;
so I missed seeing several of the most curious. An ugly cobra laid and
blinked at me through the glass, looking quite as dangerous as he was.
There were big and little snakes,--black, brown, and speckled, lively
and lazy, pretty and plain ones,--but I liked the great boa best.

When I came to his cage, I didn't see anything but the branch of a tree,
such as I had seen in other cages, for the snakes to wind up and down.
'Where is he, I wonder? I hope he hasn't got out,' I said to myself,
thinking of a story I read once of a person in a menagerie, who turned
suddenly and saw a great boa gliding towards him. As I stood wondering
if the big worm could be under the little flat blanket before me, the
branch began to move all at once, and with a start, I saw a limb swing
down to stare at me with the boa's glittering eyes. He was so exactly
the colour of the bare bough, and lay so still, I had not seen him till
he came to take a look at me. A very villainous-looking reptile he was,
and I felt grateful that I didn't live in a country where such
unpleasant neighbours might pop in upon you unexpectedly. He was kind
enough to take a promenade and show me his size, which seemed immense,
as he stretched himself, and then knotted his rough grayish body into a
great loop, with the fiery-eyed head in the middle. He was not one of
the largest kind, but I was quite satisfied, and left him to his dinner
of rabbits, which I hadn't the heart to stay and see him devour alive.

I was walking toward the camel's pagoda, when, all of a sudden, a long,
dark, curling thing came over my shoulder, and I felt warm breath in my
face. 'It's the boa;' I thought, and gave a skip which carried me into
the hedge, where I stuck, much to the amusement of some children riding
on the elephant whose trunk had frightened me. He had politely tried to
tell me to clear the way, which I certainly had done with all speed.
Picking myself out of the hedge I walked beside him, examining his
clumsy feet and peering up at his small, intelligent eye. I'm very sure
he winked at me, as if enjoying the joke, and kept poking his trunk into
my pocket, hoping to find something eatable.

I felt as if I had got into a foreign country as I looked about me and
saw elephants and camels walking among the trees; flocks of snow-white
cranes stalking over the grass, on their long scarlet legs; striped
Zebras racing in their paddock; queer kangaroos hopping about, with
little ones in their pouches; pretty antelopes chasing one another; and,
in an immense wire-covered aviary, all sorts of brilliant birds were
flying about as gaily as if at home.

One of the curiosities was a sea-cow, who lived in a tank of salt water,
and came at the keeper's call to kiss him, and flounder on its flippers
along the margin of the tank after a fish. It was very like a seal, only
much larger, and had four fins instead of two. Its eyes were lovely, so
dark and soft and liquid; but its mouth was not pretty, and I declined
one of the damp kisses which it was ready to dispense at word of
command.

The great polar bear lived next door, and spent his time splashing in
and out of a pool of water, or sitting on a block of ice, panting, as if
the mild spring day was blazing midsummer. He looked very unhappy, and I
thought it a pity that they didn't invent a big refrigerator for him.

These are not half of the wonderful creatures I saw, but I have not room
to tell more; only I advise all who can to pay a visit to the Zoological
Gardens when they go to London, for it is one of the most interesting
sights in that fine old city.




_OUR LITTLE NEWSBOY._


Hurrying to catch a certain car at a certain corner late one stormy
night, I was suddenly arrested by the sight of a queer-looking bundle
lying in a door-way.

'Bless my heart, it's a child! O John! I'm afraid he's frozen!' I
exclaimed to my brother, as we both bent over the bundle.

Such a little fellow as he was, in the big, ragged coat; such a tired,
baby face, under the fuzzy cap; such a purple, little hand, still
holding fast a few papers; such a pathetic sight altogether was the boy,
lying on the stone step, with the snow drifting over him, that it was
impossible to go by.

'He is asleep; but he'll freeze, if left so long. Here! wake up, my boy,
and go home, as fast as you can,' cried John, with a gentle shake, and a
very gentle voice; for the memory of a dear little lad, safely tucked up
at home, made him fatherly kind to the small vagabond.

The moment he was touched, the boy tumbled up, and, before he was half
awake, began his usual cry, with an eye to business.

'Paper, sir? "Herald!" "Transkip!" Last'--a great gape swallowed up the
'last edition,' and he stood blinking at us like a very chilly young
owl.

'I'll buy 'em all if you'll go home, my little chap; it's high time you
were abed,' said John, whisking the damp papers into one pocket, and his
purse out of another, as he spoke.

'All of 'em?--why there's six!' croaked the boy, for he was as hoarse as
a raven.

'Never mind, I can kindle the fire with 'em. Put that in your pocket;
and trot home, my man, as fast as possible.'

'Where do you live?' I asked, picking up the fifty cents that fell from
the little fingers, too benumbed to hold it.

'Mills Court, out of Hanover. Cold, ain't it?' said the boy, blowing on
his purple hands, and hopping feebly from one leg to the other, to take
the stiffness out.

'He can't go all that way in this storm--such a mite, and so used up
with cold and sleep, John.'

'Of course he can't; we'll put him in a car,' began John; when the boy
wheezed out,--

'No; I've got ter wait for Sam. He'll be along as soon's the theatre's
done. He said he would; and so I'm waitin'.'

'Who is Sam?' I asked.

'He's the feller I lives with. I ain't got any folks, and he takes care
o' me.'

'Nice care, indeed; leaving a baby like you to wait for him here such a
night as this,' I said crossly.

'Oh, he's good to me Sam is, though he does knock me round sometimes,
when I ain't spry. The big feller shoves me back, you see; and I gets
cold, and can't sing out loud; so I don't sell my papers, and has to
work 'em off late.'

'Hear the child talk! One would think he was sixteen, instead of six,' I
said, half laughing.

'I'm most ten. Hi! ain't that a oner?' cried the boy, as a gust of sleet
slapped him in the face, when he peeped to see if Sam was coming.
'Hullo! the lights is out! Why, the play's done, and the folks gone, and
Sam's forgot me.'

It was very evident that Sam _had_ forgotten his little _protégé_; and
a strong desire to shake Sam possessed me.

'No use waitin' any longer; and now my papers is sold, I ain't afraid to
go home,' said the boy, stepping down like a little old man with the
rheumatism, and preparing to trudge away through the storm.

'Stop a bit, my little Casabianca; a car will be along in fifteen
minutes; and while waiting you can warm yourself over there,' said John,
with the purple hand in his.

'My name's Jack Hill, not Cassy Banks, please, sir,' said the little
party, with dignity.

'Have you had your supper, Mr. Hill?' asked John, laughing.

'I had some peanuts, and two sucks of Joe's orange; but it warn't very
fillin',' he said, gravely.

'I should think not. Here! one stew; and be quick, please,' cried John,
as we sat down in a warm corner of the confectioner's opposite.

While little Jack shovelled in the hot oysters, with his eyes shutting
up now and then in spite of himself, we looked at him and thought again
of little Rosy-face at home safe in his warm nest, with mother-love
watching over him. Nodding towards the ragged, grimy, forlorn, little
creature, dropping asleep over his supper like a tired baby, I said,--

'Can you imagine our Freddy out alone at this hour, trying to 'work off'
his papers, because afraid to go home till he has?'

'I'd rather not try,' answered brother John, winking hard, as he stroked
the little head beside him, which, by the bye, looked very like a
ragged, yellow door-mat. I _think_ brother John winked hard, but I can't
be sure, for I know I did; and for a minute there seemed to be a dozen
little newsboys dancing before my eyes.

'There goes our car; and it's the last,' said John, looking at me.

'Let it go, but don't leave the boy;' and I frowned at John for hinting
at such a thing.

'Here is his car. Now, my lad, bolt your last oyster, and come on.'

'Good-night, ma'am! thankee, sir!' croaked the grateful little voice, as
the child was caught up in John's strong hands and set down on the
car-step.

With a word to the conductor, and a small business transaction, we left
Jack coiled up in a corner to finish his nap as tranquilly as if it
wasn't midnight, and a 'knocking-round' might not await him at his
journey's end.

We didn't mind the storm much as we plodded home; and when I told the
story to Rosy-face, next day, his interest quite reconciled me to the
sniffs and sneezes of a bad cold.

'If I saw that poor little boy, Aunt Jo, I'd love him lots!' said
Freddy, with a world of pity in his beautiful child's eyes.

And, believing that others also would be kind to little Jack, and such
as he, I tell the story.

When busy fathers hurry home at night, I hope they'll buy their papers
of the small boys, who get 'shoved back;' the feeble ones, who grow
hoarse, and can't 'sing out;' the shabby ones, who evidently have only
forgetful Sams to care for them; and the hungry-looking ones, who don't
get what is 'fillin'.' For love of the little sons and daughters safe at
home, say a kind word, buy a paper, even if you don't want it; and never
pass by, leaving them to sleep forgotten in the streets at midnight,
with no pillow but a stone, no coverlet but the pitiless snow, and not
even a tender-hearted robin to drop leaves over them.




_PATTY'S PATCHWORK._


'I perfectly hate it! and something dreadful ought to be done to the
woman who invented it,' said Patty, in a pet, sending a shower of gay
pieces flying over the carpet as if a small whirlwind and a rainbow had
got into a quarrel.

Puss did not agree with Patty, for, after a surprised hop when the
flurry came, she calmly laid herself down on a red square, purring
comfortably and winking her yellow eyes, as if she thanked the little
girl for the bright bed that set off her white fur so prettily. This
cool performance made Patty laugh, and say more pleasantly--

'Well, it _is_ tiresome, isn't it, Aunt Pen?'

'Sometimes; but we all have to make patchwork, my dear, and do the best
we can with the pieces given us.'

'Do we?' and Patty opened her eyes in great astonishment at this new
idea.

'Our lives are patchwork, and it depends on us a good deal how the
bright and dark bits get put together so that the whole is neat, pretty,
and useful when it is done,' said Aunt Pen soberly.

'Deary me, now she is going to preach,' thought Patty; but she rather
liked Aunt Pen's preachments, for a good deal of fun got mixed up with
the moralising; and she was so good herself that children could never
say in their naughty little minds, 'You are just as bad as we, so you
needn't talk to us, ma'am.'

'I gave you that patchwork to see what you would make of it, and it is
as good as a diary to me, for I can tell by the different squares how
you felt when you made them,' continued Aunt Pen, with a twinkle in her
eye as she glanced at the many-coloured bits on the carpet.

'Can you truly? just try and see,' and Patty looked interested at once.

Pointing with the yard-measure, Aunt Pen said, tapping a certain dingy,
puckered, brown and purple square--

'That is a bad day; don't it look so?'

'Well, it was, I do declare! for that was the Monday piece, when
everything went wrong and I didn't care how my work looked,' cried
Patty, surprised at Aunt Pen's skill in reading the calico diary.

'This pretty pink and white one so neatly sewed is a good day; this
funny mixture of red, blue, and yellow with the big stitches is a merry
day; that one with spots on it is one that got cried over; this with the
gay flowers is a day full of good little plans and resolutions; and that
one made of dainty bits, all stars and dots and tiny leaves, is the one
you made when you were thinking about the dear new baby there at home.'

'Why, Aunt Pen, you are a fairy! How _did_ you know? they truly are just
as you say, as near as I can remember. I rather like that sort of
patchwork,' and Patty sat down upon the floor to collect, examine, and
arrange her discarded work with a new interest in it.

'I see what is going on, and I have queer plays in my mind just as you
little folks do. Suppose you make this a moral bed-quilt, as some people
make album quilts. See how much patience, perseverance, good nature, and
industry you can put into it. Every bit will have a lesson or a story,
and when you lie under it you will find it a real comforter,' said Aunt
Pen, who wanted to amuse the child and teach her something better even
than the good old-fashioned accomplishment of needlework.

'I don't see how I can put that sort of thing into it,' answered Patty,
as she gently lifted puss into her lap, instead of twitching the red bit
roughly from under her.

'There goes a nice little piece of kindness this very minute,' laughed
Aunt Pen, pointing to the cat and the red square.

Patty laughed also, and looked pleased as she stroked Mother Bunch,
while she said thoughtfully--

'I see what you mean now. I am making two kinds of patchwork at the same
time; and this that I see is to remind me of the other kind that I don't
see.'

'Every task, no matter how small or homely, that gets well and
cheerfully done, is a fine thing; and the sooner we learn to use up the
dark and bright bits (the pleasures and pains, the cares and duties)
into a cheerful, useful life, the sooner we become real comforters, and
every one likes to cuddle about us. Don't you see, deary?'

'That's what you are, Aunt Pen;' and Patty put up her hand to hold fast
by that other strong, kind, helpful hand that did so much, yet never was
tired, cold, or empty.

Aunt Pen took the chubby little one in both her own, and said, smiling,
yet with meaning in her eyes, as she tapped the small fore-finger, rough
with impatient and unskilful sewing--

'Shall we try and see what a nice little comforter we can make this
month, while you wait to be called home to see mamma and the dear new
baby?'

'Yes, I'd like to try;' and Patty gave Aunt Pen's hand a hearty shake,
for she wanted to be good, and rather thought the new fancy would lend a
charm to the task which we all find rather tiresome and hard.

So the bargain was made, and the patch Patty sewed that day was
beautiful to behold; for she was in a delightfully moral state of mind,
and felt quite sure that she was going to become a model for all
children to follow, if they could. The next day her ardour had cooled a
little, and being in a hurry to go out to play, she slighted her work,
thinking no one would know. But the third day she got so angry with her
patch that she tore it in two, and declared it was all nonsense to fuss
about being good and thorough and all the rest of it.

Aunt Pen did not say much, but made her mend and finish her patch and
add it to the pile. After she went to bed that night Patty thought of
it, and wished she could do it over, it looked so badly. But as it could
not be, she had a penitent fit, and resolved to keep her temper while
she sewed, at any rate, for mamma was to see the little quilt when it
was done, and would want to know all about it.

Of course she did not devote herself to being good _all_ the time, but
spent her days in lessons, play, mischief, and fun, like any other
lively, ten-year-older. But somehow, whenever the sewing-hour came, she
remembered that talk; and as she worked she fell into the way of
wondering whether Aunt Pen could guess from the patches what sort of
days she had passed. She wanted to try and see, but Aunt Pen refused to
read any more calico till the quilt was done: then, she said in a
queer, solemn way, she should make the good and bad days appear in a
remarkable manner.

This puzzled Patty very much, and she quite ached to know what the joke
would be; meantime the pile grew steadily, and every day, good or bad,
added to that other work called Patty's life. She did not think much
about that part of it, but unconsciously the quiet sewing-time had its
influence on her, and that little 'conscience hour,' as she sometimes
called it, helped her very much.

One day she said to herself as she took up her work, 'Now I'll puzzle
Aunt Pen. She thinks my naughty tricks get into the patches; but I'll
make this very nicely and have it gay, and then I don't see how she will
ever guess what I did this morning.'

Now you must know that Tweedle-dee, the canary, was let out every day
to fly about the room and enjoy himself. Mother Bunch never tried to
catch him, though he often hopped temptingly near her. He was a droll
little bird, and Patty liked to watch his promenades, for he did funny
things. That day he made her laugh by trying to fly away with a shawl,
picking up the fringe with which to line the nest he was always trying
to build. It was so heavy he tumbled on his back and lay kicking and
pulling, but had to give it up and content himself with a bit of thread.

Patty was forbidden to chase or touch him at these times, but always
felt a strong desire to have just one grab at him and see how he felt.
That day, being alone in the dining-room, she found it impossible to
resist; and when Tweedle-dee came tripping pertly over the table-cloth,
cocking his head on one side with shrill chirps and little prancings,
she caught him, and for a minute held him fast in spite of his wrathful
pecking.

She put her thimble on his head, laughing to see how funny he looked,
and just then he slipped out of her hand. She clutched at him, missed
him, but alas, alas! he left his little tail behind him. Every feather
in his blessed little tail, I do assure you; and there sat Patty with
the yellow plumes in her hand and dismay in her face. Poor Tweedle-dee
retired to his cage much afflicted, and sung no more that day, but Patty
hid the lost tail and never said a word about it.

'Aunt Pen is so near-sighted she won't mind, and maybe he will have
another tail pretty soon, or she will think he is moulting. If she asks
of course I shall tell her.'

Patty settled it in that way, forgetting that the slide was open and
Aunt Pen in the kitchen. So she made a neat blue and buff patch, and put
it away, meaning to puzzle aunty when the reading-time came. But Patty
got the worst of it, as you will see by-and-bye.

Another day she strolled into the store-room and saw a large tray of
fresh buns standing there. Now, it was against the rule to eat between
meals, and new hot bread or cake was especially forbidden. Patty
remembered both these things, but could not resist temptation. One
plump, brown bun, with a lovely plum right in the middle, was so
fascinating it was impossible to let it alone; so Patty whipped it into
her pocket, ran to the garden, and hiding behind the big lilac-bush, ate
it in a great hurry. It was just out of the oven, and so hot it burned
her throat, and lay like a live coal in her little stomach after it was
down, making her very uncomfortable for several hours.

'Why do you keep sighing?' asked Aunt Pen, as Patty sat down to her
work.

'I don't feel very well.'

'You have eaten something that disagrees with you. Did you eat hot
biscuits for breakfast?'

'No, ma'am, I never do,' and Patty gave another little gasp, for the bun
lay very heavily on both stomach and conscience just then.

'A drop or two of ammonia will set you right,' and Aunt Pen gave her
some. It did set the stomach right, but the conscience still worried
her, for she could not make up her mind to 'fess' the sly, greedy thing
she had done.

'Put a white patch in the middle of those green ones,' said Aunt Pen, as
Patty sat soberly sewing her daily square.

'Why?' asked the little girl, for aunty seldom interfered in her
arrangement of the quilt.

'It will look pretty, and match the other three squares that are going
at the corners of that middle piece.'

'Well, I will,' and Patty sewed away, wondering at this sudden interest
in her work, and why Aunt Pen laughed to herself as she put away the
ammonia bottle.

These are two of the naughty little things that got worked into the
quilt; but there were good ones also, and Aunt Pen's sharp eyes saw them
all.

At the window of a house opposite, Patty often saw a little girl who sat
there playing with an old doll or a torn book. She never seemed to run
about or go out, and Patty often wondered if she was sick, she looked so
thin and sober, and was so quiet. Patty began by making faces at her
for fun, but the little girl only smiled back, and nodded so
good-naturedly that Patty was ashamed of herself.

'Is that girl over there poor?' she asked suddenly as she watched her
one day.

'Very poor: her mother takes in sewing, and the child is lame,' answered
Aunt Pen, without looking up from the letter she was writing.

'Her doll is nothing but an old shawl tied round with a string, and she
don't seem to have but one book. Wonder if she'd like to have me come
and play with her,' said Patty to herself, as she stood her own big doll
in the window, and nodded back at the girl, who bobbed up and down in
her chair with delight at this agreeable prospect.

'You can go and see her some day if you like,' said Aunt Pen, scribbling
away.

Patty said no more then, but later in the afternoon she remembered this
permission, and resolved to try if aunty would find out her good doings
as well as her bad ones. So, tucking Blanch Augusta Arabella Maud under
one arm, her best picture-book under the other, and gathering a little
nosegay of her own flowers, she slipped across the road, knocked, and
marched boldly upstairs.

Mrs. Brown, the sewing-woman, was out, and no one there but Lizzie in
her chair at the window, looking lonely and forlorn.

'How do you do? My name is Patty, and I live over there, and I've come
to play with you,' said one child in a friendly tone.

'How do you do? My name is Lizzie, and I'm very glad to see you. What a
lovely doll!' returned the other child gratefully; and then the ceremony
of introduction was over, and they began to play as if they had known
each other for ever so long.

To poor Lizzie it seemed as if a little fairy had suddenly appeared to
brighten the dismal room with flowers and smiles and pretty things;
while Patty felt her pity and good-will increase as she saw Lizzie's
crippled feet, and watched her thin face brighten and glow with interest
and delight over book and doll and posy. 'It felt good,' as Patty said
afterwards; 'sort of warm and comfortable in my heart, and I liked it
ever so much.' She stayed an hour, making sunshine in a shady place, and
then ran home, wondering if Aunt Pen would find that out.

She found her sitting with her hands before her, and such a sad look in
her face that Patty ran to her, saying anxiously--

'What's the matter, aunty? Are you sick?'

'No dear; but I have sorrowful news for you. Come, sit in my lap and
let me tell you as gently as I can.'

'Mamma is dead!' Cried Patty with a look of terror in her rosy face.

'No, thank God! but the dear, new baby only stayed a week, and we shall
never see her in this world.'

With a cry of sorrow Patty threw herself into the arms outstretched to
her, and on Aunt Pen's loving bosom sobbed away the first bitterness of
her grief and disappointment.

'Oh, I wanted a little sister so much, and I was going to be so fond of
her, and was so glad she came, and now I can't see or have her even for
a day! I'm _so_ disappointed I don't think I _can_ bear it,' sobbed
Patty.

'Think of poor mamma, and bear it bravely for her sake,' whispered Aunt
Pen, wiping away her own and Patty's tears.

'Oh, dear me! there's the pretty quilt I was going to make for baby, and
now it isn't any use, and I can't bear to finish it;' and Patty broke
out afresh at the thought of so much love's labour lost.

'Mamma will love to see it, so I wouldn't give it up. Work is the best
cure for sorrow; and I think you never will be sorry you tried it. Let
us put a bright bit of submission with this dark trouble, and work both
into your little life as patiently as we can, deary.'

Patty put up her trembling lips, and kissed Aunt Pen, grateful for the
tender sympathy and the helpful words. 'I'll try,' was all she said; and
then they sat talking quietly together about the dear, dead baby, who
only stayed long enough to make a place in every one's heart, and leave
them aching when she went.

Patty did try to bear her first trouble bravely, and got on very well
after the first day or two, except when the sewing-hour came. Then the
sight of the pretty patchwork recalled the memory of the cradle it was
meant to cover, and reminded her that it was empty now. Many quiet tears
dropped on Patty's work; and sometimes she had to put it down and sob,
for she had longed so for a little sister, it was very hard to give her
up, and put away all the loving plans she had made for the happy time
when baby came. A great many tender little thoughts and feelings got
sewed into the gay squares; and if a small stain showed here and there,
I think they only added to its beauty in the eyes of those who knew what
made them. Aunt Pen never suggested picking out certain puckered bits
and grimy stitches, for she knew that just there the little fingers
trembled, and the blue eyes got dim as they touched and saw the
delicate, flowery bits left from baby's gowns.

Lizzie was full of sympathy, and came hopping over on her crutches with
her only treasure, a black rabbit, to console her friend. But of all the
comfort given, Mother Bunch's share was the greatest and best; for that
very first sad day, as Patty wandered about the house disconsolately,
puss came hurrying to meet her, and in her dumb way begged her mistress
to follow and see the fine surprise prepared for her--four plump kits as
white as snow, with four gray tails all wagging in a row, as they laid
on their proud mamma's downy breast, while she purred over them, with
her yellow eyes full of supreme content.

It was in the barn, and Patty lay for an hour with her head close to
Mother Bunch, and her hands softly touching the charming little
Bunches, who squeaked and tumbled and sprawled about with their dim eyes
blinking, their tiny pink paws fumbling, and their dear gray tails
waggling in the sweetest way. Such a comfort as they were to Patty no
words could tell, and nothing will ever convince me that Mrs. Bunch did
not know all about baby, and so lay herself out to cheer up her little
mistress like a motherly loving old puss, as she was.

As Patty lay on the rug that evening while Aunt Pen sung softly in the
twilight, a small, white figure came pattering over the straw carpet,
and dropped a soft, warm ball down by Patty's cheek, saying, as plainly
as a loud, confiding purr could say it--

'There, my dear, this is a lonely time for you, I know, so I've brought
my best and prettiest darling to comfort you;' and with that Mother
Bunch sat down and washed her face, while Patty cuddled little
Snowdrop, and forgot to cry about baby.

Soon after this came a great happiness to Patty in the shape of a letter
from mamma, saying she must have her little girl back a week earlier
than they had planned.

'I'm sorry to leave you, aunty, but it is _so_ nice to be wanted, and
I'm all mamma has now, you know, so I must hurry and finish my work to
surprise her with. How shall we finish it off? There ought to be
something regularly splendid to go all round,' said Patty, in a great
bustle, as she laid out her pieces, and found that only a few more were
needed to complete the 'moral bed-quilt.'

'I must try and find something. We will put this white star, with the
blue round it, in the middle, for it is the neatest and prettiest piece,
in spite of the stains. I will sew in this part, and you may finish
putting the long strips together,' said Aunt Pen, rummaging her bags and
bundles for something fine to end off with.

'I know! I've got something!' and away hurried Lizzie, who was there,
and much interested in the work.

She came hopping back again, presently, with a roll in her hand, which
she proudly spread out, saying--

'There! mother gave me that ever so long ago, but I never had any quilt
to use it for, and now it's just what you want. You can't buy such
chintz now-a-days, and I'm _so_ glad I had it for you.'

'It's regularly splendid!' cried Patty, in a rapture; and so it was, for
the pink and white was all covered with animals, and the blue was full
of birds and butterflies and bees flying about as naturally as possible.
Really lovely were the little figures and the clear, soft colours, and
Aunt Pen clapped her hands, while Patty hugged her friend, and declared
that the quilt was perfect now.

Mrs. Brown begged to be allowed to quilt it when the patches were all
nicely put together, and Patty was glad to have her, for that part of
the work was beyond her skill. It did not come home till the morning
Patty left, and Aunt Pen packed it up without ever unrolling it.

'We will look at it together when we show it to mamma,' she said: and
Patty was in such a hurry to be off that she made no objection.

A pleasant journey, a great deal of hugging and kissing, some tears and
tender laments for baby, and then it was time to show the quilt, which
mamma said was just what she wanted to throw over her feet as she lay on
the sofa.

If there _were_ any fairies, Patty would have been sure they had done
something to her bed-cover, for when she proudly unrolled it, what do
you think she saw?

Right in the middle of the white star, which was the centre-piece,
delicately drawn with indelible ink, was a smiling little cherub, all
head and wings, and under it these lines--

  'While sister dear lies asleep,
  Baby careful watch will keep.'

Then in each of the four gay squares that were at the corners of the
strip that framed the star, was a white bit bearing other pictures and
couplets that both pleased and abashed Patty as she saw and read them.

In one was seen a remarkably fine bun, with the lines--

  'Who stole the hot bun
    And got burnt well?
  Go ask the lilac bush,
    Guess it can tell.'

In the next was a plump, tailless bird, who seemed to be saying
mournfully--

  'My little tail, my little tail!
  This bitter loss I still bewail;
  But rather ne'er have tail again
  Than Patty should deceive Aunt Pen.'

The third was less embarrassing, for it was a pretty bunch of flowers so
daintily drawn one could almost think they smelt them, and these lines
were underneath--

  'Every flower to others given,
  Blossoms fair and sweet in heaven.'

The fourth was a picture of a curly-haired child sewing, with some very
large tears rolling down her cheeks and tumbling off her lap like
marbles, while some tiny sprites were catching and flying away with them
as if they were very precious--

  'Every tender drop that fell,
    Loving spirits caught and kept;
  And Patty's sorrows lighter grew,
    For the gentle tears she wept.'

'Oh, aunty! what does it all mean?' cried Patty, who had looked both
pleased and ashamed as she glanced from one picture to the other.

'It means, dear, that the goods and bads got into the bed-quilt in spite
of you, and there they are to tell their own story. The bun and the lost
tail, the posy you took to poor Lizzie, and the trouble you bore so
sweetly. It is just so with our lives, though we don't see it quite as
clearly as this. Invisible hands paint our faults and virtues, and
by-and-bye we have to see them, so we must be careful that they are good
and lovely, and we are not ashamed to let the eyes that love us best
read there the history of our lives.'

As Aunt Pen spoke, and Patty listened with a thoughtful face, mamma
softly drew the pictured coverlet over her, and whispered, as she held
her little daughter close--

'My Patty will remember this; and if all her years tell as good a story
as this month, I shall not fear to read the record, and she will be in
truth my little comforter.'


(FOR SECOND SERIES, SEE 'SHAWL-STRAPS.')


  PRINTED BY
  SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
  LONDON





AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG

Is now full, and contains

    =I. MY BOYS=, and other stories.
   =II. SHAWL-STRAPS=. Sketches of a European Trip.
  =III. CUPID AND CHOW-CHOW=, and other stories.
   =IV. MY GIRLS=, and other stories.
    =V. JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE=, and other stories.
   =VI. AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING=, and other stories.

_Six volumes neatly bound in cloth. Price, $6.00._

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON.

[Illustration: AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING.

"Suddenly Tilly threw down the axe, flung open the door, and ran
straight into the arms of the bear."--PAGE 29.]

[Illustration: HOW IT ALL HAPPENED.

Dolly opened the door, and started back with a cry of astonishment at
the lovely spectacle before her.--PAGE 47.]

       *       *       *       *       *




AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING,
  Etc.

[Illustration: SCRAP-BAG, VOL. VI.]

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."

  BOSTON:
  ROBERTS BROTHERS.
  1882.

  _Copyright, 1882,_
  BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT.

  UNIVERSITY PRESS:
  JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




CONTENTS.

                                                               PAGE.
     I. AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING                              7
    II. HOW IT ALL HAPPENED                                       37
   III. THE DOLLS' JOURNEY FROM MINNESOTA TO MAINE                53
    IV. MORNING-GLORIES                                           78
     V. SHADOW-CHILDREN                                          104
    VI. POPPY'S PRANKS                                           124
   VII. WHAT THE SWALLOWS DID                                    147
  VIII. LITTLE GULLIVER                                          163
    IX. THE WHALE'S STORY                                        178
     X. A STRANGE ISLAND                                         192
    XI. FANCY'S FRIEND                                           208

       *       *       *       *       *




I.

AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING.


Sixty years ago, up among the New Hampshire hills, lived Farmer Bassett,
with a house full of sturdy sons and daughters growing up about him.
They were poor in money, but rich in land and love, for the wide acres
of wood, corn, and pasture land fed, warmed, and clothed the flock,
while mutual patience, affection, and courage made the old farm-house a
very happy home.

November had come; the crops were in, and barn, buttery, and bin were
overflowing with the harvest that rewarded the summer's hard work. The
big kitchen was a jolly place just now, for in the great fireplace
roared a cheerful fire; on the walls hung garlands of dried apples,
onions, and corn; up aloft from the beams shone crook-necked squashes,
juicy hams, and dried venison--for in those days deer still haunted the
deep forests, and hunters flourished. Savory smells were in the air; on
the crane hung steaming kettles, and down among the red embers copper
sauce-pans simmered, all suggestive of some approaching feast.

A white-headed baby lay in the old blue cradle that had rocked seven
other babies, now and then lifting his head to look out, like a round,
full moon, then subsided to kick and crow contentedly, and suck the rosy
apple he had no teeth to bite. Two small boys sat on the wooden settle
shelling corn for popping, and picking out the biggest nuts from the
goodly store their own hands had gathered in October. Four young girls
stood at the long dresser, busily chopping meat, pounding spice, and
slicing apples; and the tongues of Tilly, Prue, Roxy, and Rhody went as
fast as their hands. Farmer Bassett, and Eph, the oldest boy, were
"chorin' 'round" outside, for Thanksgiving was at hand, and all must be
in order for that time-honored day.

To and fro, from table to hearth, bustled buxom Mrs. Bassett, flushed
and floury, but busy and blithe as the queen bee of this busy little
hive should be.

"I do like to begin seasonable and have things to my mind. Thanksgivin'
dinners can't be drove, and it does take a sight of victuals to fill all
these hungry stomicks," said the good woman, as she gave a vigorous stir
to the great kettle of cider apple-sauce, and cast a glance of
housewifely pride at the fine array of pies set forth on the buttery
shelves.

"Only one more day and then it will be time to eat. I didn't take but
one bowl of hasty pudding this morning, so I shall have plenty of room
when the nice things come," confided Seth to Sol, as he cracked a large
hazel-nut as easily as a squirrel.

"No need of my starvin' beforehand. _I always_ have room enough, and I'd
like to have Thanksgiving every day," answered Solomon, gloating like a
young ogre over the little pig that lay near by, ready for roasting.

"Sakes alive, I don't, boys! It's a marcy it don't come but once a year.
I should be worn to a thread-paper with all this extra work atop of my
winter weavin' and spinnin'," laughed their mother, as she plunged her
plump arms into the long bread-trough and began to knead the dough as if
a famine was at hand.

Tilly, the oldest girl, a red-cheeked, black-eyed lass of fourteen, was
grinding briskly at the mortar, for spices were costly, and not a grain
must be wasted. Prue kept time with the chopper, and the twins sliced
away at the apples till their little brown arms ached, for all knew how
to work, and did so now with a will.

"I think it's real fun to have Thanksgiving at home. I'm sorry Gran'ma
is sick, so we can't go there as usual, but I like to mess 'round here,
don't you, girls?" asked Tilly, pausing to take a sniff at the spicy
pestle.

"It will be kind of lonesome with only our own folks." "I like to see
all the cousins and aunts, and have games, and sing," cried the twins,
who were regular little romps, and could run, swim, coast and shout as
well as their brothers.

"I don't care a mite for all that. It will be so nice to eat dinner
together, warm and comfortable at home," said quiet Prue, who loved her
own cozy nooks like a cat.

"Come, girls, fly 'round and get your chores done, so we can clear away
for dinner jest as soon as I clap my bread into the oven," called Mrs.
Bassett presently, as she rounded off the last loaf of brown bread which
was to feed the hungry mouths that seldom tasted any other.

"Here's a man comin' up the hill, lively!" "Guess it's Gad Hopkins. Pa
told him to bring a dezzen oranges, if they warn't too high!" shouted
Sol and Seth, running to the door, while the girls smacked their lips at
the thought of this rare treat, and Baby threw his apple overboard, as
if getting ready for a new cargo.

But all were doomed to disappointment, for it was not Gad, with the
much-desired fruit. It was a stranger, who threw himself off his horse
and hurried up to Mr. Bassett in the yard, with some brief message that
made the farmer drop his ax and look so sober that his wife guessed at
once some bad news had come; and crying, "Mother's wuss! I know she
is!" out ran the good woman, forgetful of the flour on her arms and the
oven waiting for its most important batch.

The man said old Mr. Chadwick, down to Keene, stopped him as he passed,
and told him to tell Mrs. Bassett her mother was failin' fast, and she'd
better come to-day. He knew no more, and having delivered his errand he
rode away, saying it looked like snow and he must be jogging, or he
wouldn't get home till night.

"We must go right off, Eldad. Hitch up, and I'll be ready in less'n
no time," said Mrs. Bassett, wasting not a minute in tears and
lamentations, but pulling off her apron as she went in, with her mind in
a sad jumble of bread, anxiety, turkey, sorrow, haste, and cider
apple-sauce.

A few words told the story, and the children left their work to help her
get ready, mingling their grief for "Gran'ma" with regrets for the lost
dinner.

"I'm dreadful sorry, dears, but it can't be helped. I couldn't cook nor
eat no way, now, and if that blessed woman gets better sudden, as she
has before, we'll have cause for thanksgivin', and I'll give you a
dinner you won't forget in a hurry," said Mrs. Bassett, as she tied on
her brown silk pumpkin-hood, with a sob for the good old mother who had
made it for her.

Not a child complained after that, but ran about helpfully, bringing
moccasins, heating the footstone, and getting ready for a long drive,
because Gran'ma lived twenty miles away, and there were no railroads in
those parts to whisk people to and fro like magic. By the time the old
yellow sleigh was at the door, the bread was in the oven, and Mrs.
Bassett was waiting, with her camlet cloak on, and the baby done up like
a small bale of blankets.

"Now, Eph, you must look after the cattle like a man, and keep up the
fires, for there's a storm brewin', and neither the children nor dumb
critters must suffer," said Mr. Bassett, as he turned up the collar of
his rough coat and put on his blue mittens, while the old mare shook her
bells as if she preferred a trip to Keene to hauling wood all day.

"Tilly, put extry comfortables on the beds to-night, the wind is so
searchin' up chamber. Have the baked beans and Injun-puddin' for dinner,
and whatever you do, don't let the boys git at the mince-pies, or you'll
have them down sick. I shall come back the minute I can leave Mother. Pa
will come to-morrer, anyway, so keep snug and be good. I depend on you,
my darter; use your jedgment, and don't let nothin' happen while
Mother's away."

"Yes'm, yes'm--good-bye, good-bye!" called the children, as Mrs. Bassett
was packed into the sleigh and driven away, leaving a stream of
directions behind her.

Eph, the sixteen-year-old boy, immediately put on his biggest boots,
assumed a sober, responsible manner, and surveyed his little
responsibilities with a paternal air, drolly like his father's. Tilly
tied on her mother's bunch of keys, rolled up the sleeves of her
homespun gown, and began to order about the younger girls. They soon
forgot poor Granny, and found it great fun to keep house all alone, for
Mother seldom left home, but ruled her family in the good old-fashioned
way. There were no servants, for the little daughters were Mrs.
Bassett's only maids, and the stout boys helped their father, all
working happily together with no wages but love; learning in the best
manner the use of the heads and hands with which they were to make their
own way in the world.

The few flakes that caused the farmer to predict bad weather soon
increased to a regular snow-storm, with gusts of wind, for up among the
hills winter came early and lingered long. But the children were busy,
gay, and warm in-doors, and never minded the rising gale nor the
whirling white storm outside.

Tilly got them a good dinner, and when it was over the two elder girls
went to their spinning, for in the kitchen stood the big and little
wheels, and baskets of wool-rolls, ready to be twisted into yarn for the
winter's knitting, and each day brought its stint of work to the
daughters, who hoped to be as thrifty as their mother.

Eph kept up a glorious fire, and superintended the small boys, who
popped corn and whittled boats on the hearth; while Roxy and Rhody
dressed corn-cob dolls in the settle corner, and Bose, the brindled
mastiff, lay on the braided mat, luxuriously warming his old legs. Thus
employed, they made a pretty picture, these rosy boys and girls, in
their homespun suits, with the rustic toys or tasks which most children
nowadays would find very poor or tiresome.

Tilly and Prue sang, as they stepped to and fro, drawing out
the smoothly twisted threads to the musical hum of the great
spinning-wheels. The little girls chattered like magpies over their
dolls and the new bed-spread they were planning to make, all white
dimity stars on a blue calico ground, as a Christmas present to Ma. The
boys roared at Eph's jokes, and had rough and tumble games over Bose,
who didn't mind them in the least; and so the afternoon wore pleasantly
away.

At sunset the boys went out to feed the cattle, bring in heaps of wood,
and lock up for the night, as the lonely farm-house seldom had visitors
after dark. The girls got the simple supper of brown bread and milk,
baked apples, and a doughnut all 'round as a treat. Then they sat before
the fire, the sisters knitting, the brothers with books or games, for
Eph loved reading, and Sol and Seth never failed to play a few games of
Morris with barley corns, on the little board they had made themselves
at one corner of the dresser.

"Read out a piece," said Tilly, from Mother's chair, where she sat in
state, finishing off the sixth woolen sock she had knit that month.

"It's the old history book, but here's a bit you may like, since it's
about our folks," answered Eph, turning the yellow page to look at a
picture of two quaintly dressed children in some ancient castle.

"Yes, read that. I always like to hear about the Lady Matildy I was
named for, and Lord Bassett, Pa's great-great-great-grandpa. He's only a
farmer now, but it's nice to know that we were somebody two or three
hundred years ago," said Tilly, bridling and tossing her curly head as
she fancied the Lady Matilda might have done.

"Don't read the queer words, 'cause we don't understand 'em. Tell it,"
commanded Roxy, from the cradle, where she was drowsily cuddled with
Rhody.

"Well, a long time ago, when Charles the First was in prison, Lord
Bassett was a true friend to him," began Eph, plunging into his story
without delay. "The lord had some papers that would have hung a lot of
people if the king's enemies got hold of 'em, so when he heard one day,
all of a sudden, that soldiers were at the castle-gate to carry him
off, he had just time to call his girl to him, and say: 'I may be going
to my death, but I won't betray my master. There is no time to burn the
papers, and I can not take them with me; they are hidden in the old
leathern chair where I sit. No one knows this but you, and you must
guard them till I come or send you a safe messenger to take them away.
Promise me to be brave and silent, and I can go without fear.' You see,
he wasn't afraid to die, but he _was_ to seem a traitor. Lady Matildy
promised solemnly, and the words were hardly out of her mouth when the
men came in, and her father was carried away a prisoner and sent off to
the Tower.

"But she didn't cry; she just called her brother, and sat down in that
chair, with her head leaning back on those papers, like a queen, and
waited while the soldiers hunted the house over for 'em: wasn't that a
smart girl?" cried Tilly, beaming with pride, for she was named for this
ancestress, and knew the story by heart.

"I reckon she was scared, though, when the men came swearin' in and
asked her if she knew anything about it. The boy did his part then, for
_he_ didn't know, and fired up and stood before his sister; and he says,
says he, as bold as a lion: 'If my lord had told us where the papers be,
we would die before we would betray him. But we are children and know
nothing, and it is cowardly of you to try to fright us with oaths and
drawn swords!'"

As Eph quoted from the book, Seth planted himself before Tilly, with the
long poker in his hand, saying, as he flourished it valiantly:

"Why didn't the boy take his father's sword and lay about him? I would,
if any one was ha'sh to Tilly."

"You bantam! He was only a bit of a boy, and couldn't do anything. Sit
down and hear the rest of it," commanded Tilly, with a pat on the yellow
head, and a private resolve that Seth should have the largest piece of
pie at dinner next day, as reward for his chivalry.

"Well, the men went off after turning the castle out of window, but they
said they should come again; so faithful Matildy was full of trouble,
and hardly dared to leave the room where the chair stood. All day she
sat there, and at night her sleep was so full of fear about it, that she
often got up and went to see that all was safe. The servants thought the
fright had hurt her wits, and let her be, but Rupert, the boy, stood by
her and never was afraid of her queer ways. She was 'a pious maid,' the
book says, and often spent the long evenings reading the Bible, with her
brother by her, all alone in the great room, with no one to help her
bear her secret, and no good news of her father. At last, word came that
the king was dead and his friends banished out of England. Then the
poor children were in a sad plight, for they had no mother, and the
servants all ran away, leaving only one faithful old man to help them."

"But the father did come?" cried Roxy, eagerly.

"You'll see," continued Eph, half telling, half reading.

"Matilda was sure he would, so she sat on in the big chair, guarding the
papers, and no one could get her away, till one day a man came with her
father's ring and told her to give up the secret. She knew the ring, but
would not tell until she had asked many questions, so as to be very
sure, and while the man answered all about her father and the king, she
looked at him sharply. Then she stood up and said, in a tremble, for
there was something strange about the man: 'Sir, I doubt you in spite of
the ring, and I will not answer till you pull off the false beard you
wear, that I may see your face and know if you are my father's friend or
foe.' Off came the disguise, and Matilda found it was my lord himself,
come to take them with him out of England. He was very proud of that
faithful girl, I guess, for the old chair still stands in the castle,
and the name keeps in the family, Pa says, even over here, where some of
the Bassetts came along with the Pilgrims."

"Our Tilly would have been as brave, I know, and she looks like the old
picter down to Grandma's, don't she, Eph?" cried Prue, who admired her
bold, bright sister very much.

"Well, I think you'd do the settin' part best, Prue, you are so patient.
Till would fight like a wild cat, but she can't hold her tongue worth a
cent," answered Eph; whereat Tilly pulled his hair, and the story ended
with a general frolic.

When the moon-faced clock behind the door struck nine, Tilly tucked up
the children under the "extry comfortables," and having kissed them all
around, as Mother did, crept into her own nest, never minding the little
drifts of snow that sifted in upon her coverlet between the shingles of
the roof, nor the storm that raged without.

As if he felt the need of unusual vigilance, old Bose lay down on the
mat before the door, and pussy had the warm hearth all to herself. If
any late wanderer had looked in at midnight, he would have seen the fire
blazing up again, and in the cheerful glow the old cat blinking her
yellow eyes, as she sat bolt upright beside the spinning-wheel, like
some sort of household goblin, guarding the children while they slept.

When they woke, like early birds, it still snowed, but up the little
Bassetts jumped, broke the ice in their pitchers, and went down with
cheeks glowing like winter apples, after a brisk scrub and scramble
into their clothes. Eph was off to the barn, and Tilly soon had a great
kettle of mush ready, which, with milk warm from the cows, made a
wholesome breakfast for the seven hearty children.

"Now about dinner," said the young housekeeper, as the pewter spoons
stopped clattering, and the earthen bowls stood empty.

"Ma said, have what we liked, but she didn't expect us to have a real
Thanksgiving dinner, because she won't be here to cook it, and we don't
know how," began Prue, doubtfully.

"I can roast a turkey and make a pudding as well as anybody, I guess.
The pies are all ready, and if we can't boil vegetables and so on, we
don't deserve any dinner," cried Tilly, burning to distinguish herself,
and bound to enjoy to the utmost her brief authority.

"Yes, yes!" cried all the boys, "let's have a dinner anyway; Ma won't
care, and the good victuals will spoil if they ain't eaten right up."

"Pa is coming to-night, so we won't have dinner till late; that will be
real genteel and give us plenty of time," added Tilly, suddenly
realizing the novelty of the task she had undertaken.

"Did you ever roast a turkey?" asked Roxy, with an air of deep interest.

"Should you darst to try?" said Rhody, in an awe-stricken tone.

"You will see what I can do. Ma said I was to use my jedgment about
things, and I'm going to. All you children have got to do is to keep out
of the way, and let Prue and me work. Eph, I wish you'd put a fire in
the best room, so the little ones can play in there. We shall want the
settin'-room for the table, and I won't have 'em pickin' 'round when we
get things fixed," commanded Tilly, bound to make her short reign a
brilliant one.

"I don't know about that. Ma didn't tell us to," began cautious Eph, who
felt that this invasion of the sacred best parlor was a daring step.

"Don't we always do it Sundays and Thanksgivings? Wouldn't Ma wish the
children kept safe and warm anyhow? Can I get up a nice dinner with four
rascals under my feet all the time? Come, now, if you want roast turkey
and onions, plum-puddin' and mince-pie, you'll have to do as I tell you,
and be lively about it."

Tilly spoke with such spirit, and her last suggestion was so
irresistible, that Eph gave in, and, laughing good-naturedly, tramped
away to heat up the best room, devoutly hoping that nothing serious
would happen to punish such audacity.

The young folks delightedly trooped in to destroy the order of that prim
apartment with housekeeping under the black horse-hair sofa, "horseback
riders" on the arms of the best rocking-chair, and an Indian war-dance
all over the well-waxed furniture. Eph, finding the society of the
peaceful sheep and cows more to his mind than that of two excited
sisters, lingered over his chores in the barn as long as possible, and
left the girls in peace.

Now Tilly and Prue were in their glory, and as soon as the breakfast
things were out of the way, they prepared for a grand cooking-time. They
were handy girls, though they had never heard of a cooking-school, never
touched a piano, and knew nothing of embroidery beyond the samplers
which hung framed in the parlor; one ornamented with a pink mourner
under a blue weeping-willow, the other with this pleasing verse, each
word being done in a different color, which gave the effect of a
distracted rainbow:

    "This sampler neat was worked by me,
     In my twelfth year, Prudence B."

Both rolled up their sleeves, put on their largest aprons, and got out
all the spoons, dishes, pots, and pans they could find, "so as to have
everything handy," as Prue said.

"Now, sister, we'll have dinner at five; Pa will be here by that time if
he is coming to-night, and be so surprised to find us all ready, for he
won't have had any very nice victuals if Gran'ma is so sick," said Tilly
importantly. "I shall give the children a piece at noon" (Tilly meant
luncheon); "doughnuts and cheese, with apple-pie and cider will please
'em. There's beans for Eph; he likes cold pork, so we won't stop to warm
it up, for there's lots to do, and I don't mind saying to you I'm
dreadful dubersome about the turkey."

"It's all ready but the stuffing, and roasting is as easy as can be. I
can baste first rate. Ma always likes to have me, I'm so patient and
stiddy, she says," answered Prue, for the responsibility of this great
undertaking did not rest upon her, so she took a cheerful view of
things.

"I know, but it's the stuffin' that troubles me," said Tilly, rubbing
her round elbows as she eyed the immense fowl laid out on a platter
before her. "I don't know how much I want, nor what sort of yarbs to put
in, and he's so awful big, I'm kind of afraid of him."

"I ain't! I fed him all summer, and he never gobbled at _me_. I feel
real mean to be thinking of gobbling him, poor old chap," laughed Prue,
patting her departed pet with an air of mingled affection and appetite.

"Well, I'll get the puddin' off my mind fust, for it ought to bile all
day. Put the big kettle on, and see that the spit is clean, while I get
ready."

Prue obediently tugged away at the crane, with its black hooks, from
which hung the iron tea-kettle and three-legged pot; then she settled
the long spit in the grooves made for it in the tall andirons, and put
the dripping-pan underneath, for in those days meat was roasted as it
should be, not baked in ovens.

Meantime Tilly attacked the plum-pudding. She felt pretty sure of coming
out right, here, for she had seen her mother do it so many times, it
looked very easy. So in went suet and fruit; all sorts of spice, to be
sure she got the right ones, and brandy instead of wine. But she forgot
both sugar and salt, and tied it in the cloth so tightly that it had no
room to swell, so it would come out as heavy as lead and as hard as a
cannon-ball, if the bag did not burst and spoil it all. Happily
unconscious of these mistakes, Tilly popped it into the pot, and proudly
watched it bobbing about before she put the cover on and left it to its
fate.

"I can't remember what flavorin' Ma puts in," she said, when she had got
her bread well soaked for the stuffing. "Sage and onions and apple-sauce
go with goose, but I can't feel sure of anything but pepper and salt for
a turkey."

"Ma puts in some kind of mint, I know, but I forget whether it is
spearmint, peppermint, or penny-royal," answered Prue, in a tone of
doubt, but trying to show her knowledge of "yarbs," or, at least, of
their names.

"Seems to me it's sweet marjoram or summer savory. I guess we'll put
both in, and then we are sure to be right. The best is up garret; you
run and get some, while I mash the bread," commanded Tilly, diving into
the mess.

Away trotted Prue, but in her haste she got catnip and wormwood, for the
garret was darkish, and Prue's little nose was so full of the smell of
the onions she had been peeling, that everything smelt of them. Eager to
be of use, she pounded up the herbs and scattered the mixture with a
liberal hand into the bowl.

"It doesn't smell just right, but I suppose it will when it is cooked,"
said Tilly, as she filled the empty stomach, that seemed aching for
food, and sewed it up with the blue yarn, which happened to be handy.
She forgot to tie down his legs and wings, but she set him by till his
hour came, well satisfied with her work.

"Shall we roast the little pig, too? I think he'd look nice with a
necklace of sausages, as Ma fixed one last Christmas," asked Prue,
elated with their success.

"I couldn't do it. I loved that little pig, and cried when he was
killed. I should feel as if I was roasting the baby," answered Tilly,
glancing toward the buttery where piggy hung, looking so pink and pretty
it certainly did seem cruel to eat him.

It took a long time to get all the vegetables ready, for, as the cellar
was full, the girls thought they would have every sort. Eph helped, and
by noon all was ready for cooking, and the cranberry-sauce, a good deal
scorched, was cooling in the lean-to.

Luncheon was a lively meal, and doughnuts and cheese vanished in such
quantities that Tilly feared no one would have an appetite for her
sumptuous dinner. The boys assured her they would be starving by five
o'clock, and Sol mourned bitterly over the little pig that was not to be
served up.

"Now you all go and coast, while Prue and I set the table and get out
the best chiny," said Tilly, bent on having her dinner look well, no
matter what its other failings might be.

Out came the rough sleds, on went the round hoods, old hats, red cloaks,
and moccasins, and away trudged the four younger Bassetts, to disport
themselves in the snow, and try the ice down by the old mill, where the
great wheel turned and splashed so merrily in the summer-time.

Eph took his fiddle and scraped away to his heart's content in the
parlor, while the girls, after a short rest, set the table and made all
ready to dish up the dinner when that exciting moment came. It was not
at all the sort of table we see now, but would look very plain and
countrified to us, with its green-handled knives and two-pronged steel
forks; its red-and-white china, and pewter platters, scoured till they
shone, with mugs and spoons to match, and a brown jug for the cider.
The cloth was coarse, but white as snow, and the little maids had seen
the blue-eyed flax grow, out of which their mother wove the linen they
had watched and watered while it bleached in the green meadow. They had
no napkins and little silver; but the best tankard and Ma's few wedding
spoons were set forth in state. Nuts and apples at the corners gave an
air, and the place of honor was left in the middle for the oranges yet
to come.

"Don't it look beautiful?" said Prue, when they paused to admire the
general effect.

"Pretty nice, I think. I wish Ma could see how well we can do it," began
Tilly, when a loud howling startled both girls, and sent them flying to
the window. The short afternoon had passed so quickly that twilight had
come before they knew it, and now, as they looked out through the
gathering dusk, they saw four small black figures tearing up the road,
to come bursting in, all screaming at once: "The bear, the bear! Eph,
get the gun! He's coming, he's coming!"

Eph had dropped his fiddle, and got down his gun before the girls could
calm the children enough to tell their story, which they did in a
somewhat incoherent manner. "Down in the holler, coastin', we heard a
growl," began Sol, with his eyes as big as saucers. "I see him fust
lookin' over the wall," roared Seth, eager to get his share of honor.

"Awful big and shaggy," quavered Roxy, clinging to Tilly, while Rhody
hid in Prue's skirts, and piped out: "His great paws kept clawing at us,
and I was so scared my legs would hardly go."

"We ran away as fast as we could go, and he come growling after us. He's
awful hungry, and he'll eat every one of us if he gets in," continued
Sol, looking about him for a safe retreat.

"Oh, Eph, don't let him eat us," cried both little girls, flying up
stairs to hide under their mother's bed, as their surest shelter.

"No danger of that, you little geese. I'll shoot him as soon as he
comes. Get out of the way, boys," and Eph raised the window to get good
aim.

"There he is! Fire away, and don't miss!" cried Seth, hastily following
Sol, who had climbed to the top of the dresser as a good perch from
which to view the approaching fray.

Prue retired to the hearth as if bent on dying at her post rather than
desert the turkey, now "browning beautiful," as she expressed it. But
Tilly boldly stood at the open window, ready to lend a hand if the enemy
proved too much for Eph.

All had seen bears, but none had ever come so near before, and even
brave Eph felt that the big brown beast slowly trotting up the door-yard
was an unusually formidable specimen. He was growling horribly, and
stopped now and then as if to rest and shake himself.

"Get the ax, Tilly, and if I should miss, stand ready to keep him off
while I load again," said Eph, anxious to kill his first bear in style
and alone; a girl's help didn't count.

Tilly flew for the ax, and was at her brother's side by the time the
bear was near enough to be dangerous. He stood on his hind legs, and
seemed to sniff with relish the savory odors that poured out of the
window.

"Fire, Eph!" cried Tilly, firmly.

"Wait till he rears again. I'll get a better shot, then," answered the
boy, while Prue covered her ears to shut out the bang, and the small
boys cheered from their dusty refuge up among the pumpkins.

But a very singular thing happened next, and all who saw it stood
amazed, for suddenly Tilly threw down the ax, flung open the door, and
ran straight into the arms of the bear, who stood erect to receive her,
while his growlings changed to a loud "Haw, haw!" that startled the
children more than the report of a gun.

"It's Gad Hopkins, tryin' to fool us!" cried Eph, much disgusted at the
loss of his prey, for these hardy boys loved to hunt, and prided
themselves on the number of wild animals and birds they could shoot in a
year.

"Oh, Gad, how could you scare us so?" laughed Tilly, still held fast in
one shaggy arm of the bear, while the other drew a dozen oranges from
some deep pocket in the buffalo-skin coat, and fired them into the
kitchen with such good aim that Eph ducked, Prue screamed, and Sol and
Seth came down much quicker than they went up.

"Wal, you see I got upsot over yonder, and the old horse went home while
I was floundering in a drift, so I tied on the buffalers to tote 'em
easy, and come along till I see the children playin' in the holler. I
jest meant to give 'em a little scare, but they run like partridges, and
I kep' up the joke to see how Eph would like this sort of company," and
Gad haw-hawed again.

"You'd have had a warm welcome if we hadn't found you out. I'd have put
a bullet through you in a jiffy, old chap," said Eph, coming out to
shake hands with the young giant, who was only a year or two older than
himself.

"Come in and set up to dinner with us. Prue and I have done it all
ourselves, and Pa will be along soon, I reckon," cried Tilly, trying to
escape.

"Couldn't, no ways. My folks will think I'm dead ef I don't get along
home, sence the horse and sleigh have gone ahead empty. I've done my
arrant and had my joke; now I want my pay, Tilly," and Gad took a hearty
kiss from the rosy cheeks of his "little sweetheart," as he called her.
His own cheeks tingled with the smart slap she gave him as she ran
away, calling out that she hated bears and would bring her ax next time.

"I ain't afeared; your sharp eyes found me out; and ef you run into a
bear's arms you must expect a hug," answered Gad, as he pushed back the
robe and settled his fur cap more becomingly.

"I should have known you in a minute if I hadn't been asleep when the
girls squalled. You did it well, though, and I advise you not to try it
again in a hurry, or you'll get shot," said Eph, as they parted, he
rather crestfallen and Gad in high glee.

"My sakes alive--the turkey is burnt one side, and the kettles have
biled over so the pies I put to warm are all ashes!" scolded Tilly, as
the flurry subsided and she remembered her dinner.

"Well, I can't help it. I couldn't think of victuals when I expected to
be eaten alive myself, could I?" pleaded poor Prue, who had tumbled into
the cradle when the rain of oranges began.

Tilly laughed, and all the rest joined in, so good humor was restored,
and the spirits of the younger ones were revived by sucks from the one
orange which passed from hand to hand with great rapidity, while the
older girls dished up the dinner. They were just struggling to get the
pudding out of the cloth when Roxy called out, "Here's Pa!"

"There's folks with him," added Rhody.

"Lots of 'em! I see two big sleighs chock full," shouted Seth, peering
through the dusk.

"It looks like a semintary. Guess Gramma's dead and come up to be buried
here," said Sol in a solemn tone. This startling suggestion made Tilly,
Prue, and Eph hasten to look out, full of dismay at such an ending of
their festival.

"If that is a funeral, the mourners are uncommon jolly," said Eph,
drily, as merry voices and loud laughter broke the white silence
without.

"I see Aunt Cinthy, and Cousin Hetty--and there's Mose and Amos. I do
declare, Pa's bringin' 'em all home to have some fun here," cried Prue,
as she recognized one familiar face after another.

"Oh, my patience! Ain't I glad I got dinner, and don't I hope it will
turn out good!" exclaimed Tilly, while the twins pranced with delight,
and the small boys roared:

"Hooray for Pa! Hooray for Thanksgivin'!"

The cheer was answered heartily, and in came Father, Mother, Baby, aunts
and cousins, all in great spirits, and all much surprised to find such a
festive welcome awaiting them.

"Ain't Gran'ma dead at all?" asked Sol, in the midst of the kissing and
hand-shaking.

"Bless your heart, no! It was all a mistake of old Mr. Chadwick's. He's
as deaf as an adder, and when Mrs. Brooks told him Mother was mendin'
fast, and she wanted me to come down to-day, certain sure, he got the
message all wrong, and give it to the fust person passin' in such a way
as to scare me 'most to death, and send us down in a hurry. Mother was
sittin' up as chirk as you please, and dreadful sorry you didn't all
come."

"So, to keep the house quiet for her, and give you a taste of the fun,
your Pa fetched us all up to spend the evenin', and we are goin' to have
a jolly time on't, to jedge by the looks of things," said Aunt Cinthy,
briskly finishing the tale when Mrs. Bassett paused for want of breath.

"What in the world put it into your head we was comin', and set you to
gettin' up such a supper?" asked Mr. Bassett, looking about him, well
pleased and much surprised at the plentiful table.

Tilly modestly began to tell, but the others broke in and sang her
praises in a sort of chorus, in which bears, pigs, pies, and oranges
were oddly mixed. Great satisfaction was expressed by all, and Tilly and
Prue were so elated by the commendation of Ma and the aunts, that they
set forth their dinner, sure everything was perfect.

But when the eating began, which it did the moment wraps were off, then
their pride got a fall; for the first person who tasted the stuffing (it
was big Cousin Mose, and that made it harder to bear) nearly choked over
the bitter morsel.

"Tilly Bassett, whatever made you put wormwood and catnip in your
stuffin'?" demanded Ma, trying not to be severe, for all the rest were
laughing, and Tilly looked ready to cry.

"I did it," said Prue, nobly taking all the blame, which caused Pa to
kiss her on the spot, and declare that it didn't do a might of harm, for
the turkey was all right.

"I never see onions cooked better. All the vegetables is well done, and
the dinner a credit to you, my dears," declared Aunt Cinthy, with her
mouth full of the fragrant vegetable she praised.

The pudding was an utter failure, in spite of the blazing brandy in
which it lay--as hard and heavy as one of the stone balls on Squire
Dunkin's great gate. It was speedily whisked out of sight, and all fell
upon the pies, which were perfect. But Tilly and Prue were much
depressed, and didn't recover their spirits till the dinner was over and
the evening fun well under way.

"Blind-man's buff," "Hunt the slipper," "Come, Philander," and other
lively games soon set every one bubbling over with jollity, and when Eph
struck up "Money Musk" on his fiddle, old and young fell into their
places for a dance. All down the long kitchen they stood, Mr. and Mrs.
Bassett at the top, the twins at the bottom, and then away they went,
heeling and toeing, cutting pigeon-wings, and taking their steps in a
way that would convulse modern children with their new-fangled romps
called dancing. Mose and Tilly covered themselves with glory by the
vigor with which they kept it up, till fat Aunt Cinthy fell into a
chair, breathlessly declaring that a very little of such exercise was
enough for a woman of her "heft."

Apples and cider, chat and singing, finished the evening, and after a
grand kissing all round, the guests drove away in the clear moonlight
which came just in time to cheer their long drive.

When the jingle of the last bell had died away, Mr. Bassett said
soberly, as they stood together on the hearth: "Children, we have
special cause to be thankful that the sorrow we expected was changed
into joy, so we'll read a chapter 'fore we go to bed, and give thanks
where thanks is due."

Then Tilly set out the light-stand with the big Bible on it, and a
candle on each side, and all sat quietly in the fire-light, smiling as
they listened with happy hearts to the sweet old words that fit all
times and seasons so beautifully.

When the good-nights were over, and the children in bed, Prue put her
arm around Tilly and whispered tenderly, for she felt her shake, and was
sure she was crying:

"Don't mind about the old stuffin' and puddin', deary--nobody cared, and
Ma said we really did do surprisin' well for such young girls."

The laughter Tilly was trying to smother broke out then, and was so
infectious, Prue could not help joining her, even before she knew the
cause of the merriment.

"I was mad about the mistakes, but don't care enough to cry. I'm
laughing to think how Gad fooled Eph and I found him out. I thought Mose
and Amos would have died over it when I told them, it was so funny,"
explained Tilly, when she got her breath.

"I was so scared that when the first orange hit me, I thought it was a
bullet, and scrabbled into the cradle as fast as I could. It was real
mean to frighten the little ones so," laughed Prue, as Tilly gave a
growl.

Here a smart rap on the wall of the next room caused a sudden lull in
the fun, and Mrs. Bassett's voice was heard, saying warningly, "Girls,
go to sleep immediate, or you'll wake the baby."

"Yes'm," answered two meek voices, and after a few irrepressible
giggles, silence reigned, broken only by an occasional snore from the
boys, or the soft scurry of mice in the buttery, taking their part in
this old-fashioned Thanksgiving.




II.

HOW IT ALL HAPPENED.


It was a small room, with nothing in it but a bed, two chairs, and a big
chest. A few little gowns hung on the wall, and the only picture was the
wintry sky, sparkling with stars, framed by the uncurtained window. But
the moon, pausing to peep, saw something pretty and heard something
pleasant. Two heads in little round nightcaps lay on one pillow, two
pairs of wide-awake blue eyes stared up at the light, and two tongues
were going like mill clappers.

"I'm so glad we got our shirts done in time! It seemed as if we never
should, and I don't think six cents is half enough for a great red
flannel thing with four button-holes--do you?" said one little voice,
rather wearily.

"No; but then we each made four, and fifty cents is a good deal of
money. Are you sorry we didn't keep our quarters for ourselves?" asked
the other voice, with an under-tone of regret in it.

"Yes, I am, till I think how pleased the children will be with our tree,
for they don't expect anything, and will be so surprised. I wish we had
more toys to put on it, for it looks so small and mean with only three
or four things."

"It won't hold any more, so I wouldn't worry about it. The toys are very
red and yellow, and I guess the babies won't know how cheap they are,
but like them as much as if they cost heaps of money."

This was a cheery voice, and as it spoke the four blue eyes turned
toward the chest under the window, and the kind moon did her best to
light up the tiny tree standing there. A very pitiful little tree it
was--only a branch of hemlock in an old flower-pot, propped up with bits
of coal, and hung with a few penny toys earned by the patient fingers of
the elder sisters, that the little ones should not be disappointed.

But in spite of the magical moonlight the broken branch, with its scanty
supply of fruit, looked pathetically poor, and one pair of eyes filled
slowly with tears, while the other pair lost their happy look, as if a
cloud had come over the sunshine.

"Are you crying, Dolly?"

"Not much, Polly."

"What makes you, dear?"

"I didn't know how poor we were till I saw the tree, and then I couldn't
help it," sobbed the elder sister, for at twelve she already knew
something of the cares of poverty, and missed the happiness that seemed
to vanish out of all their lives when father died.

"It's dreadful! I never thought we'd have to earn our tree, and only be
able to get a broken branch, after all, with nothing on it but three
sticks of candy, two squeaking dogs, a red cow, and an ugly bird with
one feather in its tail;" and overcome by a sudden sense of destitution,
Polly sobbed even more despairingly than Dolly.

"Hush, dear; we must cry softly, or mother will hear, and come up, and
then we shall have to tell. You know we said we wouldn't seem to mind
not having any Christmas, she felt so sorry about it."

"I _must_ cry, but I'll be quiet."

So the two heads went under the pillow for a few minutes, and not a
sound betrayed them as the little sisters cried softly in one another's
arms, lest mother should discover that they were no longer careless
children, but brave young creatures trying to bear their share of the
burden cheerfully.

When the shower was over, the faces came out shining like roses after
rain, and the voices went on again as before.

"Don't you wish there really was a Santa Claus, who knew what we wanted,
and would come and put two silver half-dollars in our stockings, so we
could go and see _Puss in Boots_ at the Museum to-morrow afternoon?"

"Yes, indeed; but we didn't hang up any stockings, you know, because
mother had nothing to put in them. It does seem as if rich people might
think of poor people now and then. Such little bits of things would
make us happy, and it couldn't be much trouble to take two small girls
to the play, and give them candy now and then."

"_I_ shall when I'm rich, like Mr. Chrome and Miss Kent. I shall go
round every Christmas with a big basket of goodies, and give _all_ the
poor children some."

"P'r'aps if we sew ever so many flannel shirts we may be rich by-and-by.
I should give mother a new bonnet first of all, for I heard Miss Kent
say no lady would wear such a shabby one. Mrs. Smith said fine bonnets
didn't make real ladies. I like her best, but I do want a locket like
Miss Kent's."

"I should give mother some new rubbers, and then I should buy a white
apron, with frills like Miss Kent's, and bring home nice bunches of
grapes and good things to eat, as Mr. Chrome does. I often smell them,
but he never gives _me_ any; he only says, 'Hullo, chick!' and I'd
rather have oranges any time."

"It will take us a long while to get rich, I'm afraid. It makes me tired
to think of it. I guess we'd better go to sleep now, dear."

"Good-night, Dolly."

"Good-night, Polly."

Two soft kisses were heard, a nestling sound followed, and presently the
little sisters lay fast asleep cheek against cheek, on the pillow wet
with their tears, never dreaming what was going to happen to them
to-morrow.

Now Miss Kent's room was next to theirs, and as she sat sewing she could
hear the children's talk, for they soon forgot to whisper. At first she
smiled, then she looked sober, and when the prattle ceased she said to
herself, as she glanced about her pleasant chamber:

"Poor little things! they think I'm rich, and envy me, when I'm only a
milliner earning my living. I ought to have taken more notice of them,
for their mother has a hard time, I fancy, but never complains. I'm
sorry they heard what I said, and if I knew how to do it without
offending her, I'd trim a nice bonnet for a Christmas gift, for she _is_
a lady, in spite of her old clothes. I can give the children some of the
things they want anyhow, and I will. The idea of those mites making a
fortune out of shirts at six cents apiece!"

Miss Kent laughed at the innocent delusion, but sympathized with her
little neighbors, for she knew all about hard times. She had good wages
now, but spent them on herself, and liked to be fine rather than neat.
Still, she was a good-hearted girl, and what she had overheard set her
to thinking soberly, then to acting kindly, as we shall see.

"If I hadn't spent all my money on my dress for the party to-morrow
night, I'd give each of them a half-dollar. As I can not, I'll hunt up
the other things they wanted, for it's a shame they shouldn't have a bit
of Christmas, when they tried so hard to please the little ones."

As she spoke she stirred about her room, and soon had a white apron, an
old carnelian heart on a fresh blue ribbon, and two papers of bonbons
ready. As no stockings were hung up, she laid a clean towel on the floor
before the door, and spread forth the small gifts to look their best.

Miss Kent was so busy that she did not hear a step come quietly up
stairs, and Mr. Chrome, the artist, peeped at her through the balusters,
wondering what she was about. He soon saw, and watched her with
pleasure, thinking that she never looked prettier than now.

Presently she caught him at it, and hastened to explain, telling what
she had heard, and how she was trying to atone for her past neglect of
these young neighbors. Then she said good-night, and both went into
their rooms, she to sleep happily, and he to smoke as usual.

But his eye kept turning to some of the "nice little bundles" that lay
on his table, as if the story he had heard suggested how he might follow
Miss Kent's example. I rather think he would not have disturbed himself
if he had not heard the story told in such a soft voice, with a pair of
bright eyes full of pity looking into his, for little girls were not
particularly interesting to him, and he was usually too tired to notice
the industrious creatures toiling up and down stairs on various errands,
or sewing at the long red seams.

Now that he knew something of their small troubles, he felt as if it
would please Miss Kent, and be a good joke, to do his share of the
pretty work she had begun.

So presently he jumped up, and, opening his parcels, took out two
oranges and two bunches of grapes, then he looked up two silver
half-dollars, and stealing into the hall, laid the fruit upon the towel,
and the money atop of the oranges. This addition improved the display
very much, and Mr. Chrome was stealing back, well pleased, when his eye
fell on Miss Kent's door, and he said to himself, "She too shall have a
little surprise, for she is a dear, kind-hearted soul."

In his room was a prettily painted plate, and this he filled with green
and purple grapes, tucked a sentimental note underneath, and leaving it
on her threshold, crept away as stealthily as a burglar.

The house was very quiet when Mrs. Smith, the landlady, came up to turn
off the gas. "Well, upon my word, here's fine doings, to be sure!" she
said, when she saw the state of the upper hall. "Now I wouldn't have
thought it of Miss Kent, she is such a giddy girl, nor of Mr. Chrome, he
is so busy with his own affairs. I meant to give those children each a
cake to-morrow, they are such good little things. I'll run down and get
them now, as my contribution to this fine set out."

Away trotted Mrs. Smith to her pantry, and picked out a couple of
tempting cakes, shaped like hearts and full of plums. There was a goodly
array of pies on the shelves, and she took two of them, saying, as she
climbed the stairs again, "They remembered the children, so I'll
remember them, and have my share of the fun."

So up went the pies, for Mrs. Smith had not much to give, and her spirit
was generous, though her pastry was not of the best. It looked very
droll to see pies sitting about on the thresholds of closed doors, but
the cakes were quite elegant, and filled up the corners of the towel
handsomely, for the apron lay in the middle, with the oranges right and
left, like two sentinels in yellow uniforms.

It was very late when the flicker of a candle came up stairs, and a pale
lady, with a sweet sad face, appeared, bringing a pair of red and a pair
of blue mittens for her Dolly and Polly. Poor Mrs. Blake did have a hard
time, for she stood all day in a great store that she might earn bread
for the poor children who staid at home and took care of one another.
Her heart was very heavy that night, because it was the first Christmas
she had ever known without gifts and festivity of some sort. But Petkin,
the youngest child, had been ill, times were very hard, the little
mouths gaped for food like the bills of hungry birds, and there was no
tender mate to help fill them.

If any elves had been hovering about the dingy hall just then, they
would have seen the mother's tired face brighten beautifully when she
discovered the gifts, and found that her little girls had been so kindly
remembered. Something more brilliant than the mock diamonds in Miss
Kent's best earrings fell and glittered on the dusty floor as Mrs. Blake
added the mittens to the other things, and went to her lonely room
again, smiling as she thought how she could thank them all in a sweet
and simple way.

Her windows were full of flowers, for the delicate tastes of the poor
lady found great comfort in their beauty. "I have nothing else to give,
and these will show how grateful I am," she said, as she rejoiced that
the scarlet geraniums were so full of gay clusters, the white
chrysanthemum stars were all out, and the pink roses at their loveliest.

They slept now, dreaming of a sunny morrow as they sat safely sheltered
from the bitter cold. But that night was their last, for a gentle hand
cut them all, and soon three pretty nosegays stood in a glass, waiting
for dawn, to be laid at three doors, with a few grateful words which
would surprise and delight the receivers, for flowers were rare in those
hard-working lives, and kind deeds often come back to the givers in
fairer shapes than they go.

Now one would think that there had been gifts enough, and no more could
possibly arrive, since all had added his or her mite except Betsey, the
maid, who was off on a holiday, and the babies fast asleep in their
trundle-bed, with nothing to give but love and kisses. Nobody dreamed
that the old cat would take it into her head that her kittens were in
danger, because Mrs. Smith had said she thought they were nearly old
enough to be given away. But she must have understood, for when all was
dark and still, the anxious mother went patting up stairs to the
children's door, meaning to hide her babies under their bed, sure they
would save them from destruction. Mrs. Blake had shut the door, however,
so poor Puss was disappointed; but finding a soft, clean spot among a
variety of curious articles, she laid her kits there, and kept them warm
all night, with her head pillowed on the blue mittens.

In the cold morning Dolly and Polly got up and scrambled into their
clothes, not with joyful haste to see what their stockings held, for
they had none, but because they had the little ones to dress while
mother got the breakfast.

Dolly opened the door, and started back with a cry of astonishment at
the lovely spectacle before her. The other people had taken in their
gifts, so nothing destroyed the magnificent effect of the treasures so
curiously collected in the night. Puss had left her kits asleep, and
gone down to get her own breakfast, and there, in the middle of the
ruffled apron, as if in a dainty cradle, lay the two Maltese darlings,
with white bibs and boots on, and white tips to the tiny tails curled
round their little noses in the sweetest way.

Polly and Dolly could only clasp their hands and look in rapturous
silence for a minute; then they went down on their knees and revelled in
the unexpected richness before them.

"I do believe there _is_ a Santa Claus, and that he heard us, for here
is everything we wanted," said Dolly, holding the carnelian heart in one
hand and the plummy one in the other.

"It must have been some kind of a fairy, for we didn't mention kittens,
but we wanted one, and here are two darlings," cried Polly, almost
purring with delight as the downy bunches unrolled and gaped till their
bits of pink tongues were visible.

"Mrs. Smith was one fairy, I guess, and Miss Kent was another, for that
is her apron. I shouldn't wonder if Mr. Chrome gave us the oranges and
the money: men always have lots, and his name is on this bit of paper,"
said Dolly.

"Oh, I'm _so_ glad! Now we shall have a Christmas like other people, and
I'll never say again that rich folks don't remember poor folks. Come and
show all our treasures to mother and the babies; they must have some,"
answered Polly, feeling that the world was all right, and life not half
as hard as she thought it last night.

Shrieks of delight greeted the sisters, and all that morning there was
joy and feasting in Mrs. Blake's room, and in the afternoon Dolly and
Polly went to the Museum, and actually saw _Puss in Boots_; for their
mother insisted on their going, having discovered how the hard-earned
quarters had been spent. This was such unhoped-for bliss that they could
hardly believe it, and kept smiling at one another so brightly that
people wondered who the happy little girls in shabby cloaks could be who
clapped their new mittens so heartily, and laughed till it was better
than music to hear them.

This was a very remarkable Christmas-day, and they long remembered it;
for while they were absorbed in the fortunes of the Marquis of Carabas
and the funny cat, who tucked his tail in his belt, washed his face so
awkwardly, and didn't know how to purr, strange things were happening at
home, and more surprises were in store for our little friends. You see,
when people once begin to do kindnesses, it is so easy and pleasant they
find it hard to leave off; and sometimes it beautifies them so that
they find they love one another very much--as Mr. Chrome and Miss Kent
did, though we have nothing to do with that except to tell how they made
the poor little tree grow and blossom.

They were very jolly at dinner, and talked a good deal about the Blakes,
who ate in their own rooms. Miss Kent told what the children said, and
it touched the soft spot in all their hearts to hear about the red
shirts, though they laughed at Polly's lament over the bird with only
one feather in its tail.

"I'd give them a better tree if I had any place to put it, and knew how
to trim it up," said Mr. Chrome, with a sudden burst of generosity,
which so pleased Miss Kent that her eyes shone like Christmas candles.

"Put it in the back parlor. All the Browns are away for a week, and
we'll help you trim it--won't we, my dear?" cried Mrs. Smith, warmly;
for she saw that he was in a sociable mood, and thought it a pity that
the Blakes should not profit by it.

"Yes, indeed; I should like it of all things, and it needn't cost much,
for I have some skill in trimmings, as you know." And Miss Kent looked
so gay and pretty as she spoke that Mr. Chrome made up his mind that
millinery must be a delightful occupation.

"Come on then, ladies, and we'll have a little frolic. I'm a lonely old
bachelor, with nowhere to go to-day, and I'd like some fun."

They had it, I assure you; for they all fell to work as busy as bees,
flying and buzzing about with much laughter as they worked their
pleasant miracle. Mr. Chrome acted more like the father of a large
family than a crusty bachelor, Miss Kent's skillful fingers flew as they
never did before, and Mrs. Smith trotted up and down as briskly as if
she were sixteen instead of being a stout old woman of sixty.

The children were so full of the play, and telling all about it, that
they forgot their tree till after supper; but when they went to look for
it they found it gone, and in its place a great paper hand with one
finger pointing down stairs, and on it these mysterious words in red
ink:

"Look in the Browns' back parlor!"

At the door of that interesting apartment they found their mother with
Will and Petkin, for another hand had suddenly appeared to them pointing
up. The door flew open quite as if it were a fairy play, and they went
in to find a pretty tree planted in a red box on the centre table,
lighted with candles, hung with gilded nuts, red apples, gay bonbons,
and a gift for each.

Mr. Chrome was hidden behind one folding-door, and fat Mrs. Smith
squeezed behind the other, and they both thought it a great improvement
upon the old-fashioned Santa Claus to have Miss Kent, in the white
dress she made for the party, with Mrs. Blake's roses in her hair, step
forward as the children gazed in silent rapture, and with a few sweet
words welcome them to the little surprise their friends had made.

There were many Christmas trees in the city that night, but none which
gave such hearty pleasure as the one which so magically took the place
of the broken branch and its few poor toys. They were all there,
however, and Dolly and Polly were immensely pleased to see that of all
her gifts Petkin chose the forlorn bird to carry to bed with her, the
one yellow feather being just to her taste.

Mrs. Blake put on her neat bonnet, and was so gratified that Miss Kent
thought it the most successful one she ever trimmed. She was well paid
for it by the thanks of one neighbor and the admiration of another; for
when she went to her party Mr. Chrome went with her, and said something
on the way which made her heart dance more lightly than her feet that
night.

Good Mrs. Smith felt that her house had covered itself with glory by
this event, and Dolly and Polly declared that it was the most perfect
and delightful surprise party ever seen.

It was all over by nine o'clock, and with good-night kisses for every
one the little girls climbed up to bed laden with treasures and too
happy for many words. But as they tied their round caps Dolly said,
thoughtfully:

"On the whole, I think it's rather nice to be poor when people are kind
to you."

"Well, I'd _rather_ be rich; but if I can't be, it is very good fun to
have Christmas trees like this one," answered truthful Polly, never
guessing that they had planted the seed from which the little pine-tree
grew so quickly and beautifully.

When the moon came to look in at the window on her nightly round, two
smiling faces lay on the pillow, which was no longer wet with tears, but
rather knobby with the mine of riches hidden underneath,--first fruits
of the neighborly friendship which flourished in that house until
another and a merrier Christmas came.




III.

THE DOLLS' JOURNEY FROM MINNESOTA TO MAINE.


Mr. Plum lived in St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A.

There were six little Plums, all girls, varying in ages from fourteen to
seven, and named Kate, Lucy, Susy, Lizzy, Marjory and Maggie. There was
no mamma, but Mrs. Gibbs, the housekeeper, was a kind old soul, and papa
did everything he could to make the small daughters good and happy.

One stormy Saturday afternoon the children were all together in the
school-room, and papa busy at his desk in the library, with the door
open because he liked to hear the pleasant voices and catch glimpses of
the droll plays that went on there.

Kate lay on the sofa reading "The Daisy Chain" for the fourth time.
Susy, Lucy and Lizzie were having a select tea party in their own
recess, the entrance to which was barricaded with chairs to keep out the
"babies," as they called the little ones, who were much offended at
being excluded and sat up in the cushioned window-seat pensively
watching the rain.

"If it had only waited till to-morrow we should have had time for our
journey; now we can't go till next Saturday. Flora is so disappointed
she would cry if I had not taught her to behave," said Maggie with a
sigh, as she surveyed the doll on her knee in its new summer suit.

"So is Dora. Just see how sweet she looks with her hat and cape on and
her travelling-bag all ready. Couldn't we play travel in the house? It
is such a pity to wait when the children are in such a hurry to go,"
answered Marjory, settling the tiny bag that held Dora's nightcap and
gown as well as the morsels of cake that were to serve for her lunch.

"No," said Maggie decidedly, "we can't do it, because there is no room
for carriages, and boats, and railroads, and hotels, and accidents. It
is a long journey from Minnesota to Maine, and we couldn't get it all
into one room I'm sure."

"I don't think papa would mind our coming into the library, if we didn't
ring the car bells very loud or scream much when the accidents happen,"
said Marjory, who hated to give up the plan they had been cherishing all
the week.

"What is it, little ones? Come and tell me what is the matter," called
Mr. Plum, hearing his name and the magic word "railroad," for he was the
president of one and had his hands full just then.

Down jumped the little girls and ran to perch on either arm of his
chair, pouring out their small tribulations as freely as if he had been
the most sympathizing of mothers.

"We planned to take a long, long journey round the garden with our dolls
to-day, and play go to Maine and see Aunt Maria. You know she asked us,
and we looked out the way on the map and got all ready, and now it rains
and we are dreadfully disappointed," said Maggie, while Marjory sighed
as she looked at the red D. worked on the inch square travelling-bag.

"As you can't go, why not send the dolls to make aunty a visit, and she
will send them back when they get homesick," proposed Mr. Plum, smiling,
as if a sudden idea had popped into his head.

"Really?" cried Maggie.

"How could we?" asked Marjory.

"They could go and come by mail, and tell you all about their adventures
when they got back," said papa.

Both children were speechless for a moment, then as the full splendor of
this proposition dawned upon them they clapped their hands, crying
eagerly:

"We will! we will! Let's do it at once."

"What? where? who?" asked Susy, Lucy and Lizzie, forgetting their tea
party to run and see what was going on.

They were told, and in their turn exclaimed so loudly that Kate came to
join in the fun.

After a great deal of talking and laughing, the dolls were prepared for
the long journey. They were common wooden-headed dollies, a hand long,
with stuffed bodies and stout legs ornamented with very small feet in
red and blue boots. Dora was a blonde and Flora a brunette, otherwise
they were just alike and nearly new. Usually when people go travelling
they put on their hats and cloaks, but these pilgrims, by papa's advice,
left all encumbrances behind them, for they were to travel in a peculiar
way, and blue gingham dresses were chosen for the expedition.

"It is possible that they may never come back. Accidents will happen you
know. Are you prepared for that?" asked Mr. Plum, pausing with the brown
paper spread out before him.

"I am," answered Maggie firmly, as she laid Flora on the table, her
black eyes staring as if rather alarmed at this sudden start.

Marjory hesitated a moment, clasping Dora to her bosom with a face full
of maternal anxiety. But Susy, Lucy and Lizzie cried: "Let her go, do
let her go, and if she is lost papa will give you a new doll."

"Good-by, my darling dear. Have a splendid time, and be sure you come
back to me," whispered Marjory, with a tender farewell kiss as she gave
up her child.

All stood watching silently while papa tied the dolls back to back with
the ribbon Kate pulled from her neck, then folded them carefully in
strong brown paper, leaving their heads out that they might see the
world as they went along. Being carefully fastened up with several turns
of cord, Mr. Plum directed the precious parcel to "Miss Maria Plum,
Portland, Maine. With care." Then it was weighed, stamped, and
pronounced ready for the post.

"I shall write and tell aunty they are coming, because she will want to
be prepared for such distinguished visitors," said papa, taking up his
pen with a glance at the six excited little faces round him.

Silence reigned while the letter was written, and as he sealed it up Mr.
Plum said solemnly, with his hand on the parcel:

"For the last time, shall they go?"

"Yes!" answered the Spartan mothers with one voice, while the other
sisters danced round them, and Kate patted the curly heads approvingly.

"Going, going, gone!" answered papa as he whisked on his coat and hat,
and slammed the door behind him.

The children clustered at the window to see him set out on this
momentous errand, and he often looked back waving his umbrella at them,
till he vanished round the corner, with a reassuring pat on the pocket
out of which dear Do and Flo popped their heads for a last look at their
sweet home.

"Now let us take out poor old Lucinda and Rose Augusta to play with. I
know their feelings were hurt at our leaving them for the new dolls,"
said Maggie, rummaging in the baby-house, whither Margery soon followed
her to reinstate the old darlings in the place of the departed new ones.

"Safely off," reported Mr. Plum, when he came into tea, "and we may
expect to hear from them in a week or two. Parcels go more slowly than
letters, and this is Aunty's busy season, so wait patiently and see what
will happen."

"We will," said the little girls; and they did, but week after week went
by and nothing was heard of the wanderers.

We, however, can follow them and learn much that their anxious mothers
never knew.

As soon as Flora and Dora recovered from the bewilderment occasioned by
the confusion of the post office, they found themselves in one of the
many leathern mail bags rumbling Eastward. As it was perfectly dark they
could not see their companions, so listened to the whispering and
rustling that went on about them. The newspapers all talked politics,
and some of them used such bad language that the dolls would have
covered their ears, if their hands had not been tied down. The letters
were better behaved and more interesting, for they told one another the
news they carried, because nothing is private in America, and even
gummed envelopes cannot keep gossip from leaking out.

"It is very interesting, but I should enjoy it more if I was not
grinding my nose against the rough side of this leather bag," whispered
Dora, who lay undermost just then.

"So should I, if a heavy book was not pinching my toes. I've tried to
kick it away, but it won't stir, and keeps droning on about reports and
tariffs and such dull things," answered Flora, with a groan.

"Do you like travelling?" asked Dora, presently, when the letters and
papers fell asleep, lulled by the motion of the cars.

"Not yet, but I shall when I can look about me. This bundle near by says
the mails are often sorted in the cars, and in that way we shall see
something of the world, I hope," answered Flora, cheering up, for, like
her mamma, she was of an enquiring turn.

The dolls took a nap of some hours, and were roused by a general
tumbling out on a long shelf, where many other parcels lay, and lively
men sent letters and papers flying here and there as if a whirlwind was
blowing. A long box lay beside the dolls who stood nearly erect leaning
against a pile of papers. Several holes were cut in the lid, and out of
one of them was thrust a little black nose, as if trying to get air.

"Dear me! what can be in it?" said Flora, who was nearest.

"I'm a poor little alligator, going to a boy in Chicago, if you please,
and I want my mother," sobbed a voice from the box, and there was a rap
on the lid as of an agitated tail.

"Mercy on us! I hope we shall not have to travel with the monster,"
whispered Dora, trying to see over her shoulder.

"I'm not afraid. He can't be very dreadful, for the box is not any
longer than we are. Natural history is very useful; I've heard mamma say
so, and I shall talk with him while we rest here," answered Flo, nodding
toward the eye which now took the place of the nose.

So the little alligator told her something of his home on the banks of a
great river, where he was just learning to play happily with his
brothers and sisters, when he was caught and sent away to pine in
captivity.

The dolls comforted him as well as they could, and a pair of baby's
shoes travelling in an envelope sympathized with him, while a shabby
bundle directed to "Michael Dolan, at Mrs. Judy Quin's, next door to Mr.
Pat Murphy, Boston, North street," told them to "Whisht and slape quite
till they came forninst the place."

"Such low people!" whispered Do to Flo, and both stood primly silent
till they were tumbled into another mail bag, and went rattling on again
with a new set of companions.

"I hope that poor baby will go safely and the boy be good to him," said
Flora, for the little alligator went with the live stock in some other
way.

"Thank goodness he didn't go with us! I shall dream about that black
nose and winking eye, I'm sure. The dangers of travelling are great, but
we are safe and comfortable now, I think," and Dora settled down in a
cozy corner of the bag, wondering when they should reach Chicago.

"I like adventures and hope we shall have some," answered Flora,
briskly, little dreaming how soon her wish was to be granted.

A few hours later there come a bump, a crash, a cry, and then all the
mail bags rolled one over the other with the car down an embankment into
a river.

"Now we are dead!" shrieked the poor dolls, clinging together as they
heard the splash of water, the shouting of men, the splintering of wood,
and the hiss of steam.

"Don't be frightened, ladies, mail bags are always looked after," said a
large envelope with an official seal and the name of a Senator on it.

"Any bones broken, dear madam?" asked a jaunty pink letter, with a scent
of musk about it, evidently a love-letter.

"I think one foot is hurt, and my clothes are dripping," sighed Dora,
faintly.

"Water won't hurt calico," called out a magazine full of fashion plates,
adding dolefully, as its gay colors began to run, "I shall be in a nice
mess if I ever get out of this. People will wear odd fashions if they
follow me this time."

"Hope they will telegraph news of this accident in time for the evening
papers," said a dingy sheet called the "Barahoo Thunderbolt," as it lay
atop of the heap in its yellow wrapper.

"Be calm, my friends, and wait with fortitude for death or deliverance,
as I do." With which philosophic remark "The St. Louis Cosmos" folded
the pages which for the first time since the paper was started, were not
dry.

Here the water rose over the topmost letter and a moist silence
prevailed till a sudden jerk fished up the bag, and before the dolls
could recover their wits they were spread out on the floor of a mail car
to dry, while several busy men sorted and saved such papers and letters
as still held together.

"Now we shall see something," said Flora, feeling the warm air blow over
her as they spun along, for a slight accident like this did not delay
the energetic Westerners a moment longer than absolutely necessary.

"I can't see you, dear, but I hope you look better than I do, for the
yellow of my hair has washed into my eyes and the red of my cheeks is
quite gone, I'm sure," answered Dora, as her wet dress flopped in the
breeze and the broken foot sticking up showed her that her blue boots
were ruined.

"I don't care a bit how I look. It's great fun now we are safe. Pop up
your head and see the wide prairie flying past. I do hope that poor baby
got away and swam home to his mother. The upset into the river was quite
to his taste, I fancy," said Flora, who was much excited by her
adventure and eager for more.

Presently one of the men set the dolls up in the corner of a window to
dry, and there they stood viewing the fine landscape with one eye while
the other watched the scene of devastation within. Everything was in
great confusion after the accident, so it is not strange that the dolls
were not missed when they slowly slid lower and lower till a sudden
lurch of the car sent them out of the window to roll into a green field
where cows were feeding and children picking strawberries.

"This is the end of us! Here we shall lie and mould forgotten by
everybody," said Dora, who always took a tragical view of things.

"Not a bit of it! I see cows eating toward us and they may give us a
lift. I've heard of their tossing people up, though I don't know just
how it's done. If they don't, we are in the path and some of those
children are sure to find us," answered Flora cheerfully, though she
stood on her head with a bunch of burrs pricking her nose.

She was right. A bright-eyed little German girl presently came trotting
along the path with a great basket full of berries on her head arranged
in pretty pottles ready for the market. Seeing the red cow sniffing at a
brown paper parcel she drove her away, picked it up and peeped in at the
open end.

The sight of two dolls in such a place made her feel as if fairies had
dropped them there for her. She could not read the direction and hurried
home to show her treasure to her brothers and sisters of whom there were
eight.

"What will become of us now!" exclaimed Dora, as eager hands slipped
them out of the wrapper and smoothed their damp skirts in a room that
seemed swarming with boys and girls of all sizes.

"Don't worry, we shall get on nicely, I'm sure, and learn German of
these young persons. It is a great relief to be able to stretch one's
limbs and stand up, isn't it?" answered Flora, undismayed by anything
that had happened as yet.

"Yes, dear, I love you but I _am_ tired of being tied to you all day. I
hope we shall live through this noise and get a little rest, but I give
up the idea of ever seeing Portland," answered Dora, staring with all
her blue eyes at the display of musical instruments about the room, and
longing to stop her ears, for several of the children were playing on
the violin, flute, horn or harp. They were street musicians, and even
the baby seemed to be getting ready to take part in the concert, for he
sat on the floor beside an immense bass horn taller than himself, with
his rosy lips at the mouth piece and his cheeks puffed out in vain
attempts to make a "boom! boom!" as brother Fritz did.

Flora was delighted, and gave skips on her red boots in time to the
lively tooting of the boys, while the girls gazed at the lovely dolls
and jabbered away with their yellow braids quivering with excitement.

The wrapper was laid aside till a neighbor who read English came in to
translate it. Meantime they enjoyed the new toys immensely, and even
despondent Dora was cheered up by the admiration she received; while
they in their turn were deeply interested in the pretty dolls' furniture
some of the children made.

Beds, tables and chairs covered the long bench, and round it sat the
neat-handed little maidens gluing, tacking and trimming, while they sang
and chatted at their work as busy and happy as a hive of bees.

All day the boys went about the streets playing, and in the evening
trooped off to the beer gardens to play again, for they lived in
Chicago, and the dolls had got so far on their way to Aunt Maria, as
they soon discovered.

For nearly two months they lived happily with Minna, Gretchen and
Nanerl, then they set out on their travels again, and this was the way
it happened. A little girl came to order a set of furniture for her new
baby-house, and seeing two shabby dolls reposing in a fine bed she asked
about them. Her mamma spoke German so Minna told how they were found,
and showed the old wrapper, saying that they always meant to send the
dolls on their way but grew so fond of them they kept putting it off.

"I am going as far as New York very soon and will take them along if you
like, for I think little Miss Maria Plum must have been expecting her
dolls all this time. Shall I?" asked the mamma, as she read the address
and saw the dash under "With care," as if the dollies were of great
importance to some one.

"Ja, ja," answered Minna, glad to oblige a lady who bought two whole
sets of their best furniture and paid for it at once.

So again the dolls were put in their brown paper cover and sent away
with farewell kisses.

"This now is genteel and just suits me," said Dora, as they drove along
with little Clara to the handsome house where she was staying.

"I have a feeling that she is a spoilt child, and we shall not be as
happy with her as with the dear Poppleheimers. We shall see," answered
Flora, wisely, for Clara had soon tossed the dolls into a corner and was
fretting because mamma would not buy her the big horn to blow on.

The party started for New York in a day or two, and to the delight of
Flo and Do they were left out of the trunks for Clara to play with on
the way, her own waxen Blanche Marie Annabel being too delicate to be
used.

"Oh my patience, this is worse than tumbling about in a mail-bag,"
groaned Dora, after hours of great suffering, for Clara treated the poor
dolls as if they had no feeling.

She amused herself with knocking their heads together, shutting them in
the window with their poor legs hanging out, swinging them by one arm,
and drawing lines with a pencil all over their faces till they looked as
if tattooed by savages. Even brave Flora was worn out and longed for
rest, finding her only comfort in saying, "I told you so," when Clara
banged them about, or dropped them on the dusty floor to be trampled on
by passing feet.

There they were left, and would have been swept away if a little dog had
not found them as the passengers were leaving the car and carried them
after his master, trotting soberly along with the bundle in his mouth,
for fortunately Clara had put them into the paper before she left them,
so they were still together in the trials of the journey.

"Hullo, Jip, what have you got?" asked the young man as the little dog
jumped up on the carriage seat and laid his load on his master's knee,
panting and wagging his tail as if he had done something to be praised
for.

"Dolls, I declare! What can a bachelor do with the poor things? Wonder
who Maria Plum is? Midge will like a look at them before we send them
along;" and into the young man's pocket they went, trembling with fear
of the dog, but very grateful for being rescued from destruction.

Jip kept his eye on them, and gave an occasional poke with his cold nose
to be sure they were there as they drove through the bustling streets of
New York to a great house with an inscription over the door.

"I do hope Midge will be a nicer girl than Clara. Children ought to be
taught to be kind to dumb dolls as well as dumb animals," said Dora, as
the young man ran up the steps and hurried along a wide hall.

"I almost wish we were at home with our own kind little mothers," began
Flo, for even her spirits were depressed by bad treatment, but just then
a door opened and she cried out in amazement, "Bless my heart, this man
has more children than even Mr. Poppleheimer!"

She might well think so, for all down both sides of the long room stood
little white beds with a small pale face on every pillow. All the eyes
that were open brightened when Jip and his master came in, and several
thin hands were outstretched to meet them.

"I've been good, Doctor, let me pat him first," cried one childish
voice.

"Did you bring me a flower, please?" asked another feeble one.

"I know he's got something nice for us, I see a bundle in his pocket,"
and a little fellow who sat up among his pillows gave a joyful cough as
he could not shout.

"Two dollies for Midge to play with. Jip found them, but I think the
little girl they are going to will lend them for a few days. We shall
not need them longer I'm afraid," added the young man to a rosy faced
nurse who came along with a bottle in her hand.

"Dear no, the poor child is very low to-day. But she will love to look
at the babies if she isn't strong enough to hold 'em," said the woman,
leading the way to a corner where the palest of all the pale faces lay
smiling on the pillow, and the thinnest of the thin hands were feebly
put up to greet the Doctor.

"So nice!" she whispered when the dolls were laid beside her, while Jip
proudly beat his tail on the floor to let her know that she owed the
welcome gift to him.

For an hour Flo and Do lay on the arm of poor Midge who never moved
except to touch them now and then with a tender little finger, or to
kiss them softly, saying, "Dear babies, it is very nice not to be all
alone. Are you comfy, darlings?" till she fell asleep still smiling.

"Sister, do you think this can be the Heaven we hear people talk about?
It is so still and white, and may be these children are angels,"
whispered Dora, looking at the sweet face turned toward her with the
long lashes lying on the colorless cheek, and the arms outstretched like
wings.

"No, dear, it is a hospital, I heard that man say so, and those are sick
children come to be cured. It is a sweet place, I think, and this child
much nicer than that horrid Clara," answered Flo, who was quicker to
hear, see and understand what went on than Dora.

"I love to lie here safe and warm, but there doesn't seem to be much
breath to rock me," said Do, who lay nearest the little bosom that very
slowly rose and fell with the feeble flutter of the heart below.

"Hush, we may disturb her," and lively Flo controlled her curiosity,
contenting herself with looking at the other children and listening to
their quiet voices, for pain seemed to have hushed them all.

For a week the dolls lay in Midge's bed, and though their breasts were
full of saw-dust and their heads were only wood, the sweet patience of
the little creature seemed to waken something like a heart in them, and
set them thinking, for dolls don't live in vain, I am firmly persuaded.

All day she tended them till the small hands could no longer hold them,
and through the weary nights she tried to murmur bits of lullabies lest
the dollies would not be able to sleep because of the crying or the
moans some of the poor babies could not repress. She often sent one or
the other to cheer up some little neighbor, and in this way Do and Flo
became small sisters of charity, welcomed eagerly, reluctantly returned,
and loved by all, although they never uttered a word and their dingy
faces could not express the emotion that stirred their saw-dust bosoms.

When Saturday night came they were laid in their usual place on Midge's
arm. She was too weak to kiss them now, and nurse laid their battered
cheeks against the lips that whispered faintly, "Be sure you send 'em to
the little girl, and tell her--tell her--all about it." Then she turned
her cheek to the pillow with a little sigh and lay so still the dolls
thought she had gone to sleep.

She had, but the sweet eyes did not open in the morning, and there was
no breath in the little breast to rock the dolls any more.

"I knew she was an angel, and now she has flown away," said Dora softly,
as they watched the white image carried out in the weeping nurse's
arms, with the early sunshine turning all the pretty hair to gold.

"I think that is what they call dying, sister. It is a much lovelier way
to end than as we do in the dust bin or rag-bag. I wonder if there is a
little Heaven anywhere for good dolls?" answered Flora, with what looked
like a tear on her cheek; but it was only a drop from the violets sent
by the kind Doctor last night.

"I hope so, for I think the souls of little children might miss us if
they loved us as dear Midge did," whispered Dora, trying to kiss the
blue flower in her hand, for the child had shared her last gift with
these friends.

"Why didn't you let her take them along, poor motherless baby?" asked
the doctor when he saw the dolls lying as she had left them.

"I promised her they should go to the girl they were sent to, and
please, I'd like to keep my word to the little darling," answered Nurse
with a sob.

"You shall," said the Doctor, and put them in his breast pocket with the
faded violets, for everybody loved the pauper child sent to die in a
hospital, because Christian charity makes every man and woman father and
mother to these little ones.

All day the dolls went about in the busy Doctor's pocket, and I think
the violets did them good, for the soft perfume clung to them long
afterward like the memory of a lovely life, as short and sweet as that
of the flowers.

In the evening they were folded up in a fresh paper and re-directed
carefully. The Doctor wrote a little note telling why he had kept them,
and was just about to put on some stamps when a friend came in who was
going to Boston in the morning.

"Anything to take along, Fred?" asked the newcomer.

"This parcel, if you will. I have a feeling that I'd rather not have it
knock about in a mail-bag," and the Doctor told him why.

It was pleasant to see how carefully the traveller put away the parcel
after that, and to hear him say that he was going through Boston to the
mountains for his holiday, and would deliver it in Portland to Miss Plum
herself.

"Now there is some chance of our getting there," said Flora, as they set
off next day in a new Russia leather bag.

On the way they overheard a long chat between some New York and Boston
ladies which impressed them very much. Flora liked to hear the
fashionable gossip about clothes and people and art and theatres, but
Dora preferred the learned conversation of the young Boston ladies, who
seemed to know a little of everything, or think they did.

"I hope Mamma will give me an entirely new wardrobe when I get home; and
we will have dolls' weddings and balls, and a play, and be as fine and
fashionable as those ladies down there," said Flora, after listening a
while.

"You have got your head full of dressy ideas and high life, sister. I
don't care for such things, but mean to cultivate my mind as fast as I
can. That girl says she is in college, and named over more studies than
I can count. I do wish we were to stop and see a little of the refined
society of Boston," answered Dora, primly.

"Pooh!" said Flo, "don't you try to be intellectual, for you are only a
wooden-headed doll. I mean to be a real Westerner, and just enjoy myself
as I please, without caring what other folks do or think. Boston is no
better than the rest of the world, I guess."

Groans from every article in the bag greeted this disrespectful speech,
and an avalanche of Boston papers fell upon the audacious doll. But Flo
was undaunted, and shouted from underneath the pile: "I don't care!
Minnesota forever!" till her breath gave out.

Dora was so mortified that she never said a word till they were let out
in a room at the Parker House. Here she admired everything, and read all
the evening in a volume of Emerson's Poems from the bag, for Mr. Mt.
Vernon Beacon was a Boston man, and never went anywhere without a wise
book or two in his pocket.

Flo turned up her nose at all she saw, and devoted herself to a long
chat with the smart bag which came from New York and was full of gossip.

The next afternoon they really got to Portland, and as soon as Mr.
Beacon had made his toilet he set out to find little Miss Plum. When the
parlor door opened to admit her he was much embarrassed, for, advancing
with a paternal smile and the dolls extended to the expected child, he
found himself face to face with a pretty young lady, who looked as if
she thought him a little mad.

A few words explained the errand, however, and when she read the note
Aunt Maria's bright eyes were full of tears as she said, hugging the
dilapidated dolls:

"I'll write the story of their travels, and send the dear old things
back to the children as soon as possible."

And so she did with Mr. Beacon's help, for he decided to try the air of
Portland, and spent his vacation there. The dolls were re-painted and
re-dressed till they were more beautiful than ever, and their clothes
fine enough to suit even Flo.

They were a good while doing this, and when all was ready, Aunt Maria
took it into her head to run out to St. Paul and surprise the children.
By a singular coincidence Mr. Beacon had railroad business in that
direction, so they set off together, with two splendid dolls done up in
a gay box.

All that was ever known about that journey was that these travellers
stopped at the hospital in New York, and went on better friends than
before after hearing from the good Doctor all the pathetic story of
little Midge.

The young Plums had long ago given up the hope of ever seeing Do and Flo
again, for they started in June and it was early in September when Aunt
Maria appeared before them without the least warning, accompanied by a
pleasant gentleman from Boston.

Six kisses had hardly resounded from Aunty's blooming cheeks when a most
attractive box was produced from the Russia leather bag, and the
wandering dolls restored to the arms of their enraptured mammas.

A small volume neatly written and adorned with a few pictures of the
most exciting incidents of the trip also appeared.

"Every one writes or prints a book in Boston, you know, so we did both,"
said Aunt Maria, laughing, as she handed over the remarkable history
which she had composed and Mr. Beacon illustrated.

It was read with intense interest, and was as true as most stories are
nowadays.

"Nothing more delightful can happen now!" exclaimed the children, as
they laid by the precious work and enthroned the travelled dolls in the
place of honor on the roof of the baby-house.

But something much more delightful did happen; for at Thanksgiving time
there was a wedding at the Plums'. Not a doll's wedding, as Flo had
planned, but a real one, for the gentleman from Boston actually married
Aunt Maria.

There were six bridesmaids, all in blue, and Flora and Dora, in the
loveliest of new pink gowns, were set aloft among the roses on the
wedding-cake, their proper place as everyone said, for there never would
have been any marriage at all but for this Doll's Journey From Minnesota
to Maine.




VI.

MORNING-GLORIES.


"What's that?"--and Daisy sat up in her little bed to listen; for she
had never heard a sound like it before.

It was very early, and the house was still. The sun was just rising, and
the morning-glories at the window were turning their blue and purple
cups to catch the welcome light. The sky was full of rosy clouds; dew
shone like diamonds on the waving grass, and the birds were singing as
they only sing at dawn. But softer, sweeter than any bird-voice was the
delicate music which Daisy heard. So airy and gay was the sound, it
seemed impossible to lie still with that fairy dancing-tune echoing
through the room. Out of bed scrambled Daisy, her sleepy eyes opening
wider and wider with surprise and pleasure as she listened and wondered.

"Where is it?" she said, popping her head out of the window. The
morning-glories only danced lightly on their stems, the robins chirped
shrilly in the garden below, and the wind gave Daisy a kiss; but none of
them answered her, and still the lovely music sounded close beside her.

"It's a new kind of bird, perhaps; or maybe it's a fairy hidden
somewhere. Oh, if it _is_ how splendid it will be!" cried Daisy; and she
began to look carefully in all the colored cups, under the leaves of the
woodbine, and in the wren's nest close by. There was neither fairy nor
bird to be seen; and Daisy stood wondering, when a voice cried out from
below:

"Why, little nightcap, what brings you out of your bed so early?"

"O Aunt Wee! do you hear it--that pretty music playing somewhere near! I
can't find it; but I think it's a fairy, don't you?" said Daisy, looking
down at the young lady standing in the garden with her hands full of
roses.

Aunt Wee listened, smiled, and shook her head.

"Don't you remember you said last night that you thought the world a
very stupid, grown-up place, because there were no giants and fairies in
it now? Well, perhaps there _are_ fairies, and they are going to show
themselves to you, if you watch well."

Daisy clapped her hands, and danced about on her little bare feet; for,
of all things in the world, she most wanted to see a fairy.

"What must I do to find them, Aunt Wee?" she cried, popping out her head
again with her cap half off, and her curly hair blowing in the wind.

"Why, you see, they frolic all night, and go to sleep at dawn; so we
must get up very early, if we want to catch the elves awake. They are
such delicate, fly-away little things, and we are so big and clumsy, we
shall have to look carefully, and perhaps hunt a long time before we
find even one," replied Aunt Wee, very gravely.

"Mamma says I'm quick at finding things; and you know all about fairies,
so I guess we'll catch one. Can't we begin now? It's very early, and
this music has waked me up; so I don't want to sleep any more. Will you
begin to hunt now?"

"But you don't like to get up early, or to walk in the fields; and, if
we mean to catch a fairy, we must be up and out by sunrise every fair
morning till we get one. Can you do this, lazy Daisy?" And Aunt Wee
smiled to herself as if something pleased her very much.

"Oh! I will, truly, get up, and not fret a bit, if you'll only help me
look. Please come now to dress me, and see if you can find what makes
the music."

Daisy was very much in earnest, and in such a hurry to be off that she
could hardly stand still to have her hair brushed, and thought there
were a great many unnecessary buttons and strings on her clothes that
day. Usually she lay late, got up slowly and fretted at every thing as
little girls are apt to do when they have had too much sleep. She wasn't
a rosy, stout Daisy; but had been ill, and had fallen into a way of
thinking she couldn't do anything but lie about, reading fairy-tales,
and being petted by every one. Mamma and papa had tried all sorts of
things to amuse and do her good; for she was their only little daughter,
and they loved her very dearly. But nothing pleased her long; and she
lounged about, pale and fretful, till Aunt Laura came. Daisy called her
"Wee" when she was a baby, and couldn't talk plainly; and she still used
the name because it suited the cheery little aunt so well.

"I don't see anything, and the music has stopped. I think some elf just
came to wake you up, and then flew away; so we won't waste any more time
in looking here," said Wee, as she finished dressing Daisy, who flew
about like a Will-o'-the-wisp all the while.

"Do you think it will come again to-morrow?" asked Daisy anxiously.

"I dare say you'll hear it, if you wake in time. Now get your hat, and
we will see what we can find down by the brook. I saw a great many
fireflies there last night, and fancy there was a ball; so we may find
some drowsy elf among the buttercups and clover."

Away rushed Daisy for her hat, and soon was walking gayly down the green
lane, looking about her as if she had never been there before; for every
thing seemed wonderfully fresh and lovely.

"How pink the clouds are, and how the dew twinkles in the grass! I never
saw it so before," she said.

"Because by the time you are up the pretty pink clouds are gone, and the
thirsty grass has drank the dew, or the sun has drawn it up to fall
again at night for the flowers' evening bath," replied Wee, watching the
soft color that began to touch Daisy's pale cheeks.

"I think we'd better look under that cobweb spread like a tent over the
white clovers. A fairy would be very likely to creep in there and
sleep."

Daisy knelt down and peeped carefully; but all she saw was a little
brown spider, who looked very much surprised to see visitors so early.

"I don't like spiders," said Daisy, much disappointed.

"There are things about spiders as interesting to hear as fairy tales,"
said Wee. "This is Mrs. Epeira Diadema; and she is a respectable,
industrious little neighbor. She spreads her tent, but sits under a leaf
near by, waiting for her breakfast. She wraps her eggs in a soft silken
bag, and hides them in some safe chink, where they lie till spring. The
eggs are prettily carved and ornamented, and so hard that the baby
spiders have to force their way out by biting the shell open and poking
their little heads through. The mother dies as soon as her eggs are
safely placed, and the spiderlings have to take care of themselves."

"How do you know about it, Aunt Wee? You talk as if Mrs. Eppyra--or
whatever her name is--had told you herself. Did she?" asked Daisy,
feeling more interested in the brown spider.

"No; I read it in a book, and saw pictures of the eggs, web, and family.
I had a live one in a bottle; and she spun silken ladders all up and
down, and a little room to sleep in. She ate worms and bugs, and was
very amiable and interesting till she fell ill and died."

"I should like to see the book; and have a spider-bottle, so I could
take care of the poor little orphans when they are born. Good-by, ma'am.
I shall call again; for you are 'most as good as a fairy there in your
pretty tent, with a white clover for your bed."

Daisy walked on a few steps, and then stopped to say:

"What does that bird mean by calling 'Hurry up, hurry up?' He keeps
flying before us, and looking back as if he wanted to show me
something."

"Let me hear what he says. I may be able to understand him, or the
bob-o-link that swings on the alder by the brook."

Wee listened a moment, while the birds twittered and chirped with all
their hearts. Presently Wee sang in a tone very like the bob-o-link's:

        "Daisy and Wee,
        Come here, and see
    What a dainty feast is spread:
        Down in the grass
        Where fairies pass,
    Here are berries ripe and red.

        "All wet with dew,
        They wait for you:
    Come hither, and eat your fill,
        While I gayly sing,
        In my airy swing,
    And the sun climbs up the hill."

"Did he really say that?" cried Daisy, watching the bob-o-link, who sat
swaying up and down on the green bough, and nodding his white-capped
head at her in the most friendly manner.

"Perhaps I didn't translate it rightly; for it is very hard to put
bird-notes into our language, because we haven't words soft and sweet
enough. But I really think there are berries over there, and we will see
if what he says is true," said Wee.

Over the wall they went, and there, on a sunny bank, found a bed of the
reddest, ripest berries ever seen.

"Thank you, thank you, for telling me to hurry up, and showing me such a
splendid feast," said Daisy, with her mouth full, as she nodded back at
the birds. "These are so much sweeter than those we buy. I'd carry some
home to mamma, if I only had a basket."

"You can pick this great leaf full, while I make you a basket," said
Wee.

Daisy soon filled the leaf, and then sat watching her aunt plait a
pretty basket of rushes. While she waited she looked about, and kept
finding something curious or pleasant to interest and amuse her. First
she saw a tiny rainbow in a dewdrop that hung on a blade of grass; then
she watched a frisky calf come down to drink on the other side of the
brook, and laughed to see him scamper away with his tail in the air.
Close by grew a pitcher-plant; and a yellow butterfly sat on the edge,
bathing its feet, Daisy said. Presently she discovered a little ground
bird sitting on her nest, and peeping anxiously, as if undecided whether
to fly away or trust her.

"I won't hurt you, little mother. Don't be afraid," whispered the child;
and, as if it understood, the bird settled down on her nest with a
comfortable chirp, while its mate hopped up to give her a nice plump
worm for breakfast.

"I love birds. Tell me something about them, Aunt Wee. You must know
many things; for they like you, and come when you call."

"Once upon a time," began Wee, while her fingers flew and the pretty
basket grew, "there was a great snow-storm, and all the country was
covered with a thick white quilt. It froze a little, so one could walk
over it, and I went out for a run. Oh, so cold it was, with a sharp
wind, and no sun or any thing green to make it pleasant! I went far away
over the fields, and sat down to rest. While I sat there, a little bird
came by, and stopped to rest also.

"'How do you do?' said I.

"'Chick-a-dee-dee,' said he.

"'A cold day,' said I.

"'Chick-a-dee-dee,' said he.

"'Aren't you afraid of starving, now the ground is covered and the trees
are bare?'

"'Chick-a-dee-dee, ma'am, chick-a-dee-dee!'" answered the bird in the
same cheerful tone. And it sounded as if he said, 'I shall be cared for.
I'm not afraid.'

"'What will you eat? There's nothing here or for miles round. I really
think you'll starve, birdie,' said I.

"Then he laughed, and gave me a merry look as he lit on a tall, dry weed
near by. He shook it hard with his little bill; when down fell a shower
of seeds, and there was dinner all ready on a snow-white cloth. All the
while he ate he kept looking up at me with his quick, bright eyes; and,
when he had done, he said, as plainly as a bird could say it:

    "'Cold winds may blow,
        And snows may fall,
      But well we know
        God cares for all.'"

"I like that little story, and shall always think of it when I hear the
chick-a-dee-dee." Daisy sat a moment with a thoughtful look in her eyes;
then she said slowly, as if sorry for the words:

"It isn't a stupid, grown-up world. It's a very pleasant, young world;
and I like it a great deal better this morning than I did last night."

"I'm glad of that; and, even if we don't find our fairy to-day, you will
have found some sunshine, Daisy, and that is almost as good. Now put in
the berries, and we'll go on."

How they hunted! They climbed trees to peep into squirrel-holes and
birds'-nests; they chased bees and butterflies to ask for news of the
elves; they waded in the brook, hoping to catch a water-sprite; they ran
after thistle-down, fancying a fairy might be astride; they searched the
flowers and ferns, questioned sun and wind, listened to robin and
thrush; but no one could tell them any thing of the little people,
though all had gay and charming bits of news about themselves. And Daisy
thought the world got younger and happier every minute.

When they came in to breakfast, papa and mamma looked at Daisy, and then
nodded with a smile at Aunt Wee; for, though Daisy's frock was soiled,
her boots wet, and her hair tumbled, her cheeks were rosy, eyes bright,
and voice so cheerful that they thought it better music than any in the
summer world without.

"Hunting fairies is a pleasant play, isn't it, Daisy?" said papa, as he
tasted the berries, and admired the green basket.

"Oh, yes! and we are going again to-morrow. Aunt Wee says we must try
seven days at least. I like it, and mean to keep on till I really find
my fairy."

"I think you will find something better than 'little vanishers,' dear,"
said mamma, filling up the bowl of bread and milk which Daisy was fast
emptying; for she certainly _had_ found an appetite.

"There it is again!" cried Daisy, flying out of bed the next morning
still earlier than the day before. Yes, there it was, the fairy music,
as blithe and sweet as ever; and the morning-glories rung their delicate
bells as if keeping time. Daisy felt rather sleepy, but remembered her
promise to Aunt Wee, and splashed into her tub, singing the bob-o-link's
song as she bathed.

"Where shall we go to-day?" she asked, as they went out into the garden.

"I think we'd better try a new place; so we'll go to the farmyard; and,
while we feed the hens, I'll listen to their chat, and perhaps can learn
something from it," replied Wee soberly.

"Do hens know about fairies? I thought they were very dull things, and
didn't care for any thing but eating corn and laying eggs," said Daisy,
surprised.

"Oh, dear, no! they are very sensible creatures, and see a deal of the
world in their daily walks. Hunting for insects gives them an excellent
chance to see fairies, if there are any. Here is some corn for the
biddies; and, after we have fed them, we will look for eggs, and so may
find a brownie or two."

Such a clatter as there was when they came to the barnyard; for every
thing was just awake, and in the best spirits. Ducks were paddling off
to the pond; geese to the meadow; and meek gray guinea-hens tripping
away to hunt bugs in the garden. A splendid cock stood on the wall, and
crowed so loud and clear that all the neighboring chanticleers replied.
The motherly hens clucked and scratched with their busy broods about
them, or sat and scolded in the coops because the chicks would gad
abroad. Doves cooed on the sunny roof, and smoothed their gleaming
feathers. Daisy's donkey nibbled a thistle by the wall, and a stately
peacock marched before the door with all his plumage spread. It made
Daisy laugh to see the airs the fowls put on as she scattered corn, and
threw meal and water to the chicks. Some pushed and gobbled; some stood
meekly outside the crowd, and got what they could; others seized a
mouthful, and ran away to eat it in a corner. The chicks got into the
pan entirely, and tumbled one over the other in their hurry to eat; but
the mammas saw that none went hungry. And the polite cock waited upon
them in the most gentlemanly manner, making queer little clucks and
gurgles as if he said:

"Allow me, madam, to offer you this kernel;" or, "Here, my dear, try
that bit." And sometimes he pecked a little, with a loud quaver,
evidently saying, "Come, come, children, behave yourselves, and don't
eat like pigs."

"What is she saying?" asked Daisy, pointing to an old gray hen in a
black turban, who was walking about alone, muttering to herself, as hens
often do in their promenades.

"She says a cat has made a nest, and hatched three kits up on the loft,
near her own nest; and she doesn't like it, because their mewing annoys
her," said Wee, after listening a minute.

"How nice! let's go and find them. But do you learn anything about the
fairies from the hen's chat?"

"No: they have been so busy setting, they have had no time for picnics
yet. But they will let us know, if they discover any."

In the barn, the cows were being milked; and Daisy had a mugful of it,
warm and sweet, out of the foaming pail.

"We'll take some to Mrs. Purr; for, I dare say, she doesn't like to
leave the kits long, and will enjoy a sip of something comfortable,"
said Wee, as Daisy climbed the ladder, and went rustling over the hay
to a corner, whence came a joyful "Mew!" What a charming sight it was,
to be sure! a snow-white cat lying in a cosy nest, and, by her, three
snow-white kits, wagging three very small gray tails.

"There never was any thing so lovely!" cried Daisy, as she sat with the
three downy balls in her lap, while the mamma gratefully lapped the new
milk from Aunt Wee's cup.

"Are they better than fairies?"

"Almost: for I know about pussies, and can cuddle them; but I couldn't a
fairy, you know, and they might be afraid of me. These dears are not
afraid, and I shall have such fun with them as they grow up. What
_shall_ we name them, auntie?"

"Snowball, Patpaw, and Wagtail would do, I think," said Wee, stroking
the cat, who rubbed against her, purring very loud.

"Yes: I like those names for my pets. But what is Mrs. Purr saying, with
her mouth up to your ear?" asked Daisy, who firmly believed that Aunt
Wee knew every thing.

"She tells me that when she went on a grasshopper hunt the other day, as
she ran through the meadow, she saw some lovely creatures all in blue,
with gauze wings, flying about over the river, and sitting in the
water-lilies. She thinks they may be fairies, and advises us to go and
look."

"So we will to-morrow," said Daisy. "Ask her, please, if I may take the
kits into the house, if I'll be very careful and give them a nice big
bed to sleep in."

"She says you may; but she must go too, else the kits will cry," said
Wee, after listening to Pussy's purr a minute.

Much pleased with her new pets, Daisy took them in her apron, and,
followed by their confiding mamma, marched to the house, and established
them in the old cradle which used to be hers. Pussy got in also; and,
when they were settled on a soft cushion, Daisy rocked them gently to
and fro. At first Mrs. Purr opened her yellow eyes, and looked rather
anxious: but, as nothing uncomfortable happened, she composed herself,
and soon quite liked the motion; for she fell asleep, and made a pretty
picture as she lay with her downy white babies on her downy white
breast.

When the sun rose next morning, he saw Daisy and Wee floating down the
river in their boat. "Bless me! here's company," said the sun, and began
at once to make them welcome in his most charming manner. He set the
waves to sparkling with a sudden shimmer; he shot long rays of light
through the dark hemlocks, till they looked like fairy trees; he touched
Daisy's hair and it turned to gold; he chased away the shadows that
lurked among the hills; he drew up the misty curtain that hovered over
the river; and, with the warmth of his kisses, waked the sleeping
lilies.

"Look, look, Aunt Wee! how they open, one by one, as the light shines on
them! We shan't have to wait any longer; for they get up with the sun,
as you do." As she spoke, Daisy caught a half-open lily, and drew it up,
fragrant and dripping, fresh from its sleep.

"They look like a fleet of fairy ships, anchored in this quiet harbor,
with sails half furled, and crews asleep. See the little sailors, in
their yellow jackets, lifting up their heads as the wind blows its
whistle, like a boatswain, to 'pipe all hands.'"

Daisy laughed at Aunt Wee's fancy, and stirred up the crew of the
Water-sprite, as she called her flower, till the white sails were all
set, and it was ready for a summer voyage.

"It is time we saw the fairies in blue, unless old Madam Purr deceived
us. I hope we _shall_ find one; for, though I enjoy every thing we see,
I do want my elf too."

"What is that?" cried Wee; and Daisy flew up so quickly that the boat
rocked like a cradle. A slender creature, in a blue dress, with gauzy
wings, darted by, and vanished among the rushes that nodded by the bank.

"Go nearer,--softly! softly!--and maybe it will fly out again. I really
think it was a fairy; for I never saw any thing like it before,"
whispered Daisy, much excited.

Wee rowed in among the green rushes and purple water-weeds, and out flew
half-a-dozen of the blue-bodied creatures. They didn't seem afraid, but
skimmed about the boat, as if curious to see what it was; and Daisy sat,
and stared with all her might. Presently one of the lovely things lit on
the lily in her hand, and she held her breath to watch it. A little
shadow of disappointment passed over her face as she looked; but it was
gone at once, and her voice was full of delight as she said softly:

"It's not a fairy, Aunt Wee; but it is very beautiful, with its slender
blue body, its lacy wings, and bright eyes. What name does it have?"

"We call it a dragon-fly; and it could tell you a pretty little story
about itself, could you understand it. In May the tiny eggs are dropped
on the water, and sink to the bottom, where little creatures are
born,--ugly, brown things, with six legs and no wings. They feed on
water-insects, and for a long time swim about in this state. When ready,
they climb up the stem of some plant, and sit in the sun till the ugly
brown shells drop away, and the lovely winged creatures appear. They
grow in an hour to be perfect dragon-flies, and float away to lead happy
lives in the sunshine by the river."

As if only waiting till the story was done, the dragon-fly flew off with
a whirr, and darted to and fro, hunting for its breakfast, glittering
splendidly as it flashed among the leaves or darted close above the
water. Daisy forgot her disappointment in a minute, and went fishing for
lilies; while the turtles came up to sun themselves on the rocks, the
merry little tadpoles wiggled in the shallow places, and a wild duck
paddled by with a brood of ducklings following in her wake.

"Oh, dear! it rains; and we can't go fairy-hunting at all," said Daisy
next morning, as the patter on the window-pane woke her up, and Aunt Wee
came in to dress her.

"Yes, we can, dear; jump up, and see what a funny place I'll take you
to."

Daisy thought the rain would be a capital excuse for lying in bed; for
she still liked to cuddle and drowse in her cosey, warm nest. But she
was curious to know where the curious place was; so she got up and
followed.

"Why, Aunt Wee, this is the garret; and there isn't any thing nice or
funny here," she said, as they climbed the stairs, and came into the big
attic, filled with all manner of old things.

"Isn't there? We'll soon see." And so they did: for Aunt Wee began to
play; and presently Daisy was shouting with fun as she sat on an old
saddle, with a hair-covered trunk for a horse, a big old-fashioned
bonnet on her head, and a red silk petticoat for a habit. Then they went
to sea in a great chest, and got wrecked on a desert island, where they
built a fort with boxes and bags, hunted bears with rusty guns, and had
to eat dried berries, herbs and nuts; for no other food could be found.
Aunt Wee got an old fiddle, and had a dancing-school, where Daisy
capered till she was tired. So they rummaged out some dusty books, and
looked at pictures so quietly that a little mouse came out of a drawer
and peeped about, thinking no one was there.

"Let's find the nest, since we don't find any fairy," said Wee; and,
opening the drawer, she turned over the things till she came to a pair
of old velvet shoes; and there in the toe of one, nicely cuddled under a
bit of flannel, lay four pink mites, which woke up, and stretched their
tiny legs, and squeaked such small squeaks one could hardly hear them.

"How cunning they are! I wish they would let me put them with the kits,
and have a nursery full of babies. Wouldn't it be nice to see them all
grow up?" said Daisy.

"I'm afraid they wouldn't grow up, if Mrs. Purr lived with them," began
Wee, but got no further; for just then the cat bounced into the drawer,
and ate up the mouselings in four mouthfuls. Daisy screamed; the
mother-mouse gave a doleful squeak, and ran into a hole; and Aunt Wee
tried to save the little ones. But it was too late: Purr had got her
breakfast, and sat washing her face after it, as if she had enjoyed it.

"Never mind, Daisy: she would have caught them by and by, and it's as
well to have them taken care of before they do any harm. There is the
bell: don't cry, but come and tell papa what a fine romp we've had."

"It doesn't rain, but it's dreadfully wet; so we'll go to the dairy, and
see if any sprites are hiding there," said Wee next day; and to the
dairy they went.

A pleasant place it was,--so clean and cool, and as full of sweet odors
as if the ghosts of buttercups and clover still haunted the milk which
they had helped to make. Dolly was churning, and Polly was making up
butter in nice little pats. Both were very kind, and let Daisy peep
everywhere. All round on white shelves stood the shining pans, full of
milk; the stone floor was wet; and a stream of water ran along a narrow
bed through the room, and in it stood jars of butter, pots of cream, and
cans of milk. The window was open, and hop-vines shook their green bells
before it. The birds sang outside, and maids sang inside, as the churn
and the wooden spatters kept time:

    "Brindle and Bess,
    White-star and Jess--
      Come, butter, come!
    Eat cowslips fine,
    Red columbine--
      Come, butter, come!
    Grasses green and tall,
    Clover, best of all,--
      Come, butter, come!
    And give every night
    Milk sweet and white--
      Come, butter, come!
    Make the churn go,
    See the lumps grow!--
      Come, butter, come!"

Daisy sang also, and turned the handle till she was tired; then she
helped Polly with the butter, and made four little pats,--one stamped
with a star for papa, one with a rose for mamma, a strawberry for Aunt
Wee, and a cow for herself. She skimmed a pitcher of cream with a
shallow shell, and liked the work so much she asked to have a little pan
of milk put by for her to take care of every day. Dolly promised, and
gave her a small shell and a low shelf all to herself. When she went in,
she carried her pretty pats in one hand, the cream-pot in the other, and
entered the breakfast room looking as brisk and rosy as a little
milkmaid.

It was a lovely morning when Daisy was next roused by the fairy music,
and the ponies were standing at the door. "Are we going far?" she
asked, as Wee put on her riding-skirt, and tied back her hair.

"Up to the mountain-top: it's only a mile; and we shall have time, if we
ride fast," answered Wee.

Away they went, through the green lane, over the bridge, and up the
steep hillside where the sheep fed and colts frisked as they passed by.
Higher and higher climbed Dandy and Prance, the ponies; and gayer and
gayer grew Daisy and Wee, as the fresh air blew over them, and the
morning-red glowed on their faces. When they reached the top, they sat
on a tall stone, and looked down into the valley on either side.

"This seems like a place to find giants, not fairies, it is so high and
big and splendid up here," said Daisy, as her eye roamed over river,
forest, town, and hill.

"There are giants here; and I brought you up to see them," answered Wee.

"Mercy, me! where are they?" cried Daisy, looking very curious and
rather frightened.

"There is one of them." And Wee pointed to the waterfall that went
dashing and foaming down into the valley. "That giant turns the wheels
of all the mills you see. Some of them grind grain for our bread, some
help to spin cloth for our clothes, some make paper, and others saw
trees into boards. That is a beautiful and busy giant, Daisy."

"So it is, and some day we'll go and see it work. Show me the others: I
like your giants 'most as well as those in the fairy-books."

"On this side you'll see another, called Steam. He is a very strong
fellow; for, with the help of gunpowder, he will break the granite
mountain in pieces, and carry it away. He works in the other mills, and
takes heavy loads of stone, cloth, paper, and wood all over the country.
Then, on the right of us is a third giant, called Electricity. He runs
along those wires, and carries messages from one end of the world to the
other. He goes under the sea and through the air; he brings news to
every one; runs day and night, yet never tires; and often helps sick
people with his lively magic."

"I like him best, I think; for he is more like a real, wonderful giant.
Is there any on that side of us?" asked Daisy, turning round to look
behind her.

"Yes: the best and most powerful of all lives in that big house with the
bell on the roof," said Wee, smiling.

"Why, that's only the schoolhouse."

"Education is a long word, dear; but you know what it means, and, as you
grow older, you will see what wonders it can work. It is a noble giant;
for in this country rich and poor are helped by it, and no one need
suffer for it unless they choose. It works more wonders than any other:
it changes little children into wise, good men and women, who rule the
world, and make happy homes everywhere; it helps write books, sing
songs, paint pictures, do good deeds, and beautify the world. Love and
respect it, my little Daisy, and be glad that you live now when such
giants lend a hand to dwarfs like us."

Daisy sat still a long time, looking all about her on the mountain-top;
and, when she rode away, she carried a new thought in her mind, which
she never forgot.

"This is the last day of the seven, and no fairies have been found. Do
you think I _ever_ shall see one?" said Daisy, on the Sunday morning
that ended her week's hunt.

"Not the kind you think of, for there are none such, Daisy; but you have
found two better and more beautiful ones than any fanciful sprites,"
said Wee.

"Have I? Where are they? What are their names?"

Aunt Wee drew her to the glass, and said, as she pointed to Daisy's
face:

"Here they are, and their names are Health and Happiness. There are many
ways of losing them, and they are hard to catch when once lost. I wanted
you to keep both, and tried to show you how. A happy, healthful hour in
the morning sweetens and brightens the whole day; and there is no
fairy-book half so wonderful as the lovely world all about us, if we
only know how to read it."

"Then all these mornings we were hunting after health and happiness,
instead of fairies, were we?"

"Yes: haven't you enjoyed it, and don't you think you have caught my
fairies?"

Daisy looked from a little picture of herself, which Wee had drawn some
time ago, to her image in the glass. One was dull and sad, pale and
cross; the other, rosy, gay, and smiling,--the likeness of a happy,
hearty little girl, wide-awake and in good tune. She understood the kind
joke; and, turning, kissed Aunt Wee, as she said, gratefully:

"I think I have caught your elves, and I'll try to keep them all my
life. But tell me one thing: was the music that woke me all a joke too?"

"No, dear: here it is, and now it is your own; for you have learned to
wake and listen to it."

Daisy looked, and saw Aunt Wee lean from the window, and take out of a
hollow nook, in the old tree close by, a little box. She set it on the
table, touched a spring, and the airy music sounded more beautiful than
ever.

"Is it mine, all mine?" cried Daisy.

"Yes: I hid it while I tried my little plan, and now you shall have it
for your own. See, here is the best elf I can give you, and she will
dance whenever you call her."

Wee pushed a golden pin, and up sprang a tiny figure, all crimson and
gold, with shining wings, and a garland on its dainty head. Softly
played the hidden music, and airily danced the little sylph till the
silvery chime died away; then, folding her delicate arms, she sank from
sight, leaving Daisy breathless with delight.




V.

SHADOW-CHILDREN.


Ned, Polly, and Will sat on the steps one sun-shiny morning, doing
nothing, except wish they had something pleasant to do.

"Something new, something never heard of before,--wouldn't that be
jolly?" said Ned, with a great yawn.

"It must be an amusing play, and one that we don't get tired of very
soon," added Polly gravely.

"And something that didn't be wrong, else mamma wouldn't like it," said
little Will, who was very good for a small boy.

As no one could suggest any thing to suit, they all sat silent a few
minutes. Suddenly Ned said, rather crossly, "I wish my shadow wouldn't
mock me. Every time I stretch or gape it does the same, and I don't like
it."

"Poor thing, it can't help that: it has to do just what you do, and be
your slave all day. I'm glad I ain't a shadow," said Polly.

"I try to run away from mine sometimes, but I can't ever. It will come
after me; and in the night it scares me, if it gets big and black," said
Will, looking behind him.

"Wouldn't it be fun to see shadows going about alone, and doing things
like people?" asked Polly.

"I just wish they would. I'd like to see ours cut capers; that would be
a jolly new game, wouldn't it?" said Ned.

No one had time to speak; for suddenly the three little shadows on the
sunny wall behind them stood up straight, and began to bow.

"Mercy, me!" cried Polly, staring at them.

"By Jove, that's odd!" said Ned, looking queer.

"Are they alive?" asked Will, a little frightened.

"Don't be alarmed: they won't hurt you," said a soft voice. "To-day is
midsummer-day, and whoever wishes a wish can have it till midnight. You
want to see your shadows by themselves; and you can, if you promise to
follow them as they have followed you so long. They will not get you
into harm; so you may safely try it, if you like. Do you agree for the
day to do as they do, and so have your wish?"

"Yes, we promise," answered the children.

"Tell no one till night, and be faithful shadows to the shadows."

The voice was silent, but with more funny little bows the shadows began
to move off in different directions. The children knew their own: for
Ned's was the tallest, and had its hands in its pockets; Polly's had a
frock on, and two bows where its hair was tied up; while Will's was a
plump little shadow in a blouse, with a curly head and a pug nose. Each
child went after its shadow, laughing, and enjoying the fun.

Ned's master went straight to the shed, took down a basket, and marched
away to the garden, where it began to move its hands as if busily
picking peas. Ned stopped laughing when he saw that, and looked rather
ashamed; for he remembered that his mother had asked him to do that
little job for her, and he had answered,--

"Oh, bother the old peas! I'm busy, and I can't."

"Who told you about this?" he asked, beginning to work.

The shadow shook its head, and pointed first to Ned's new jacket, then
to a set of nice garden tools near by, and then seemed to blow a kiss
from its shadowy fingers towards mamma, who was just passing the open
gate.

"Oh! you mean that she does lots for me; so I ought to do what I can for
her, and love her dearly," said Ned, getting a pleasanter face every
minute.

The shadow nodded, and worked away as busily as the bees, tumbling heels
over head in the great yellow squash blossoms, and getting as dusty as
little millers. Somehow Ned rather liked the work, with such an odd
comrade near by; for, though the shadow didn't really help a bit, it
seemed to try, and set an excellent example. When the basket was full,
the shadow took one handle, and Ned the other; and they carried it in.

"Thank you, dear. I was afraid we should have to give up our peas
to-day: I'm so busy, I can't stop," said mamma, looking surprised and
pleased.

Ned couldn't stop to talk; for the shadow ran away to the woodpile, and
began to chop with all its might.

"Well, I suppose I must; but I never saw such a fellow for work as this
shadow is. He isn't a bit like me, though he's been with me so long,"
said Ned, swinging the real hatchet in time with the shadowy one.

Polly's new mistress went to the dining-room, and fell to washing up the
breakfast cups. Polly hated that work, and sulkily began to rattle the
spoons and knock the things about. But the shadow wouldn't allow that;
and Polly had to do just what it did, though she grumbled all the while.

"She doesn't splash a bit, or make any clatter; so I guess she's a tidy
creature," said Polly. "How long she does rub each spoon and glass. We
never shall get done. What a fuss she makes with the napkins, laying
them all even in the drawer. And now she's at the salt-cellars, doing
them just as mamma likes. I wish she'd live here, and do my work for
me. Why, what's that?" And Polly stopped fretting to listen; for she
seemed to hear the sound of singing,--so sweet, and yet so very faint
she could catch no words, and only make out a cheerful little tune.

"Do you hear any one singing, mamma?" she asked.

"No: I wish I did." And mamma sighed; for baby was poorly, piles of
sewing lay waiting for her, Biddy was turning things topsy-turvy in the
kitchen for want of a word from the mistress, and Polly was looking
sullen.

The little girl didn't say any more, but worked quietly and watched the
shadow, feeling sure the faint song came from it. Presently she began to
hum the tune she caught by snatches; and, before she knew it, she was
singing away like a blackbird. Baby stopped crying, and mamma said,
smiling:

"Now I hear somebody singing, and it's the music I like best in the
world."

That pleased Polly; but, a minute after, she stopped smiling, for the
shadow went and took baby, or seemed to, and Polly really did. Now, baby
was heavy, and cross with its teeth; and Polly didn't feel like tending
it one bit. Mamma hurried away to the kitchen; and Polly walked up and
down the room with poor baby hanging over her arm, crying dismally, with
a pin in its back, a wet bib under its chin, and nothing cold and hard
to bite with its hot, aching gums, where the little teeth were trying to
come through.

"Do stop, you naughty, fretty baby. I'm tired of your screaming, and
it's high time you went to sleep. Bless me! what's Miss Shadow doing
with _her_ baby?" said Polly.

Miss Shadow took out the big pin and laid it away, put on a dry bib, and
gave _her_ baby a nice ivory ring to bite; then began to dance up and
down the room, till the shadowy baby clapped its hands and kicked
delightedly. Polly laughed, and did the same, feeling sorry she had been
so pettish. Presently both babies grew quiet, went to sleep, and were
laid in the cradle.

"Now, I hope we shall rest a little," said Polly, stretching her arms.

But, no: down sat the shadow, and began to sew, making her needle fly
like a real little seamstress.

"Oh, dear!" groaned Polly. "I promised to hem those handkerchiefs for
Ned, and so I must; but I do think handkerchiefs are the most pokey
things in the world to sew. I dare say you think you can sew faster than
I can. Just wait a bit, and see what I can do, miss," she said to the
shadow.

It took some time to find her thimble and needles and spools, for Polly
wasn't a very neat little girl; but she got settled at last, and
stitched away as if bent on beating her dumb friend.

Little Will's shadow went up to the nursery, and stopped before a basin
of water. "Oh! ah! ain't this drefful?" cried Will, with a shiver; for
he knew he'd got to have his face washed, because he wouldn't have it
done properly when he got up, but ran away. Now, Will was a good child;
but this one thing was his great trouble, and sometimes he couldn't bear
it. Jane was so rough. She let soap get in his eyes, and water run down
his neck, and she pinched his nose when she wiped him, and brushed his
hair so hard that really it _was_ dreadful; and even a bigger boy would
have found it hard to bear. He shivered and sighed: but Jane came in;
and, when he saw that the shadow stood still and took the scrubbing like
a little hero, he tried to do the same, and succeeded so well that Jane
actually patted his head and called him "a deary;" which was something
new, for old Nurse Jane was always very busy and rather cross.

Feeling that nothing worse could possibly happen to him, Will ran after
his shadow, as it flitted away into the barn, and began to feed the
chickens.

"There, now! I forgetted all about my chickeys, and the shadow 'membered
'em; and I'm glad of it," said Will, scattering dabs of meal and water
to the chirping, downy little creatures who pecked and fluttered at his
feet. Little shadow hunted for eggs, drove the turkeys out of the
garden, and picked a basket of chips: then it went to play with Sammy,
a neighbor's child; for, being a small shadow, it hadn't many jobs to
do, and plenty of active play was good for it.

Sammy was a rough little boy and rather selfish: so, when they played
ball, he wanted to throw all the time; and, when Will objected, he grew
angry and struck him. The blow didn't hurt Will's cheek much, but it did
his little feelings; and he lifted his hand to strike back, when he saw
his shadow go and kiss Sammy's shadow. All his anger was gone in a
minute, and he just put his arm round Sammy's neck and kissed him. This
kiss for a blow made him so ashamed that he began to cry, and couldn't
be comforted till he had given Will his best marble and a ride on his
pony.

About an hour before dinner, the three shadows and the children met in
the garden, and had a grand game of play, after they had told each other
what they had been doing since they parted. Now, the shadows didn't
forget baby even then, but got out the wagon, and Miss Baby, all fresh
from her nap, sat among her pillows like a queen, while Ned was horse,
Polly footman, and Will driver; and in this way she travelled all round
the garden and barn, up the lane and down to the brook, where she was
much delighted with the water sparkling along and the fine splash of the
stones they threw in.

When the dinner-bell rang, mamma saw four clean, rosy faces and four
smooth heads at the table; for the shadow-children made themselves neat,
without being told. Every one was merry and hungry and good-natured.
Even poor baby forgot her teeth, and played a regular rub-a-dub with her
spoon on her mug, and tried to tell about the fine things she saw on her
drive. The children said nothing about the new play, and no one observed
the queer actions of their shadows but themselves. They saw that there
was no gobbling, or stretching over, or spilling of things, among the
shadows; but that they waited to be helped, served others first, and ate
tidily, which was a great improvement upon the usual state of things.

It was Saturday afternoon: the day was fine, and mamma told them they
could go for a holiday frolic in the woods. "Don't go to the pond, and
be home early," she said.

"Yes, mamma; we'll remember," they answered, as they scampered away to
get ready.

"We shall go through the village, and Mary King will be looking out; so
I shall wear my best hat. Mamma won't see me, if I slip down the back
way; and I do so want Mary to know that my hat is prettier than hers,"
said Polly, up in her little room.

Now Polly was rather vain, and liked to prink; so she got out the new
hat, and spent some time in smoothing her braids and putting on her
blue ribbons. But when all was ready, and the boys getting impatient,
she found her shadow, with a sun-bonnet on, standing by the door, as if
to prevent her going out.

"You tiresome thing! do you mean that I mustn't wear my hat, but that
old bonnet?" asked Polly.

The shadow nodded and beckoned, and patted its head, as if it was all
right.

"I wish I hadn't promised to do as you do; then I could do as I like,
and not make a fright of myself," said Polly, rather sulkily, as she put
away the hat, and tied on the old bonnet with a jerk.

Once out in the lovely sunshine, she soon forgot the little
disappointment; and, as they didn't go through the village, but by a
green lane, where she found some big blackberries, she was quite
contented. Polly had a basket to hold fruit or flowers, Ned his
jackknife, and Will a long stick on which he rode, fancying that this
sort of horse would help his short legs along; so they picked, whittled,
and trotted their way to the wood, finding all manner of interesting
things on the road.

The wood was full of pleasant sights and sounds; for wild roses bloomed
all along the path, ferns and scarlet berries filled the little dells,
squirrels chattered, birds sang, and pines whispered musically
overhead.

"I'm going to stop here and rest, and make a wreath of these pretty wild
roses for baby: it's her birthday, and it will please mamma," said
Polly, sitting down on a mound of moss, with a lapful of flowers.

"I'm going to cut a fishing-pole, and will be back in a minute." And Ned
went crashing into the thickest part of the wood.

"I shall see where that rabbit went to, and maybe I'll find some
berries," said Will, trotting down the path the wild rabbit had gone.

The sound of the boys' steps died away, and Polly was wondering how it
would seem to live all alone in the wood, when a little girl came
trudging by, with a great pail of berries on her arm. She was a poor
child: her feet were bare, her gown was ragged, she wore an old shawl
over her head, and walked as if lame. Polly sat behind the ferns, and
the child did not see her till Polly called out. The sudden sound
startled her; and she dropped her pail, spilling the berries all over
the path. The little girl began to cry, and Polly to laugh, saying, in a
scornful tone:

"How silly to cry for a few berries!"

"I've been all day picking 'em," said the girl; "and I'm so tired and
hungry; 'cause I didn't dare to go home till my pail was full,--mother
scolds if I do,--and now they're all spoilt. Oh, dear! dear me!" And
she cried so hard that great tears fell on the moss.

Polly was sorry now, and sat looking at her till she saw her shadow down
on its knees, picking up the berries; then it seemed to fold its little
handkerchief round the girl's bruised foot, and give her something from
its pocket. Polly jumped up and imitated the kind shadow, even to giving
the great piece of gingerbread she had brought for fear she should be
hungry.

"Take this," she said gently. "I'm sorry I frightened you. Here are the
berries all picked up, and none the worse for falling in the grass. If
you'll take them to the white house on the hill, my mamma will buy them,
and then your mother won't scold you."

"Oh, thank you, miss! It's ever so good. I'll take the berries to your
mother, and bring her more whenever she likes," said the child
gratefully, as she walked away munching the gingerbread, and smiling
till there were little rainbows in her tears.

Meanwhile Ned had poked about in the bushes, looking for a good pole.
Presently he saw a willow down by the pond, and thought that would give
him a nice, smooth pole. He forgot his promise, and down he went to the
pond; where he cut his stick, and was whittling the end, when he saw a
boat by the shore. It was untied, and oars lay in it, as if waiting for
some one to come and row out.

"I'll just take a little pull across, and get those cardinal-flowers for
Polly," he said; and went to the boat.

He got in, and was about to push off, when he saw his shadow standing on
the shore.

"Don't be a fool; get in, and come along," he said to it, remembering
his promise now, but deciding to break it, and ask pardon afterwards.

But the shadow shook its head; pointed to the swift stream that ran
between the banks, the rocks and mud on the opposite side, and the leaky
boat itself.

"I ain't afraid: mamma won't mind, if I tell her I'm sorry; and it will
be such fun to row alone. Be a good fellow, and let me go," said Ned,
beckoning.

But the shadow would not stir, and Ned was obliged to mind. He did so
very reluctantly, and scolded the shadow well as he went back to Polly;
though all the time he felt he was doing right, and knew he should be
glad afterwards.

Will trotted after the rabbit, but didn't find it; he found a
bird's-nest instead with four little birds in it. He had an empty cage
at home, and longed for something to put in it; for kittens didn't like
it, and caterpillars and beetlebugs got away. He chose the biggest bird,
and, holding him carefully, walked away to find Polly. The poor
mother-bird chirped and fluttered in great distress; but Will kept on
till his little shadow came before him, and tried to make him turn
back.

"No, no, I want him," said Will. "I won't hurt him, and his mother has
three left: she won't mind if I take one."

Here the mother-bird chirped so loud it was impossible to help seeing
that she _did_ care very much; and the shadow stamped its foot and waved
its hand, as if ordering the young robber to carry back the baby-bird.
Will stood still, and thought a minute; but his little heart was a very
kind one, and he soon turned about, saying pleasantly:

"Yes, it _is_ naughty, and I won't do it. I'll ask mamma to get me a
canary, and will let this birdie stay with his brothers."

The shadow patted him on the shoulder, and seemed to be delighted as
Will put the bird in the nest and walked on, feeling much happier than
if he had kept it. A bush of purple berries grew by the path, and Will
stopped to pick some. He didn't know what they were, and mamma had often
told him never to eat strange things. But they smelt so good, and looked
so nice, he couldn't resist, and lifted one to his mouth, when little
shadow motioned for him to stop.

"Oh, dear! you don't let me do any thing I want to," sighed Will. "I
shall ask Polly if I tarn't eat these; and, if she says I may, I shall,
so now."

He ran off to ask Polly; but she said they were poisonous, and begged
him to throw them away.

"Good little shadow, to keep me safe!" cried Will. "I like you; and I'll
mind better next time, 'cause you are always right."

The shadow seemed to like this, and bobbed about so comically it made
Will laugh till his eyes were full of tears. Ned came back, and they
went on, having grand times in the wood. They found plenty of berries to
fill the basket; they swung down on slender birches, and got rolls of
white bark for canoes; they saw all sorts of wild-wood insects and
birds; and frolicked till they were tired. As they crossed a field, a
cow suddenly put down her head and ran at them, as if she was afraid
they meant to hurt her calf. All turned, and ran as fast as they could
toward the wall; but poor Will in his fright tumbled down, and lay
screaming. Ned and Polly had reached the wall, and, looking back, saw
that their shadows had not followed. Ned's stood before Will,
brandishing his pole; and Polly's was flapping a shadowy sun-bonnet with
all its might. As soon as they saw that, back they went,--Ned to
threaten till he broke his pole, and Polly to flap till the strings came
off. As if anxious to do its part, the bonnet flew up in the air, and
coming down lit on the cross cow's head; which so astonished her that
she ran away as hard as she could pelt.

"Wasn't that funny?" said Will, when they had tumbled over the wall, and
lay laughing in the grass on the safe side.

"I'm glad I wore the old bonnet; for I suppose my best hat would have
gone just the same," said Polly thankfully.

"The calf doesn't know its own mother with that thing on," laughed Ned.

"How brave and kind you were to come back and save me! I'd have been
deaded if you hadn't," said Will, looking at his brother and sister with
his little face full of grateful admiration.

They turned towards home after this flurry, feeling quite like heroes.
When they came to the corner where two roads met, Ned proposed they
should take the river-road; for, though the longest, it was much the
pleasantest.

"We shan't be home at supper-time," said Polly. "You won't be able to do
your jobs, Ned, nor I mine, and Will's chickens will have to go to bed
hungry."

"Never mind: it's a holiday, so let's enjoy it, and not bother,"
answered Ned.

"We promised mamma we'd come home early," said Will.

They stood looking at the two roads,--one sandy, hot, and hilly; the
other green and cool and level, along the river-side. They all chose the
pleasant path, and walked on till Ned cried out, "Why, where are our
shadows?"

They looked behind, before, and on either side; but nowhere could they
see them.

"They were with us at the corner," said Will.

"Let's run back, and try to find them," said Polly.

"No, let 'em go: I'm tired of minding mine, and don't care if I never
see it again," said Ned.

"Don't say so; for I remember hearing about a man who sold his shadow,
and then got into lots of trouble because he had none. We promised to
follow them, and we must," said Polly.

"I wish," began Ned in a pet; but Polly clapped her hand over his mouth,
saying:

"Pray, don't wish now; for it may come to pass as the man's wish in the
fairy tale did, and the black pudding flew up and stuck tight to his
wife's nose."

This made Ned laugh, and they all turned back to the corner. Looking up
the hilly road, they saw the three shadows trudging along, as if bent on
getting home in good time. Without saying a word, the children followed;
and, when they got to the garden gate, they all said at once:

"Aren't you glad you came?"

Under the elm-tree stood a pretty tea-table, covered with bread and
butter, custards, and berries, and in the middle a fine cake with
sugar-roses on the top; and mamma and baby, all nicely dressed, were
waiting to welcome them to the birthday feast. Polly crowned the little
queen, Ned gave her a willow whistle he had made, and Will some pretty,
bright pebbles he had found; and Miss Baby was as happy as a bird, with
her treasures.

A pleasant supper-time; then the small duties for each one; and then the
go-to-bed frolic. The nursery was a big room, and in the evening a
bright wood fire always burned there for baby. Mamma sat before it,
softly rubbing baby's little rosy limbs before she went to bed, singing
and telling stories meanwhile to the three children who pranced about in
their long nightgowns. This evening they had a gay time; for the shadows
amused them by all sorts of antics, and kept them laughing till they
were tired. As they sat resting on the big sofa, they heard a soft,
sweet voice singing. It wasn't mamma; for she was only talking to baby,
and this voice sang a real song. Presently they saw mamma's shadow on
the wall, and found it was the shadow-mother singing to the
shadow-children. They listened intently, and this is what they heard:

    "Little shadows, little shadows,
      Dancing on the chamber wall,
    While I sit beside the hearthstone
      Where the red flames rise and fall.
    Caps and nightgowns, caps and nightgowns,
      My three antic shadows wear;
    And no sound they make in playing,
      For the six small feet are bare.

    "Dancing gayly, dancing gayly,
      To and fro all together,
    Like a family of daisies
      Blown about in windy weather;
    Nimble fairies, nimble fairies,
      Playing pranks in the warm glow,
    While I sing the nursery ditties
      Childish phantoms love and know.

    "Now what happens, now what happens?
      One small shadow's tumbled down:
    I can see it on the carpet,
      Softly rubbing its hurt crown.
    No one whimpers, no one whimpers;
      A brave-hearted sprite is this:
    See! the others offer comfort
      In a silent, shadowy kiss.

    "Hush! they're creeping; hush! they're creeping,
      Up about my rocking-chair:
    I can feel their loving fingers
      Clasp my neck and touch my hair.
    Little shadows, little shadows,
      Take me captive, hold me tight,
    As they climb and cling and whisper,
      'Mother dear, good night! good night!'"

As the song ended, the real children, as well as the shadows, lovingly
kissed mamma, and said "Good-night;" then went away into their rooms,
said their prayers, and nestled down into their beds. Ned slept alone in
the room next that which Polly and Will had; and, after lying quiet a
little while, he called out softly:

"I say, Polly, are you asleep?"

"No: I'm thinking what a queer day we've had," answered Polly.

"It's been a good day, and I'm glad we tried our wish; for the shadows
showed us, as well as they could, what we ought to do and be. I shan't
forget it, shall you?" said Ned.

"No: I'm much obliged for the lesson."

"So is I," called out Will, in a very earnest, but rather a sleepy,
little voice.

"I wonder what mamma will say, when we tell her about it," said Ned.

"And I wonder if our shadows will come back to us at midnight, and
follow us as they used to do," added Polly.

"I shall be very careful where I lead my shadow; 'cause he's a good
little one, and set me a righter zarmple than ever I did him," said
Will, and then dropped asleep.

The others agreed with him, and resolved that their shadows should not
be ashamed of them. All were fast asleep; and no one but the moon saw
the shadows come stealing back at midnight, and, having danced about the
little beds, vanish as the clock struck twelve.




VI.

POPPY'S PRANKS.


She wasn't a wilfully naughty child, this harum-scarum Poppy, but very
thoughtless and very curious. She wanted to see every thing, do every
thing, and go every where: she feared nothing, and so was continually
getting into scrapes.

Her pranks began early; for, when she was about four, her mamma one day
gave her a pair of green shoes with bright buttons. Poppy thought there
never was any thing so splendid, and immediately wanted to go to walk.
But mamma was busy, and Poppy couldn't go alone any farther than the
garden. She showed her shoes to the servants, the cat, the doves, and
the flowers; and then opened the gate that the people in the street
might see the trim little feet she was so proud of. Now Poppy had been
forbidden to go out; but, when she saw Kitty Allen, her neighbor,
playing ball down the street, she forgot every thing but the desire to
show her new shoes; and away she went marching primly along as vain as a
little peacock, as she watched the bright buttons twinkle, and heard the
charming creak. Kitty saw her coming; and, being an ill-natured little
girl, took no notice, but called out to her brother Jack:

"Ain't some folks grand? If I couldn't have red shoes for my best, I
wouldn't have any, would you?"

They both laughed, and this hurt Poppy's feelings dreadfully. She tossed
her head, and tried to turn up her nose; but, it was so very small, it
couldn't be very scornful. She said nothing, but walked gravely by, as
if she was going on an errand, and hadn't heard a word. Round the corner
she went, thinking she would wait till Kitty was gone; as she didn't
like to pass again, fearing Jack might say something equally trying. An
organ-man with a monkey was playing near by; and Poppy was soon so busy
listening to the music, and watching the sad-looking monkey, that she
forgot home, shoes, and Kitty altogether.

She followed the man a long way; and, when she turned to go back, she
took the wrong street, and found herself by the park. Being fond of
dandelions, Poppy went in, and gathered her hands full, enjoying herself
immensely; for Betsy, the maid, never let her play in the pond, or roll
down the hill, or make dirt-pies, and now she did all these things,
besides playing with strange children and talking with any one she
pleased. If she had not had her luncheon just before she started, she
would have been very hungry; for dinner-time came, without her knowing
it.

By three o'clock, she began to think it was time to go home, and boldly
started off to find it. But poor little Poppy didn't know the way, and
went all wrong. She was very tired now, and hot and hungry, and wanted
to see mamma, and wondered why she didn't come to the brown house with
the white garden-gate. On and on she went, up streets and down, amusing
herself with looking in the shop-windows, and sitting to rest on
doorsteps. Once she asked a pleasant-faced little girl to show her the
way home; but, as she didn't know in what street it was, and said her
father's name was "papa," the girl couldn't help her: so she gave her a
bun and went away. Poppy ate her bun, and began to wonder what would
become of her; for night was coming on, and there didn't seem to be any
prospect of finding mamma or home or bed. Her courage was all gone now;
and, coming to a quiet place, she sat down on some high steps, and cried
till her little "hankchif," as she called it, was all wet.

Nobody minded her: and she felt very forlorn till a big black dog came
by, and seemed to understand the matter entirely; for he smelt of her
face, licked her hands, and then lay down by her with such a friendly
look in his brown eyes that Poppy was quite comforted. She told him her
story, patted his big head; and then, being fairly tired out, laid her
wet cheek on his soft back, and fell fast asleep.

It was quite dark when she woke; but a lamp was lighted near by, and
standing under it was a man ringing a great bell. Poppy sat up, and
wondered if anybody's supper was ready. The man had a paper; and, when
people stopped at the sound of the bell, he read in a loud voice:

"Lost! a little girl, four years old; curly brown hair, blue eyes; had
on a white frock and green shoes; calls herself Poppy."

He got no farther; for a little voice cried out of the dark, in a tone
of surprise:

"Why, dats me!"

The people all turned to look; and the big man put his bell in his
pocket, took her up very kindly, and said he'd carry her home.

"Is it far away?" asked Poppy, with a little sob.

"Yes, my dear; but I am going to give you some supper fust, along of my
little girl. I live close by; and, when we've had a bite, we'll go find
your ma."

Poppy was so tired and hungry, she was glad to find herself taken care
of, and let the man do as he liked. He took her to a funny little house,
and his wife gave her bread and molasses on a new tin plate with letters
all round the edge. Poppy thought it very fine, and enjoyed her supper,
though the man's little girl stared at her all the time with eyes as
blue as her mug.

While she ate, the man sent word to her father that she was found; and,
when both papa and mamma came hurrying in all out of breath with joy,
there sat Miss Poppy talking merrily, with her face well daubed with
molasses, her gown torn, her hands very dirty, and her shoes--ah, the
pretty new shoes!--all spoiled with mud and dust, scratched, and half
worn out, the buttons dull, and the color quite gone. No one cared for
it that night; for little runaway was kissed and petted, and taken home
to her own cosey bed as tenderly as if she had done nothing naughty, and
never frightened her parents out of their wits in her life.

But the next day,--dear me! what a sad time it was, to be sure! When
Poppy woke up, there hung the spoilt shoes over the mantle-piece; and,
as soon as she was dressed, papa came in with a long cord, one end of
which he tied round Poppy's waist, and the other to the arm of the sofa.

"I'm very sorry to have to tie you up, like a little dog; but I must, or
you will forget, and run away again, and make mamma ill."

Then he went away without his morning kiss, and Poppy was so very
unhappy she could hardly eat her breakfast. She felt better by and by,
and tried to play; but the cord kept pulling her back. She couldn't get
to the window; and, when she heard mamma passing the door, she tried to
run and meet her, but had to stop halfway, for the cord jerked her over.
Cousin Fanny came up, but Poppy was so ashamed to be tied that she
crept under the sofa and hid. All day she was a prisoner, and was a very
miserable little girl; but at night she was untied, and, when mamma took
her in her lap for the first time that day, Poppy held her fast, and
sobbed very penitently--

"O mamma! I drefful sorry I runned away. Fordive me one time more, and I
never will adain;" and she never did.

Two or three years after this, Poppy went to live in the country, and
tried some new pranks. One day she went with her sister Nelly to see a
man plough, for that sort of thing was new to her. While the man worked,
she saw him take out a piece of something brown, and bite off a bit.

"What's that?" asked Poppy.

"Tobaccer," said the man.

"Is it nice?" asked Poppy.

"Prime," said the man.

"Could you let me taste it?" asked curious Poppy.

"It will make you sick," said the man, laughing.

"It doesn't make _you_ sick. I'd like to try," said Poppy, nothing
daunted.

He gave her a piece; and Poppy ate it, though it didn't taste good at
all. She did it because Cy, her favorite playfellow, told her she'd die
if she did, and tried to frighten her.

"You darsn't eat any more," he said.

"Yes, I dare. See if I don't." And Poppy took another piece, just to
show how brave she was. Silly little Poppy!

"I ain't sick, and I shan't die, so now."

And Poppy pranced about as briskly as ever. But the man shook his head,
Nelly watched her anxiously, and Cy kept saying:

"Ain't you sick yet, say?"

For a little while Poppy felt all right; but presently she grew rather
pale, and began to look rather pensive. She stopped running, and walked
slower and slower, while her eyes got dizzy, and her hands and feet very
cold.

"Ain't you sick now, say?" repeated Cy; and Poppy tried to answer, "Oh,
dear! no;" but a dreadful feeling came over her, and she could only
shake her head, and hold on to Nelly.

"Better lay down a spell," said the man, looking a little troubled.

"I don't wish to dirty my clean frock," said Poppy faintly, as she
glanced over the wide-ploughed field, and longed for a bit of grass to
drop on. She kept on bravely for another turn; but suddenly stopped,
and, quite regardless of the clean pink gown, dropped down in a furrow,
looking so white and queer that Nelly began to cry. Poppy lay a minute,
then turned to Cy, and said very solemnly:

"Cy, run home, and tell my mother I'm dying."

Away rushed Cy in a great fright, and burst upon Poppy's mamma,
exclaiming breathlessly:

"O ma'am! Poppy's been and ate a lot of tobacco; and she's sick, layin'
in the field; and she says 'Come quick, 'cause she's dyin.'"

"Mercy on us! what will happen to that child next?" cried poor mamma,
who was used to Poppy's mishaps. Papa was away, and there was no
carriage to bring Poppy home in; so mamma took the little wheelbarrow,
and trundled away to get the suffering Poppy.

She couldn't speak when they got to her; and, only stopping to give the
man a lecture, mamma picked up her silly little girl, and the procession
moved off. First came Cy, as grave as a sexton; then the wheelbarrow
with Poppy, white and limp and speechless, all in a bunch; then mamma,
looking amused, anxious and angry; then Nelly, weeping as if her tender
heart was entirely broken; while the man watched them, with a grin,
saying to himself:

"Twarn't my fault. The child was a reg'lar fool to swaller it."

Poppy was dreadfully sick all night, but next day was ready for more
adventures and experiments. She swung on the garret stairs, and tumbled
down, nearly breaking her neck. She rubbed her eyes with red peppers, to
see if it _really_ would make them smart, as Cy said; and was led home
quite blind and roaring with pain. She got into the pigsty to catch a
young piggy, and was taken out in a sad state of dirt. She slipped into
the brook, and was half drowned; broke a window and her own head,
swinging a little flat-iron on a string; dropped baby in the coal-hod;
buried her doll, and spoilt her; cut off a bit of her finger, chopping
wood; and broke a tooth, trying to turn heels over head on a haycock.
These are only a few of her pranks, but one was nearly her last.

She wanted to go bare-footed, as the little country boys and girls did;
but mamma wasn't willing, and Poppy was much afflicted.

"It doesn't hurt Cy, and it won't hurt me, just for a little while," she
said.

"Say no more, Poppy. I never wish to see you barefooted," replied mamma.

"Well, you needn't: I'll go and do it in the barn," muttered Poppy, as
she walked away.

Into the barn she went, and played country girl to her heart's content,
in spite of Nelly's warnings. Nelly never got into scrapes, being a
highly virtuous young lady; but she enjoyed Poppy's pranks, and wept
over her misfortunes with sisterly fidelity.

"Now I'll be a bear, and jump at you as you go by," said Poppy, when
they were tired of playing steam-engine with the old winnowing machine.
So she got up on a beam; and Nelly, with a peck measure on her head for
a hat, and a stick for a gun, went bear-hunting, and banged away at the
swallows, the barrels, and the hencoops, till the bear was ready to eat
her. Presently, with a loud roar, the bear leaped; but Nelly wasn't
eaten that time, for Poppy cried out with pain:

"Oh! I jumped on a pitchfork, and it's in my foot! Take it out! take it
out!"

Poor little foot! There was a deep purple hole in the sole, and the
blood came, and Poppy fainted away, and Nelly screamed, and mamma ran,
and the neighbors rushed in, and there was _such_ a flurry. Poppy was
soon herself again, and lay on the sofa, with Nelly and Cy to amuse her.

"What did the doctor say to mamma in the other room about me?" whispered
Poppy, feeling very important at having such a bustle made on her
account. Nelly sniffed, but said nothing; Cy, however, spoke up briskly:

"He says you might have lockjaw."

"Is that bad?" asked Poppy gravely.

"Oh, ain't it, though! Your mouth shuts up, and you can't open it; and
you have fits and die."

"Always?" said Poppy, looking scared, and feeling of her mouth.

"'Most always, I guess. That's why your ma cried, and Nelly keeps
kissin' you."

Cy felt sorry, but rather enjoyed the excitement, and was sure, that, if
any one ever _could_ escape dying, it would be Poppy, for she always
"came alive" again after her worst mishaps. She looked very solemn for a
few minutes, and kept opening and shutting her mouth to see if it wasn't
stiff. Presently she said, in a serious tone and with a pensive air:

"Nelly, I'll give you my bead-ring: I shan't want it any more. And Cy
may have the little horse: he lost his tail; but I put on the lamb's
tail, and he is as good as ever. I wish to give away my things 'fore I
die; and, Nelly, won't you bring me the scissors?"

"What for?" said Nelly, sniffing more than ever.

"To cut off my hair for mamma. She'll want it, and I like to cut
things."

Nelly got the scissors; and Poppy cut away all she could reach, giving
directions about her property while she snipped.

"I wish papa to have my pictures and my piece of poetry I made. Give
baby my dolly and the quacking duck. Tell Billy, if he wants my
collection of bright buttons, he can have 'em; and give Hattie the
yellow plaster dog, with my love."

Here mamma came in with a poultice, and couldn't help laughing, though
tears stood in her eyes, as she saw Poppy's cropped head and heard her
last wishes.

"I don't think I shall lose my little girl yet, so we won't talk of it.
But Poppy must keep quiet, and let Nelly wait on her for a few days."

"Are fits bad, mamma? and does it hurt much to die?" asked Poppy
thoughtfully.

"If people are good while they live, it is not hard to die, dear," said
mamma, with a kiss; and Poppy hugged her, saying softly:

"Then I'll be very good; so I won't mind, if the jawlock does come."

And Poppy _was_ good,--oh, dreadfully good! for a week. Quite an angel
was Poppy; so meek and gentle, so generous and obedient, you really
wouldn't have known her. She loved everybody, forgave her playmates all
their sins against her, let Nelly take such of her precious treasures as
she liked, and pensively hoped baby would remember her when she was
gone. She hopped about with a crutch, and felt as if she was an object
of public interest; for all the old ladies sent to know how she was, the
children looked at her with respectful awe as one set apart and doomed
to fits, and Cy continually begged to know if her mouth was stiff.

Poppy didn't die, though she got all ready for it; and felt rather
disappointed when the foot healed, the jaws remained as active as ever,
and the fits didn't come. I think it did her good; for she never forgot
that week, and, though she was near dying several times after, she never
was so fit to go as she was then.

"Burney's making jelly: let's go and get our scrapings," said Poppy to
Nellie once, when mamma was away.

But Burney was busy and cross, and cooks are not as patient as mothers;
so when the children appeared, each armed with a spoon, and demanded
their usual feast, she wouldn't hear of it, and ordered them off.

"But we only want the scrapings of the pan, Burney: mamma always lets us
have them, when we help her make jelly; don't she, Nelly?" said Poppy,
trying to explain the case.

"Yes; and makes us our little potful too," added Nelly, persuasively.

"I don't want your help; so be off. Your ma can fuss with your pot, if
she chooses. I've no time."

"_I_ think Burney's the crossest woman in the world. It's mean to eat
all the scrapings herself; isn't it Nelly?" said Poppy, very loud, as
the cook shut the door in their faces. "Never mind: I know how to pay
her," she added, in a whisper, as they sat on the stairs bewailing their
wrongs. "She'll put her old jelly in the big closet, and lock the door;
but we can climb the plum tree, and get in at the window, when she takes
her nap."

"Should we dare to eat any?" asked Nelly, timid, but longing for the
forbidden fruit.

"_I_ should; just as much as ever I like. It's mamma's jelly, and she
won't mind. I don't care for old cross Burney," said Poppy, sliding down
the banisters by way of soothing her ruffled spirit.

So when Burney went to her room after dinner, the two rogues climbed in
at the window; and, each taking a jar, sat on the shelf, dipping in
their fingers and revelling rapturously. But Burney wasn't asleep, and,
hearing a noise below, crept down to see what mischief was going on.
Pausing in the entry to listen, she heard whispering, clattering of
glasses, and smacking of lips in the big closet; and in a moment knew
that her jelly was lost. She tried the door with her key; but sly Poppy
had bolted it on the inside, and, feeling quite safe, defied Burney from
among the jelly-pots, entirely reckless of consequences. Short-sighted
Poppy! she forgot Cy; but Burney didn't, and sent him to climb in at the
window, and undo the door. Feeling hurt that the young ladies hadn't
asked him to the feast, Cy hardened his heart against them, and
delivered them up to the enemy, regardless of Poppy's threats and
Nelly's prayers.

"Poppy proposed it, she broke the jar, and I didn't eat _much_. O
Burney! don't hurt her, please, but let me 'splain it to mamma when she
comes," sobbed Nelly, as Burney seized Poppy, and gave her a good
shaking.

"You go wash your face, Miss Nelly, and leave this naughty, naughty
child to me," said Burney; and took Poppy, kicking and screaming, into
the little library, where she--oh, dreadful to relate!--gave her a good
spanking, and locked her up.

Mamma never whipped, and Poppy was in a great rage at such an indignity.
The minute she was left alone, she looked about to see how she could be
revenged. A solar lamp stood on the table; and Poppy coolly tipped it
over, with a fine smash, calling out to Burney that she'd have to pay
for it, that mamma would be very angry, and that she, Poppy, was going
to spoil every thing in the room. But Burney was gone, and no one came
near her. She kicked the paint off the door, rattled the latch, called
Burney a "pig," and Cy "a badder boy than the man who smothered the
little princes in the Tower." Poppy was very fond of that story, and
often played it with Nelly and the dolls. Having relieved her feelings
in this way, Poppy rested, and then set about amusing herself. Observing
that the spilt oil made the table shine, she took her handkerchief and
polished up the furniture, as she had seen the maids do.

"Now, that looks nice; and I know mamma will be pleased 'cause I'm so
tidy," she said, surveying her work with pride, when she had thoroughly
greased every table, chair, picture-frame, book-back, and ornament in
the room. Plenty of oil still remained; and Poppy finished off by
oiling her hair, till it shone finely, and smelt--dear me, how it did
smell! If she had been a young whale, it couldn't have been worse. Poppy
wasn't particular about smells; but she got some in her mouth, and
didn't like the taste. There was no water to wash in; and her hands,
face, and pinafore were in a high state of grease. She was rather lonely
too; for, though mamma had got home, she didn't come to let Poppy out:
so the young rebel thought it was about time to surrender. She could
write pretty well, and was fond of sending penitent notes to mamma,
after being naughty: for mamma always answered them so kindly, and was
so forgiving, that Poppy's naughtiest mood was conquered by them sooner
than by any punishment; and Poppy kept the notes carefully in a little
cover, even after she was grown up. There was pen, ink, and paper in the
room; so, after various trials, Poppy wrote her note:--

    "dear Mamma.

    "i am sorry i Took bernys gelli. i have braked The lamP. The oyl
    maks A bad smel. i tHink i wil Bee sik iF i stay HeRe anny More.
    i LoVe yoU--your Trying To Bee GooD

    popy."

When she had finished, she lowered her note by a string, and bobbed it
up and down before the parlor window till Nelly saw and took it in.
Every one laughed over it; for, besides the bad spelling and the funny
periods, it was covered with oil-spots, blots, and tear marks; for Poppy
got tender-hearted toward the end, and cried a few very repentant tears
when she said, "I love you; your trying-to-be-good Poppy."

Mamma went up at once, and ordered no further punishment, but a thorough
scrubbing; which Poppy underwent very meekly, though Betsey put soap in
her eyes, pulled her hair, and scolded all the time. They were not
allowed any jelly for a long while; and Cy teased Poppy about her
hair-oil till the joke was quite worn out, and even cross Burney was
satisfied with the atonement.

When Poppy was eight, she got so very wild that no one could manage her
but mamma, and she was ill; so Poppy was sent away to grandpa's for a
visit. Now, grandpa was a very stately old gentleman, and every one
treated him with great respect; but Poppy wasn't at all afraid, and
asked all manner of impolite questions.

"Grandpa, why don't you have any hair on the top of your head?"--"O
grandpa! you _do_ snore _so_ loud when you take naps!"--"What makes you
turn out your feet so, when you walk?" and such things.

If grandpa hadn't been the best-natured old gentleman in the world, he
wouldn't have liked this: but he only laughed at Poppy, especially when
she spoke of his legs; for he was rather proud of them, and always wore
long black silk stockings, and told every one that the legs were so
handsome an artist put them in a picture of General Washington; which
was quite true, as any one may see when they look at the famous picture
in Boston.

Well, Poppy behaved herself respectably for a day or two; but the house
was rather dull, she missed Nelly, wanted to run in the street, and
longed to see mamma. She amused herself as well as she could with
picture-books, patchwork, and the old cat; but, not being a quiet,
proper, little Rosamond sort of a child, she got tired of hemming neat
pocket-handkerchiefs, and putting her needle carefully away when she had
done. She wanted to romp and shout, and slide down the banisters, and
riot about; so, when she couldn't be quiet another minute, she went up
into a great empty room at the top of the house, and cut up all sorts of
capers. Her great delight was to lean out of the window as far as she
could, and look at the people in the street, with her head upside down.
It was very dangerous, for a fall would have killed her; but the danger
was the fun, and Poppy hung out till her hands touched the ledge below,
and her face was as red as any real poppy's.

She was enjoying herself in this way one day, when an old gentleman,
who lived near, came home to dinner, and saw her.

"What in the world is that hanging out of the colonel's upper window?"
said he, putting on his spectacles. "Bless my soul! that child will kill
herself. Hallo, there! little girl; get in this minute!" he called to
Poppy, flourishing his hat to make her see him.

"What for?" answered Poppy, staring at him without moving an inch.

"You'll fall, and break your neck!" screamed the old gentleman.

"Oh, no, I shan't!" returned Poppy, much flattered by his interest, and
hanging out still further.

"Stop that, instantly, or I'll go in and inform the colonel!" roared the
old gentleman, getting angry.

"I don't care," shouted Poppy; and she didn't, for she knew grandpa
wasn't at home.

"Little gipsy! I'll settle her," muttered the old man, bustling up to
the steps, and ringing the bell, as if the house was on fire.

No one was in but the servants; and, when he'd told old Emily what the
matter was, she went up to "settle" Poppy. But Poppy was already
settled, demurely playing with her doll, and looking quite innocent.
Emily scolded; and Poppy promised never to do it again, if she might
stay and play in the big room. Being busy about dinner, Emily was glad
to be rid of her, and left her, to go and tell the old gentleman it was
all right.

"Ain't they crosspatches?" said Poppy to her doll. "Never mind, dear:
_you_ shall hang out, if I can't. I guess the old man won't order you
in, any way."

Full of this idea, Poppy took her long-suffering dolly, and, tying a
string to her neck, danced her out of the window. Now this dolly had
been through a great deal. Her head had been cut off (and put on again);
she had been washed, buried, burnt, torn, soiled, and banged about till
she was a mournful object. Poppy loved her very much; for she was two
feet tall, and had once been very handsome: so her trials only endeared
her to her little mamma. Away she went, skipping and prancing like
mad,--a funny sight, for Poppy had taken off her clothes, and she hadn't
a hair on her head.

Poppy went to another window of the room for this performance, because
in the opposite house lived five or six children, and she thought they
would enjoy the fun.

So they did, and so did the other people; for it was a boarding-house,
and all the people were at home for dinner. They came to the windows,
and looked and laughed at dolly's capers, and Poppy was in high feather
at the success of her entertainment.

All of a sudden she saw grandpa coming down the street, hands behind
his back, feet turned out, gold-headed cane under his arm, and the
handsome legs in the black silk stockings marching along in the most
stately manner. Poppy whisked dolly in before grandpa saw her, and
dodged down as he went by. This made the people laugh again, and grandpa
wondered what the joke was. The minute he went in out flew dolly,
dancing more frantically than ever; and the children shouted so loud
that grandpa went to see what the matter was. The street was empty; yet
there stood the people, staring out and laughing. Yes; they were
actually looking and laughing at _his_ house; and he didn't see what
there was to laugh at in that highly respectable mansion.

He didn't like it; and, clapping on his hat, he went out to learn what
the matter was. He looked over at the house, up at the sky, down at the
ground, and through the street; but nothing funny appeared, for Poppy
and dolly were hidden again, and the old gentleman was puzzled. He went
in and sat down to watch, feeling rather disturbed. Presently the fun
began again: the children clapped their hands, the people laughed, and
every one looked over at the house, in what he thought a very
impertinent way. This made him angry; and out he rushed a second time,
saying, as he marched across the street:

"If those saucy young fellows are making game of me, I'll soon stop
it."

Up to the door he went, gave a great pull at the bell, and, when the
servant came, he demanded why every one was laughing at his house. One
of the young men came and told him, and asked him to come in and see the
fun. Poppy didn't see grandpa go in, for she hid, and when she looked
out he was gone: so she boldly began the dancing; but, in the midst of a
lively caper, dolly went bounce into the garden below, for the string
fell from Poppy's hand when she suddenly saw grandpa at the window
opposite, laughing as heartily as any one at her prank.

She stared at him in a great fright, and looked so amazed that every one
enjoyed that joke better than the other; and poor Poppy didn't hear the
last of it for a long time.

Her next performance was to fall into the pond on the Common. She was
driving hoop down the hill, and went so fast she couldn't stop herself;
so splashed into the water, hoop and all. How dreadful it was to feel
the cold waves go over her head, shutting out the sun and air! The
ground was gone, and she could find no place for her feet, and could
only struggle and choke, and go down, down, with a loud roaring sound in
her ears. That would have been the end of Poppy, if a little black boy
hadn't jumped in and pulled her out. She was sick and dizzy, and looked
like a drowned kitten; but a kind lady took her home in a carriage.
After that mishap grandpa thought he wouldn't keep her any longer, for
fear she should come to some worse harm. So Miss Poppy was sent home,
much to her delight and much to mamma's also; for no matter where she
went, or how naughty she was, mamma was always glad to see the little
wanderer back, and to forgive and forget all Poppy's pranks.




VII.

WHAT THE SWALLOWS DID.


A man lay on a pile of new-made hay, in a great barn, looking up at the
swallows who darted and twittered above him. He envied the cheerful
little creatures; for he wasn't a happy man, though he had many friends,
much money, and the beautiful gift of writing songs that everybody loved
to sing. He had lost his wife and little child, and would not be
comforted; but lived alone, and went about with such a gloomy face that
no one liked to speak to him. He took no notice of friends and
neighbors; neither used his money for himself nor others; found no
beauty in the world, no happiness anywhere; and wrote such sad songs it
made one's heart ache to sing them.

As he lay alone on the sweet-smelling hay, with the afternoon sunshine
streaming in, and the busy birds chirping overhead, he said sadly to
himself:

"Happy swallows, I wish I were one of you; for you have no pains nor
sorrows, and your cares are very light. All summer you live gayly
together; and, when winter comes, you fly away to the lovely South,
unseparated still."

"Neighbors, do you hear what that lazy creature down there is saying?"
cried a swallow, peeping over the edge of her nest, and addressing
several others who sat on a beam near by.

"We hear, Mrs. Skim; and quite agree with you that he knows very little
about us and our affairs," answered one of the swallows with a shrill
chirp, like a scornful laugh. "We work harder than he does any day. Did
he build his own house, I should like to know? Does he get his daily
bread for himself? How many of his neighbors does he help? How much of
the world does he see, and who is the happier for his being alive?"

"Cares indeed!" cried another; "I wish he'd undertake to feed and teach
my brood. Much he knows about the anxieties of a parent." And the little
mother bustled away to get supper for the young ones, whose bills were
always gaping wide.

"Sorrows we have, too," softly said the fourth swallow. "He would not
envy _me_, if he knew how my nest fell, and all my children were killed;
how my dear husband was shot, and my old mother died of fatigue on our
spring journey from the South."

"Dear neighbor Dart, he _would_ envy you, if he knew how patiently you
bear your troubles; how tenderly you help us with our little ones; how
cheerfully you serve your friends; how faithfully you love your lost
mate; and how trustfully you wait to meet him again in a lovelier
country than the South."

As Skim spoke, she leaned down from her nest to kiss her neighbor; and,
as the little beaks met, the other birds gave a grateful and approving
murmur, for Neighbor Dart was much beloved by all the inhabitants of
Twittertown.

"I, for my part, don't envy _him_," said Gossip Wing, who was fond of
speaking her mind. "Men and women call themselves superior beings; but,
upon my word, I think they are vastly inferior to us. Now, look at that
man, and see how he wastes his life. There never was any one with a
better chance for doing good, and being happy; and yet he mopes and
dawdles his time away most shamefully."

"Ah! he has had a great sorrow, and it is hard to be gay with a heavy
heart, an empty home; so don't be too severe, Sister Wing." And the
white tie of the little widow's cap was stirred by a long sigh as Mrs.
Dart glanced up at the nook where her nest once stood.

"No, my dear, I won't; but really I do get out of patience when I see so
much real misery which that man might help, if he'd only forget himself
a little. It's my opinion he'd be much happier than he now is, wandering
about with a dismal face and a sour temper."

"I quite agree with you; and I dare say he'd thank any one for telling
him how he may find comfort. Poor soul! I wish he could understand me;
for I sympathize with him, and would gladly help him if I could."

And, as she spoke, kind-hearted Widow Dart skimmed by him with a
friendly chirp, which did comfort him; for, being a poet, he _could_
understand them, and lay listening, well pleased while the little
gossips chattered on together.

"I am so tied at home just now, that I know nothing of what is going on,
except the bits of news Skim brings me; so I enjoy your chat immensely.
I'm interested in your views on this subject, and beg you'll tell me
what you'd have that man do to better himself," said Mrs. Skim, settling
herself on her eggs with an attentive air.

"Well, my dear, I'll tell you; for I've seen a deal of the world, and
any one is welcome to my experience," replied Mrs. Wing, in an important
manner; for she was proud of her "views," and very fond of talking. "In
my daily flights about the place, I see a great deal of poverty and
trouble, and often wish I could lend a hand. Now, this man has plenty of
money and time; and he might do more good than I can tell, if he'd only
set about it. Because he is what they call a poet is no reason he should
go moaning up and down, as if he had nothing to do but make songs. We
sing, but we work also; and are wise enough to see the necessity of
both, thank goodness!"

"Yes, indeed, we do," cried all the birds in a chorus; for several more
had stopped to hear what was going on.

"Now, what I say is this," continued Mrs. Wing impressively. "If I were
that man, I'd make myself useful at once. There is poor little Will
getting more and more lame every day, because his mother can't send him
where he can be cured. A trifle of that man's money would do it, and he
ought to give it. Old Father Winter is half starved, alone there in his
miserable hovel; and no one thinks of the good old man. Why don't that
lazy creature take him home, and care for him, the little while he has
to live? Pretty Nell is working day and night, to support her father,
and is too proud to ask help, though her health and courage are going
fast. The man might make hers the gayest heart alive, by a little help.
There in a lonely garret lives a young man studying his life away,
longing for books and a teacher. The man has a library full, and might
keep the poor boy from despair by a little help and a friendly word. He
mourns for his own lost baby: I advise him to adopt the orphan whom
nobody will own, and who lies wailing all day untended on the poor-house
floor. Yes: if he wants to forget sorrow and find peace, let him fill
his empty heart and home with such as these, and life won't seem dark to
him any more."

"Dear me! how well you express yourself, Mrs. Wing; it's quite a
pleasure to hear you; and I heartily wish some persons could hear you,
it would do 'em a deal of good," said Mrs. Skim; while her husband gave
an approving nod as he dived off the beam, and vanished through the open
doors.

"I know it would comfort that man to do these things; for I have tried
the same cure in my small way, and found great satisfaction in it,"
began little Madame Dart, in her soft voice; but Mrs. Wing broke in,
saying with a pious expression of countenance:

"I flew into church one day, and sat on the organ enjoying the music;
for every one was singing, and I joined in, though I didn't know the
air. Opposite me were two great tablets with golden letters on them. I
can read a little, thanks to my friend, the learned raven; and so I
spelt out some of the words. One was, 'Love thy neighbor;' and as I sat
there, looking down on the people, I wondered how they could see those
words week after week, and yet pay so little heed to them. Goodness
knows, _I_ don't consider myself a perfect bird; far from it; for I know
I am a poor, erring fowl; but I believe I may say I _do_ love my
neighbor, though I _am_ 'an inferior creature.'" And Mrs. Wing bridled
up, as if she resented the phrase immensely.

"Indeed you do, gossip," cried Dart and Skim; for Wing was an excellent
bird, in spite of the good opinion she had of herself.

"Thank you: well, then, such being the known fact, I may give advice on
the subject as one having authority; and, if it were possible, I'd give
that man a bit of my mind."

"You have, madam, you have; and I shall not forget it. Thank you,
neighbors, and good night," said the man, as he left the barn, with the
first smile on his face which it had worn for many days.

"Mercy on us! I do believe the creature heard every thing we said,"
cried Mrs. Wing, nearly tumbling off the beam, in her surprise.

"He certainly did; so I'm glad I was guarded in my remarks," replied
Mrs. Skim, laughing at her neighbor's dismay.

"Dear me! dear me! what did I say?" cried Mrs. Wing, in a great twitter.

"You spoke with more than your usual bluntness, and some of your
expressions were rather strong, I must confess; but I don't think any
harm will come of it. We are of too little consequence for our
criticisms or opinions to annoy him," said Mrs. Dart consolingly.

"I don't know that, ma'am," returned Mrs. Wing, sharply: for she was
much ruffled and out of temper. "A cat may look at a king; and a bird
may teach a man, if the bird is the wisest. He may destroy my nest, and
take my life; but I feel that I have done my duty, and shall meet
affliction with a firmness which will be an example to that indolent,
ungrateful man."

In spite of her boasted firmness, Mrs. Wing dropped her voice, and
peeped over the beam, to be sure the man was gone before she called him
names; and then flew away, to discover what he meant to do about it.

For several days, there was much excitement in Twittertown; for news of
what had happened flew from nest to nest, and every bird was anxious to
know what revenge the man would take for the impertinent remarks which
had been made about him.

Mrs. Wing was in a dreadful state of mind, expecting an assault, and the
destruction of her entire family. Every one blamed her. Her husband
lectured; the young birds chirped, "Chatterbox, chatterbox," as she
passed; and her best friends were a little cool. All this made her very
meek for a time; and she scarcely opened her bill, except to eat.

A guard was set day and night, to see if any danger approached; and a
row of swallows might be seen on the ridgepole at all hours. If any one
entered the barn, dozens of little black heads peeped cautiously over
the edges of the nests, and there was much flying to and fro with
reports and rumors; for all the birds in the town soon knew that
something had happened.

The day after the imprudent conversation, a chimney-swallow came to call
on Mrs. Wing; and, the moment she was seated on the beam, she began:

"My dear creature, I feel for you in your trying position,--indeed I do,
and came over at once to warn you of your danger."

"Mercy on us! what is coming?" cried Mrs. Wing, covering her brood with
trembling wings, and looking quite wild with alarm.

"Be calm, my friend, and bear with firmness the consequences of your
folly," replied Mrs. Sooty-back, who didn't like Mrs. Wing, because
she prided herself on her family, and rather looked down on
chimney-swallows. "You know, ma'am, I live at the great house, and am in
the way of seeing and hearing all that goes on there. No fire is lighted
in the study now; but my landlord still sits on the hearth, and I can
overhear every word he says. Last evening, after my darlings were
asleep, and my husband gone out, I went down and sat on the andiron, as
I often do; for the fireplace is full of oak boughs, and I can peep out
unseen. My landlord sat there, looking a trifle more cheerful than
usual, and I heard him say, in a very decided tone:

"'I'll catch them, one and all, and keep them here; that is better than
pulling the place down, as I planned at first. Those swallows little
know what they have done; but I'll show them I don't forget.'"

On hearing this a general wail arose, and Mrs. Wing fainted entirely
away. Madam Sooty-back was quite satisfied with the effect she had
produced, and departed, saying loftily:

"I'm sorry for you, Mrs. Wing, and forgive your rude speech about my
being related to chimney-sweeps. One can't expect good manners from
persons brought up in mud houses, and entirely shut out from good
society. If I hear any thing more, I'll let you know."

Away she flew; and poor Mrs. Wing would have had another fit, if they
hadn't tickled her with a feather, and fanned her so violently that she
was nearly blown off her nest by the breeze they raised.

"What shall we do?" she cried.

"Nothing, but wait. I dare say, Mrs. Sooty-back is mistaken; at any
rate, we can't get away without leaving our children, for they can't fly
yet. Let us wait, and see what happens. If the worst comes, we shall
have done our duty, and will all die together."

As no one could suggest any thing better, Mrs. Dart's advice was taken,
and they waited. On the afternoon of the same day, Dr. Banks, a
sand-swallow, who lived in a subterranean village over by the great
sand-bank, looked in to see Mrs. Wing, and cheered her by the following
bit of news:

"The man was down at the poor-house to-day, and took away little Nan,
the orphan baby. I saw him carry her to Will's mother, and heard him ask
her to take care of it for a time. He paid her well, and she seemed glad
to do it; for Will needs help, and now he can have it. An excellent
arrangement, I think. Bless me, ma'am! what's the matter? Your pulse is
altogether too fast, and you look feverish."

No wonder the doctor looked surprised; for Mrs. Wing suddenly gave a
skip, and flapped her wings, with a shrill chirp, exclaiming, as she
looked about her triumphantly:

"Now, who was right? Who has done good, not harm, by what you call
'gossip'? Who has been a martyr, and patiently borne all kinds of blame,
injustice, and disrespect? Yes, indeed! the man saw the sense of my
words; he took my advice; he will show his gratitude by some good turn
yet; and, if half a dozen poor souls are helped, it will be my doing,
and mine alone."

Here she had to stop for breath; and her neighbors all looked at one
another, feeling undecided whether to own they were wrong, or to put
Mrs. Wing down. Every one twittered and chirped, and made a great noise;
but no one would give up, and all went to roost in a great state of
uncertainty. But, the next day, it became evident that Mrs. Wing was
right; for Major Bumble-bee came buzzing in to tell them that old Daddy
Winter's hut was empty, and his white head had been seen in the sunny
porch of the great house.

After this the swallows gave in; and, as no harm came to them, they had
a jubilee in honor of the occasion. Mrs. Wing was president, and
received a vote of thanks for the good she had done, and the credit she
had bestowed upon the town by her wisdom and courage. She was much
elated by all this; but her fright had been of service, and she bore her
honors more meekly than one would have supposed. To be sure, she cut
Mrs. Sooty-back when they met; assumed an injured air, when some of her
neighbors passed her; and said, "I told you so," a dozen times a day to
her husband, who got so many curtain lectures that he took to sleeping
on the highest rafter, pretending that the children's noise disturbed
him.

All sorts of charming things happened after that, and such a fine summer
never was known before; for not only did the birds rejoice, but people
also. A good spirit seemed to haunt the town, leaving help and happiness
wherever it passed. Some unseen hand scattered crumbs over the barn
floor, and left food at many doors. No dog or boy or gun marred the
tranquillity of the birds, insects, and flowers who lived on the great
estate. No want, care, or suffering, that love or money could prevent,
befell the poor folk whose cottages stood near the old house. Sunshine
and peace seemed to reign there; for its gloomy master was a changed man
now, and the happiness he earned for himself, by giving it to others,
flowed out in beautiful, blithe songs, and went singing away into the
world, making him friends, and bringing him honor in high places as well
as low.

He did not forget the wife and little child whom he had loved so well;
but he mourned no longer, for cheerful daisies grew above their graves,
and he knew that he should meet them in the lovely land where death can
never come. So, while he waited for that happy time to come, he made his
life a cheery song,--as every one may do, if they will; and went about
dropping kind words and deeds as silently and sweetly as the sky drops
sunshine and dew. Every one was his friend, but his favorites were the
swallows. Every day he went to see them, carrying grain and crumbs,
hearing their chat, sharing their joys and sorrows, and never tiring of
their small friendship; for to them, he thought, he owed all the content
now his.

When autumn leaves were red, and autumn winds blew cold, the inhabitants
of Twittertown prepared for their journey to the South. They lingered
longer than usual this year, feeling sorry to leave their friend. But
the fields were bare, the frosts began to pinch, and the young ones
longed to see the world; so they must go. The day they started, the
whole flock flew to the great house, to say good-by. Some dived and
darted round and round it, some hopped to and fro on the sere lawn, some
perched on the chimney-tops, and some clung to the window ledges; all
twittering a loving farewell.

Chirp, Dart, and Wing peeped everywhere, and everywhere found something
to rejoice over. In a cosey room, by a bright fire, sat Daddy Winter and
Nell's old father, telling stories of their youth, and basking in the
comfortable warmth. In the study, surrounded by the books he loved, was
the poor young man, happy as a king now, and learning many things which
no book could teach him; for he had found a friend. Then, down below was
Will's mother, working like a bee; for she was housekeeper, and enjoyed
her tasks as much as any mother-bird enjoys filling the little mouths of
her brood. Close by was pretty Nell, prettier than ever now; for her
heavy care was gone, and she sung as she sewed, thinking of the old
father, whom nothing could trouble any more.

But the pleasantest sight the three gossips saw was the man with Baby
Nan on his arm and Will at his side, playing in the once dreary nursery.
How they laughed and danced! for Will was up from his bed at last, and
hopped nimbly on his crutches, knowing that soon even they would be
unneeded. Little Nan was as plump and rosy as a baby should be, and
babbled like a brook, as the man went to and fro, cradling her in his
strong arms, feeling as if his own little daughter had come back when he
heard the baby voice call him father.

"Ah, how sweet it is!" cried Mrs. Dart, glad to see that he had found
comfort for his grief.

"Yes; indeed: it does one's heart good to see such a happy family,"
added Mrs. Skim, who was a very motherly bird.

"I don't wish to boast; but I _will_ say that I am satisfied with my
summer's work, and go South feeling that I leave an enviable reputation
behind me." And Mrs. Wing plumed herself with an air of immense
importance, as she nodded and bridled from her perch on the window-sill.

The man saw the three, and hastened to feed them for the last time,
knowing that they were about to go. Gratefully they ate, and chirped
their thanks; and then, as they flew away, the little gossips heard
their friend singing his good-by:

    "Swallow, swallow, neighbor swallow,
      Starting on your autumn flight,
    Pause a moment at my window,
      Twitter softly your good-night;
    For the summer days are over,
      All your duties are well done,
    And the happy homes you builded
      Have grown empty, one by one.

    "Swallow, swallow, neighbor swallow,
      Are you ready for your flight?
    Are all the feather cloaks completed?
      Are the little caps all right?
    Are the young wings strong and steady
      For the journey through the sky?
    Come again in early spring-time;
      And till then, good-by, good-by!"




VIII.

LITTLE GULLIVER.


Up in the light-house tower lived Davy, with Old Dan the keeper. Most
little boys would have found it very lonely; but Davy had three friends,
and was as happy as the day was long. One of Davy's friends was the
great lamp, which was lighted at sunset, and burnt all night, to guide
the ships into the harbor. To Dan it was only a lamp; but to the boy it
seemed a living thing, and he loved and tended it faithfully. Every day
he helped Dan clear the big wick, polish the brass work, and wash the
glass lantern which protected the flame. Every evening he went up to see
it lighted, and always fell asleep, thinking, "No matter how dark or
wild the night, my good Shine will save the ships that pass, and burn
till morning."

Davy's second friend was Nep, the Newfoundland, who was washed ashore
from a wreck, and had never left the island since. Nep was rough and
big, but had such a loyal and loving heart that no one could look in his
soft brown eyes and not trust him. He followed Davy's steps all day,
slept at his feet all night, and more than once had saved his life when
Davy fell among the rocks, or got caught by the rising tide.

But the dearest friend of all was a sea-gull. Davy found him, with a
broken wing, and nursed him carefully till he was well; then let him go,
though he was very fond of "Little Gulliver," as he called him in fun.
But the bird never forgot the boy, and came daily to talk with him,
telling all manner of wild stories about his wanderings by land and sea,
and whiling away many an hour that otherwise would have been very
lonely.

Old Dan was Davy's uncle,--a grim, gray man, who said little, did his
work faithfully, and was both father and mother to Davy, who had no
parents, and no friends beyond the island. That was his world; and he
led a quiet life among his playfellows,--the winds and waves. He seldom
went to the main land, three miles away; for he was happier at home. He
watched the sea-anemones open below the water, looking like
fairy-plants, brilliant and strange. He found curious and pretty shells,
and sometimes more valuable treasures, washed up from some wreck. He saw
little yellow crabs, ugly lobsters, and queer horse-shoes with their
stiff tails. Sometimes a whale or a shark swam by, and often sleek black
seals came up to bask on the warm rocks. He gathered lovely sea-weeds of
all kinds, from tiny red cobwebs to great scalloped leaves of kelp,
longer than himself. He heard the waves dash and roar unceasingly; the
winds howl or sigh over the island; and the gulls scream shrilly as they
dipped and dived, or sailed away to follow the ships that came and went
from all parts of the world.

With Nep and Gulliver he roamed about his small kingdom, never tired of
its wonders; or, if storms raged, he sat up in the tower, safe and dry,
watching the tumult of sea and sky. Often in long winter nights he lay
awake, listening to the wind and rain, that made the tower rock with
their violence; but he never was afraid, for Nep nestled at his feet,
Dan sat close by, and overhead the great lamp shone far out into the
night, to cheer and guide all wanderers on the sea.

Close by the tower hung the fog-bell, which, being wound up, would ring
all night, warningly. One day Dan found that something among the chains
was broken; and, having vainly tried to mend it, he decided to go to the
town, and get what was needed. He went once a week, usually, and left
Davy behind; for in the daytime there was nothing to do, and the boy was
not afraid to stay.

"A heavy fog is blowing up: we shall want the bell to-night, and I must
be off at once. I shall be back before dark, of course; so take care of
yourself, boy," said Dan.

Away went the little boat; and the fog shut down over it, as if a misty
wall had parted Davy from his uncle. As it was dull weather, he sat and
read for an hour or two; then fell asleep, and forgot everything till
Nep's cold nose on his hand waked him up. It was nearly dark; and,
hoping to find Dan had come, he ran down to the landing-place. But no
boat was there, and the fog was thicker than ever.

Dan never had been gone so long before, and Davy was afraid something
had happened to him. For a few minutes he was in great trouble; then he
cheered up, and took courage.

"It is sunset by the clock; so I'll light the lamp, and, if Dan is lost
in the fog, it will guide him home," said Davy.

Up he went, and soon the great star shone out above the black-topped
light-house, glimmering through the fog, as if eager to be seen. Davy
had his supper, but no Dan came. He waited hour after hour, and waited
all in vain. The fog thickened, till the lamp was hardly seen; and no
bell rung to warn the ships of the dangerous rocks. Poor Davy could not
sleep, but all night long wandered from the tower to the door, watching,
calling, and wondering; but Dan did not come.

At sunrise he put out the light, and, having trimmed it for the next
night, ate a little breakfast, and roved about the island hoping to see
some sign of Dan. The sun drew up the fog at last; and he could see the
blue bay, the distant town, and a few fishing-boats going out to sea.
But nowhere was the island-boat with gray Old Dan in it; and Davy's
heart grew heavier and heavier, as the day passed, and still no one
came. In the afternoon Gulliver appeared: to him Davy told his trouble,
and the three friends took counsel together.

"There is no other boat; and I couldn't row so far, if there was: so I
can't go to find Dan," said David sorrowfully.

"I'd gladly swim to town, if I could; but it's impossible to do it, with
wind and tide against me. I've howled all day, hoping some one would
hear me; but no one does, and I'm discouraged," said Nep, with an
anxious expression.

"I can do something for you; and I will, with all my heart. I'll fly to
town, if I don't see him in the bay, and try to learn what has become of
Dan. Then I'll come and tell you, and we will see what is to be done
next. Cheer up, Davy dear: I'll bring you tidings, if any can be had."
With these cheerful words, away sailed Gulliver, leaving Nep and his
master to watch and wait again.

The wind blew hard, and the broken wing was not quite well yet, else
Gulliver would have been able to steer clear of a boat that came swiftly
by. A sudden gust drove the gull so violently against the sail that he
dropped breathless into the boat; and a little girl caught him, before
he could recover himself.

"Oh, what a lovely bird! See his black cap, his white breast,
dove-colored wings, red legs and bill, and soft, bright eyes. I wanted a
gull; and I'll keep this one, for I don't think he is much hurt."

Poor Gulliver struggled, pecked and screamed; but little Dora held him
fast, and shut him in a basket till they reached the shore. Then she put
him in a lobster pot,--a large wooden thing, something like a cage,--and
left him on the lawn, where he could catch glimpses of the sea, and
watch the light-house tower, as he sat alone in this dreadful prison. If
Dora had known the truth, she would have let him go, and done her best
to help him; but she could not understand his speech, as Davy did, for
very few people have the power of talking with birds, beasts, insects,
and plants. To her, his prayers and cries were only harsh screams; and,
when he sat silent, with drooping head and ruffled feathers, she thought
he was sleepy: but he was mourning for Davy, and wondering what his
little friend would do.

For three long days and nights he was a prisoner, and suffered much. The
house was full of happy people, but no one took pity upon him. Ladies
and gentlemen talked learnedly about him; boys poked and pulled him;
little girls admired him, and begged his wings for their hats, if he
died. Cats prowled about his cage; dogs barked at him; hens cackled over
him; and a shrill canary jeered at him from the pretty pagoda in which
it hung, high above danger. In the evening there was music; and the poor
bird's heart ached as the sweet sounds came to him, reminding him of the
airier melodies he loved. Through the stillness of the night, he heard
the waves break on the shore; the wind came singing up from the sea; the
moon shone kindly on him, and he saw the water-fairies dancing on the
sand. But for three days no one spoke a friendly word to him, and he
pined away with a broken heart.

On the fourth night, when all was quiet, little Gulliver saw a black
shadow steal across the lawn, and heard a soft voice say to him:

"Poor bird, you'll die, if yer stays here; so I'se gwine to let yer go.
Specs little missy'll scold dreffle; but Moppet'll take de scoldin for
yer. Hi, dere! you is peart nuff now, kase you's in a hurry to go; but
jes wait till I gits de knots out of de string dat ties de door, and den
away you flies."

"But, dear, kind Moppet, won't you be hurt for doing this? Why do you
care so much for me? I can only thank you, and fly away."

As Gulliver spoke, he looked up at the little black face bent over him,
and saw tears in the child's sad eyes; but she smiled at him, and shook
her fuzzy head, as she whispered kindly:

"I don't want no tanks, birdie: I loves to let you go, kase you's a
slave, like I was once; and it's a dreffle hard ting, I knows. I got
away, and I means you shall. I'se watched you, deary, all dese days; and
I tried to come 'fore, but dey didn't give me no chance."

"Do you live here? I never see you playing with the other children,"
said the gull, as Moppet's nimble fingers picked away at the knots.

"Yes: I lives here, and helps de cook. You didn't see me, kase I never
plays; de chilen don't like me."

"Why not?" asked Gulliver, wondering.

"I'se black," said Moppet, with a sob.

"But that's silly in them," cried the bird, who had never heard of such
a thing. "Color makes no difference; the peeps are gray, the seals
black, and the crabs yellow; but we don't care, and are all friends. It
is very unkind to treat you so. Haven't you any friends to love you,
dear?"

"Nobody in de world keres fer me. Dey sold me way from my mammy when I
was a baby, and I'se knocked roun eber since. De oder chilen has folks
to lub an kere fer em, but Moppet's got no friends;" and here the black
eyes grew so dim with tears that the poor child couldn't see that the
last knot was out.

Gulliver saw it, and, pushing up the door, flew from his prison with a
glad cry; and, hopping into Moppet's hand, looked into the little dark
face with such grateful confidence that it cleared at once, and the
brightest smile it had worn for months broke over it as the bird nestled
its soft head against her cheek, saying gently:

"I'm your friend, dear; I love you, and I never shall forget what you
have done for me to-night. How can I thank you before I go?"

For a minute, Moppet could only hug the bird, and cry; for these were
the first kind words she had heard for a long time, and they went
straight to her lonely little heart.

"O my deary! I'se paid by dem words, and I don't want no tanks. Jes lub
me, and come sometimes to see me ef you can, it's so hard livin' in dis
yere place. I don't tink I'll bar it long. I wish I was a bird to fly
away, or a oyster safe in de mud, and free to do as I's a mind."

"I wish you could go and live with Davy on the island; he is so kind, so
happy, and as free as the wind. Can't you get away, Moppet?" whispered
Gulliver, longing to help this poor, friendless little soul. He told her
all his story; and they agreed that he should fly at once to the island,
and see if Dan was there; if not, he was to come back, and Moppet would
try to get some one to help find him. When this was done, Davy and Dan
were to take Moppet, if they could, and make her happy on the island.
Full of hope and joy, Gulliver said good-by, and spread his wings; but,
alas for the poor bird! he was too weak to fly. For three days he had
hardly eaten any thing, had found no salt water to bathe in, and had sat
moping in the cage till his strength was all gone.

"What shall I do? what shall I do?" he cried, fluttering his feeble
wings, and running to and fro in despair.

"Hush, birdie, I'll take kere ob you till you's fit to fly. I knows a
nice, quiet little cove down yonder, where no one goes; and dare you kin
stay till you's better. I'll come and feed you, and you kin paddle, and
rest, and try your wings, safe and free, honey."

As Moppet spoke, she took Gulliver in her arms, and stole away in the
dim light, over the hill, down to the lonely spot where nothing went but
the winds and waves, the gulls, and little Moppet, when hard words and
blows made heart and body ache. Here she left the bird, and, with a
loving "Good-night," crept home to her bed in the garret, feeling as
rich as a queen, and much happier; for she had done a kind thing, and
made a friend.

Next day, a great storm came: the wind blew a hurricane, the rain
poured, and the sea thundered on the coast. If he had been well,
Gulliver wouldn't have minded at all; but, being sick and sad, he spent
an anxious day, sitting in a cranny of the rock, thinking of Davy and
Moppet. It was so rough, even in the cove, that he could neither swim
nor fly, so feeble was he; and could find no food but such trifles as he
could pick up among the rocks. At nightfall the storm raged fiercer than
ever, and he gave up seeing Moppet; for he was sure she wouldn't come
through the pelting rain just to feed him. So he put his head under his
wing, and tried to sleep; but he was so wet and weak, so hungry and
anxious, no sleep came.

"What has happened to Davy alone on the island all this while? He will
fall ill with loneliness and trouble; the lamp won't be lighted, the
ships will be wrecked, and many people will suffer. O Dan, Dan, if we
could only find you, how happy we should be!"

As Gulliver spoke, a voice cried through the darkness:

"Is you dere, honey?" and Moppet came climbing over the rocks, with a
basket full of such bits as she could get. "Poor birdie, is you
starvin'? Here, jes go at dis, and joy yourself. Dere's fish and tings I
tink you'd like. How is you now, dear?"

"Better, Moppet; but, it's so stormy, I can't get to Davy; and I worry
about him," began Gulliver, pecking away at his supper: but he stopped
suddenly, for a faint sound came up from below, as if some one called,
"Help, help!"

"Hi! what's dat?" said Moppet, listening.

"Davy, Davy!" called the voice.

"It's Dan. Hurrah, we've found him!" and Gulliver dived off the rock so
reckless that he went splash into the water. But that didn't matter to
him; and he paddled away, like a little steamer with all the engines in
full blast. Down by the sea-side, between two stones, lay Dan, so
bruised and hurt he couldn't move, and so faint with hunger and pain he
could hardly speak. As soon as Gulliver called, Moppet scrambled down,
and fed the poor man with her scraps, brought him rain-water from a
crevice near by, and bound up his wounded head with her little apron.
Then Dan told them how his boat had been run down by a ship in the fog;
how he was hurt, and cast ashore in the lonely cove; how he had lain
there half dead, for no one heard his shouts, and he couldn't move; how
the storm brought him back to life, when he was almost gone, and the
sound of Moppet's voice told him help was near.

How glad they all were then! Moppet danced for joy; Gulliver screamed
and flapped his wings; and Dan smiled, in spite of pain, to think he
should see Davy again. He couldn't understand Gulliver; but Moppet told
him all the story, and, when he heard it, he was more troubled for the
boy than for himself.

"What will he do? He may get killed or scared, or try to come ashore. Is
the lamp alight?" he cried, trying to move, and falling back with a moan
of pain.

Gulliver flew up to the highest rock, and looked out across the dark
sea. Yes, there it was,--the steady star shining through the storm, and
saying plainly, "All is well."

"Thank heaven! if the lamp is burning, Davy is alive. Now, how shall I
get to him?" said Dan.

"Never you fret, massa: Moppet'll see to dat. You jes lay still till I
comes. Dere's folks in de house as'll tend to you, ef I tells em who and
where you is."

Off she ran, and soon came back with help. Dan was taken to the house,
and carefully tended; Moppet wasn't scolded for being out so late; and,
in the flurry, no one thought of the gull. Next morning, the cage was
found blown over, and every one fancied the bird had flown away. Dora
was already tired of him; so he was soon forgotten by all but Moppet.

In the morning it was clear; and Gulliver flew gladly to the tower where
Davy still watched and waited, with a pale face and heavy heart, for the
three days had been very hard to bear, and, but for Nep and Shine, he
would have lost his courage entirely. Gulliver flew straight into his
bosom, and, sitting there, told his adventures; while Davy laughed and
cried, and Nep stood by, wagging his tail for joy, while his eyes were
full of sympathy. The three had a very happy hour together, and then
came a boat to carry Davy ashore, while another keeper took charge of
the light till Dan was well.

Nobody ever knew the best part of the story but Moppet, Davy, and
Gulliver. Other people didn't dream that the boy's pet gull had any
thing to do with the finding of the man, or the good fortune that came
to Moppet. While Dan lay sick, she tended him, like a loving little
daughter; and, when he was well, he took her for his own. He did not
mind the black skin: he only saw the loneliness of the child, the tender
heart, the innocent, white soul; and he was as glad to be a friend to
her as if she had been as blithe and pretty as Dora.

It was a happy day when Dan and Davy, Moppet, Gulliver, and Nep sailed
away to the island; for that was still to be their home, with stout
young Ben to help.

The sun was setting; and they floated through waves as rosy as the rosy
sky. A fresh wind filled the sail, and ruffled Gulliver's white breast
as he sat on the mast-head crooning a cheery song to himself. Dan held
the tiller, and Davy lay at his feet, with Nep bolt upright beside him;
but the happiest face of all was Moppet's. Kneeling at the bow, she
leaned forward, with her lips apart, her fuzzy hair blown back, and her
eyes fixed on the island which was to be her home. Like a little black
figure-head of Hope, she leaned and looked, as the boat flew on, bearing
her away from the old life into the new.

As the sun sunk, out shone the lamp with sudden brightness, as if the
island bade them welcome. Dan furled the sail; and, drifting with the
tide, they floated in, till the waves broke softly on the shore, and
left them safe at home.




IX.

THE WHALE'S STORY.


Freddy sat thinking on the seat under the trees. It was a wide, white
seat, about four feet long, sloping from the sides to the middle,
something like a swing; and was not only comfortable but curious, for it
was made of a whale's bone. Freddy often sat there, and thought about it
for he was very much interested in it, and nobody could tell him any
thing of it, except that it had been there a long time.

"Poor old whale, I wonder how you got here, where you came from, and if
you were a good and happy creature while you lived," said Freddy,
patting the old bone with his little hand.

It gave a great creak; and a sudden gust of air stirred the trees, as if
some monster groaned and sighed. Then Freddy heard a strange voice, very
loud, yet cracked and queer, as if some one tried to talk with a broken
jaw.

"Freddy ahoy!" called the big voice. "I'll tell you all about it; for
you are the only person who ever pitied me, or cared to know any thing
about me."

"Why, can you talk?" asked Freddy, very much astonished and a little
frightened.

"Of course I can, for this is a part of my jaw-bone. I should talk
better if my whole mouth was here; but I'm afraid my voice would then be
so loud you wouldn't be able to hear it. I don't think any one but you
would understand me, any way. It isn't every one that can, you know; but
you are a thoughtful little chap, with a lively fancy as well as a kind
heart, so you shall hear my story."

"Thank you, I should like it very much, if you would please to speak a
little lower, and not sigh; for your voice almost stuns me, and your
breath nearly blows me away," said Freddy.

"I'll try: but it's hard to suit my tone to such a mite, or to help
groaning when I think of my sad fate; though I deserve it, perhaps,"
said the bone, more gently.

"Were you a naughty whale?" asked Freddy.

"I was proud, very proud, and foolish; and so I suffered for it. I dare
say you know a good deal about us. I see you reading often, and you seem
a sensible child."

"No: I haven't read about you yet, and I only know that you are the
biggest fish there is," replied Freddy.

The bone creaked and shook, as if it was laughing, and said in a tone
that showed it hadn't got over its pride yet:

"You're wrong there, my dear; we are not fishes at all, though stupid
mortals have called us so for a long time. We can't live without air; we
have warm, red blood; and we don't lay eggs,--so we are _not_ fishes. We
certainly _are_ the biggest creatures in the sea and out of it. Why,
bless you! some of us are nearly a hundred feet long; our tails alone
are fifteen or twenty feet wide; the biggest of us weigh five hundred
thousand pounds, and have in them the fat, bone, and muscle of a
thousand cattle. The lower jaw of one of my family made an arch large
enough for a man on horseback to ride under easily, and my cousins of
the sperm-family usually yield eighty barrels of oil."

"Gracious me, what monsters you are!" cried Freddy, taking a long
breath, while his eyes got bigger and bigger as he listened.

"Ah! you may well say so; we are a very wonderful and interesting
family. All our branches are famous in one way or another. Fin-backs,
sperms, and rights are the largest; then come the norwhals, the
dolphins, and porpoises,--which last, I dare say, you've seen."

"Yes: but tell me about the big ones, please. Which were you?" cried
Freddy.

"I was a Right whale, from Greenland. The Sperms live in warm places;
but to us the torrid zone is like a sea of fire, and we don't pass it.
Our cousins do; and go to the East Indies by way of the North Pole,
which is more than your famous Parrys and Franklins could do."

"I don't know about that; but I'd like to hear what you eat, and how you
live, and why you came here," said Freddy, who thought the whale rather
inclined to boast.

"Well, we haven't got any teeth,--our branch of the family; and we live
on creatures so small, that you could only see them with a microscope.
Yes, you may stare; but it's true, my dear. The roofs of our mouths are
made of whalebone, in broad pieces from six to eight feet long, arranged
one against the other; so they make an immense sieve. The tongue, which
makes about five barrels of oil, lies below, like a cushion of white
satin. When we want to feed, we rush through the water, which is full of
the little things we eat, and catch them in our sieve, spurting the
water through two holes in our heads. Then we collect the food with our
tongue, and swallow it; for, though we are so big, our throats are
small. We roam about in the ocean, leaping and floating, feeding and
spouting, flying from our enemies, or fighting bravely to defend our
young ones."

"Have you got any enemies? I shouldn't think you could have, you are so
large," said Freddy.

"But we have, and many too,--three who attack us in the water, and
several more that men use against us. The killer, the sword-fish, and
the thrasher trouble us at home. The killer fastens to us, and won't be
shaken off till he has worried us to death; the sword-fish stabs us with
his sword; and the thrasher whips us to death with his own slender, but
strong and heavy body. Then, men harpoon us, shoot or entrap us; and
make us into oil and candles and seats, and stiffening for gowns and
umbrellas," said the bone, in a tone of scorn.

Freddy laughed at the idea, and asked, "How about candles? I know about
oil and seats and umbrellas; but I thought candles were made of wax."

"I can't say much on that point: I only know that, when a sperm whale is
killed, they make oil out of the fat part as they do of ours; but the
Sperms have a sort of cistern in their heads, full of stuff like cream,
and rose-colored. They cut a hole in the skull, and dip it out; and
sometimes get sixteen or twenty barrels. This is made into what you call
spermaceti candles. _We_ don't have any such nonsense about us; but the
Sperms always were a light-headed set."

Here the bone laughed, in a cracked sort of roar, which sent Freddy
flying off the seat on to the grass, where he stayed, laughing also,
though he didn't see any joke.

"I beg your pardon, child. It isn't often that I laugh; for I've a
heavy heart somewhere, and have known trouble enough to make me as sad
as the sea is sometimes."

"Tell me about your troubles; I pity you very much, and like to hear you
talk," said Freddy, kindly.

"Unfortunately we are very easily killed, in spite of our size; and have
various afflictions besides death. We grow blind; our jaws are deformed
sometimes; our tails, with which we swim, get hurt; and we have
dyspepsia."

Freddy shouted at that; for he knew what dyspepsia was, because at the
sea-side there were many sickly people who were always groaning about
that disease.

"It's no laughing matter, I assure you," said the whale's bone. "We
suffer a great deal, and get thin and weak and miserable. I've sometimes
thought that's the reason we are blue."

"Perhaps, as you have no teeth, you don't chew your food enough, and so
have dyspepsia, like an old gentleman I know," said Freddy.

"That's not the reason; my cousins, the Sperms, have teeth, and
dyspepsia also."

"Are they blue?"

"No, black and white. But I was going to tell you my troubles. My father
was harpooned when I was very young, and I remember how bravely he
died. The Rights usually run away when they see a whaler coming; not
from cowardice,--oh, dear, no!--but discretion. The Sperms stay and
fight, and are killed off very fast; for they are a very headstrong
family. We fight when we can't help it; and my father died like a hero.
They chased him five hours before they stuck him; he tried to get away,
and dragged three or four boats and sixteen hundred fathoms of line from
eight in the morning till four at night. Then they got out another line,
and he towed the ship itself for more than an hour. There were fifteen
harpoons in him: he chewed up a boat, pitched several men overboard, and
damaged the vessel, before they killed him. Ah! he was a father to be
proud of."

Freddy sat respectfully silent for a few minutes, as the old bone seemed
to feel a great deal on the subject. Presently he went on again:

"The Sperms live in herds; but the Rights go in pairs, and are very fond
of one another. My wife was a charming creature, and we were very happy,
till one sad day, when she was playing with our child,--a sweet little
whaleling only twelve feet long, and weighing but a ton,--my son was
harpooned. His mamma, instead of flying, wrapped her fins round him, and
dived as far as the line allowed. Then she came up, and dashed at the
boats in great rage and anguish, entirely regardless of the danger she
was in. The men struck my son, in order to get her, and they soon
succeeded; but even then, in spite of her suffering, she did not try to
escape, but clung to little Spouter till both were killed. Alas! alas!"

Here the poor bone creaked so dismally, Freddy feared it would tumble to
pieces, and bring the story to an end too soon.

"Don't think of those sorrowful things," he said; "tell me how you came
to be here. Were you harpooned?"

"Not I; for I've been very careful all my life to keep out of the way of
danger: I'm not like one of my relations, who attacked a ship, gave it
such a dreadful blow that he made a great hole, the water rushed in, and
the vessel was wrecked. But he paid dearly for that prank; for a few
months afterward another ship harpooned him very easily, finding two
spears still in him, and a wound in his head. I forgot to mention, that
the Sperms have fine ivory teeth, and make ambergris,--a sort of stuff
that smells very nice, and costs a great deal. I give you these little
facts about my family, as you seem interested, and it's always well to
improve the minds of young people."

"You are very kind; but will you be good enough to tell about yourself?"
said Freddy again; for the bone seemed to avoid that part of the story,
as if he didn't want to tell it.

"Well, if I must, I must; but I'm sorry to confess what a fool I've
been. You know what coral is, don't you?"

"No," said Freddy, wondering why it asked.

"Then I must tell you, I suppose. There is a bit in the house
there,--that rough, white, stony stuff on the table in the parlor. It's
full of little holes, you know. Well, those holes are the front doors of
hundreds of little polypes, or coral worms, who build the great branches
of coral, and live there. They are of various shapes and colors,--some
like stars; some fine as a thread, and blue or yellow; others like
snails and tiny lobsters. Some people say the real coral-makers are
shaped like little oblong bags of jelly, closed at one end, the other
open, with six or eight little feelers, like a star, all around it. The
other creatures are boarders or visitors: these are the real workers,
and, when they sit in their cells and put out their feelers, they make
all manner of lovely colors under the water,--crimson, green, orange,
and violet. But if they are taken up or touched, the coral people go in
doors, and the beautiful hues disappear. They say there are many coral
reefs and islands built by these industrious people, in the South Seas;
but I can't go there to see, and I am contented with those I find in the
northern latitudes. I knew such a community of coral builders, and used
to watch them long ago, when they began to work. It was a charming
spot, down under the sea; for all manner of lovely plants grew there;
splendid fishes sailed to and fro; wonderful shells lay about; crimson
and yellow prawns, long, gliding green worms, and purple sea-urchins,
were there. When I asked the polypes what they were doing, and they
answered, 'Building an island,' I laughed at them; for the idea that
these tiny, soft atoms could make any thing was ridiculous. 'You may
roar; but you'll see that we are right, if you live long enough,' said
they. 'Our family have built thousands of islands and long reefs, that
the sea can't get over, strong as it is.' That amused me immensely; but
I wouldn't believe it, and laughed more than ever."

"It does seem very strange," said Freddy, looking at the branch of coral
which he had brought out to examine.

"Doesn't it? and isn't it hard to believe? I used to go, now and then,
to see how the little fellows got on, and always found them hard at it.
For a long while there was only a little plant without leaves, growing
slowly taller and taller; for they always build upward toward the light.
By and by, the small shrub was a tree: flying-fish roosted in its
branches; sea-cows lay under its shadow; and thousands of jolly little
polypes lived and worked in its white chambers. I was glad to see them
getting on so well; but still I didn't believe in the island story, and
used to joke them about their ambition. They were very good-natured, and
only answered me, 'Wait a little longer, Friend Right.' I had my own
affairs to attend to; so, for years at a time, I forgot the
coral-workers, and spent most of my life up Greenland way, for warm
climates don't agree with my constitution. When I came back, after a
long absence, I was astonished to see the tree grown into a large
umbrella-shaped thing, rising above the water. Sea-weed had washed up
and clung there; sea-birds had made nests there; land-birds and the
winds had carried seeds there, which had sprung up; trunks of trees had
been cast there by the sea; lizards, insects, and little animals came
with the trees, and were the first inhabitants; and, behold! it _was_ an
island."

"What did you say then?" asked Freddy.

"I was angry, and didn't want to own that I was wrong; so I insisted
that it wasn't a real island, without people on it. 'Wait a little
longer,' answered the polypes; and went on, building broader and broader
foundations. I flounced away in a rage, and didn't go back for a great
while. I hoped something would happen to the coral builders and their
island; but I was so curious that I couldn't keep away, and, on going
back there, I found a settlement of fishermen, and the beginning of a
thriving town. Now I should have been in a towering passion at this, if
in my travels I hadn't discovered a race of little creatures as much
smaller than polypes as a mouse is smaller than an elephant. I heard two
learned men talking about diatoms, as they sailed to Labrador; and I
listened. They said these people lived in both salt and fresh water, and
were found in all parts of the world. They were a glassy shell, holding
a soft, golden-yellow substance, and that they were so countless that
banks were made of them, and that a town here in these United States was
founded on them. They were the food of many little sea-animals, who, in
turn, fed us big creatures, and were very interesting and wonderful. I
saved up this story; and, when the polypes asked if they hadn't done
what they intended, I told them I didn't think it so very remarkable,
for the tiny diatoms made cities, and were far more astonishing animals
than they. I thought that would silence them; but they just turned
round, and informed me that my diatoms were plants, not animals,--so my
story was all humbug. Then I _was_ mad; and couldn't get over the fact
that these little rascals had done what we, the kings of the sea,
couldn't do. I wasn't content with being the biggest creature there: I
wanted to be the most skilful also. I didn't remember that every thing
has its own place and use, and should be happy in doing the work for
which it was made. I fretted over the matter a long while, and at last
decided to make an island myself."

"How could you?" asked Freddy.

"I had my plans; and thought them very wise ones. I was so bent on
outdoing the polypes that I didn't much care what happened; and so I
went to work in my clumsy way. I couldn't pile up stones, or build
millions of cells; so I just made an island of myself. I swam up into
the harbor yonder one night; covered my back with sea-weed; and lay
still on the top of the water. In the morning the gulls came to see what
it was, and pecked away at the weeds, telling me very soon that they
knew what I was after, and that I couldn't gull them. All the people on
shore turned out to see the wonder also; for a fisherman had carried the
tidings, and every one was wild to behold the new island. After staring
and chattering a long while, boats came off to examine the mystery.
Loads of scientific gentlemen worked away at me with microscopes,
hammers, acids, and all sorts of tests, to decide what I was; and kept
up such a fire of long words that I was 'most dead. They couldn't make
up their minds; and meanwhile news of the strange thing spread, and
every sort of person came to see me. The gulls kept telling them the
joke; but they didn't understand, and I got on capitally. Every night I
dined and fed and frolicked till dawn; then put on my sea-weeds, and
lay still to be stared at. I wanted some one to come and live on me;
then I should be equal to the island of the polypes. But no one came,
and I was beginning to be tired of fooling people, when I was fooled
myself. An old sailor came to visit me: he had been a whaler, and he
soon guessed the secret. But he said nothing till he was safely out of
danger; then he got all ready, and one day, as I lay placidly in the
sun, a horrible harpoon came flying through the air, and sunk deep into
my back. I forgot every thing but the pain, and dived for my life. Alas!
the tide was low; the harbor-bar couldn't be passed; and I found
hundreds of boats chasing me, till I was driven ashore down there on the
flats. Big and strong as we are, once out of water, and we are perfectly
helpless. I was soon despatched; and my bones left to whiten on the
sand. This was long ago; and, one by one, all my relics have been
carried off or washed away. My jaw-bone has been used as a seat here,
till it's worn out; but I couldn't crumble away till I'd told some one
my story. Remember, child, pride goeth before a fall."

Then, with a great creak, the bone tumbled to pieces; and found a
peaceful grave in the long green grass.




X.

A STRANGE ISLAND.


One day I lay rocking in my boat, reading a very famous book, which all
children know and love; and the name of which I'll tell you by and by.
So busily was I reading, that I never minded the tide; and presently
discovered that I was floating out to sea, with neither sail nor oar. At
first I was very much frightened; for there was no one in sight on land
or sea, and I didn't know where I might drift to. But the water was
calm, the sky clear, and the wind blew balmily; so I waited for what
should happen.

Presently I saw a speck on the sea, and eagerly watched it; for it drew
rapidly near, and seemed to be going my way. When it came closer, I was
much amazed; for, of all the queer boats I ever saw, this was the
queerest. It was a great wooden bowl, very cracked and old; and in it
sat three gray-headed little gentlemen with spectacles, all reading
busily, and letting the boat go where it pleased. Now, right in their
way was a rock; and I called out, "Sir, sir, take care."

But my call came too late: crash went the bowl, out came the bottom, and
down plumped all the little gentlemen into the sea. I tried not to
laugh, as the books, wigs, and spectacles flew about; and, urging my
boat nearer, I managed to fish them up, dripping and sneezing, and
looking like drowned kittens. When the flurry was over, and they had got
their breath, I asked who they were, and where they were going.

"We are from Gotham, ma'am," said the fattest one, wiping a very wet
face on a very wet handkerchief. "We were going to that island yonder.
We have often tried, but never got there: it's always so, and I begin to
think the thing can't be done."

I looked where he pointed; and, sure enough, there was an island where I
had never seen one before. I rubbed my eyes, and looked again. Yes:
there it was,--a little island, with trees and people on it; for I saw
smoke coming out of the chimney of a queerly-shaped house on the shore.

"What is the name of it?" I asked.

The little old gentleman put his finger on his lips, and said, with a
mysterious nod:

"I couldn't tell you, ma'am. It's a secret; but, if you manage to land
there, you will soon know."

The other old men nodded at the same time; and then all went to reading
again, with the water still dropping off the ends of their noses. This
made me very curious; and, as the tide drifted us nearer and nearer, I
looked well about me, and saw several things that filled me with a
strong desire to land on the island. The odd house, I found, was built
like a high-heeled shoe; and at every window I saw children's heads.
Some were eating broth; some were crying; and some had nightcaps on. I
caught sight of a distracted old lady flying about, with a ladle in one
hand, and a rod in the other; but the house was so full of children
(even up to the skylight,--out of which they popped their heads, and
nodded at me) that I couldn't see much of the mamma of this large
family: one seldom can, you know.

I had hardly got over my surprise at this queer sight, when I saw a cow
fly up through the air, over the new moon that hung there, and come down
and disappear in the woods. I really didn't know what to make of this,
but had no time to ask the old men what it meant; for a cat, playing a
fiddle, was seen on the shore. A little dog stood by, listening and
laughing; while a dish and a spoon ran away over the beach with all
their might. If the boat had not floated up to the land, I think I
should have swam there,--I was so anxious to see what was going on; for
there was a great racket on the island, and such a remarkable collection
of creatures, it was impossible to help staring.

As soon as we landed, three other gentlemen came to welcome the ones I
had saved, and seemed very glad to see them. They appeared to have just
landed from a tub in which was a drum, rub-a-dub-dubbing all by itself.
One of the new men had a white frock on, and carried a large knife; the
second had dough on his hands, flour on his coat, and a hot-looking
face; the third was very greasy, had a bundle of candles under his arm,
and a ball of wicking half out of his pocket. The six shook hands, and
walked away together, talking about a fair; and left me to take care of
myself.

I walked on through a pleasant meadow, where a pretty little girl was
looking sadly up at a row of sheep's tails hung on a tree. I also saw a
little boy in blue, asleep by a haycock; and another boy taking aim at a
cock-sparrow, who clapped his wings and flew away. Presently I saw two
more little girls: one sat by a fire warming her toes; and, when I asked
what her name was, she said pleasantly:

"Polly Flinders, ma'am."

The other one sat on a tuft of grass, eating something that looked very
nice; but, all of a sudden, she dropped her bowl, and ran away, looking
very much frightened.

"What's the matter with her?" I asked of a gay young frog who came
tripping along with his hat under his arm.

"Miss Muffit is a fashionable lady, and afraid of spiders, madam; also
of frogs." And he puffed himself angrily up, till his eyes quite
goggled in his head.

"And, pray, who are you, sir?" I asked, staring at his white vest, green
coat, and fine cravat.

"Excuse me, if I don't give my name, ma'am. My false friend, the rat,
got me into a sad scrape once; and Rowley insists upon it that a duck
destroyed me, which is all gammon, ma'am,--all gammon."

With that, the frog skipped away; and I turned into a narrow lane, which
seemed to lead toward some music. I had not gone far, when I heard the
rumbling of a wheelbarrow, and saw a little man wheeling a little woman
along. The little man looked very hot and tired; but the little woman
looked very nice, in a smart bonnet and shawl, and kept looking at a new
gold ring on her finger, as she rode along under her little umbrella. I
was wondering who they were, when down went the wheelbarrow; and the
little lady screamed so dismally that I ran away, lest I should get into
trouble,--being a stranger.

Turning a corner, I came upon a very charming scene, and slipped into a
quiet nook to see what was going on. It was evidently a wedding; and I
was just in time to see it, for the procession was passing at that
moment. First came a splendid cock-a-doodle, all in black and gold, like
a herald, blowing his trumpet, and marching with a very dignified step.
Then came a rook, in black, like a minister, with spectacles and white
cravat. A lark and bullfinch followed,--friends, I suppose; and then the
bride and bridegroom. Miss Wren was evidently a Quakeress; for she wore
a sober dress, and a little white veil, through which her bright eyes
shone. The bridegroom was a military man, in his scarlet uniform,--a
plump, bold-looking bird, very happy and proud just then. A goldfinch
gave away the bride, and a linnet was bridesmaid. The ceremony was very
fine; and, as soon as it was over, the blackbird, thrush and nightingale
burst out in a lovely song.

A splendid dinner followed, at which was nearly every bird that flies;
so you may imagine the music there was. They had currant-pie in
abundance; and cherry-wine, which excited a cuckoo so much, that he
became quite rude, and so far forgot himself as to pull the bride about.
This made the groom so angry that he begged his friend, the sparrow, to
bring his bow and arrow, and punish the ruffian. But, alas! Sparrow had
also taken a drop too much: he aimed wrong, and, with a dreadful cry,
Mr. Robin sank dying into the arms of his wife, little Jane.

It was too much for me; and, taking advantage of the confusion that
followed, I left the tragical scene as fast as possible.

A little farther on, I was shocked to see a goose dragging an old man
down some steps that led to a little house.

"Dear me! what's the matter here?" I cried.

"He won't say his prayers," screamed the goose.

"But perhaps he was never taught," said I.

"It's never too late to learn: he's had his chance; he won't be pious
and good, so away with him. Don't interfere, whatever you do: hold your
tongue, and go about your business," scolded the goose, who certainly
had a dreadful temper.

I dared say no more; and, when the poor old man had been driven away by
this foul proceeding, I went up the steps and peeped in; for I heard
some one crying, and thought the cross bird, perhaps, had hurt some one
else. A little old woman stood there, wringing her hands in great
distress; while a small dog was barking at her with all his might.

"Bless me! the fashions have got even here," thought I; for the old
woman was dressed in the latest style,--or, rather, she had overdone it
sadly; for her gown was nearly up to her knees, and she was nearly as
ridiculous an object as some of the young ladies I had seen at home. She
had a respectable bonnet on, however, instead of a straw saucer; and her
hair was neatly put under a cap,--not made into a knob on the top of her
head.

"My dear soul, what's the trouble?" said I, quite touched by her tears.

"Lud a mercy, ma'am! I've been to market with my butter and eggs,--for
the price of both is so high, one can soon get rich nowadays,--and,
being tired, I stopped to rest a bit, but fell asleep by the road.
Somebody--I think it's a rogue of a peddler who sold me wooden nutmegs,
and a clock that wouldn't go, and some pans that came to bits the first
time I used them--somebody cut my new gown and petticoat off all round,
in the shameful way you see. I thought I never should get home; for I
was such a fright, I actually didn't know myself. But, thinks I, my
doggy will know me; and then I shall be sure I'm I, and not some
boldfaced creature in short skirts. But, oh, ma'am! doggy _don't_ know
me; and I ain't myself, and I don't know what to do."

"He's a foolish little beast; so don't mind him, but have a cup of tea,
and go to bed. You can make your gown decent to-morrow; and, if I see
the tricksy peddler, I'll give him a scolding."

This seemed to comfort the old woman; though doggy still barked.

"My next neighbor has a dog who never behaves in this way," she said, as
she put her teapot on the coals. "He's a remarkable beast; and you'd
better stop to see him as you pass, ma'am. He's always up to some funny
prank or other."

I said I would; and, as I went by the next house, I took a look in at
the window. The closet was empty, I observed; but the dog sat smoking a
pipe, looking as grave as a judge.

"Where is your mistress?" asked I.

"Gone for some tripe," answered the dog, politely taking the pipe out of
his mouth, and adding, "I hope the smoke doesn't annoy you."

"I don't approve of smoking," said I.

"Sorry to hear it," said the dog, coolly.

I was going to lecture him on this bad habit; but I saw his mistress
coming with a dish in her hand, and, fearing she might think me rude to
peep in at her windows, I walked on, wondering what we were coming to
when even four-legged puppies smoked.

At the door of the next little house, I saw a market-wagon loaded with
vegetables, and a smart young pig just driving it away. I had heard of
this interesting family, and took a look as I passed by. A second tidy
pig sat blowing the fire; and a third was eating roast-beef, as if he
had just come in from his work. The fourth, I was grieved to see, looked
very sulky; for it was evident he had been naughty, and so lost his
dinner. The little pig was at the door, crying to get in; and it was
sweet to see how kindly the others let him in, wiped his tears, tied on
his bib, and brought him his bread and milk. I was very glad to see
these young orphans doing so well, and I knew my friends at home would
enjoy hearing from them.

A loud scream made me jump; and the sudden splash of water made me run
along, without stopping to pick up a boy and girl who came tumbling down
the hill, with an empty pail, bumping their heads as they rolled.
Smelling something nice, and feeling hungry, I stepped into a large room
near by,--a sort of eating-house, I fancy; for various parties seemed to
be enjoying themselves in their different ways. A small boy sat near the
door, eating a large pie; and he gave me a fine plum which he had just
pulled out. At one table was a fat gentleman cutting another pie, which
had a dark crust, through which appeared the heads of a flock of birds,
all singing gayly.

"There's no end to the improvements in cooking, and no accounting for
tastes," I added, looking at a handsomely-dressed lady, who sat near,
eating bread and honey.

As I passed this party, I saw behind the lady's chair a maid, with a
clothes-pin in her hand, and no nose. She sobbingly told me a bird had
nipped it off; and I gave her a bit of court-plaster, which I
fortunately had in my pocket.

Another couple were dividing their meat in a queer way; for one took all
the fat, and the other all the lean. The next people were odder still;
for the man looked rather guilty, and seemed to be hiding a three-peck
measure under his chair, while he waited for his wife to bring on some
cold barley-pudding, which, to my surprise, she was frying herself. I
also saw a queer moonstruck-looking man inquiring the way to Norridge;
and another man making wry faces over some plum-pudding, with which he
had burnt his mouth, because his friend came down too soon.

I ordered pease-porridge hot, and they brought it cold; but I didn't
wait for any thing else, being in a hurry to see all there was to be
seen on this strange island. Feeling refreshed, I strolled on, passing a
jolly old gentleman smoking and drinking, while three fiddlers played
before him. As I turned into a road that led toward a hill, a little
boy, riding a dapple-gray pony, and an old lady on a white horse, with
bells ringing somewhere, trotted by me, followed by a little girl, who
wished to know where she could buy a penny bun. I told her the best were
at Newmarch's, in Bedford Street, and she ran on, much pleased; but I'm
afraid she never found that best of bake-shops. I was going quietly
along, when the sound of another horse coming made me look round; and
there I saw a dreadful sight,--a wild horse, tearing over the ground,
with fiery eyes and streaming tail. On his back sat a crazy man, beating
him with a broom; a crazy woman was behind him, with her bonnet on wrong
side before, holding one crazy child in her lap, while another stood on
the horse; a third was hanging on by one foot, and all were howling at
the top of their voices as they rushed by. I scrambled over the wall to
get out of the way, and there I saw more curious sights. Two blind men
were sitting on the grass, trying to see two lame men who were hobbling
along as hard as they could; and, near by, a bull was fighting a bee in
the most violent manner. This rather alarmed me; and I scrambled back
into the road again, just as a very fine lady jumped over a
barberry-bush near by, and a gentleman went flying after, with a ring in
one hand and a stick in the other.

"What very odd people they have here!" I thought. Close by was a tidy
little house under the hill, and in it a tidy little woman who sold
things to eat. Being rather hungry, in spite of my porridge, I bought a
baked apple and a cranberry-pie; for she said they were good, and I
found she told the truth. As I sat eating my pie, some dogs began to
bark; and by came a troop of beggars, some in rags, and some in old
velvet gowns. A drunken grenadier was with them, who wanted a pot of
beer; but as he had no money, the old woman sent him about his business.

On my way up the hill, I saw a little boy crying over a dead pig, and
his sister, who seemed to be dead also. I asked his name, and he sobbed
out, "Johnny Pringle, ma'am;" and went on crying so hard I could do
nothing to comfort him. While I stood talking to him, a sudden gust of
wind blew up the road, and down came the bough of a tree; and, to my
surprise, a cradle with a baby in it also. The baby screamed dreadfully,
and I didn't know how to quiet it; so I ran back to the old woman, and
left it with her, asking if that was the way babies were taken care of
there.

"Bless you, my dear! its ma is making patty-cakes; and put it up there
to be out of the way of Tom Tinker's dog. I'll soon hush it up," said
the old woman; and, trotting it on her knee, she began to sing:

    "Hey! my kitten, my kitten,
    Hey! my kitten, my deary."

Feeling that the child was in good hands, I hurried away, for I saw
something was going on upon the hill-top. When I got to the hill-top, I
was shocked to find some people tossing an old woman in a blanket. I
begged them to stop; but one of the men, who, I found, was a Welchman,
by the name of Taffy, told me the old lady liked it.

"But why does she like it?" I asked in great surprise.

"Tom, the piper's son, will tell you: it's my turn to toss now," said
the man.

"Why, you see, ma'am," said Tom, "she is one of those dreadfully nice
old women, who are always fussing and scrubbing, and worrying people to
death, with everlastingly cleaning house. Now and then we get so tired
out with her that we propose to her to clean the sky itself. She likes
that; and, as this is the only way we can get her up, we toss till she
sticks somewhere, and then leave her to sweep cobwebs till she is ready
to come back and behave herself."

"Well, that is the oddest thing I ever heard. I know just such an old
lady, and when I go home I'll try your plan. It seems to me that you
have a great many queer old ladies on this island," I said to another
man, whom they called Peter, and who stood eating pumpkin all the time.

"Well, we do have rather a nice collection; but you haven't seen the
best of all. We expect her every minute; and Margery Daw is to let us
know the minute she lights on the island," replied Peter, with his mouth
full.

"Lights?" said I, "you speak as if she flew."

"She rides on a bird. Hurrah! the old sweeper has lit. Now the cobwebs
will fly. Don't hurry back," shouted the man; and a faint, far-off voice
answered, "I shall be back again by and by."

The people folded up the blanket, looking much relieved; and I was
examining a very odd house which was built by an ancient king called
Boggen, when Margery Daw, a dirty little girl, came up the hill,
screaming, at the top of her voice:

"She's come! she's come!"

Every one looked up; and I saw a large white bird slowly flying over the
island. On its back sat the nicest old woman that ever was seen: all the
others were nothing compared to her. She had a pointed hat on over her
cap, a red cloak, high-heeled shoes, and a crutch in her hand. She
smiled and nodded as the bird approached; and every one ran and nodded,
and screamed, "Welcome! welcome, mother!"

As soon as she touched the ground, she was so surrounded that I could
only see the top of her hat; for hundreds and hundreds of little
children suddenly appeared, like a great flock of birds,--rosy, happy,
pretty children; but all looked unreal, and among them I saw some who
looked like little people I had known long ago.

"Who are they?" I asked of a bonny lass, who was sitting on a cushion,
eating strawberries and cream.

"They are the phantoms of all the little people who ever read and loved
our mother's songs," said the maid.

"What did she write?" I asked, feeling very queer, and as if I was going
to remember something.

"Songs that are immortal; and you have them in your hand," replied the
bonny maid, smiling at my stupidity.

I looked; and there, on the cover of the book I had been reading so
busily when the tide carried me away, I saw the words "Mother Goose's
Melodies." I was so delighted that I had seen her I gave a shout, and
tried to get near enough to hug and kiss the dear old soul, as the swarm
of children were doing; but my cry woke me, and I was _so_ sorry to find
it all a dream!




XI.

FANCY'S FRIEND.


It was a wagon, shaped like a great square basket, on low wheels, and
drawn by a stout donkey. There was one seat, on which Miss Fairbairn the
governess sat; and all round her, leaning over the edge of the basket,
were children, with little wooden shovels and baskets in their hands,
going down to play on the beach. Away they went, over the common,
through the stony lane, out upon the wide, smooth sands. All the
children but one immediately fell to digging holes, and making ponds,
castles, or forts. They did this every day, and were never tired of it;
but little Fancy made new games for herself, and seldom dug in the sand.
She had a garden of sea-weed, which the waves watered every day: she had
a palace of pretty shells, where she kept all sorts of little
water-creatures as fairy tenants; she had friends and playmates among
the gulls and peeps, and learned curious things by watching crabs,
horse-shoes, and jelly-fishes; and every day she looked for a mermaid.

It was of no use to tell her that there were no mermaids: Fancy firmly
believed in them, and was sure she would see one some day. The other
children called the seals mermaids; and were contented with the queer,
shiny creatures who played in the water, lay on the rocks, and peeped at
them with soft, bright eyes as they sailed by. Fancy was not satisfied
with seals,--they were not pretty and graceful enough for her,--and she
waited and watched for a real mermaid. On this day she took a breezy run
with the beach-birds along the shore; she planted a pretty red weed in
her garden; and let out the water-beetles and snails who had passed the
night in her palace. Then she went to a rock that stood near the quiet
nook where she played alone, and sat there looking for a mermaid as the
tide came in; for it brought her many curious things, and it might
perhaps bring a mermaid.

As she looked across the waves that came tumbling one over the other,
she saw something that was neither boat nor buoy nor seal. It was a
queer-looking thing, with a wild head, a long waving tail, and something
like arms that seemed to paddle it along. The waves tumbled it about, so
Fancy could not see very well: but, the longer she looked, the surer she
was that this curious thing was a mermaid; and she waited eagerly for it
to reach the shore. Nearer and nearer it came, till a great wave threw
it upon the sand; and Fancy saw that it was only a long piece of kelp,
torn up by the roots. She was very much disappointed; but, all of a
sudden, her face cleared up, she clapped her hands, and began to dance
round the kelp, saying:

"I'll make a mermaid myself, since none will come to me."

Away she ran, higher up the beach, and, after thinking a minute, began
her work. Choosing a smooth, hard place, she drew with a stick the
outline of her mermaid; then she made the hair of the brown marsh-grass
growing near by, arranging it in long locks on either side the face,
which was made of her prettiest pink and white shells,--for she pulled
down her palace to get them. The eyes were two gray pebbles; the neck
and arms of larger, white shells; and the dress of sea-weed,--red,
green, purple, and yellow; very splendid, for Fancy emptied her garden
to dress her mermaid.

"People say that mermaids always have tails; and I might make one out of
this great leaf of kelp. But it isn't pretty, and I don't like it; for I
want mine to be beautiful: so I won't have any tail," said Fancy, and
put two slender white shells for feet, at the lower edge of the fringed
skirt. She laid a wreath of little star-fish across the brown hair, a
belt of small orange-crabs round the waist, buttoned the dress with
violet snail-shells, and hung a tiny white pebble, like a pearl, in
either ear.

"Now she must have a glass and a comb in her hand, as the song says,
and then she will be done," said Fancy, looking about her, well pleased.

Presently she found the skeleton of a little fish, and his backbone made
an excellent comb; while a transparent jelly-fish served for a glass,
with a frame of cockle-shells round it. Placing these in the hands of
her mermaid, and some red coral bracelets on her wrists, Fancy
pronounced her done; and danced about her, singing:

    "My pretty little mermaid,
      Oh! come, and play with me:
    I'll love you, I'll welcome you;
      And happy we shall be."

Now, while she had been working, the tide had crept higher and higher;
and, as she sung, one wave ran up and wet her feet.

"Oh, what a pity I didn't put her farther up!" cried Fancy; "the tide
will wash her all away; and I meant to keep her fresh, and show her to
Aunt Fiction. My poor mermaid!--I shall lose her; but perhaps she will
be happier in the sea: so I will let her go."

Mounting her rock, Fancy waited to see her work destroyed. But the sea
seemed to pity her; and wave after wave came up, without doing any harm.
At last one broke quite over the mermaid, and Fancy thought that would
be the end of her. But, no: instead of scattering shells, stones, and
weeds, the waves lifted the whole figure, without displacing any thing,
and gently bore it back into the sea.

"Good by! good by!" cried Fancy, as the little figure floated away;
then, as it disappeared, she put her hands before her face,--for she
loved her mermaid, and had given all her treasures to adorn her; and now
to lose her so soon seemed hard,--and Fancy's eyes were full of tears.
Another great wave came rolling in; but she did not look up to see it
break, and, a minute after, she heard steps tripping toward her over the
sand. Still she did not stir; for, just then, none of her playmates
could take the place of her new friend, and she didn't want to see them.

"Fancy! Fancy!" called a breezy voice, sweeter than any she had ever
heard. But she did not raise her head, nor care to know who called. The
steps came quite close; and the touch of a cold, wet hand fell on her
own. Then she looked up, and saw a strange little girl standing by her,
who smiled, showing teeth like little pearls, and said, in the breezy
voice:

"You wanted me to play with you, so I came."

"Who are you?" asked Fancy, wondering where she had seen the child
before.

"I'm your mermaid," said the child.

"But the water carried her away," cried Fancy.

"The waves only carried me out for the sea to give me life, and then
brought me back to you," answered the new comer.

"But are you really a mermaid?" asked Fancy, beginning to smile and
believe.

"I am really the one you made: look, and see if I'm not;" and the little
creature turned slowly round, that Fancy might be sure it was her own
work.

She certainly was very like the figure that once lay on the sand,--only
she was not now made of stones and shells. There was the long brown hair
blowing about her face, with a wreath of starry shells in it. Her eyes
were gray, her cheeks and lips rosy, her neck and arms white; and from
under her striped dress peeped little bare feet. She had pearls in her
ears, coral bracelets, a golden belt, and a glass and comb in her hands.

"Yes," said Fancy, drawing near, "you _are_ my little mermaid; but how
does it happen that you come to me at last?"

"Dear friend," answered the water-child, "you believed in me, watched
and waited long for me, shaped the image of the thing you wanted out of
your dearest treasures, and promised to love and welcome me. I could not
help coming; and the sea, that is as fond of you as you are of it,
helped me to grant your wish."

"Oh, I'm glad, I'm glad! Dear little mermaid, what is your name?" cried
Fancy, kissing the cool cheek of her new friend, and putting her arms
about her neck.

"Call me by my German cousin's pretty name,--Lorelei," answered the
mermaid, kissing back as warmly as she could.

"Will you come home and live with me, dear Lorelei?" asked Fancy, still
holding her fast.

"If you will promise to tell no one who and what I am, I will stay with
you as long as you love and believe in me. As soon as you betray me, or
lose your faith and fondness, I shall vanish, never to come back again,"
answered Lorelei.

"I promise: but won't people wonder who you are? and, if they ask me,
what shall I say?" said Fancy.

"Tell them you found me on the shore; and leave the rest to me. But you
must not expect other people to like and believe in me as you do. They
will say hard things of me; will blame you for loving me; and try to
part us. Can you bear this, and keep your promise faithfully?"

"I think I can. But why won't they like you?" said Fancy, looking
troubled.

"Because they are not like you, dear," answered the mermaid, with salt
tears in her soft eyes. "They have not your power of seeing beauty in
all things, of enjoying invisible delights, and living in a world of
your own. Your Aunt Fiction will like me; but your Uncle Fact won't. He
will want to know all about me; will think I'm a little vagabond; and
want me to be sent away somewhere, to be made like other children. I
shall keep out of his way as much as I can; for I'm afraid of him."

"I'll take care of you, Lorelei dear; and no one shall trouble you. I
hear Miss Fairbairn calling; so I must go. Give me your hand, and don't
be afraid."

Hand in hand the two went toward the other children, who stopped
digging, and stared at the new child. Miss Fairbairn, who was very wise
and good, but rather prim, stared too, and said, with surprise:

"Why, my dear, where did you find that queer child?"

"Down on the beach. Isn't she pretty?" answered Fancy, feeling very
proud of her new friend.

"She hasn't got any shoes on; so she's a beggar, and we mustn't play
with her," said one boy, who had been taught that to be poor was a very
dreadful thing.

"What pretty earrings and bracelets she's got!" said a little girl, who
thought a great deal of her dress.

"She doesn't look as if she knew much," said another child, who was kept
studying so hard that she never had time to dig and run, and make
dirt-pies, till she fell ill, and had to be sent to the sea-side.

"What's your name? and who are your parents?" asked Miss Fairbairn.

"I've got no parents; and my name is Lorelei," answered the mermaiden.

"You mean Luly; mind your pronunciation, child," said Miss Fairbairn,
who corrected every one she met in something or other. "Where do you
live?"

"I haven't got any home now," said Lorelei, smiling at the lady's tone.

"Yes, you have: my home is yours; and you are going to stay with me
always," cried Fancy, heartily. "She is my little sister, Miss
Fairbairn: I found her; and I'm going to keep her, and make her happy."

"Your uncle won't like it, my dear." And Miss Fairbairn shook her head
gravely.

"Aunt will; and Uncle won't mind, if I learn my lessons well, and
remember the multiplication table all right. He was going to give me
some money, so I might learn to keep accounts; but I'll tell him to keep
the money, and let me have Lorelei instead."

"Oh, how silly!" cried the boy who didn't like bare feet.

"No, she isn't; for, if she's kind to the girl, maybe she'll get some of
her pretty things," said the vain little girl.

"Keeping accounts is a very useful and important thing. I keep mine; and
mamma says I have great arth-met-i-cal talent," added the pale child,
who studied too much.

"Come, children; it's time for dinner. Fancy, you can take the girl to
the house; and your uncle will do what he thinks best about letting you
keep her," said Miss Fairbairn, piling them into the basket-wagon.

Fancy kept Lorelei close beside her; and as soon as they reached the
great hotel, where they all were staying with mothers and fathers,
uncles or aunts, she took her to kind Aunt Fiction, who was interested
at once in the friendless child so mysteriously found. She was satisfied
with the little she could discover, and promised to keep her,--for a
time, at least.

"We can imagine all kinds of romantic things about her; and, by and by,
some interesting story may be found out concerning her. I can make her
useful in many ways; and she shall stay."

As Aunt Fiction laid her hand on the mermaid's head, as if claiming her
for her own, Uncle Fact came stalking in, with his note-book in his
hand, and his spectacles on his nose. Now, though they were married,
these two persons were very unlike. Aunt Fiction was a graceful,
picturesque woman; who told stories charmingly, wrote poetry and novels,
was very much beloved by young folks, and was the friend of some of the
most famous people in the world. Uncle Fact was a grim, grave, decided
man; whom it was impossible to bend or change. He was very useful to
every one; knew an immense deal; and was always taking notes of things
he saw and heard, to be put in a great encyclopædia he was making. He
didn't like romance, loved the truth, and wanted to get to the bottom of
every thing. He was always trying to make little Fancy more sober,
well-behaved, and learned; for she was a freakish, dreamy, yet very
lovable and charming child. Aunt Fiction petted her to her heart's
content, and might have done her harm, if Uncle Fact had not had a hand
in her education; for the lessons of both were necessary to her, as to
all of us.

"Well, well, well! who is this?" he said briskly, as he turned his keen
eyes and powerful glasses on the new comer.

Aunt Fiction told him all the children had said; but he answered
impatiently:

"Tut, tut! my dear: I want the facts of the case. You are apt to
exaggerate; and Fancy is not to be relied on. If the child isn't a fool,
she must know more about herself than she pretends. Now, answer truly,
Luly, where did you come from?"

But the little mermaid only shook her head, and answered as before,
"Fancy found me on the beach, and wants me to stay with her. I'll do
her no harm: please, let me stay."

"She has evidently been washed ashore from some wreck, and has forgotten
all about herself. Her wonderful beauty, her accent, and these ornaments
show that she is some foreign child," said Aunt Fiction, pointing to the
earrings.

"Nonsense! my dear: those are white pebbles, not pearls; and, if you
examine them, you will find that those bracelets are the ones you gave
Fancy as a reward for so well remembering the facts I told her about
coral," said the uncle, who had turned Lorelei round and round, pinched
her cheek, felt her hair, and examined her frock through the glasses
which nothing escaped.

"She may stay, and be my little playmate, mayn't she? I'll take care of
her; and we shall be very happy together," cried Fancy eagerly.

"One can't be sure of that till one has tried. You say you will take
care of her: have you got any money to pay her board, and buy her
clothes?" asked her uncle.

"No; but I thought you'd help me," answered Fancy wistfully.

"Never say you'll do a thing till you are sure you can," said Uncle
Fact, as he took notes of the affair, thinking they might be useful by
and by. "I've no objection to your keeping the girl, if, after making
inquiries about her, she proves to be a clever child. She can stay
awhile; and, when we go back to town, I'll put her in one of our charity
schools, where she can be taught to earn her living. Can you read,
Luly?"

"No," said the mermaid, opening her eyes.

"Can you write and cipher?"

"What is that?" asked Lorelei innocently.

"Dear me! what ignorance!" cried Uncle Fact.

"Can you sew, or tend babies?" asked Aunt Fiction gently.

"I can do nothing but play and sing, and comb my hair."

"I see! I see!--some hand-organ man's girl. Well, I'm glad you keep your
hair smooth,--that's more than Fancy does," said Uncle Fact.

"Let us hear you sing," whispered his little niece; and, in a voice as
musical as the sound of ripples breaking on the shore, Lorelei sung a
little song that made Fancy dance with delight, charmed Aunt Fiction,
and softened Uncle Fact's hard face in spite of himself.

"Very well, very well, indeed: you have a good voice. I'll see that you
have proper teaching; and, by and by, you can get your living by giving
singing-lessons," he said, turning over the leaves of his book, to look
for the name of a skilful teacher; for he had lists of every useful
person, place, and thing under the sun.

Lorelei laughed at the idea; and Fancy thought singing for gold, not
love, a hard way to get one's living.

Inquiries were made; but nothing more was discovered, and neither of the
children would speak: so the strange child lived with Fancy, and made
her very happy. The other children didn't care much about her; for with
them she was shy and cold, because she knew, if the truth was told, they
would not believe in her. Fancy had always played a good deal by
herself, because she never found a mate to suit her; now she had one,
and they enjoyed each other very much. Lorelei taught her many things
besides new games; and Aunt Fiction was charmed with the pretty stories
Fancy repeated to her, while Uncle Fact was astonished at the knowledge
of marine plants and animals which she gained without any books. Lorelei
taught her to swim, like a fish; and the two played such wonderful
pranks in the water that people used to come down to the beach when they
bathed. In return, Fancy tried to teach her friend to read and write and
sew; but Lorelei couldn't learn much, though she loved her little
teacher dearly, and every evening sung her to sleep with beautiful
lullabies.

There was a great deal of talk about the curious stranger; for her ways
were odd, and no one knew what to make of her. She would eat nothing
but fruit and shell-fish, and drink nothing but salt water. She didn't
like tight clothes; but would have run about in a loose, green robe,
with bare feet and flying hair, if Uncle Fact would have allowed it.
Morning, noon, and night, she plunged into the sea,--no matter what the
weather might be; and she would sleep on no bed but one stuffed with
dried sea-weed. She made lovely chains of shells; found splendid bits of
coral; and dived where no one else dared, to bring up wonderful plants
and mosses. People offered money for these things; but she gave them all
to Fancy and Aunt Fiction, of whom she was very fond. It was curious to
see the sort of people who liked both Fancy and her friend,--poets,
artists; delicate, thoughtful children; and a few old people, who had
kept their hearts young in spite of care and time and trouble. Dashing
young gentlemen, fine young ladies, worldly-minded and money-loving men
and women, and artificial, unchildlike children, the two friends avoided
carefully; and these persons either made fun of them, neglected them
entirely, or seemed to be unconscious that they were alive. The others
they knew at a glance; for their faces warmed and brightened when the
children came, they listened to their songs and stories, joined in their
plays, and found rest and refreshment in their sweet society.

"This will do for a time; as Fancy is getting strong, and not entirely
wasting her days, thanks to me! But our holiday is nearly over; and, as
soon as I get back to town, I'll take that child to the Ragged Refuge,
and see what they can make of her," said Uncle Fact, who was never quite
satisfied about Lorelei; because he could find out so little concerning
her. He was walking over the beach as he said this, after a hard day's
work on his encyclopædia. He sat down on a rock in a quiet place; and,
instead of enjoying the lovely sunset, he fell to studying the course of
the clouds, the state of the tide, and the temperature of the air, till
the sound of voices made him peep over the rock. Fancy and her friend
were playing there, and the old gentleman waited to see what they were
about. Both were sitting with their little bare feet in the water;
Lorelei was stringing pearls, and Fancy plaiting a crown of pretty green
rushes.

"I wish I could go home, and get you a string of finer pearls than
these," said Lorelei; "but it is too far away, and I cannot swim now as
I used to do."

"I must look into this. The girl evidently knows all about herself, and
can tell, if she chooses," muttered Uncle Fact, getting rather excited
over this discovery.

"Never mind the pearls: I'd rather have you, dear," said Fancy lovingly.
"Tell me a story while we work, or sing me a song; and I'll give you my
crown."

"I'll sing you a little song that has got what your uncle calls a moral
to it," said Lorelei, laughing mischievously. Then, in her breezy little
voice, she sang the story of--

THE ROCK AND THE BUBBLE.

        Oh! a bare, brown rock
          Stood up in the sea,
        The waves at its feet
          Dancing merrily.

        A little bubble
          Came sailing by,
        And thus to the rock
          Did it gayly cry,--

        "Ho! clumsy brown stone,
          Quick, make way for me:
        I'm the fairest thing
          That floats on the sea.

        "See my rainbow-robe,
          See my crown of light,
        My glittering form,
          So airy and bright.

        "O'er the waters blue,
          I'm floating away,
        To dance by the shore
          With the foam and spray.

        "Now, make way, make way;
          For the waves are strong,
        And their rippling feet
          Bear me fast along."

        But the great rock stood
          Straight up in the sea:
        It looked gravely down,
          And said pleasantly,--

        "Little friend, you must
          Go some other way;
        For I have not stirred
          This many a long day.

        "Great billows have dashed,
          And angry winds blown;
        But my sturdy form
          Is not overthrown.

        "Nothing can stir me
          In the air or sea;
        Then, how can I move,
          Little friend, for thee?"

        Then the waves all laughed,
          In their voices sweet;
        And the sea-birds looked,
          From their rocky seat,

        At the bubble gay,
          Who angrily cried,
        While its round cheek glowed
          With a foolish pride,--

        "You _shall_ move for me;
          And you shall not mock
        At the words I say,
          You ugly, rough rock!

        "Be silent, wild birds!
          Why stare you so?
        Stop laughing, rude waves,
          And help me to go!

        "For I am the queen
          Of the ocean here,
        And this cruel stone
          Cannot make me fear."

        Dashing fiercely up,
          With a scornful word,
        Foolish bubble broke;
          But rock never stirred.

        Then said the sea-birds,
          Sitting in their nests,
        To the little ones
          Leaning on their breasts,--

        "Be not like Bubble,
          Headstrong, rude, and vain,
        Seeking by violence
          Your object to gain;

        "But be like the rock,
          Steadfast, true, and strong,
        Yet cheerful and kind,
          And firm against wrong.

        "Heed, little birdlings,
          And wiser you'll be
        For the lesson learned
          To-day by the sea."

"Well, to be sure the song _has_ got a moral, if that silly Fancy only
sees it," said Uncle Fact, popping up his bald head again as the song
ended.

"I thank you: that's a good little song for me. But, Lorelei, are you
sorry you came to be my friend?" cried Fancy; for, as she bent to lay
the crown on the other's head, she saw that she was looking wistfully
down into the water that kissed her feet.

"Not yet: while you love me, I am happy, and never regret that I ceased
to be a mermaid for your sake," answered Lorelei, laying her soft cheek
against her friend's.

"How happy I was the day my play-mermaid changed to a real one!" said
Fancy. "I often want to tell people all about that wonderful thing, and
let them know who you really are: then they'd love you as I do, instead
of calling you a little vagabond."

"Few would believe our story; and those that did would wonder at
me,--not love me as you do. They would put me in a cage, and make a show
of me; and I should be so miserable I should die. So don't tell who I
am, will you?" said Lorelei earnestly.

"Never," cried Fancy, clinging to her. "But, my deary, what will you do
when uncle sends you away from me, as he means to do as soon as we go
home? I can see you sometimes; but we cannot be always together, and
there is no ocean for you to enjoy in the city."

"I shall bear it, if I can, for your sake; if I cannot, I shall come
back here, and wait till you come again next year."

"No, no! I will not be parted from you; and, if uncle takes you away,
I'll come here, and be a mermaid with you," cried Fancy.

The little friends threw their arms about each other, and were so full
of their own feelings that they never saw Uncle Fact's tall shadow flit
across them, as he stole away over the soft sand. Poor old gentleman! he
was in a sad state of mind, and didn't know what to do; for in all his
long life he had never been so puzzled before.

"A mermaid indeed!" he muttered. "I always thought that child was a
fool, and now I'm sure of it. She thinks she is a mermaid, and has made
Fancy believe it. I've told my wife a dozen times that she let Fancy
read too many fairy tales and wonder-books. Her head is full of
nonsense, and she is just ready to believe any ridiculous story that is
told her. Now, what on earth shall I do? If I put Luly in an asylum,
Fancy will break her heart, and very likely they will both run away. If
I leave them together, Luly will soon make Fancy as crazy as she is
herself, and I shall be mortified by having a niece who insists that her
playmate is a mermaid. Bless my soul! how absurd it all is!"

Aunt Fiction had gone to town to see her publishers about a novel she
had written, and he didn't like to tell the queer story to any one else;
so Uncle Fact thought it over, and decided to settle the matter at
once. When the children came in, he sent Fancy to wait for him in the
library, while he talked alone with Lorelei. He did his best; but he
could do nothing with her,--she danced and laughed, and told the same
tale as before, till the old gentleman confessed that he had heard their
talk on the rocks: then she grew very sad, and owned that she _was_ a
mermaid. This made him angry, and he wouldn't believe it for an instant;
but told her it was impossible, and she must say something else.

Lorelei could say nothing else, and wept bitterly when he would not
listen; so he locked her up and went to Fancy, who felt as if something
dreadful was going to happen when she saw his face. He told her all he
knew, and insisted that Lorelei was foolish or naughty to persist in
such a ridiculous story.

"But, uncle, I really did make a mermaid; and she really did come alive,
for I saw the figure float away, and then Lorelei appeared," said Fancy,
very earnestly.

"It's very likely you made a figure, and called it a mermaid: it would
be just the sort of thing you'd do," said her uncle. "But it is
impossible that any coming alive took place, and I won't hear any such
nonsense. You didn't see this girl come out of the water; for she says
you never looked up, till she touched you. She was a real child, who
came over the beach from somewhere; and you fancied she looked like
your figure, and believed the silly tale she told you. It is my belief
that she is a sly, bad child; and the sooner she is sent away the better
for you."

Uncle Fact was so angry and talked so loud, that Fancy felt frightened
and bewildered; and began to think he might be right about the mermaid
part, though she hated to give up the little romance.

"If I agree that she _is_ a real child, won't you let her stay, uncle?"
she said, forgetting that, if she lost her faith, her friend was lost
also.

"Ah! then you have begun to come to your senses, have you? and are ready
to own that you don't believe in mermaids and such rubbish?" cried Uncle
Fact, stopping in his tramp up and down the room.

"Why, if you say there never were and never can be any, I suppose I
_must_ give up my fancy; but I'm sorry," sighed the child.

"That's my sensible girl! Now, think a minute, my dear, and you will
also own that it is best to give up the child as well as the mermaid,"
said her uncle briskly.

"Oh! no: we love one another; and she is good, and I can't give her up,"
cried Fancy.

"Answer me a few questions; and I'll prove that she isn't good, that you
don't love her, and that you _can_ give her up," said Uncle Fact, and
numbered off the questions on his fingers as he spoke.

"Didn't Luly want you to deceive us, and every one else, about who she
was?"

"Yes, sir."

"Don't you like to be with her better than with your aunt or myself?"

"Yes, sir."

"Hadn't you rather hear her songs and stories than learn your lessons?"

"Yes, sir."

"Isn't it wrong to deceive people, to love strangers more than those who
are a father and mother to you, and to like silly tales better than
useful lessons?"

"Yes, sir."

"Very well. Then, don't you see, that, if Luly makes you do these wrong
and ungrateful things, she is not a good child, nor a fit playmate for
you?"

Fancy didn't answer; for she couldn't feel that it was so, though he
made it seem so. When Uncle Fact talked in that way, she always got
confused and gave up; for she didn't know how to argue. He was right in
a certain way; but she felt as if she was right also in another way,
though she could not prove it: so she hung her head, and let her tears
drop on the carpet one by one.

Uncle Fact didn't mean to be unkind, but he did mean to have his own
way; and, when he saw the little girl's sad face, he took her on his
knee, and said, more mildly:

"Do you remember the story about the German Lorelei, who sung so
sweetly, and lured people to death in the Rhine?"

"Yes, uncle; and I like it," answered Fancy, looking up.

"Well, my dear, your Lorelei will lead you into trouble, if you follow
her. Suppose she is what you think her,--a mermaid: it is her delight to
draw people into the water, where, of course, they drown. If she is what
I think her,--a sly, bad child, who sees that you are very simple, and
who means to get taken care of without doing any thing useful,--she will
spoil you in a worse way than if you followed her into the sea. I've got
no little daughter of my own, and I want to keep you as safe and happy
as if you were mine. I don't like this girl, and I want you to give her
up for my sake. Will you, Fancy?"

While her uncle said these things, all the beauty seemed to fall away
from her friend, all the sweetness from their love, and all her faith in
the little dream which had made her so happy. Mermaids became
treacherous, unlovely, unreal creatures; and Lorelei seemed like a
naughty, selfish child, who deceived her, and made her do wrong things.
Her uncle had been very kind to her all her life; and she loved him, was
grateful, and wanted to show that she was, by pleasing him. But her
heart clung to the friend she had made, trusted, and loved; and it
seemed impossible to give up the shadow, even though the substance was
gone. She put her hands before her face for a moment; then laid her arms
about the old man's neck, and whispered, with a little sob:

"I'll give her up; but you'll be kind to her, because I was fond of her
once."

As the last word left Fancy's lips, a long, sad cry sounded through the
room; Lorelei sprung in, gave her one kiss, and was seen to run swiftly
toward the beach, wringing her hands. Fancy flew after; but, when she
reached the shore, there was nothing to be seen but the scattered
pebbles, shells, and weeds that made the mock mermaid, floating away on
a receding wave.

"Do you believe now?" cried Fancy, weeping bitterly, as she pointed to
the wreck of her friend, and turned reproachfully toward Uncle Fact, who
had followed in great astonishment.

The old gentleman looked well about him; then shook his head, and
answered decidedly:

"No, my dear, I _don't_. It's an odd affair; but, I've no doubt, it will
be cleared up in a natural way sometime or other."

But there he was mistaken; for this mystery never _was_ cleared up.
Other people soon forgot it, and Fancy never spoke of it; yet she made
very few friends, and, though she learned to love and value Uncle Fact
as well as Aunt Fiction, she could not forget her dearest playmate. Year
after year she came back to the sea-side; and the first thing she always
did was to visit the place where she used to play, and stretch her arms
toward the sea, crying tenderly:

"O my little friend! come back to me!"

But Lorelei never came again.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS

[Illustration: "Sing, Tessa; sing!" cried Tommo, twanging away with all
his might.--PAGE 47.]

AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG: Containing "My Boys," "Shawl-Straps," "Cupid and
Chow-Chow," "My Girls," "Jimmy's Cruise in the Pinafore," "An
Old-Fashioned Thanksgiving." 6 vols. Price of each, $1.00.

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, _Boston_.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON'S STORIES.

[Illustration]

BED-TIME STORIES.

    MORE BED-TIME STORIES.

        NEW BED-TIME STORIES.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ADDIE LEDYARD.

Three volumes in a box. Price, $3.75.

_ROBERTS BROTHERS_, _Publishers_, BOSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

CUPID AND CHOW-CHOW, ETC.

[Illustration: SCRAP-BAG. VOL III.]

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."


BOSTON:

ROBERTS BROTHERS.

1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Jean Ingelow's Prose Story Books.

In 5 vols. 16mo, uniformly bound.

STUDIES FOR STORIES FROM GIRLS' LIVES. Illustrated, Price, $1.25.

    "A rare source of delight for all who can find pleasure in
    really good works of prose fiction.... They are prose poems,
    carefully meditated, and exquisitely couched in by a teacher
    ready to sympathize with every joy and sorrow."--_Athenæum._

STORIES TOLD TO A CHILD. Illustrated. Price, $1.25.

STORIES TOLD TO A CHILD. Second Series. Illustrated. Price, $1.25.

    "This is one of the most charming juvenile books ever laid on
    our table. Jean Ingelow, the noble English poet, second only to
    Mrs. Browning, bends easily and gracefully from the heights of
    thought and fine imagination to commune with the minds and
    hearts of children; to sympathize with their little joys and
    sorrows; to feel for their temptations. She is a safe guide for
    the little pilgrims; for her paths, though 'paths of
    pleasantness,' lead straight upward."--_Grace Greenwood in "The
    Little Pilgrim."_


A SISTER'S BYE-HOURS. Illustrated. Price, $1.25.

    "Seven short stories of domestic life by one of the most popular
    of the young authors of the day,--an author who has her heart in
    what she writes,--Jean Ingelow. And there is heart in these
    stories, and healthy moral lessons, too. They are written in the
    author's most graceful and affecting style, will be read with
    real pleasure, and, when read, will leave more than momentary
    impressions."--_Brooklyn Union._


MOPSA THE FAIRY. A Story. With Eight Illustrations. Price, $1.25.

    "Miss Ingelow is, to our mind, the most charming of all living
    writers for children, and 'Mopsa' alone ought to give her a kind
    of pre-emptive right to the love and gratitude of our young
    folks. It requires genius to conceive a purely imaginary work
    which must of necessity deal with the supernatural, without
    running into a mere riot of fantastic absurdity; but genius Miss
    Ingelow has, and the story of Jack is as careless and joyous,
    but as delicate, as a picture of childhood.

    "The young people should be grateful to Jean Ingelow and those
    other noble writers, who, in our day, have taken upon themselves
    the task of supplying them with literature, if for no other
    reason, that these writers have saved them from the ineffable
    didacticism which, till within the last few years, was
    considered the only food fit for the youthful
    mind."--_Eclectic._

_Sold everywhere. Mailed, postpaid, by the Publishers._

ROBERTS BROTHERS, BOSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Messrs. Roberts Brothers' Publications._

CASTLE BLAIR:

A STORY OF YOUTHFUL DAYS.

BY FLORA L. SHAW.

16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00

    "There is quite a lovely little book just come out about
    children,--'Castle Blair!' ... The book is good, and lovely, and
    true, having the best description of a noble child in it
    (Winnie) that I ever read; and nearly the best description of
    the next best thing,--a noble dog," says John Ruskin, the
    distinguished art critic.

    "'Castle Blair,' a story of youthful days, by Flora L. Shaw, is
    an Irish story. A charming young girl--half French, half
    English--comes from France, at the age of eighteen, to live with
    her bachelor uncle at Castle Blair, which is in possession of
    five children of an absent brother of this uncle. The children
    are in a somewhat wild and undisciplined condition, but they are
    as interesting children as can be imagined, and some of them
    winning to an extraordinary degree. They are natural children,
    in manner and in talk; but the book differs from some American
    books about children, in that it is pervaded by an air of
    refinement and good-breeding. The story is altogether
    delightful, quite worthy, from an American point of view, of all
    Mr. Ruskin says of it; and if circulation were determined by
    merit, it would speedily outstrip a good many now popular
    children's books which have a vein of commonness, if not of
    vulgarity."--_Hartford Courant._

    "It is not too much to say that nothing more interesting or more
    wholesome is offered this year for older boys and girls. It is a
    charming story, in which the author has delineated character as
    carefully, and with as keen an artistic sense, as if she had
    been writing a novel. Her book is a novel, indeed, with children
    and the lives of children, instead of men and women and their
    lives, for its theme."--_New York Evening Post._

_Our publications are to be had of all Booksellers. When not to be
found, send directly to_

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, =BOSTON.=

       *       *       *       *       *


_Messrs. Roberts Brothers' Publications._

NELLY'S SILVER MINE.

BY H. H.

With Illustrations. 16mo, cloth. Price $1.50.

    "The sketches of life, especially of its odd and out-of-the-way
    aspects, by H. H. always possess so vivid a reality that they
    appear more like the actual scenes than any copy by pencil or
    photograph. They form a series of living pictures, radiant with
    sunlight and fresh as morning dew. In this new story the fruits
    of her fine genius are of Colorado growth, and though without
    the antique flavor of her recollections of Rome and Venice, are
    as delicious to the taste as they are tempting to the eye, and
    afford a natural feast of exquisite quality."--_N. Y. Tribune._

    "This charming little book, written for children's entertainment
    and instruction, is equally delightful to the fathers and
    mothers. It is life in New England, and the racy history of a
    long railway journey to the wilds of Colorado. The children are
    neither imps nor angels, but just such children as are found in
    every happy home. The pictures are so graphically drawn that we
    feel well acquainted with Rob and Nelly, have travelled with
    them and climbed mountains and found silver mines, and know all
    about the rude life made beautiful by a happy family, and can
    say of Nelly, with their German neighbor, Mr. Kleesman, 'Ach
    well, she haf better than any silver mine in her own
    self.'"--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._

    "In 'Nelly's Silver Mine' Mrs. Helen Hunt Jackson has given us a
    true classic for the nursery and the school-room, but its
    readers will not be confined to any locality. Its vivid
    portraiture of Colorado life and its truth to child-nature give
    it a charm which the most experienced cannot fail to feel. It
    will stand by the side of Miss Edgeworth and Mrs. Barbauld in
    all the years to come."--_Mrs. Caroline H. Dall._

    "We heartily commend the book for its healthy spirit, its lively
    narrative, and its freedom from most of the faults of books for
    children."--_Atlantic Monthly._

_Our publications are to be had of all Booksellers. When not to be
found, send directly to_

ROBERTS BROTHERS, BOSTON.






AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

VOL V.

JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE, ETC.

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."


BOSTON:
ROBERTS BROTHERS.
1880.

_Copyright_,
BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT.
1879.

UNIVERSITY PRESS:
JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: SIR JOSEPH PORTER, K.C.B.]

  I am the monarch of the Sea,
  The ruler of the Queen's Navee,--
  When at anchor here I ride,
  My bosom swells with pride,
And I snap my fingers at a foeman's taunts.


[Illustration: COUSIN HEBE.]

And so do his sisters, and his cousins, and his aunts
  His sisters and his cousins!
  Whom he reckons by the dozens,
And his aunts!


[Illustration: RALPH RACKSTRAW.]

"I am the lowliest tar
  That sails the water.
And you, proud maiden, are
  My captain's daughter."


[Illustration: JOSEPHINE.]

"Refrain, audacious tar.
  Your suit from pressing;
Remember what you are,
  And whom addressing."


[Illustration: LITTLE BUTTERCUP.]

For I am called Little Buttercup,--dear Little Buttercup,
  Though I never could tell why;
But still I'm called Buttercup,--poor Little Buttercup,
  Sweet Little Buttercup I!


[Illustration: CAPTAIN CORCORAN.]

Fair moon, to thee I sing
  Bright regent of the heavens;
Say, why is every thing
  Either at sixes or at sevens!


[Illustration: BILL BOBSTAY, THE BOS'N]

He is an Englishman!
  For he himself has said it,
  And it's greatly to his credit
That he is an Englishman.


[Illustration: DICK DEADEYE.]

"I'm ugly too, aint I?"


       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.


   I. JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE                          5

  II. TWO LITTLE TRAVELLERS                                  27

 III. A JOLLY FOURTH                                         38

  IV. SEVEN BLACK CATS                                       52

   V. ROSA'S TALE                                            67

  VI. LUNCH                                                  89

 VII. A BRIGHT IDEA                                         105

VIII. HOW THEY CAMPED OUT                                   119

  IX. MY LITTLE SCHOOL-GIRL                                 141

   X. WHAT A SHOVEL DID                                     154

  XI. CLAMS                                                 168

 XII. KITTY'S CATTLE SHOW                                   182

XIII. WHAT BECOMES OF THE PINS                              189


[Illustration: TOM TUCKER, MIDSHIPMITE.]




AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.




I.

JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE.


HOW HE SHIPPED.

A boy sat on a door-step in a despondent attitude, with his eyes fixed
on a pair of very shabby shoes, and his elbows resting on his knees, as
if to hide the big patches there. But it was not the fact that his toes
were nearly out and his clothes dilapidated which brought the wrinkles
to his forehead and the tears to his eyes, for he was used to that
state of things, and bore it without complaint. The prospect was a dull
one for a lively lad full of the spring longings which sunny April
weather always brings. But it was not the narrow back-street where noisy
children played and two or three dusty trees tried to bud without
sunshine, that made him look so dismal. Nor was it the knowledge that a
pile of vests was nearly ready for him to trudge away with before he
could really rest after doing many errands to save mother's weary feet.

No, it was a burden that lay very heavily on his heart, and made it
impossible to even whistle as he waited. Above the sounds that filled
the street he heard a patient moan from the room within; and no matter
what object his eyes rested on, he saw with sorrowful distinctness a
small white face turned wistfully toward the window, as if weary of the
pillow where it had laid so long.

Merry little Kitty, who used to sing and dance from morning till night,
was now so feeble and wasted that he could carry her about like a baby.
All day she lay moaning softly, and her one comfort was when "brother"
could come and sing to her. That night he could not sing; his heart was
so full, because the doctor had said that the poor child must have
country air as soon as possible, else she never would recover from the
fever which left her such a sad little ghost of her former self. But,
alas, there was no money for the trip, and mother was sewing day and
night to earn enough for a week at least of blessed country air and
quiet. Jimmy did his best to help, but could find very little to do, and
the pennies came in so slowly he was almost in despair.

There was no father to lend a strong hand, and Mrs. Nelson was one of
the "silent poor," who cannot ask for charity, no matter how much they
may need it. The twelve-year-old boy considered himself the man of the
family, and manfully carried as many burdens as his young shoulders
would bear; but this was a very heavy one, so it is no wonder that he
looked sober. Holding his curly head in his hands, as if to keep it from
flying asunder with the various plans working inside, he sat staring at
the dusty bricks in a desperate frame of mind.

Warm days were coming, and every hour was precious, for poor Kitty pined
in the close room, and all he could do was to bring her dandelions and
bits of green grass from the Common when she begged to go in the fields
and pick "pretties" for herself. He loved the little sister dearly,
and, as he remembered her longing, his eyes filled, and he doubled up
both fists with an air of determination, muttering to himself,--

"She _shall_ go! I don't see any other way, and I'll do it!"

The plan which had been uppermost lately was this. His father had been a
sailor, and Jimmy proposed to run away to sea as cabin boy. His wages
were to be paid before he went, so mother and Kitty could be in the
country while he was gone, and in a few months he would come sailing
gayly home to find the child her rosy self again. A very boyish and
impossible plan, but he meant it, and was in just the mood to carry it
out,--for every other attempt to make money had failed.

"I'll do it as sure as my name is Jim Nelson. I'll take a look at the
ships this very night, and go in the first one that will have me," he
said, with a resolute nod of the head, though his heart sank within him
at the thought. "I wonder which kind of captains pay boys best? I guess
I'll try a steamer; they make short trips. I heard the cannon to-day, so
one is in, and I'll try for a place before I go to bed."

Little did desperate Jimmy guess what ship he would really sail in, nor
what a prosperous voyage he was about to make; for help was coming that
very minute, as it generally does, sooner or later, to generous people
who are very much in earnest.

First a shrill whistle was heard, at the sound of which he looked up
quickly; then a rosy-faced girl of about his own age came skipping down
the street, swinging her hat by one string; and, as Jimmy watched her
approach, a smile began to soften the grim look he wore, for Willy
Bryant was his best friend and neighbor, being full of courage, fun, and
kindness. He nodded, and made room for her on the step,--the place she
usually occupied at spare moments when they got lessons and recounted
their scrapes to each other.

But to-night Willy seemed possessed of some unusually good piece of news
which she chose to tell in her own lively fashion, for, instead of
sitting down, she began to dance a sailor's hornpipe, singing gayly,
"I'm little Buttercup, sweet little Buttercup," till her breath gave
out.

"What makes you so jolly, Will?" asked Jimmy, as she dropped down
beside him and fanned herself with the ill-used hat.

"Such fun--you'll never guess--just what we wanted--if your mother only
will! You'll dance, too, when you know," panted the girl, smiling like a
substantial sort of fairy come to bring good luck.

"Fire away, then. It will have to be extra nice to set me off. I don't
feel a bit like jigs now," answered Jimmy, as the gloom obscured his
face again, like a cloud over the sun.

"You know 'Pinafore'?" began Will, and getting a quick nod for an
answer, she poured forth the following tale with great rapidity: "Well,
some folks are going to get it up with children to do it, and they want
any boys and girls that can sing to go and be looked at to-morrow, and
the good ones will be picked out, and dressed up, and taught how to act,
and have the nicest time that ever was. Some of our girls are going, and
so am I, and you sing and must come, too, and have some fun. Won't it be
jolly?"

"I guess it would; but I can't. Mother needs me every minute out of
school," began Jimmy, with a shake of the head, having made up his mind
some time ago that he must learn to do without fun.

"But we shall be paid for it," cried Will, clapping her hands with the
double delight of telling the best part of her story, and seeing Jimmy's
sober face clear suddenly as if the sun had burst forth with great
brilliancy.

"Really? How much? Can I sing well enough?" and he clutched her arm
excitedly, for this unexpected ray of hope dazzled him.

"Some of them will have ten dollars a week, and some more,--the real
nice ones, like Lee, the singing boy, who is a wonder," answered Will,
in the tone of one well informed on such points.

"Ten dollars!" gasped Jimmy, for the immensity of the sum took his
breath away. "Could _I_ get that? How long? Where do we go? Do they
really want us fellows? Are you sure it's all true?"

"It was all in the paper, and Miss Pym, the teacher who boards at our
house, told Ma about it. The folks advertised for school-children, sixty
of 'em, and will really pay; and Ma said I could go and try, and all
the money I get I'm going to put in a bank and have for my own. Don't
you believe me now?"

Miss Pym and the newspapers settled the matter in Jimmy's mind, and made
him more anxious than before about the other point.

"Do you think _I_ would have any chance?" he asked, still holding Will,
who seemed inclined for another dance.

"I know you would. Don't you do splendidly at school? And didn't they
want you for a choir boy, only your mother couldn't spare you?" answered
Will, decidedly; for Jimmy did love music, and had a sweet little pipe
of his own, as she well knew.

"Mother will have to spare me now, if they pay like that. I can work all
day and do without sleep to earn money this way. Oh, Will, I'm so glad
you came, for I was just ready to run away to sea. There didn't seem
anything else to do," whispered Jimmy in a choky sort of tone, as hopes
and fears struggled together in his boyish mind.

"Run as fast as you like, and I'll go too. We'll sail in the 'Pinafore,'
and come home with our pockets full of money.

"'Sing, hey, the merry maiden and the tar!'"

burst out Will, who was so full of spirits she could not keep still
another minute.

Jimmy joined in, and the fresh voices echoed through the street so
pleasantly that Mrs. Peters stopped scolding her six squabbling
children, while Kitty's moaning changed to a feeble little sound of
satisfaction, for "brother's" lullabies were her chief comfort and
delight.

"We shall lose school, you know, for we act in the afternoon, not the
evening. I don't care; but you will, you like to study so well. Miss Pym
didn't like it at first, but Ma said it would help the poor folks, and a
little fun wouldn't hurt the children. I thought of you right away, and
if you don't get as much money as I do, you shall have some of mine, so
Kitty can go away soon."

Will's merry face grew very sweet and kind as she said that, and Jimmy
was glad his mother called him just then, because he did not know how
to thank this friend in need. When he came out with the parcel of vests
he looked like a different boy, for Mrs. Nelson had told him to go and
find out all about it, and had seemed as much dazzled by the prospect as
he did, sewing was such weary work.

Their interview with Miss Pym was a most encouraging one, and it was
soon settled that Jimmy should go with Will to try for a place on the
morrow.

"And I'll get it, too!" he said to himself, as he kissed Kitty's thin
cheek, full of the sweet hope that he might be the means of bringing
back life and color to the little face he loved so well.

He was so excited he could not sleep, and beguiled the long hours by
humming under his breath all the airs he knew belonging to the already
popular opera. Next morning he flew about his work as if for a wager,
and when Will came for him there was not a happier heart in all the city
than the hopeful one that thumped under Jimmy's threadbare best jacket.

Such a crowd of girls and boys as they found at the hall where they
were told to apply for inspection; such a chirping and piping went on
there, it sounded like a big cage full of larks and linnets; and by and
by, when the trial was over, such a smiling troop of children as was
left to be drilled by the energetic gentlemen who had the matter in
hand. Among this happy band stood our Jimmy, chosen for his good voice,
and Will, because of her bright face and lively, self-possessed manners.
They could hardly wait to be dismissed, and it was a race home to see
who should be first to tell the good news. Jimmy tried to be quiet on
Kitty's account, but failed entirely; and it was a pleasant sight to see
the boy run into his mother's arms, crying joyfully,--

"I'm in! I'm in! Ten dollars a week! Hurrah!"

"I can hardly believe it!" And weary Mrs. Nelson dropped her needle to
indulge in a few moments of delightful repose.

"If it goes well they may want us for a month or six weeks," the man
said. "Just think, maybe I'll get fifty or sixty dollars! and Baby will
get well right off," cried Jimmy, in an arithmetical sort of rapture,
as he leaned above Kitty, who tried to clap her little hands without
quite knowing what the joy was all about.


HOW HE SAILED.

After that day Jimmy led a very happy life, for he loved music and
enjoyed the daily drill with his mates, though it was long before he saw
the inside of the theatre. Will knew a good deal about it, for an
actor's family had boarded with her mother, and the little girl had been
behind the scenes. But to Jimmy, who had only seen one fairy play, all
was very strange when at last he went upon the stage; for the glittering
world he expected was gone, and all was dusty, dark, and queer, with
trap-doors underfoot, machinery overhead, and a wilderness of scenery
jumbled together in the drollest way. He was all eyes and ears, and
enjoyed himself immensely as he came and went, sung and acted, with the
troop of lads who made up the sailor chorus. It was a real ship to him,
in spite of painted cannon, shaky masts, and cabin doors that led
nowhere. He longed to run up the rigging; but as that was forbidden,
for fear of danger, he contented himself by obeying orders with nautical
obedience, singing with all his might, and taking great satisfaction in
his blue suit with the magical letters "H. M. S. Pinafore" round his
cap.

Day by day all grew more and more interesting. His mother was never
tired of hearing his adventures, he sung Kitty to sleep with the new
songs, and the neighbors took such a friendly interest in his success
that they called him Lord Nelson, and predicted that he would be as
famous as his great namesake.

When the grand day came at last, and the crew of jolly young tars stood
ready to burst forth with the opening chorus,

"We sail the ocean blue,
  Our saucy ship's a beauty;
We're gallant men and true,
  And bound to do our duty!"

Jimmy hardly knew whether he stood on his head or his heels at first,
for, in spite of many rehearsals, everything seemed changed. Instead of
daylight, gas shone everywhere, the empty seats were full, the
orchestra playing splendidly, and when the curtain rose, a sea of
friendly faces welcomed them, and the pleasant sound of applause made
the hearts under the blue jackets dance gayly.

How those boys did sing! how their eyes shone, and their feet kept time
to the familiar strains! with what a relish they hitched up their
trousers and lurched about, or saluted and cheered as the play demanded.
With what interest they watched the microscopic midshipmite, listened to
Rafe as his sweet voice melodiously told the story of his hapless love,
and smiled on pretty Josephine, who was a regular bluebird without the
scream.

"Ain't this fun?" whispered Jimmy's next neighbor, taking advantage of a
general burst of laughter, as the inimitable little bumboat woman
advertised her wares with captivating drollery.

"Right down jolly!" answered Jimmy, feeling that a series of somersaults
across the stage would be an immense relief to the pent-up emotions of
his boyish soul. For under all the natural excitement of the hour deep
down lay the sweet certainty that he was earning health for Kitty, and
it made his heart sing for joy more blithely than any jovial chorus to
which he lent his happy voice.

But his bliss was not complete till the stately Sir Joseph, K. C. B.,
had come aboard, followed by "his sisters and his cousins and his
aunts;" for among that flock of devoted relatives in white muslin and
gay ribbons was Will. Standing in the front row, her bright face was
good to see, for her black eyes sparkled, every hair on her head curled
its best, her cherry bows streamed in the breeze, and her feet pranced
irresistibly at the lively parts of the music. She longed to dance the
hornpipe which the little Quaker aunt did so capitally, but, being
denied that honor, distinguished herself by the comic vigor with which
she "polished up the handle of the big front door," and did the other
"business" recorded by the gallant "ruler of the Queen's Navee."

She and Jimmy nodded to each other behind the Admiral's august back, and
while Captain Corcoran was singing to the moon, and Buttercup suffering
the pangs of "Wemorse," the young people had a gay time behind the
scenes. Jimmy and Will sat upon a green baize bank to compare notes,
while the relatives flew about like butterflies, and the sailors talked
base-ball, jack-knives, and other congenial topics, when not envying Sir
Joseph his cocked hat, and the Captain his epaulettes.

It was a very successful launch, and the merry little crew set sail with
a fair wind and every prospect of a prosperous voyage. When the first
performance was over, our two children left their fine feathers behind
them, like Cinderella when the magic hour struck, and went gayly home,
feeling much elated, for they knew they should go back to fresh
triumphs, and were earning money by their voices like Jenny Lind and
Mario. How they pitied other boys and girls who could not go in at that
mysterious little door; how important they felt as parts of the
spectacle about which every one was talking, and what millionnaires they
considered themselves as they discussed their earnings and planned what
to do with the prospective fortunes.

That was the beginning of many busy, happy weeks for both the
children,--weeks which they long remembered with great pleasure, as did
older and wiser people; for that merry, innocent little opera proved
that theatres can be made the scenes of harmless amusement, and opened
to a certain class of young people a new and profitable field for their
talents. So popular did this small company become that the piece went on
through the summer vacation, and was played in the morning as well as
afternoon to satisfy the crowds who wished to see and hear it.

Never had the dear old Boston Museum, which so many of us have loved and
haunted for years, seen such a pretty sight as one of those morning
performances. It was the perfection of harmless merry-making, and the
audience was as pleasant a spectacle as that upon the stage. Fathers and
mothers stole an hour from their busy lives to come and be children with
their children, irresistibly attracted and charmed by the innocent fun,
the gay music that bewitched the ear one could hardly tell why, and the
artless acting of those who are always playing parts, whether the
nursery or the theatre is their stage.

The windows stood open, and sunshine and fresh air came in to join the
revel. Babies crowed and prattled, mammas chatted together, old people
found they had not forgotten how to laugh, and boys and girls rejoiced
over the discovery of a new delight for holidays. It was good to be
there, and in spite of all the discussion in papers and parlors, no harm
came to the young mariners, but much careful training of various sorts,
and well-earned wages that went into pockets which sorely needed a
silver lining.


HOW THE VOYAGE ENDED.

So the good ship "Pinafore" sailed and sailed for many prosperous weeks,
and when at last she came into port and dropped anchor for the season
she was received with a salute of general approbation for the successful
engagement out of which she came with her flags flying and not one of
her gallant crew killed or wounded. Well pleased with their share of the
glory, officers and men went ashore to spend their prize money with
true sailor generosity, all eager to ship again for another cruise in
the autumn.

But long before that time Able Seaman James Nelson had sent his family
into the country, mother begging Will to take good care of her dear boy
till he could join them, and Kitty throwing kisses as she smiled
good-by, with cheeks already the rosier for the comforts "brother" had
earned for her. Jimmy would not desert his ship while she floated, but
managed to spend his Sundays out of town, often taking Will with him as
first mate; and, thanks to her lively tongue, friends were soon made for
the new-comers. Mrs. Nelson found plenty of sewing, Kitty grew strong
and well in the fine air, and the farmer with whom they lived, seeing
what a handy lad the boy was, offered him work and wages for the autumn,
so all could be independent and together. With this comfortable prospect
before him, Jimmy sang away like a contented blackbird, never tiring of
his duty, for he was a general favorite, and Kitty literally strewed his
way with flowers gathered by her own grateful little hands.

When the last day came, he was in such spirits that he was found doing
double-shuffles in corners, hugging the midshipmite, who was a little
girl of about Kitty's age, and treating his messmates to peanuts with a
lavish hand. Will had her hornpipe, also, when the curtain was down,
kissed every one of the other "sisters, cousins, and aunts," and joined
lustily in the rousing farewell cheers given by the crew.

A few hours later, a cheerful-looking boy might have been seen trudging
toward one of the railway-stations. A new hat, brave in blue streamers,
was on his head; a red balloon struggled to escape from one hand; a
shabby carpet-bag, stuffed full, was in the other; and a pair of shiny
shoes creaked briskly, as if the feet inside were going on a very
pleasant errand.

About this young traveller, who walked with a sailor-like roll and
lurch, revolved a little girl chattering like a magpie, and occasionally
breaking into song, as if she couldn't help it.

"Be sure you come next Saturday; it won't be half such fun if you don't
go halves," said the boy, beaming at her as he hauled down the
impatient balloon, which seemed inclined to break from its moorings

"'Yes, I know
That is so!'"

hummed the girl with a skip to starboard, that she might bear a hand
with the bag. "Keep some cherries for me, and don't forget to give Kit
the doll I dressed for her."

"I shouldn't have been going myself if it hadn't been for you, Will. I
never shall forget that," said Jimmy, whom intense satisfaction rendered
rather more sedate than his friend.

"Running away to sea is great fun,

'With a tar that ploughs the water!'"

sung Will in spite of herself.

"'And a gallant captain's daughter,'"

echoed Jimmy, smiling across the carpet-bag. Then both joined in an
irrepressible chorus of "Dash it! Dash it!" as a big man nearly upset
them and a dog barked madly at the balloon.

Being safely landed in the train, Jimmy hung out of the window till the
last minute, discussing his new prospects with Will, who stood on tiptoe
outside, bubbling over with fun.

"I'll teach you to make butter and cheese, and you shall be my
dairy-woman, for I mean to be a farmer," he said, just as the bell rang.

"All right, I'd like that ever so much." And then the irrepressible
madcap burst out, to the great amusement of the passengers,--

"'For you might have been a Roosian,
A Frenchman, Turk or Proosian,
        Or an Ital-i-an.'"

And Jimmy could not resist shouting back, as the train began to move,--

"'But in spite of all temptations
To belong to other nations,
    I'm an Amer-i-can.'"

Then he subsided, to think over the happy holiday before him and the
rich cargo of comfort, independence, and pleasure he had brought home
from his successful cruise in the "Pinafore."




II.

TWO LITTLE TRAVELLERS.


The first of these true histories is about Annie Percival,--a very dear
and lovely child, whose journey interested many other children, and is
still remembered with gratitude by those whom she visited on a far-off
island.

Annie was six when she sailed away to Fayal with her mother, grandmamma,
and "little Aunt Ruth," as she called the young aunty who was still a
school-girl. Very cunning was Annie's outfit, and her little trunk was a
pretty as well as a curious sight, for everything was so small and
complete it looked as if a doll was setting off for Europe. Such a wee
dressing-case, with bits of combs and brushes for the curly head; such a
cosey scarlet wrapper for the small woman to wear in her berth, with
slippers to match when she trotted from state-room to state-room; such
piles of tiny garments laid nicely in, and the owner's initials on the
outside of the trunk; not to mention the key on a ribbon in her pocket,
as grown up as you please.

I think the sight of that earnest, sunshiny face must have been very
pleasant to all on board, no matter how seasick they might be, and the
sound of the cheery little voice, as sweet as the chirp of a bird,
especially when she sung the funny song about the "Owl and the pussy-cat
in the pea-green boat," for she had charming ways, and was always making
quaint, wise, or loving remarks.

Well, "they sailed and they sailed," and came at last to Fayal, where
everything was so new and strange that Annie's big brown eyes could
hardly spare time to sleep, so busy were they looking about. The donkeys
amused her very much, so did the queer language and ways of the
Portuguese people round her, especially the very droll names given to
the hens of a young friend. The biddies seemed to speak the same dialect
as at home, but evidently they understood Spanish also, and knew their
own names, so it was fun to go and call Rio, Pico, Cappy, Clarissa,
Whorfie, and poor Simonena, whose breast-bone grew out so that she
could not eat and had to be killed.

But the thing which made the deepest impression on Annie was a visit to
a charity-school at the old convent of San Antonio. It was kept by some
kind ladies, and twenty-five girls were taught and cared for in the big,
bare place, that looked rather gloomy and forlorn to people from happy
Boston, where charitable institutions are on a noble scale, as everybody
knows.

Annie watched all that went on with intelligent interest, and when they
were shown into the play-room she was much amazed and afflicted to find
that the children had nothing to play with but a heap of rags, out of
which they made queer dolls, with ravelled twine for hair, faces rudely
drawn on the cloth, and funny boots on the shapeless legs. No other toys
appeared, but the girls sat on the floor of the great stone room,--for
there was no furniture,--playing contentedly with their poor dolls, and
smiling and nodding at "the little Americana," who gravely regarded this
sad spectacle, wondering how they could get on without china and waxen
babies, tea-sets, and pretty chairs and tables to keep house with.

The girls thought that she envied them their dolls, and presently one
came shyly up to offer two of their best, leaving the teacher to explain
in English their wish to be polite to their distinguished guest. Like
the little gentlewoman she was, Annie graciously accepted the ugly bits
of rag with answering nods and smiles, and carried them away with her as
carefully as if they were of great beauty and value.

But when she was at home she expressed much concern and distress at the
destitute condition of the children. Nothing but rags to play with
seemed a peculiarly touching state of poverty to her childish mind, and
being a generous creature she yearned to give of her abundance to "all
the poor orphans who didn't have any nice dollies." She had several pets
of her own, but not enough to go round even if she sacrificed them, so
kind grandmamma, who had been doing things of this sort all her life,
relieved the child's perplexity by promising to send twenty-five fine
dolls to Fayal as soon as the party returned to Boston, where these
necessaries of child-life are cheap and plenty.

Thus comforted, Annie felt that she could enjoy her dear Horta and Chica
Pico Fatiera, particular darlings rechristened since her arrival. A
bundle of gay bits of silk, cloth, and flannel, and a present of money
for books, were sent out to the convent by the ladies. A treat of little
cheeses for the girls to eat with their dry bread was added, much to
Annie's satisfaction, and helped to keep alive her interest in the
school of San Antonio.

After many pleasant adventures during the six months spent in the city,
our party came sailing home again all the better for the trip, and Annie
so full of tales to tell that it was a never-failing source of amusement
to hear her hold forth to her younger brother in her pretty way,
"splaining and 'scribing all about it."

Grandmamma's promise was faithfully kept, and Annie brooded blissfully
over the twenty-five dolls till they were dressed, packed, and sent away
to Fayal. A letter of thanks soon came back from the teacher, telling
how surprised and delighted the girls were, and how they talked of
Annie as if she were a sort of fairy princess who in return for two poor
rag-babies sent a miraculous shower of splendid china ladies with gay
gowns and smiling faces.

This childish charity was made memorable to all who knew of it by the
fact that three months after she came home from that happy voyage Annie
took the one from which there is no return. For this journey there was
needed no preparation but a little white gown, a coverlet of flowers,
and the casket where the treasure of many hearts was tenderly laid away.
All alone, but not afraid, little Annie crossed the unknown sea that
rolls between our world and the Islands of the Blest, to be welcomed
there, I am sure, by spirits as innocent as her own, leaving behind her
a very precious memory of her budding virtues and the relics of a short,
sweet life.

Every one mourned for her, and all her small treasures were so carefully
kept that they still exist. Poor Horta, in the pincushion arm-chair,
seems waiting patiently for the little mamma to come again; the two
rag-dolls lie side by side in grandma's scrap-book, since there is now
no happy voice to wake them into life; and far away in the convent of
San Antonio the orphans carefully keep their pretty gifts in memory of
the sweet giver. To them she is a saint now, not a fairy princess; for
when they heard of her death they asked if they might pray for the soul
of the dear little Americana, and the teacher said, "Pray rather for the
poor mother who has lost so much." So the grateful orphans prayed and
the mother was comforted, for now another little daughter lies in her
arms and kisses away the lonely pain at her heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second small traveller I want to tell about lived in the same city
as the first, and her name was Maggie Woods. Her father was an
Englishman who came to America to try his fortune, but did not find it;
for, when Maggie was three months old, the great Chicago fire destroyed
their home; soon after, the mother died; then the father was drowned,
and Maggie was left all alone in a strange country.

She had a good aunt in England, however, who took great pains to
discover the child after the death of the parents, and sent for her to
come home and be cared for. It was no easy matter to get a five-years'
child across the Atlantic, for the aunt could not come to fetch her, and
no one whom she knew was going over. But Maggie had found friends in
Chicago; the American consul at Manchester was interested in the case,
and every one was glad to help the forlorn baby, who was too young to
understand the pathos of her story.

After letters had gone to and fro, it was decided to send the child to
England in charge of the captain of a steamer, trusting to the kindness
of all fellow-travellers to help her on her way.

The friends in Chicago bestirred themselves to get her ready, and then
it was that Annie's mother found that she could do something which would
have delighted her darling, had she been here to know of it. Laid
tenderly away were many small garments belonging to the other little
pilgrim, whose journeying was so soon ended; and from among all these
precious things Mrs. Percival carefully chose a comfortable outfit for
that cold March voyage.

The little gray gown went, and the red hood, the warm socks, and the
cosey wraps no longer needed by the quiet sleeper under the snow.
Perhaps something of her loving nature lingered about the clothes, and
helped to keep the orphan warm and safe, for Annie's great delight was
to pet and help all who needed comfort and protection.

When all was ready, Maggie's small effects were packed in a light
basket, so that she could carry it herself if need be. A card briefly
telling the story was fastened on the corner, and a similar paper
recommending her to the protection of all kind people, was sewed to the
bosom of her frock. Then, not in the least realizing what lay before
her, the child was consigned to the conductor of the train to be
forwarded to persons in New York who would see her safely on board the
steamer.

I should dearly like to have seen the little maid and the big basket as
they set out on that long trip as tranquilly as if for a day's visit;
and it is a comfort to know that before the train started, the persons
who took her there had interested a motherly lady in the young
traveller, who promised to watch over her while their ways were the
same.

All went well, and Maggie was safely delivered to the New York friends,
who forwarded her to the steamer, well supplied with toys and comforts
for the voyage, and placed in charge of captain and stewardess. She
sailed on the 3d of March, and on the 12th landed at Liverpool, after a
pleasant trip, during which she was the pet of all on board.

The aunt welcomed her joyfully, and the same day the child reached her
new home, the Commercial Inn, Compstall, after a journey of over four
thousand miles. The consul and owners of the steamer wanted to see the
adventurous young lady who had come so far alone, and neighbors and
strangers made quite a lion of her, for all kindly hearts were
interested, and the protective charity which had guided and guarded her
in two hemispheres and across the wide sea, made all men fathers, all
women mothers, to the little one till she was safe.

Her picture lies before me as I write,--a pretty child standing in a
chair, with a basket of toys on the table before her; curly hair pushed
back from the face, pensive eyes, and a pair of stout little feet
crossed one over the other as if glad to rest. I wish I could put the
photograph into the story, because the small heroine is an interesting
one, and still lives with the good aunt, who is very fond and proud of
her, and writes pleasant accounts of her progress to the friends in
America.

So ends the journey of my second small traveller, and when I think of
her safe and happy in a good home, I always fancy that (if such things
may be) in the land which is lovelier than even beautiful old England,
Maggie's mother watches over little Annie.




III.

A JOLLY FOURTH.


Door-step parties were the fashion that year, and it was while a dozen
young folks sat chatting on Annie Hadwin's steps in the twilight that
they laid the plan which turned out such a grand success in the end.

"For my part, I am glad we are to be put on a short allowance of
gunpowder, and that crackers are forbidden, they are such a nuisance,
burning holes in clothes, frightening horses, and setting houses afire,"
said sober Fred from the gate, where he and several other fellows were
roosting socially together.

"It won't seem a bit like a regular Fourth without the salutes three
times during the day. They are afraid the old cannon will kick, and blow
off some other fellow's arm, as it did last year," added Elly Dickens,
the beau of the party, as he pulled down his neat wristbands, hoping
Maud admired the new cuff-buttons in them.

"What shall we do in the evening, since the ball is given up? Just
because the old folks are too tired to enjoy dancing, we can't have any,
and I think it is too bad," said pretty Belle, impatiently, for she
danced like a fairy and was never tired.

"The authorities didn't dare to stop our races in the morning. There
would have been an insurrection if they had," called out long Herbert
from the grass, where he lay at the feet of black-eyed Julia.

"We _must_ do something to finish off with. Come, somebody suggest a
new, nice, safe, and jolly plan for the evening," cried Grace, who liked
fun, and had just slipped a little toad into Jack Spratt's pocket as a
pleasant surprise when he felt for his handkerchief.

"Let us offer a prize for the brightest idea. Five minutes for
meditation, then all suggest a plan, and the best one shall be adopted,"
proposed Annie, glad to give a lively turn to her party.

All agreed, and sudden silence followed the chatter, broken now and
then by an exclamation of "I've got it! No, I haven't," which produced a
laugh at the impetuous party.

"Time's up," announced Fred, looking at "the turnip," as his big
old-fashioned watch was called. Every one had a proposal more or less
original, and much discussion followed; but it was finally decided that
Herbert's idea of floating about in boats to enjoy the fireworks on the
hill would be romantic, reposeful, and on the whole satisfactory.

"Each boat might have a colored lantern; that would look pretty, and
then there would be no danger of running into our neighbors in the
dark," said Annie, who was a little timid on the water in a wherry.

"Why not have lots, and make a regular 'feast of lanterns,' as they do
in China? I was reading about it the other day, and can show you how to
do it. Won't it be gay?" And Fred the bookworm nearly tumbled off his
perch, as an excited gesture emptied his pockets of the library books
which served as ballast.

"Yes! yes!" cried the other lads, with various demonstrations of
delight as the new fancy grew upon their lively minds.

"Fred and Annie must have the prize, for their idea is the most
brilliant one. Nan can give the flag to the winner of the race, and
'Deacon' can lead the boats, for _I_ think it would be fine to have a
procession on the river. Fireworks are an old story, so let us surprise
the town by something regularly splendid," proposed Elly, fired in his
turn with a bright idea.

"We will! we will!" cried the rest, and at once plunged into the affair
with all the ardor of their years.

"Let us dress up," said Julia, who liked theatricals.

"In different characters," added Maud, thinking how well her long yellow
hair would look as a mermaid.

"And all sing as we go under the bridges," put in Annie, who adored
music.

"What a pity the boats can't dance, it would be so lovely to see them
waltzing round like fireflies!" said Belle, still longing for the ball.

"A lot of fellows are coming up to spend the day with us, and we ought
to have some sort of a picnic; city folks think so much of such things,"
said Herbert the hospitable, for his house and barn were the favorite
resorts of all his mates, and three gentle little sisters always came
into his plans if possible.

"I've got two girl cousins coming, and they would like it, I guess. I
should any way, for Jack will go tagging after Grace and leave me to
take care of them. Let's have a picnic, by all means," said lazy Fred,
who thought all girls but one great plagues.

"I shouldn't wonder if all our people liked that plan, and we might have
a town picnic as we did once before. Let every one ask his or her
mother, and see if we can't do it," suggested Annie, eager for a whole
day of merry-making.

The door-step party was late in breaking up that night; and if half the
plans proposed had been carried out, that town would have been
considered a large lunatic asylum. Wiser heads remodelled the wild
plans, however, and more skilful hands lent their aid, so that only the
possible was attempted, though the older folks had bright ideas as well
as the boys and girls, and gave the finishing touches to the affair.

The Fourth was a fine day, with a fresh air, cloudless sky, and no dust.
The town was early astir, though neither sunrise cannon nor the Antiques
and Horribles disturbed the dawn with their clamor. The bells rang
merrily, and at eight all flocked to the Town Hall to hear the
Declaration of Independence read by the good and great man of the town,
whose own wise and noble words go echoing round the world, teaching the
same lesson of justice, truth, and courage as that immortal protest. An
Ode by the master of the revels was sung, then every one shouted America
with hearty good-will, and before the echoes had fairly died away, the
crowd streamed forth to the river-side; for these energetic people were
bound to make a day of it.

At nine the races began, and both green banks of the stream were lined
with gay groups eagerly watching "our boys" as they swept by in
wherries, paddled in canoes, or splashed and tumbled in and out of their
tubs amid shouts of laughter from the spectators. The older fellows did
the scientific, and their prizes were duly awarded by the judges. But
our young party had their share of fun, and Fred and Herbert, who were
chums in everything, won the race for the little flag yearly given to
the lads for any success on the river. Then the weary heroes loaded the
big dory with a cargo of girls, and with the banner blowing gayly in the
wind, rowed away to the wide meadow, where seven oaks cast shade enough
to shelter a large picnic. And a large one they had, for the mammas took
kindly to the children's suggestion, agreeing to club together in a
social lunch, each contributing her stores, her family, and her guests,
all being happy together in the free and easy way so pleasant and
possible in summer weather.

A merry company they were, and it was a comfortable sight to see the
tired fathers lying in the shade, while the housewives forgot their
cares for a day, the young folks made table-setting and dishwashing a
joke by doing it together, and the children frolicked to their hearts'
content. Even the babies were trundled to the party by proud mammas and
took naps in their carriages, or held receptions for admiring friends
and neighbors with infantile dignity.

A social, sensible time, and when sunset came all turned homeward to
make ready for the evening festivities. It was vaguely rumored that the
pretty rustic bridge was to be illuminated, for the older people had
taken up the idea and had _their_ surprises ready as well as the young
folks. A band was stationed by the river-side, a pretty villa on the
hill blazed out with lines of light, and elms and apple-trees bore red
and golden lanterns, like glorified fruit. The clerk of the weather was
evidently interested in this novel entertainment, for the evening was
windless, dark, and cool, so the arch of light that spanned the shadowy
river shone splendidly. Fireworks soared up from the hill-top beyond,
fireflies lent their dancing sparks to illuminate the meadows, and the
three bridges were laden with the crowds, who greeted each new surprise
with cries of admiration.

Higher up the stream, where two branches met about a rocky island, elves
seemed gathering for a summer revel.

From all the landings that lined either shore brilliant boats glided to
the rendezvous; some hung with luminous globes of blue and silver, some
with lanterns fiery-red, flower-shaped, golden, green, or variegated, as
if a rainbow were festooned about the viewless masts. Up and down they
flashed, stealing out from dusky nooks and floating in their own
radiance, as they went to join the procession that wound about the
island like a splendid sea-serpent uncoiling itself from sleep and
darkness.

"Isn't it beautiful?" cried even the soberest of the townsfolk, as all
turned their backs on the shining bridge and bursting rockets to admire
the new spectacle, which was finer than its most enthusiastic advocate
expected. All felt proud of their success as they looked, and even the
children forgot to shout while watching the pretty pageant that
presently came floating by, with music, light, and half-seen figures so
charming, grotesque, or romantic that the illusion was complete.

First, a boat so covered with green boughs and twinkling yellow sparks
that it looked like a floating island by starlight or a cage of
singing-birds, for music came from within and fresh voices, led by
Annie, sang sweetly as it sailed along. Then a gondola of lovely
Venetian ladies, rowed by the handsome artist, who was the pride of the
town. Next a canoe holding three dusky Indians, complete in war-paint,
wampum, and tomahawks, paddled before the brilliant barge in which
Cleopatra sat among red cushions, fanned by two pretty maids. Julia's
black eyes sparkled as she glanced about her, feeling very queen-like
with a golden crown on her head, all the jewelry she could muster on her
neck and arms, and grandmother's yellow brocade shining in the light.
Belle and Grace waved their peacock fans like two comely little Egyptian
damsels, and the many-colored lanterns made a pretty picture of the
whole.

A boatful of jolly little tars followed, with Tom Brown, Jr., as
skipper. Then a party of fairies in white, with silver wings and wands,
and lanterns like moon and stars.

Lou Pope, as Lady of the Lake, rowed her own boat, with Jack for a droll
little Harper, twanging his zitter for want of a better instrument.

A black craft hung with lurid red lanterns and manned by a crew of
ferocious pirates in scarlet shirts, dark beards, and an imposing
display of pistols and cutlasses in their belts, not to mention the
well-known skull and cross-bones on the flag flying at the masthead,
produced a tremendous effect as the crew clashed their arms and roared
the blood-thirstiest song they could find. All the boys cheered that,
and all the horses pranced as the pirates fired off their pistols,
causing timid ladies to shriek, and prudent drivers to retire from the
bridges with their carriage-loads of company.

A Chinese junk (or what was intended to look like one, but really
resembled a mud-scow), with a party of Mandarins, rich in fans,
umbrellas, and pigtails, taking tea on board in a blaze of fantastic
lanterns, delighted the children.

Then a long low boat came sliding by softly, lighted with pale blue
lamps, and on a white couch lay "Elaine," the letter in her hand, the
golden hair streaming to her knees, and at her feet the dwarf
sorrowfully rowing her down to Camelot. Every one recognized that, for
the master of the revels got it up as no one else could; and Maud
laughed to herself as the floating tableau went under the bridge, and
she heard people rushing to the other side, waiting eagerly to see the
"lily maid" appear and glide away, followed by applause, as one of the
prettiest sights seen that night.

There were eighty boats in all, and as the glittering train wound along
the curves of the river smooth and dark as a mirror, the effect was
truly beautiful, especially when they all congregated below the
illuminated bridge, making an island of many-colored light. An enchanted
island it seemed to lookers-on, for music and laughter came from it, and
a strange mixture of picturesque faces and figures flitted to and fro.

Elaine sat up and ate bonbons with the faithful dwarf; Ellen Douglas
ducked the Harper; the Chinamen invited Cleopatra to tea; the mermaids
pelted the pirates with water-lilies; the gallant gondolier talked art
with the Venetian ladies; and the jolly little tars danced hornpipes,
regardless of danger; while the three Indians, Fred, Herbert, and Elly,
whooped and tomahawked right and left as if on the war-path.

A regular Midsummer Night's Dream frolic, which every one enjoyed
heartily, while the band played patriotic airs, the pretty villa shone
like a fairy palace, and the sky was full of dazzling meteors, falling
stars, and long-tailed comets, as the rockets whizzed and blazed from
the hill-tops.

Just as the fun was at its height the hurried clang of a bell startled
the merry-makers, and a cry of "Fire!" came from the town, causing a
general stampede. "Post-office all afire! Men wanted!" shouted a
breathless boy, racing through the crowd toward the river. Then great
was the scampering, for shops stood thickly all about the post-office,
and distracted merchants hastily collected their goods, while the
firemen smashed windows, ran up and down ladders, broke in doors, and
poured streams of water with generous impartiality over everybody and
everything in the neighborhood, and the boys flew about, as if this
unexpected display of fireworks suited them exactly.

Such noble exertions could not fail of success, and the fire was happily
extinguished before the river was pumped dry. Then every one went home,
and, feeling the need of refreshment after their labors, had supper all
over again, to the great delight of the young folks, who considered this
a most appropriate finish to an exciting day.

But the merriest party of all was the one gathered on Fred's piazza to
eat cake and talk over the fun. Such a droll group as they were. The
Indians were sadly dilapidated as to feathers and paint, beside being
muddy to the knees, having landed in hot haste. Poor Cleopatra had been
drenched by the hose, but though very damp still sparkled with
unextinguishable gayety. Elaine had tied herself up in a big shawl,
having lost her hat overboard. Jack and Grace wore one waterproof, and
Annie was hoarse with leading her choir of birds on the floating island.
Also several of the pirates wore their beards twisted round behind for
the sake of convenience in eating.

All were wet, warm, and weary, but all rejoiced over the success of the
day's delights, and it was unanimously agreed that this had been the
jolliest Fourth they had ever known.




IV.

SEVEN BLACK CATS.


They all came uninvited, they all led eventful lives, and all died
tragical deaths; so out of the long list of cats whom I have loved and
lost, these seven are the most interesting and memorable.

I have no prejudice against color, but it so happened that our pussies
were usually gray or maltese. One white one, who _would_ live in the
coal-bin, was a failure, and we never repeated the experiment. Black
cats had not been offered us, so we had no experience of them till
number one came to us in this wise.

Sitting at my window, I saw a very handsome puss come walking down the
street in the most composed and dignified manner. I watched him with
interest, wondering where he was going.

Pausing now and then, he examined the houses as he passed, as if looking
for a particular number, till, coming to our gate, he pushed it open,
and walked in. Straight up to the door he came, and finding it shut sat
down to wait till some one opened it for him.

Much amused, I went at once, and he came directly in, after a long stare
at me, and a few wavings of his plumy tail. It was evidently the right
place, and, following me into the parlor, he perched himself on the rug,
blinked at the fire, looked round the room, washed his face, and then,
lying down in a comfortable sprawl, he burst into a cheerful purr, as if
to say,--

"It's all right; the place suits me, and I'm going to stay."

His coolness amused me very much, and his beauty made me glad to keep
him. He was not a common cat, but, as we afterward discovered, a Russian
puss. His fur was very long, black, and glossy as satin; his tail like a
graceful plume, and his eyes as round and yellow as two little moons.
His paws were very dainty, and white socks and gloves, with a neat
collar and shirt-bosom, gave him the appearance of an elegant young
beau, in full evening dress. His face was white, with black hair parted
in the middle; and whiskers, fiercely curled up at the end, gave him a
martial look.

Every one admired him, and a vainer puss never caught a mouse. If he saw
us looking at him, he instantly took an attitude; gazed pensively at the
fire, as if unconscious of our praises; crouched like a tiger about to
spring, and glared, and beat the floor with his tail; or lay luxuriously
outstretched, rolling up his yellow eyes with a sentimental expression
that was very funny.

We named him the Czar, and no tyrannical emperor of Russia ever carried
greater desolation and terror to the souls of his serfs, than this royal
cat did to the hearts and homes of the rats and mice over whom he ruled.

The dear little mice who used to come out to play so confidingly in my
room, live in my best bonnet-box, and bring up their interesting young
families in the storeroom, now fell an easy prey to the Czar, who made
nothing of catching half a dozen a day.

Brazen-faced old rats, gray in sin, who used to walk boldly in and out
of the front door, ravage our closets, and racket about the walls by
night, now paused in their revels, and felt that their day was over.
Czar did not know what fear was, and flew at the biggest, fiercest rat
that dared to show his long tail on the premises. He fought many a
gallant fight, and slew his thousands, always bringing his dead foe to
display him to us, and receive our thanks.

It was sometimes rather startling to find a large rat reposing in the
middle of your parlor; not always agreeable to have an excited cat
bounce into your lap, lugging a half-dead rat in his mouth; or to have
visitors received by the Czar, tossing a mouse on the door-steps, like a
playful child with its cup and ball.

He was not fond of petting, but allowed one or two honored beings to
cuddle him. My work-basket was his favorite bed, for a certain fat
cushion suited him for a pillow, and, having coolly pulled out all the
pins, the rascal would lay his handsome head on the red mound, and wink
at me with an irresistibly saucy expression that made it impossible to
scold.

All summer we enjoyed his pranks and admired his manly virtues; but in
the winter we lost him, for, alas! he found his victor in the end, and
fell a victim to his own rash daring.

One morning after a heavy snow-fall, Czar went out to take a turn up and
down the path. As he sat with his back to the gate, meditatively
watching some doves on the shed-roof, a big bull-dog entered the yard,
and basely attacked him in the rear. Taken by surprise, the dear fellow
did his best, and hit out bravely, till he was dragged into the deep
snow where he could not fight, and there so cruelly maltreated that he
would have been murdered outright, if I had not gone to the rescue.

Catching up a broom, I belabored the dog so energetically that he was
forced to turn from the poor Czar to me. What would have become of me I
don't know, for the dog was in a rage, and evidently meditating a grab
at my ankles, when his master appeared and ordered him off.

Never was a boy better scolded than that one, for I poured forth vials
of wrath upon his head as I took up my bleeding pet, and pointed to his
wounds as indignantly as Antony did to Cæsar's.

The boy fled affrighted, and I bore my poor Czar in to die. All day he
lay on his cushion, patient and quiet, with his torn neck tied up in a
soft bandage, a saucer of cream close by, and an afflicted mistress to
tend and stroke him with tender lamentations.

We had company in the evening, and my interesting patient was put into
another room. Once, in the midst of conversation, I thought I heard a
plaintive mew, but could not go to see, and soon forgot all about it;
but when the guests left, my heart was rent by finding Czar stretched
out before the door quite dead.

Feeling death approach, he had crept to say good-by, and with a farewell
mew had died before the closed door, a brave and faithful cat to the
end.

He was buried with great pomp, and before his grave was green, little
Blot came to take his place, though she never filled it. Blot's career
was a sad and brief one. Misfortune marked her for its own, and life was
one too many for her.

I saw some boys pelting a wretched object with mud. I delivered a
lecture on cruelty to animals, confiscated the victim, and, wrapping
her in a newspaper, bore the muddy little beast away in triumph. Being
washed and dried, she turned out a thin black kit, with dirty blue bows
tied in her ears. As I don't approve of ear-rings, I took hers out, and
tried to fatten her up, for she was a forlorn creature at first.

But Blot would not grow plump. Her early wrongs preyed upon her, and she
remained a thin, timid, melancholy little cat all her days. I could not
win her confidence. She had lost her faith in mankind, and I don't blame
her. She always hid in corners, quaked when I touched her, took her food
by stealth, and sat in a forlorn bunch in cold nooks, down cellar or
behind the gate, mewing despondently to herself, as if her woes must
find a vent. She would _not_ be easy and comfortable. No cushion could
allure, no soft beguilements win her to purr, no dainty fare fill out
her rusty coat, no warmth or kindness banish the scared look from her
sad green eyes, no ball or spool lure her to play, or cause her to wag
her mortified thin tail with joy.

Poor, dear little Blot! She was a pathetic spectacle, and her end was
quite in keeping with the rest of her hard fate. Trying one day to make
her come and be cuddled, she retreated to the hearth, and when I pursued
her, meaning to catch and pet her, she took a distracted skip right into
a bed of hot coals. One wild howl, and another still more distracted
skip brought her out again, to writhe in agony with four burnt paws and
a singed skin.

"We must put the little sufferer out of her pain," said a strong-minded
friend; and quenched little Blot's life and suffering together in a pail
of water.

I laid her out sweetly in a nice box, with a doll's blanket folded round
her, and, bidding the poor dear a long farewell, confided her to old
MacCarty for burial. He was my sexton, and I could trust him to inter my
darlings decently, and not toss them disrespectfully into a dirt-cart or
over a bridge.

My dear Mother Bunch was an entire contrast to Blot. Such a fat, cosey
old mamma you never saw, and her first appearance was so funny, I never
think of her without laughing.

In our back kitchen was an old sideboard, with two little doors in the
lower part. Some bits of carpet were kept there, but we never expected
to let that small mansion till, opening the door one day, I found Mrs.
Bunch and her young family comfortably settled.

I had never seen this mild black cat before, and I fancy no one had ever
seen her three roly-poly, jet-black kits. Such a confiding puss I never
met, for when I started back, surprised, Mrs. Bunch merely looked at me
with an insinuating purr, and began to pick at my carpet, as if to
say,--

"The house suited me; I'll take it, and pay rent by allowing you to
admire and pet my lovely babies."

I never thought of turning her out, and there she remained for some
months, with her children growing up around her, all as fat and funny,
black and amiable, as herself.

Three jollier kits were never born, and a more devoted mother never
lived. I put her name on the door of her house, and they lived on most
comfortably together, even after they grew too big for their
accommodations, and tails and legs hung out after the family had
retired.

I really did hope they would escape the doom that seemed to pursue my
cats, but they did not, for all came to grief in different ways. Cuddle
Bunch had a fit, and fell out of the window, killing herself instantly.
Othello, her brother, was shot by a bad boy, who fired pistols at all
the cats in the neighborhood, as good practice for future gunning
expeditions.

Little Purr was caught in a trap, set for a woodchuck, and so hurt she
had to be gently chloroformed out of life. Mother Bunch still remained,
and often used to go and sit sadly under the tree where her infants were
buried,--an afflicted, yet resigned parent.

Her health declined, but we never had the heart to send her away, and it
wouldn't have done any good if we had tried. We did it once, and it was
a dead failure. At one time the four cats were so wearing that my
honored father, who did not appreciate the dears, resolved to clear the
house of the whole family; so he packed them in a basket, and carried
them "over the hills and far away," like the "Babes in the Wood." Coming
to a lonely spot, he let them out, and returned home, much relieved in
mind. Judge of his amazement when the first thing he saw was Mrs. Bunch
and her children, sitting on the steps resting after their run home.

We all laughed at the old gentleman so that he left them in peace, and
even when the mamma alone remained, feeble and useless, her bereavement
made her sacred.

When we shut up the house, and went to the city for the winter, we gave
Mother Bunch to the care of a kind neighbor, who promised to guard her
faithfully. Returning in the spring, one of my first questions was,--

"How is old Pussy?"

Great was my anguish when my neighbor told me that she was no more. It
seems the dear thing pined for her old home, and kept returning to it in
spite of age or bad weather.

Several times she was taken back when she ran away, but at last they
were tired of fussing over her, and let her go. A storm came on, and
when they went to see what had become of her, they found her frozen, in
the old sideboard, where I first discovered her with her kits about
her.

As a delicate attention to me, Mrs. Bunch's skin was preserved, and
presented when the tale was told. I kept it some time, but the next
Christmas I made it into muffs for several dolls, who were sent me to
dress; and very nice little muffs the pretty black fur made, lined with
cherry silk, and finished off with tiny tassels.

I loved the dear old puss, but I knew the moths would get her skin if I
kept it, and preferred to rejoice the hearts of several small friends
with dolls in full winter costume. I am sure Mrs. Bunch would have
agreed with me, and not felt that I treated her remains with disrespect.

The last of my cats was the blackest of all, and such a wild thing we
called him the Imp. He tumbled into the garret one day through a broken
scuttle, and took possession of the house from that time forth, acting
as if bewitched.

He got into the furnace pipes, but could not get out, and kept me up one
whole night, giving him air and light, food and comfort, through a
little hole in the floor, while waiting for a carpenter to come and saw
him out.

He got a sad pinch in his tail, which made it crooked forever after. He
fell into the soft-soap barrel, and was fished out a deplorable
spectacle. He was half strangled by a fine collar we put on him, and was
found hanging by it on a peg.

People sat down on him, for he would lie in chairs. No one loved him
much, for he was not amiable in temper, but bit and scratched if
touched, worried the bows off our slippers in his play, and if we did
not attend to him at once, he complained in the most tremendous bass
growl I ever heard.

He was not beautiful, but very impressive; being big, without a white
hair on him. One eye was blue and one green, and the green one was
always half shut, as if he was winking at you, which gave him a rowdy
air comical to see. Then he swaggered in his walk, never turned out for
any one, and if offended fell into rages fit to daunt the bravest soul.

Yes, the Imp was truly an awful animal; and when a mischievous cousin of
ours told us he wanted a black cat, without a single white hair on it,
to win a wager with, we at once offered ours.

It seems that sailors are so superstitious they will not sail in a ship
with a black cat; and this rogue of a cousin was going to send puss off
on a voyage, unknown to any one but the friend who took him, and when
the trip was safely over, he was to be produced as a triumphant proof of
the folly of the nautical superstition.

So the Imp was delivered to his new master, and sailed away packed up in
an old fishing-basket, with his head poked out of a hole in the cover.

We waited anxiously to hear how the joke ended; but unfortunately the
passage was very rough, his guardian too ill to keep him safe and quiet,
so the irrepressible fellow escaped from prison, and betrayed himself by
growling dismally, as he went lurching across the deck to the great
dismay of the sailors.

They chased, caught, and tossed the poor Imp overboard without loss of
time. And when the joke came out, they had the best of it, for the
weather happened to improve, and the rest of the voyage was prosperous.
So, of course, they laid it all to the loss of the cat, and were more
fixed in their belief than ever.

We were sorry that poor old Imp met so sad a fate, but did not mourn him
long, for he had not won our hearts as some of our other pets had.

He was the last of the seven black cats, and we never had another; for I
really did feel as if there was something uncanny about them after my
tragical experiences with Czar, Blot, Mother Bunch's family, and the
martyred Imp.




V.

ROSA'S TALE.


"Now, I believe every one has had a Christmas present and a good time.
Nobody has been forgotten, not even the cat," said Mrs. Ward to her
daughter, as she looked at Pobbylinda, purring on the rug, with a new
ribbon round her neck and the remains of a chicken bone between her
paws.

It was very late, for the Christmas-tree was stripped, the little folks
abed, the baskets and bundles left at poor neighbors' doors, and
everything ready for the happy day which would begin as the clock struck
twelve. They were resting after their labors, while the yule log burned
down; but the mother's words reminded Belinda of one good friend who had
received no gift that night.

"We've forgotten Rosa! Her mistress is away, but she _shall_ have a
present nevertheless. Late as it is, she will like some apples and cake
and a Merry Christmas from the family."

Belinda jumped up as she spoke, and, having collected such remnants of
the feast as a horse would relish, she put on her hood, lighted a
lantern, and trotted off to the barn.

As she opened the door of the loose box in which Rosa was kept, she saw
her eyes shining in the dark as she lifted her head with a startled air.
Then, recognizing a friend, she rose and came rustling through the straw
to greet her late visitor. She was evidently much pleased with the
attention, and rubbed her nose against Miss Belinda gratefully, but
seemed rather dainty, and poked over the contents of the basket, as if a
little suspicious, though apples were her favorite treat.

Knowing that she would enjoy the little feast more if she had company
while she ate it, for Rosa was a very social beast, Miss Belinda hung up
the lantern, and, sitting down on an inverted bucket, watched her as she
munched contentedly.

"Now really," said Miss Belinda, when telling her story afterwards, "I
am not sure whether I took a nap and dreamed what follows, or whether
it actually happened, for strange things do occur at Christmas time, as
every one knows.

"As I sat there the town clock struck twelve, and the sound reminded me
of the legend which affirms that all dumb animals are endowed with
speech for one hour after midnight on Christmas eve, in memory of the
animals about the manger when the blessed Child was born.

"'I wish the pretty fancy was a fact, and our Rosa could speak, if only
for an hour, because I am sure she has an interesting history, and I
long to know it.'

"I said this aloud, and to my utter amazement the bay mare stopped
eating, fixed her intelligent eyes upon my face, and answered in a
language I understood perfectly well,--

"'You shall know it, for whether the legend is true or not I feel as if
I could confide in you and tell you all I feel. I was lying awake
listening to the fun in the house, thinking of my dear mistress over the
sea and feeling very sad, for I heard you say I was to be sold. That
nearly broke my heart, for no one has ever been so kind to me as Miss
Merry, and nowhere shall I be taken care of, nursed, and loved as I have
been since she bought me. I know I am getting old, and stiff in the
knees, and my forefoot is lame, and sometimes I'm cross when my shoulder
aches; but I do try to be a patient, grateful beast. I've got fat with
good living, my work is not hard, I dearly love to carry those who have
done so much for me, and I'll tug for them till I die in harness, if
they will only keep me.'

"I was so astonished at this address that I tumbled off the pail, and
sat among the straw staring up at Rosa, as dumb as if I had lost the
power she had gained. She seemed to enjoy my surprise, and added to it
by letting me hear a genuine _horse laugh_, hearty, shrill, and clear,
as she shook her pretty head, and went on talking rapidly in the
language which I now perceived to be a mixture of English and the
peculiar dialect of the horse-country Gulliver visited.

"'Thank you for remembering me to-night, and in return for the goodies
you bring I'll tell my story as fast as I can, for I have often longed
to recount the trials and triumphs of my life. Miss Merry came last
Christmas eve to bring me sugar, and I wanted to speak, but it was too
early and I could not say a word, though my heart was full.'

"Rosa paused an instant, and her fine eyes dimmed as if with tender
tears at the recollection of the happy year which had followed the day
she was bought from the drudgery of a livery-stable to be a lady's pet.
I stroked her neck as she stooped to sniff affectionately at my hood,
and said eagerly,--

"'Tell away, dear, I'm full of interest, and understand every word you
say.'

"Thus encouraged, Rosa threw up her head, and began with an air of pride
which plainly proved, what we had always suspected, that she belonged to
a good family.

"'My father was a famous racer, and I am very like him; the same color,
spirit, and grace, and but for the cruelty of man I might have been as
renowned as he. I was a very happy colt, petted by my master, tamed by
love, and never struck a blow while he lived. I gained one race for him,
and promised so well that when he died I brought a great price. I
mourned for him, but was glad to be sent to my new owner's racing-stable
and made much of, for people predicted that I should be another
Goldsmith Maid or Flora Temple. Ah, how ambitious and proud I was in
those days! Vain of my good blood, my speed, and my beauty; for indeed I
_was_ handsome then, though you may find it hard to believe now.' And
Rosa sighed regretfully as she stole a look at me, and took the attitude
which showed to advantage the fine lines about her head and neck.

"'I do not find it hard, for we have always said you had splendid points
about you. Miss Merry saw them, though you were a skeleton, when she
bought you; so did the skilful Cornish blacksmith when he shod you. And
it is easy to see that you belong to a good family by the way you hold
your head without a check-rein and carry your tail like a plume,' I
said, with a look of admiration which comforted her as much as if she
had been a _passée_ belle.

"'I must hurry over this part of my story, because, though brilliant,
it was very brief, and ended in a way which made it the bitterest
portion of my life,' continued Rosa. 'I won several races, and great
fame was predicted for me. You may guess how high my reputation was when
I tell you that before my last fatal trial thousands were bet on me, and
my rival trembled in his shoes. I was full of spirit, eager to show my
speed and sure of success. Alas, how little I knew of the wickedness of
human nature then, how dearly I bought the knowledge, and how it has
changed my whole life! You do not know much about such matters, of
course, and I won't digress to tell you all the tricks of the trade;
only beware of jockeys and never bet.

"'I was kept carefully out of every one's way for weeks, and only taken
out for exercise by my trainer. Poor Bill! I was fond of him, and he was
so good to me that I never have forgotten him, though he broke his neck
years ago. A few nights before the great race, as I was getting a good
sleep, carefully tucked away in my roomy stall, some one stole in and
gave me a warm mash. It was dark, I was half awake, and I ate it like a
fool, though I knew by instinct that it was not Bill who fed it to me. I
was a confiding creature then, and as all sorts of queer things had been
done to prepare me I thought it was all right. But it was not, and that
deceit has caused me to be suspicious about my food ever since, for the
mash was dosed in some way; it made me very ill, and my enemies nearly
triumphed, thanks to this cowardly trick.

"'Bill worked over me day and night, that I might be fit to run. I did
my best to seem well and gay, but there was not time for me to regain my
lost strength and spirit, and pride alone kept me up. "I'll win for my
master if I die in doing it," I said to myself, and when the hour came
pranced to my place trying to look as well as ever, though my heart was
very heavy and I trembled with excitement. "Courage, my lass, and we'll
beat in spite of their black tricks," whispered Bill, as he sprung to
his place.

"'I lost the first heat, but won the second, and the sound of the
cheering gave me strength to walk away without staggering, though my
legs shook under me. What a splendid minute that was when, encouraged
and refreshed by my faithful Bill, I came on the track again! I knew my
enemies began to fear, for I had borne myself so bravely they fancied I
was quite well, and now, excited by that first success, I was mad with
impatience to be off and cover myself with glory.'

"Rosa looked as if the 'splendid minute' had come again, for she arched
her neck, opened wide her red nostrils, and pawed the straw with one
little foot, while her eyes shone with sudden fire, and her ears were
pricked up as if to catch again the shouts she heard that day.

"'I wish I had been there to see you!' I exclaimed, quite carried away
by her ardor.

"'I wish you had, for I won, I won! The big black horse did his best,
but I had vowed to win or die, and I kept my word, for I beat him by a
head, and then dropped as if dead. I might as well have died then,
people thought, for the poison, the exertion, and the fall ruined me for
a racer. My master cared no more for me, and would have had me shot if
Bill had not saved my life. I was pronounced good for nothing, and he
bought me cheap. I was lame and useless for a long time, but his patient
care did wonders, and just as I was able to be of use to him he was
killed.

"'A gentleman in want of a saddle-horse purchased me because my easy
gait and quiet temper suited him; for I was meek enough now, and my size
fitted me to carry his delicate daughter.

"'For more than a year I served little Miss Alice, rejoicing to see how
rosy her pale cheeks became, how upright her feeble figure grew, thanks
to the hours spent with me; for my canter rocked her as gently as if she
were in a cradle, and fresh air was the medicine she needed. She often
said she owed her life to me, and I liked to think so, for she made _my_
life a very easy one.

"'But somehow my good times never lasted long, and when Miss Alice went
West I was sold. I had been so well treated that I _looked_ as handsome
and gay as ever, though my shoulder never was strong again, and I often
had despondent moods, longing for the excitement of the race-course with
the instinct of my kind; so I was glad when, attracted by my spirit and
beauty, a young army officer bought me and I went to the war. Ah! you
never guessed that, did you? Yes, I did my part gallantly and saved my
master's life more than once. You have observed how martial music
delights me, but you don't know that it is because it reminds me of the
proudest hour of my life. I've told you about the saddest; let me relate
this also, and give me a pat for the brave action which won my master
his promotion, though I got no praise for my part of the achievement.

"'In one of the hottest battles my captain was ordered to lead his men
to a most perilous exploit. They hesitated, so did he; for it must cost
many lives, and, brave as they were, they paused an instant. But _I_
settled the point, for I was wild with the sound of drums, the smell of
powder, the excitement of the hour, and, finding myself sharply reined
in, I rebelled, took the bit between my teeth, and dashed straight away
into the midst of the fight, spite of all my rider could do. The men
thought their captain led them on, and with a cheer they followed,
carrying all before them.

"'What happened just after that I never could remember, except that I
got a wound here in my neck and a cut on my flank; the scar is there
still, and I'm proud of it, though buyers always consider it a blemish.
But when the battle was won my master was promoted on the field, and I
carried him up to the general as he sat among his officers under the
torn flags.

"'Both of us were weary and wounded, both were full of pride at what we
had done; but _he_ got all the praise and the honor, _I_ only a careless
word and a better supper than usual.

"'I thought no one knew what I had done, and resented the ingratitude of
your race; for it was the horse, not the man, who led that forlorn hope,
and I did think I should have a rosette at least, when others got stars
and bars for far less dangerous deeds. Never mind, my master knew the
truth, and thanked me for my help by keeping me always with him till the
sad day when he was shot in a skirmish, and lay for hours with none to
watch and mourn over him but his faithful horse.

"'Then I knew how much he loved and thanked me, for his hand stroked me
while it had the strength, his eye turned to me till it grew too dim for
seeing, and when help came, among the last words he whispered to a
comrade were these, "Be kind to Rosa and send her safely home; she has
earned her rest."

"'I _had_ earned it, but I did not get it, for when I was sent home the
old mother's heart was broken at the loss of her son, and she did not
live long to cherish me. Then my hard times began, for my next owner was
a fast young man, who ill used me in many ways, till the spirit of my
father rose within me, and I gave my brutal master a grand runaway and
smash-up.

"'To tame me down, I was sold for a car horse; and that almost killed
me, for it was dreadful drudgery to tug, day after day, over the hard
pavement with heavy loads behind me, uncongenial companions beside me,
and no affection to cheer my life.

"'I have often longed to ask why Mr. Bergh does not try to prevent such
crowds from piling into those cars; and now I beg you to do what you can
to stop such an unmerciful abuse.

"'In snow-storms it was awful, and more than one of my mates dropped
dead with overwork and discouragement. I used to wish I could do the
same, for my poor feet, badly shod, became so lame I could hardly walk
at times, and the constant strain on the up grades brought back the old
trouble in my shoulder worse than ever.

"'Why they did not kill me I don't know, for I was a miserable creature
then; but there must be something attractive about me, I fancy, for
people always seem to think me worth saving. What can it be, ma'am?'

"'Now, Rosa, don't be affected; you know you are a very engaging little
animal, and if you live to be forty will still have certain pretty ways
about you, that win the hearts of women, if not of men. _They_ see your
weak points, and take a money view of the case; but _we_ sympathize with
your afflictions, are amused with your coquettish airs, and like your
affectionate nature. Now hurry up and finish, for I find it a trifle
cold out here.'

"I laughed as I spoke, for Rosa eyed me with a sidelong glance and
gently waved the docked tail, which was her delight; for the sly thing
liked to be flattered and was as fond of compliments as a girl.

"'Many thanks. I will come now to the most interesting portion of my
narrative. As I was saying, instead of knocking me on the head I was
packed off to New Hampshire, and had a fine rest among the green hills,
with a dozen or so of weary friends. It was during this holiday that I
acquired the love of nature which Miss Merry detected and liked in me,
when she found me ready to study sunsets with her, to admire new
landscapes, and enjoy bright summer weather.

"'In the autumn a livery-stable keeper bought me, and through the winter
fed me up till I was quite presentable in the spring. It was a small
town, but through the summer many city people visited there, so I was
kept on the trot while the season lasted, because ladies could drive me.
You, Miss Belinda, were one of the ladies, and I never shall forget,
though I have long ago forgiven it, how you laughed at my queer gait the
day you hired me.

"'My tender feet and stiff knees made me tread very gingerly, and amble
along with short mincing steps, which contrasted oddly, I know, with my
proudly waving tail and high-carried head. You liked me nevertheless,
because I didn't rattle you down the steep hills, was not afraid of
locomotives, and stood patiently while you gathered flowers and enjoyed
the lovely prospects.

"'I have always felt a regard for you since you did not whip me, and
admired my eyes, which, I may say without vanity, have always been
considered unusually fine. But no one ever won my whole heart like Miss
Merry, and I never shall forget the happy day when she came to the
stable to order a saddle-horse. Her cheery voice made me prick up my
ears, and when she said, after looking at several showy beasts, "No,
they don't suit me. This one now has the right air; can I ride her?" my
heart danced within me and I looked round with a whinny of delight. She
understood my welcome, and came right up to me, patted me, peered into
my face, rubbed my nose, and looked at my feet with an air of interest
and sympathy, that made me feel as if I'd like to carry her round the
world.

"'Ah, what rides we had after that! What happy hours trotting gayly
through the green woods, galloping over the breezy hills, or pacing
slowly along quiet lanes, where I often lunched luxuriously on
clover-tops, while Miss Merry took a sketch of some picturesque bit with
me in the foreground.

"'I liked that, and we had long chats at such times, for she seemed to
understand me perfectly. She was never frightened when I danced for
pleasure on the soft turf, never chid me when I snatched a bite from the
young trees as we passed through sylvan ways, never thought it a trouble
to let me wet my tired feet in babbling brooks, or to dismount and take
out the stones that plagued me.

"'Then how well she rode! So firm yet light a seat, so steady a hand, so
agile a foot to spring on and off, and such infectious spirits, that no
matter how despondent or cross I might be, in five minutes I felt gay
and young again when dear Miss Merry was on my back.'

"Here Rosa gave a frisk that sent the straw flying, and made me shrink
into a corner, while she pranced about the box with a neigh which waked
the big brown colt next door, and set poor Buttercup to lowing for her
calf, the loss of which she had forgotten for a little while in sleep.

"'Ah, Miss Merry never ran away from me! She knew my heels were to be
trusted, and she let me caper as I would, glad to see me lively. Never
mind, Miss Belinda, come out and I'll be sober, as befits my years,'
laughed Rosa, composing herself, and adding, so like a woman that I
could not help smiling in the dark,--

"'When I say "years" I beg you to understand that I am _not_ as old as
that base man declared, but just in the prime of life for a horse. Hard
usage has made me seem old before my time, and I am good for years of
service yet.'

"'Few people have been through as much as you have, Rosa, and you
certainly _have_ earned the right to rest,' I said consolingly, for her
little whims and vanities amused me much.

"'You know what happened next,' she continued; 'but I must seize this
opportunity to express my thanks for all the kindness I've received
since Miss Merry bought me, in spite of the ridicule and dissuasion of
all her friends.

"'I know I didn't look like a good bargain, for I _was_ very thin and
lame and shabby; but she saw and loved the willing spirit in me, pitied
my hard lot, and felt that it would be a good deed to buy me even if she
never got much work out of me.

"'I shall always remember that, and whatever happens to me hereafter, I
never shall be as proud again as I was the day she put my new saddle and
bridle on, and I was led out, sleek, plump, and handsome, with blue
rosettes at my ears, my tail cut in the English style, and on my back
Miss Merry in her London hat and habit, all ready to head a cavalcade of
eighteen horsemen and horsewomen. _We_ were the most perfect pair of
all, and when the troop caracoled down the wide street six abreast, _my_
head was the highest, _my_ rider the straightest, and _our_ two hearts
the friendliest in all the goodly company.

"'Nor is it pride and love alone that binds me to her, it is gratitude
as well, for did not she often bathe my feet herself, rub me down, water
me, blanket me, and daily come to see me when I was here alone for weeks
in the winter time? Didn't she study horses' feet and shoes, that I
might be cured if possible? Didn't she write to the famous friend of my
race for advice, and drive me seven miles to get a good smith to shoe me
well? Have not my poor contracted feet grown much better, thanks to the
weeks of rest without shoes which she gave me? Am I not fat and
handsome, and, barring the stiff knees, a very presentable horse? If I
am, it is all owing to her; and for that reason I want to live and die
in her service.

"'_She_ doesn't want to sell me, and only bade you do it because you
didn't want the care of me while she is gone. Dear Miss Belinda, please
keep me! I'll eat as little as I can. I won't ask for a new blanket,
though your old army one is very thin and shabby. I'll trot for you all
winter, and try not to show it if I am lame. I'll do anything a horse
can, no matter how humble, to earn my living, only don't, pray don't
send me away among strangers who have neither interest nor pity for me!'

"Rosa had spoken rapidly, feeling that her plea must be made now or
never, for before another Christmas she might be far away and speech of
no use to win her wish. I was much touched, though she was only a
horse; for she was looking earnestly at me as she spoke, and made the
last words very eloquent by preparing to bend her stiff knees and lie
down at my feet. I stopped her, and answered, with an arm about her neck
and her soft nose in my hand,--

"'You shall _not_ be sold, Rosa! you shall go and board at Mr. Town's
great stable, where you will have pleasant society among the eighty
horses who usually pass the winter there. Your shoes shall be taken off,
and you shall rest till March at least. The best care will be taken of
you, dear, and I will come and see you; and in the spring you shall
return to us, even if Miss Merry is not here to welcome you.'

"'Thanks, many, many thanks! But I wish I could do something to earn my
board. I hate to be idle, though rest _is_ delicious. Is there nothing I
can do to repay you, Miss Belinda? Please answer quickly, for I know the
hour is almost over,' cried Rosa, stamping with anxiety; for, like all
her sex, she wanted the last word.

"'Yes, you can,' I cried, as a sudden idea popped into my head. 'I'll
write down what you have told me, and send the little story to a certain
paper I know of, and the money I get for it will pay your board. So rest
in peace, my dear; you _will_ have earned your living, and may feel that
your debt is paid.'

"Before she could reply the clock struck one, and a long sigh of
satisfaction was all the response in her power. But we understood each
other now, and, cutting a lock from her mane for Miss Merry, I gave Rosa
a farewell caress and went away, wondering if I had made it all up, or
if she had really broken a year's silence and freed her mind.

"However that may be, here is the tale, and the sequel to it is, that
the bay mare has really gone to board at a first-class stable,"
concluded Miss Belinda. "I call occasionally and leave my card in the
shape of an apple, finding Madam Rosa living like an independent lady,
with her large box and private yard on the sunny side of the barn, a
kind ostler to wait upon her, and much genteel society from the city
when she is inclined for company.

"What more could any reasonable horse desire?"




VI.

LUNCH.


"Sister Jerusha, it really does wear upon me to see those dear boys eat
such bad pies and stuff day after day when they ought to have good
wholesome things for lunch. I actually ache to go and give each one of
'em a nice piece of bread-and-butter or one of our big cookies," said
kind Miss Mehitable Plummer, taking up her knitting after a long look at
the swarm of boys pouring out of the grammar school opposite, to lark
about the yard, sit on the posts, or dive into a dingy little shop close
by, where piles of greasy tarts and cakes lay in the window. They would
not have allured any but hungry school-boys, and ought to have been
labelled Dyspepsia and Headache, so unwholesome were they.

Miss Jerusha looked up from her seventeenth patchwork quilt, and
answered, with a sympathetic glance over the way,--

"If we had enough to go round I'd do it myself, and save these poor
deluded dears from the bilious turns that will surely take them down
before vacation comes. That fat boy is as yellow as a lemon now, and no
wonder, for I've seen him eat half a dozen dreadful turnovers for one
lunch."

Both old ladies shook their heads and sighed, for they led a very quiet
life in the narrow house that stood end to the street, squeezed in
between two stores, looking as out of place as the good spinsters would
have done among the merry lads opposite. Sitting at the front windows
day after day, the old ladies had learned to enjoy watching the boys,
who came and went, like bees to a hive, month by month. They had their
favorites, and beguiled many a long hour speculating on the looks,
manners, and probable station of the lads. One lame boy was Miss
Jerusha's pet, though she never spoke to him, and a tall bright-faced
fellow, who rather lorded it over the rest, quite won Miss Hetty's old
heart by helping her across the street on a slippery day. They longed to
mend some of the shabby clothes, to cheer up the dull discouraged ones,
advise the sickly, reprove the rude, and, most of all, feed those who
persisted in buying lunch at the dirty bake-shop over the way.

The good souls were famous cooks, and had many books full of all manner
of nice receipts, which they seldom used, as they lived simply and saw
little company. A certain kind of molasses cookie made by their honored
mother,--a renowned housewife in her time,--and eaten by the sisters as
children, had a peculiar charm for them. A tin box was always kept full,
though they only now and then nibbled one, and preferred to give them
away to poor children, as they trotted to market each day. Many a time
had Miss Hetty felt sorely tempted to treat the boys, but was a little
timid, for they were rough fellows, and she regarded them much as a
benevolent tabby would a party of frisky puppies.

To-day the box was full of fresh cookies, crisp, brown, and sweet; their
spicy odor pervaded the room, and the china-closet door stood
suggestively open. Miss Hetty's spectacles turned that way, then went
back to the busy scene in the street, as if trying to get courage for
the deed. Something happened just then which decided her, and sealed
the doom of the bilious tarts and their maker.

Several of the younger lads were playing marbles on the sidewalk, for
Hop Scotch, Leap Frog, and friendly scuffles were going on in the yard,
and no quiet spot could be found. The fat boy sat on a post near by,
and, having eaten his last turnover, fell to teasing the small fellows
peacefully playing at his feet. One was the shabby lame boy, who hopped
to and fro with his crutch, munching a dry cracker, with now and then a
trip to the pump to wash it down. He seldom brought any lunch, and
seemed to enjoy this poor treat so much that the big bright-faced chap
tossed him a red apple as he came out of the yard to get his hat, thrown
there by the mate he had been playfully thrashing.

The lame child eyed the pretty apple lovingly, and was preparing to take
the first delicious bite, when the fat youth with a dexterous kick sent
it flying into the middle of the street, where a passing wheel crushed
it down into the mud.

"It's a shame! He _shall_ have something good! The scamp!" And with this
somewhat confused exclamation Miss Hetty threw down her work, ran to
the closet, then darted to the front door, embracing the tin box, as if
the house was on fire and that contained her dearest treasures.

"Sakes alive, what _is_ the matter with sister?" ejaculated Miss
Jerusha, going to the window just in time to see the fat boy tumble off
the post as the tall lad came to the rescue, while the cripple went
hopping across the street in answer to a kindly quavering voice that
called out to him,--

"Come here, boy, and get a cookie,--a dozen if you want 'em."

"Sister's done it at last!" And, inspired by this heroic example, Miss
Jerusha threw up the window, saying, as she beckoned to the avenger,--

"You too, because you stood by that poor little boy. Come right over and
help yourself."

Charley Howe laughed at the indignant old ladies, but, being a
gentleman, took off his hat and ran across to thank them for their
interest in the fray. Several other lads followed as irresistibly as
flies to a honey-pot, for the tin box was suggestive of cake, and they
waited for no invitation.

Miss Hetty was truly a noble yet a droll sight, as she stood there, a
trim little old lady, with her cap-strings flying in the wind, her rosy
old face shining with good-will, as she dealt out cookies with a lavish
hand, and a kind word to all.

"Here's a nice big one for you, my dear. I don't know your name, but I
do your face, and I like to see a big boy stand up for the little ones,"
she said, beaming at Charley as he came up.

"Thank you, ma'am. That's a splendid one. We don't get anything so nice
over there." And Charley gratefully bolted the cake in three mouthfuls,
having given away his own lunch.

"No, indeed! One of these is worth a dozen of those nasty pies. I hate
to see you eating them, and I don't believe your mothers know how bad
they are," said Miss Hetty, diving for another handful into the depths
of the box, which was half empty already.

"Wish you'd teach old Peck how you make 'em. We'd be glad enough to buy
these and let the cockroach pies alone," said Charley, accepting another
and enjoying the fun, for half the fellows were watching the scene from
over the way.

"Cockroach pies! You don't mean to say?" cried Miss Hetty, nearly
dropping her load in her horror at the idea, for she had heard of
fricasseed frogs and roasted locusts, and thought a new delicacy had
been found.

"We find 'em in the apple-sauce sometimes, and nails and bits of barrel
in the cake, so some of us don't patronize Peck," replied Charley; and
little Briggs the cripple added eagerly,--

"I never do; my mother won't let me."

"He never has any money, that's why," bawled Dickson, the fat boy,
dodging behind the fence as he spoke.

"Never you mind, sonny, you come here every day, and _I'll_ see that you
have a good lunch. Apples too, _red ones_, if you like them, with your
cake," answered Miss Hetty, patting his head and sending an indignant
glance across the street.

"Cry-baby! Molly-coddle! Grandma's darling!" jeered Dickson, and then
fled, for Charley fired a ball at him with such good aim it narrowly
escaped his nose.

"That boy will have the jaundice as sure as fate, and he deserves it,"
said Miss Hetty, sternly, as she dropped the lid on the now empty box;
for while she was talking the free-and-easy young gentlemen had been
helping themselves.

"Thank you very much, ma'am, for my cookie. I won't forget to call
to-morrow." And little Briggs shook hands with as innocent a face as if
his jacket pocket was not bulging in a most suspicious manner.

"You'll get your death a cold, Hetty," called Miss Jerusha, and, taking
the hint, Charley promptly ended the visit.

"Sheer off, fellows. We are no end obliged, ma'am, and I'll see that
Briggs isn't put upon by sneaks."

Then the boys ran off, and the old lady retired to her parlor to sink
into her easy-chair, as much excited by this little feat as if she had
led a forlorn hope to storm a battery.

"I'll fill both those big tins to-morrow, and treat every one of the
small boys, if I'm spared," she panted, with a decided nod, as she
settled her cap and composed her neat black skirts, with which the wind
had taken liberties, as she stood on the steps.

"I'm not sure it isn't our duty to make and sell good, wholesome lunches
to those boys. We can afford to do it cheap, and it wouldn't be much
trouble. Just put the long table across the front entry for half an hour
every day, and let them come and get a bun, a cookie, or a buttered
biscuit. It could be done, sister," said Miss Jerusha, longing to
distinguish herself in some way also.

"It _shall_ be done, sister!" And Miss Hetty made up her mind at that
moment to devote some of her time and skill to rescuing those blessed
boys from the unprincipled Peck and his cockroach pies.

It was pleasant, as well as droll, to see how heartily the good souls
threw themselves into the new enterprise, how bravely they kept each
other up when courage showed signs of failing, and how rapidly they
became convinced that it was a duty to provide better food for the
future defenders and rulers of their native land.

"You can't expect the dears to study with clear heads if they are not
fed properly, and half the women in the world never think that what
goes into children's stomachs affects their brains," declared Miss
Hetty, as she rolled out vast sheets of dough next day, emphasizing her
remarks with vigorous flourishes of the rolling-pin.

"Our blessed mother understood how to feed a family. Fourteen stout boys
and girls, all alive and well, and you and I as smart at seventy one and
two, as most folks at forty. Good, plain victuals and plenty of 'em is
the secret of firm health," responded Miss Jerusha, rattling a pan of
buns briskly into the oven.

"We'd better make some Brighton Rock. It is gone out of fashion, but our
brothers used to be dreadful fond of it, and boys are about alike all
the world over. Ma's _resate_ never fails, and it will be a new treat
for the little dears."

"S'pose we have an extra can of milk left and give 'em a good mugful?
Some of those poor things look as if they never got a drop. Peck sells
beer, and milk is a deal better. Shall we, sister?"

"We'll try it, Jerushy. In for a penny, in for a pound."

And upon that principle the old ladies did the thing handsomely,
deferring the great event till Monday, that all might be in apple-pie
order. They said nothing of it when the lads came on Friday morning, and
all Saturday, which was a holiday at school, was a very busy one with
them.

"Hullo! Miss Hetty _has_ done it now, hasn't she? Look at that, old
Peck, and tremble!" exclaimed Charley to his mates, as he came down the
street on Monday morning, and espied a neat little sign on the sisters'
door, setting forth the agreeable fact that certain delectable articles
of food and drink could be had within at reasonable prices during
recess.

No caps were at the windows, but behind the drawn curtains two beaming
old faces were peeping out to see how the boys took the great
announcement. Whoever remembers Hawthorne's half-comic, half-pathetic
description of poor Hepsibah Pyncheon's hopes and fears, when arranging
her gingerbread wares in the little shop, can understand something of
the excitement of the sisters that day, as the time drew near when the
first attempt was to be made.

"Who will set the door open?" said Miss Hetty when the fateful moment
came, and boys began to pour out into the yard.

"I will!" And, nerving herself to the task, Miss Jerusha marched boldly
round the table, set wide the door, and then, as the first joyful whoop
from the boys told that the feast was in view, she whisked back into the
parlor panic-stricken.

"There they come,--hundreds of them, I should think by the sound!" she
whispered, as the tramp of feet came nearer, and the clamor of voices
exclaiming,--

"What bully buns!" "Ain't those cookies rousers?" "New stuff too, looks
first-rate." "I told you it wasn't a joke." "Wonder how Peck likes it?"
"Dickson sha'n't come in." "You go first, Charley." "Here's a cent for
you, Briggs; come on and trade like the rest of us."

"I'm so flurried I couldn't make change to save my life," gasped Miss
Jerusha from behind the sofa, whither she had fled.

"It is _my_ turn now. Be calm, and we shall soon get used to it."

Bracing herself to meet the merry chaff of the boys, as new and trying
to the old lady as real danger would have been, Miss Hetty stepped forth
into the hall to be greeted by a cheer, and then a chorus of demands for
everything so temptingly set forth upon her table. Intrenched behind a
barricade of buns, she dealt out her wares with rapidly increasing speed
and skill, for as fast as one relay of lads were satisfied another came
up, till the table was bare, the milk-can ran dry, and nothing was left
to tell the tale but an empty water-pail and a pile of five-cent pieces.

"I hope I didn't cheat any one, but I was flurried, sister, they were so
very noisy and so hungry. Bless their dear hearts; they are full now, I
trust." And Miss Hetty looked over her glasses at the crumby
countenances opposite, meeting many nods and smiles in return, as her
late customers enthusiastically recommended her establishment to the
patronage of those who had preferred Peck's questionable dainties.

"The Brighton Rock was a success; we must have a good store for
to-morrow, and more milk. Briggs drank it like a baby, and your nice
boy proposed my health like a little gentleman, as he is," replied Miss
Jerusha, who had ventured out before it was too late, and done the
honors of the can with great dignity, in spite of some inward
trepidation at the astonishing feats performed with the mug.

"Peck's nose is out of joint, if I may use so vulgar an expression, and
_our_ lunch a triumphant success. Boys know what is good, and we need
not fear to lose their custom as long as we can supply them. I shall
order a barrel of flour at once, and heat up the big oven. We have put
our hand to the work and must not turn back, for our honor is pledged
now."

With which lofty remark Miss Hetty closed the door, trying to look
utterly unconscious of the anxious Peck, who was flattening his nose
against his dingy window-pane to survey his rivals over piles of unsold
pastry.

The little venture _was_ a success, and all that winter the old ladies
did their part faithfully, finding the task more to their taste than
everlasting patchwork and knitting, and receiving a fair profit on
their outlay, being shrewd managers, and rich in old-fashioned thrift,
energy, and industry.

The boys revelled in wholesome fare, and soon learned to love "the
Aunties," as they were called, while such of the parents as took an
interest in the matter showed their approval in many ways most
gratifying to the old ladies.

The final triumph, however, was the closing of Peck's shop for want of
custom, for few besides the boys patronized him. None mourned for him,
and Dickson proved the truth of Miss Hetty's prophecy by actually having
a bilious fever in the spring.

But a new surprise awaited the boys; for when they came flocking back
after the summer vacation, there stood the little shop, brave in new
paint and fittings, full of all the old goodies, and over the door a
smart sign, "Plummer & Co."

"By Jove, the Aunties are bound to cover themselves with glory. Let's go
in and hear all about it. Behave now, you fellows, or I'll see about it
afterward," commanded Charley, as he paused to peer in through the clean
windows at the tempting display.

In they trooped, and, tapping on the counter, stood ready to greet the
old ladies as usual, but to their great surprise a pretty young woman
appeared, and smilingly asked what they would have.

"We want the Aunties, if you please. Isn't this their shop?" said little
Briggs, bitterly disappointed at not finding his good friends.

"You will find them over there at home as usual. Yes, this is their
shop, and I'm their niece. My husband is the Co., and we run the shop
for the aunts. I hope you'll patronize us, gentlemen."

"We will! we will! Three cheers for Plummer & Co.!" cried Charley,
leading off three rousers, that made the little shop ring again, and
brought two caps to the opposite windows, as two cheery old faces smiled
and nodded, full of satisfaction at the revolution so successfully
planned and carried out.




VII.

A BRIGHT IDEA.


"No answer to my advertisement, mamma, and I must sit with idle hands
for another day," said Clara with a despondent sigh, as the postman
passed the door.

"You needn't do that, child, when I'm suffering for a new cap, and no
one can suit me so well as you, if you have the spirits to do it,"
answered her mother from the sofa, where she spent most of her time
bewailing her hard lot.

"Plenty of spirits, mamma, and what is still more necessary, plenty of
materials; so I'll toss you up 'a love of a cap' before you know it."

And putting her own disappointment out of sight, pretty Clara fell to
work with such good-will that even poor, fretful Mrs. Barlow cheered up
in spite of herself.

"What a mercy it is that when everything else is swept away in this
dreadful failure I still have you, dear, and no dishonest banker can rob
me of my best treasure," she said fondly, as she watched her daughter
with tearful eyes.

"No one shall part us, mamma; and if I can only get something to do we
can be independent and happy in spite of our losses; for now the first
shock and worry is over, I find a curious sort of excitement in being
poor and having to work for my living. I was so tired of pleasure and
idleness I really quite long to work at something, if I could only find
it."

But though Clara spoke cheerfully, she had a heavy heart; for during the
month which had followed the discovery that they were nearly penniless,
she had been through a great deal for a tenderly nurtured girl of
three-and-twenty. Leaving a luxurious home for two plainly furnished
rooms, and trying to sustain her mother with hopeful plans, had kept her
busy for a time; but now she had nothing to do but wait for replies to
her modest advertisements as governess, copyist, or reader.

"I do wish I'd been taught a trade, mamma, or some useful art by which
I could earn our bread now. Rich people ought to remember that money
takes to itself wings, and so prepare their children to face poverty
bravely. If half the sums spent on my music and dress had been used in
giving me a single handicraft, what a blessing it would be to us now!"
she said, thoughtfully, as she sewed with rapid fingers, unconsciously
displaying the delicate skill of one to whom dress was an art and a
pleasure.

"If you were not so proud we might accept Cousin John's offer and be
quite comfortable," returned her mother, in a reproachful tone.

"No; we should soon feel that we were a burden, and that would be worse
than living on bread and water. Let us try to help ourselves first, and
then, if we fail, we cannot be accused of indolence. I know papa would
wish it, so please let me try."

"As you like; _I_ shall not be a burden to any one long." And Mrs.
Barlow looked about for her handkerchief.

But Clara prevented the impending shower by skilfully turning the poor
lady's thoughts to the new cap which was ready to try on.

"Isn't it pretty? Just the soft effect that is so becoming to your dear,
pale face. Take a good look at it, and tell me whether you'll have pale
pink bows or lavender."

"It is very nice, child; you always suit me, you've such charming taste.
I'll have lavender, for though it's not so becoming as pink, it is more
appropriate to our fallen fortunes," answered her mother, smiling in
spite of herself, as she studied effects in the mirror.

"No, let us have it pink, for I want my pretty mother to look her best,
though no one sees her but me, and I'm so glad to know that I _can_ make
caps well if I can't do anything else," said Clara, rummaging in a box
for the desired shade.

"No one ever suited me so well, and if you were not a lady, you might
make a fortune as a milliner, for you have the taste of a Frenchwoman,"
said Mrs. Barlow, adding, as she took her cap off, "Don't you remember
how offended Madame Pigat was when she found out that you altered all
her caps before I wore them, and how she took some of your hints and got
all the credit of them?"

"Yes, mamma," was all Clara answered, and then sat working so silently
that it was evident her thoughts were as busy as her hands. Presently
she said, "I must go down to our big box for the ribbon, there is none
here that I like," and, taking a bunch of keys, she went slowly away.

In the large parlor below stood several trunks and cases belonging to
Mrs. Barlow, and left there for her convenience, as the room was unlet.

Clara opened several of these, and rapidly turned over their contents,
as if looking for something beside pale pink ribbon. Whatever it was she
appeared to find it, for, dropping the last lid with a decided bang, she
stood a moment looking about the large drawing-room with such
brightening eyes it was evident that they saw some invisible beauty
there; then a smile broke over her face, and she ran up stairs to waken
her mother from a brief doze, by crying joyfully, as she waved a curl of
gay ribbon over her head,--

"I've got it, mamma, I've got it!"

"Bless the child! what have you got,--a letter?" cried Mrs. Barlow,
starting up.

"No; but something better still,--a new way to get a living. I'll be a
milliner, and you shall have as many caps as you like. Now don't laugh,
but listen; for it is a splendid idea, and you shall have all the credit
of it, because you suggested it."

"I've materials enough," she continued, "to begin with; for when all
else went, they left us our finery, you know, and now we can live on it
instead of wearing it. Yes, I'll make caps and sell them, and that will
be both easier and pleasanter than to go out teaching and leave you here
alone."

"But how _can_ you sell them?" asked her mother, half bewildered by the
eagerness with which the new plan was unfolded.

"That's the best of all, and I only thought of it when I was among the
boxes. Why not take the room below and lay out all our fine things
temptingly, instead of selling them one by one as if we were ashamed of
it?

"As I stood there just now, I saw it all. Mrs. Smith would be glad to
let the room, and I could take it for a month, just to try how my plan
works; and if it _does_ go well, why can I not make a living as well as
Madame?"

"But, child, what will people say?"

"That I'm an honest girl, and lend me a hand, if they are friends worth
having."

Mrs. Barlow was not convinced, and declared she would hide herself if
any one came; but after much discussion consented to let the trial be
made, though predicting utter failure, as she retired to her sofa to
bewail the sad necessity for such a step.

Clara worked busily for several days to carry into execution her plan;
then she sent some notes to a dozen friends, modestly informing them
that her "opening" would take place on a certain day.

"Curiosity will bring them, if nothing else," she said, trying to seem
quite cool and gay, though her heart fluttered with anxiety as she
arranged her little stock in the front parlor.

In the bay-window was her flower-stand, where the white azaleas, red
geraniums, and gay nasturtiums seemed to have bloomed their loveliest to
help the gentle mistress who had tended them so faithfully, even when
misfortune's frost had nipped her own bright roses. Overhead swung a
pair of canaries in their garlanded cage, singing with all their might,
as if, like the London 'prentice-boys in old times, they cried, "What do
you lack? Come buy, come buy!"

On a long table in the middle of the room, a dozen delicate caps and
head-dresses were set forth. On another lay garlands of French flowers
bought for pretty Clara's own adornment. Several dainty ball-dresses,
imported for the gay winter she had expected to pass, hung over chairs
and couch, also a velvet mantle Mrs. Barlow wished to sell, while some
old lace, well-chosen ribbons, and various elegant trifles gave color
and grace to the room.

Clara's first customer was Mrs. Tower,--a stout florid lady, full of the
good-will and the real kindliness which is so sweet in times of trouble.

"My dear girl, how are you, and how is mamma? Now this is charming. Such
a capital idea, and just what is needed; a quiet place, where one can
come and be made pretty without all the world's knowing how we do it."
And greeting Clara even more cordially than of old, the good lady
trotted about, admiring everything, just as she used to do when she
visited the girl in her former home to see and exclaim over any fresh
arrival of Paris finery.

"I'll take this mantle off your hands with pleasure, for I intended to
import one, and this saves me so much trouble. Put it up for me, dear,
at the price mamma paid for it, not a cent less, because it has never
been worn, and I've no duties to pay on it, so it is a good bargain for
me."

Then, before Clara could thank her, she turned to the head-gear, and
fell into raptures over a delicate affair, all blonde and
forget-me-nots.

"Such a sweet thing! I _must_ have it before any one else snaps it up.
Try it on, love, and give it a touch if it doesn't fit."

Clara knew it would be vain to remonstrate, for Mrs. Tower had not a
particle of taste, and insisted on wearing blue, with the complexion of
a lobster. On it went, and even the wearer could not fail to see that
something was amiss.

"It's not the fault of the cap, dear. I always was a fright, and my
dreadful color spoils whatever I put on, so I have things handsome, and
give up any attempt at beauty," she said, shaking her head at herself in
the glass.

"You need not do that, and I'll show you what I mean, if you will give
me leave; for, with your fine figure and eyes, you can't help being an
elegant woman. See, now, how I'll make even this cap becoming." And
Clara laid the delicate flowers among the blonde behind, where the
effect was unmarred by the over-red cheeks, and nothing but a soft ruche
lay over the dark hair in front.

"There, isn't that better?" she asked, with her own blooming face so
full of interest it was a pleasure to see her.

"Infinitely better; really becoming, and just what I want with my new
silver-gray satin. Dear me, what a thing taste is!" And Mrs. Tower
regarded herself with feminine satisfaction in her really fine eyes.

Here a new arrival interrupted them, and Clara went to meet several
girls belonging to what had lately been her own set. The young ladies
did not quite know how to behave; for, though it seemed perfectly
natural to be talking over matters of dress with Clara, there was an air
of proud humility about her that made them feel ill at ease, till
Nellie, a lively, warm-hearted creature, broke the ice by saying, with a
little quiver in her gay voice,--

"It's no use, girls; we've either got to laugh or cry, and I think, on
the whole, it would be best for all parties to laugh, and then go on
just as we used to do;" which she did so infectiously that the rest
joined, and then began to chatter as freely as of old.

"I speak for the opal silk, Clara, for papa has promised me a Worth
dress, and I was green with envy when this came," cried Nellie, secretly
wishing she wore caps, that she might buy up the whole dozen.

"You would be green with disgust if I let you have it, for no brunette
could wear that most trying of colors, and I was rash to order it. You
are very good, dear Nell, but I won't let you sacrifice yourself to
friendship in that heroic style," answered Clara, with a grateful kiss.

"But the others are blue and lilac, both more trying than anything with
a shade of pink in it. If you won't let me have this, you must invent
me the most becoming thing ever seen; for the most effective dress I had
last winter was the gold-colored one with the wreath of laburnums, which
you chose for me," persisted Nellie, bound to help in some way.

"I bespeak something sweet for New Year's Day. You know my style," said
another young lady, privately resolving to buy the opal dress, when the
rest had gone.

"Consider yourself engaged to get up my bridesmaids' costumes, for I
never shall forget what a lovely effect those pale green dresses
produced at Alice's wedding. She looked like a lily among its leaves,
some one said, and you suggested them, I remember," added a third
damsel, with the dignity of a bride-elect.

So it went on, each doing what she could to help, not with condolence,
but approbation, and the substantial aid that is so easy to accept when
gilded by kind words and cheery sympathy.

A hard winter, but a successful one; and when spring came, and all her
patrons were fitted out for mountains, seaside, or springs, Clara folded
her weary hands content. But Mrs. Barlow saw with anxiety how pale the
girl's cheeks had grown, how wistfully she eyed the green grass in the
park, and how soon the smile died on the lips that tried to say
cheerfully,--

"No, mamma, dear, I dare not spend in a summer trip the little sum I
have laid by for the hard times that may come. I shall do very well, but
I can't help remembering the happy voyage we meant to make this year,
and how much good it would do _you_."

Watching the unselfish life of her daughter had taught Mrs. Barlow to
forget her own regrets, inspired her with a desire to do her part, and
made her ashamed of her past indolence.

Happening to mention her maternal anxieties to Mrs. Tower, that good
lady suggested a plan by which the seemingly impossible became a fact,
and Mrs. Barlow had the pleasure of surprising Clara with a "bright
idea," as the girl had once surprised her.

"Come, dear, bestir yourself, for we must sail in ten days to pass our
summer in or near Paris. I've got commissions enough to pay our way,
and we can unite business and pleasure in the most charming manner."

Clara could only clasp her hands and listen, as her mother unfolded her
plan, telling how she was to get Maud's trousseau, all Mrs. Tower's
winter costumes, and a long list of smaller commissions from friends and
patrons who had learned to trust and value the taste and judgment of the
young _modiste_.

So Clara had her summer trip, and came home bright and blooming in the
early autumn, ready to take up her pretty trade again, quite unconscious
that, while trying to make others beautiful, she was making her own life
a very lovely one.




VIII.

HOW THEY CAMPED OUT.


"It looks so much like snow I think it would be wiser to put off your
sleighing party, Gwen," said Mrs. Arnold, looking anxiously out at the
heavy sky and streets still drifted by the last winter storm.

"Not before night, mamma; we don't mind its being cloudy, we like it,
because the sun makes the snow so dazzling when we get out of town. "We
can't give it up now, for here comes Patrick with the boys." And Gwen
ran down to welcome the big sleigh, which just then drove up with four
jolly lads skirmishing about inside.

"Come on!" called Mark, her brother, knocking his friends right and
left, to make room for the four girls who were to complete the party.

"What do you think of the weather, Patrick?" asked Mrs. Arnold from the
window, still undecided about the wisdom of letting her flock go off
alone, papa having been called away after the plan was made.

"Faith, ma'm, it's an illigant day barring the wind, that's a thrifle
could to the nose. I'll have me eye on the childer, ma'm, and there'll
be no throuble at all, at all," replied the old coachman, lifting a
round red face out of his muffler, and patting little Gus on the
shoulder, as he sat proudly on the high seat holding the whip.

"Be careful, dears, and come home early."

With which parting caution mamma shut the window, and watched the young
folks drive gayly away, little dreaming what would happen before they
got back.

The wind was more than a "thrifle could," for when they got out of the
city it blew across the open country in bitter blasts, and made the
eight little noses almost as red as old Pat's, who had been up all night
at a wake, and was still heavy-headed with too much whiskey, though no
one suspected it.

The lads enjoyed themselves immensely snowballing one another; for the
drifts were still fresh enough to furnish soft snow, and Mark, Bob, and
Tony had many a friendly tussle in it as they went up hills, or paused
to breathe the horses after a swift trot along a level bit of road.
Little Gus helped drive till his hands were benumbed in spite of the new
red mittens, and he had to descend among the girls, who were cuddled
cosily under the warm robes, telling secrets, eating candy, and laughing
at the older boys' pranks.

Sixteen-year-old Gwendoline was matron of the party, and kept excellent
order among the girls; for Ruth and Alice were nearly her own age, and
Rita a most obedient younger sister.

"I say, Gwen, we are going to stop at the old house on the way home and
get some nuts for this evening. Papa said we might, and some of the big
Baldwins too. I've got baskets, and while we fellows fill them you girls
can look round the house," said Mark, when the exhausted young gentlemen
returned to their seats.

"That will be nice. I want to get some books, and Rita has been very
anxious about one of her dolls, which she is sure was left in the
nursery closet. If we are going to stop we ought to be turning back,
Pat, for it is beginning to snow and will be dark early," answered Gwen,
suddenly realizing that great flakes were fast whitening the roads and
the wind had risen to a gale.

"Shure and I will, miss dear, as soon as iver I can; but it's round a
good bit we must go, for I couldn't be turning here widout upsettin' the
whole of yez, it's that drifted. Rest aisy, and I'll fetch up at the
ould place in half an hour, plaze the powers," said Pat, who had lost
his way and wouldn't own it, being stupid with a sup or two he had
privately taken on the way, to keep the chill out of his bones he said.

On they went again, with the wind at their backs, caring little for the
snow that now fell fast, or the gathering twilight, since they were
going toward home they thought. It was a very long half-hour before Pat
brought them to the country-house, which was shut up for the winter.
With difficulty they ploughed their way up to the steps, and scrambled
on to the piazza, where they danced about to warm their feet till Mark
unlocked the door and let them in, leaving Pat to enjoy a doze on his
seat.

"Make haste, boys; it is cold and dark here, and we must get home. Mamma
will be so anxious, and it really is going to be a bad storm," said
Gwen, whose spirits were damped by the gloom of the old house, and who
felt her responsibility, having promised to be home early.

Off went the boys to attic and cellar, being obliged to light the
lantern left here for the use of whoever came now and then to inspect
the premises. The girls, having found books and doll, sat upon the
rolled-up carpets, or peeped about at the once gay and hospitable rooms,
now looking very empty and desolate with piled-up furniture, shuttered
windows, and fireless hearths.

"If we were going to stay long I'd have a fire in the library. Papa
often does when he comes out, to keep the books from moulding," began
Gwen, but was interrupted by a shout from without, and, running to the
door, saw Pat picking himself out of a drift while the horses were
galloping down the avenue at full speed.

"Be jabbers, them villains give a jump when that fallin' branch struck
'em, and out I wint, bein' tuk unknownst, just thinkin' of me poor
cousin Mike. May his bed above be aisy the day! Whist now, miss dear!
I'll fetch 'em back in a jiffy. Stop still till I come, and kape them
b'ys quite."

With a blow to settle his hat, Patrick trotted gallantly away into the
storm, and the girls went in to tell the exciting news to the lads, who
came whooping back from their search, with baskets of nuts and apples.

"Here's a go!" cried Mark. "Old Pat will run half-way to town before he
catches the horses, and we are in for an hour or two at least."

"Then do make a fire, for we shall die of cold if we have to wait long,"
begged Gwen, rubbing Rita's cold hands, and looking anxiously at little
Gus, who was about making up his mind to roar.

"So we will, and be jolly till the blunderbuss gets back. Camp down,
girls, and you fellows, come and hold the lantern while I get wood and
stuff. It is so confoundedly dark, I shall break my neck down the shed
steps." And Mark led the way to the library, where the carpet still
remained, and comfortable chairs and sofas invited the chilly visitors
to rest.

"How can you light your fire when you get the wood?" asked Ruth, a
practical damsel, who looked well after her own creature comforts and
was longing for a warm supper.

"Papa hides the matches in a tin box, so the rats won't get at them.
Here they are, and two or three bits of candle for the sticks on the
chimney-piece, if he forgets to have the lantern trimmed. Now we will
light up, and look cosey when the boys come back."

And producing the box from under a sofa-cushion, Gwen cheered the hearts
of all by lighting two candles, rolling up the chairs, and making ready
to be comfortable. Thoughtful Alice went to see if Pat was returning,
and found a buffalo-robe lying on the steps. Returning with this, she
reported that there was no sign of the runaways, and advised making
ready for a long stay.

"How mamma will worry!" thought Gwen, but made light of the affair,
because she saw Rita looked timid, and Gus shivered till his teeth
chattered.

"We will have a nice time, and play we are shipwrecked people or Arctic
explorers. Here comes Dr. Kane and the sailors with supplies of wood,
so we can thaw our pemmican and warm our feet. Gus shall be the little
Esquimaux boy, all dressed in fur, as he is in the picture we have at
home," she said, wrapping the child in the robe, and putting her own
sealskin cap on his head to divert his mind.

"Here we are! Now for a jolly blaze, boys; and if Pat doesn't come back
we can have our fun here instead of at home," cried Mark, well pleased
with the adventure, as were his mates.

So they fell to work, and soon a bright fire was lighting up the room
with its cheerful shine, and the children gathered about it, quite
careless of the storm raging without, and sure that Pat would come in
time.

"I'm hungry," complained Gus as soon as he was warm.

"So am I," added Rita from the rug, where the two little ones sat
toasting themselves.

"Eat an apple," said Mark.

"They are so hard and cold I don't like them," began Gus.

"Roast some!" cried Ruth.

"And crack nuts," suggested Alice.

"Pity we can't cook something in real camp style; it would be such fun,"
said Tony, who had spent weeks on Monadnock, living upon the supplies he
and his party tugged up the mountain on their backs.

"We shall not have time for anything but what we have. Put down your
apples and crack away, or we shall be obliged to leave them," advised
Gwen, coming back from an observation at the front door with an anxious
line on her forehead; for the storm was rapidly increasing, and there
was no sign of Pat or the horses.

The rest were in high glee, and an hour or two slipped quickly away as
they enjoyed the impromptu feast and played games. Gus recalled them to
the discomforts of their situation by saying with a yawn and a
whimper,--

"I'm so sleepy! I want my own bed and mamma."

"So do I!" echoed Rita, who had been nodding for some time, and longed
to lie down and sleep comfortably anywhere.

"Almost eight o'clock! By Jove, that old Pat _is_ taking his time, I
think. Wonder if he has got into trouble? We can't do anything, and may
as well keep quiet here," said Mark, looking at his watch and beginning
to understand that the joke was rather a serious one.

"Better make a night of it and all go to sleep. Pat can wake us up when
he comes. The cold makes a fellow _so_ drowsy." And Bob gave a stretch
that nearly rent him asunder.

"I will let the children nap on the sofa. They are so tired of waiting,
and may as well amuse themselves in that way as in fretting. Come, Gus
and Rita, each take a pillow, and I'll cover you up with my shawl."

Gwen made the little ones comfortable, and they were off in five
minutes. The others kept up bravely till nine o'clock, then the bits of
candles were burnt out, the stories all told, nuts and apples had lost
their charm, and weariness and hunger caused spirits to fail
perceptibly.

"I've eaten five Baldwins, and yet I want more. Something filling and
good. Can't we catch a rat and roast him?" proposed Bob, who was a
hearty lad and was ravenous by this time.

"Isn't there anything in the house?" asked Ruth, who dared not eat nuts
for fear of indigestion.

"Not a thing that I know of except a few pickles in the storeroom; we
had so many, mamma left some here," answered Gwen, resolving to
provision the house before she left it another autumn.

"Pickles alone are rather sour feed. If we only had a biscuit now, they
wouldn't be bad for a relish," said Tony, with the air of a man who had
known what it was to live on burnt bean-soup and rye flapjacks for a
week.

"I saw a keg of soft-soap in the shed. How would that go with the
pickles?" suggested Bob, who felt equal to the biggest and acidest
cucumber ever grown.

"Mamma knew an old lady who actually did eat soft-soap and cream for her
complexion," put in Alice, whose own fresh face looked as if she had
tried the same distasteful remedy with success.

The boys laughed, and Mark, who felt that hospitality required him to do
something for his guests, said briskly,--

"Let us go on a foraging expedition while the lamp holds out to burn,
for the old lantern is almost gone and then we are done for. Come on,
Bob; your sharp nose will smell out food if there is any."

"Don't set the house afire, and bring more wood when you come, for we
must have light of some kind in this poky place," called Gwen, with a
sigh, wishing every one of them were safely at home and abed.

A great tramping of boots, slamming of doors, and shouting of voices
followed the departure of the boys, as well as a crash, a howl, and then
a roar of laughter, as Bob fell down the cellar stairs, having opened
the door in search of food and poked his nose in too far. Presently they
came back, very dusty, cobwebby, and cold, but triumphantly bearing a
droll collection of trophies. Mark had a piece of board and the lantern,
Tony a big wooden box and a tin pail, Bob fondly embraced a pickle jar
and a tumbler of jelly which had been forgotten on a high shelf in the
storeroom.

"Meal, pickles, jam, and boards. What a mess, and what are we to do with
it all?" cried the girls, much amused at the result of the expedition.

"Can any of you make a hoe cake?" demanded Mark.

"No, indeed! I can make caramels and cocoanut-cakes," said Ruth,
proudly.

"I can make good toast and tea," added Alice.

"I can't cook anything," confessed Gwen, who was unusually accomplished
in French, German, and music.

"Girls aren't worth much in the hour of need. Take hold, Tony, you are
the chap for me." And Mark disrespectfully turned his back on the young
ladies, who could only sit and watch the lads work.

"He can't do it without water," whispered Ruth.

"Or salt," answered Alice.

"Or a pan to bake it in," added Gwen; and then all smiled at the dilemma
they foresaw.

But Tony was equal to the occasion, and calmly went on with his task,
while Mark arranged the fire and Bob opened the pickles. First the new
cook filled the pail with snow till enough was melted to wet the meal;
this mixture was stirred with a pine stick till thick enough, then
spread on the board and set up before the bed of coals to brown.

"It never will bake in the world." "He can't turn it, so it won't be
done on both sides." "Won't be fit to eat any way!" And with these dark
hints the girls consoled themselves for their want of skill.

But the cake did bake a nice brown, Tony did turn it neatly with his
jack-knife and the stick, and when it was done cut it into bits, added
jelly, and passed it round on an old atlas; and every one said,--

"It really does taste good!"

Two more were baked, and eaten with pickles for a change, then all were
satisfied, and after a vote of thanks to Tony they began to think of
sleep.

"Pat has gone home and told them we are all right, and mamma knows we
can manage here well enough for one night, so don't worry, Gwen, but
take a nap, and I'll lie on the rug and see to the fire."

Mark's happy-go-lucky way of taking things did not convince his sister;
but as she could do nothing, she submitted and made her friends as
comfortable as she could.

All had plenty of wraps, so the girls nestled into the three large
chairs, Bob and Tony rolled themselves up in the robe, with their feet
to the fire, and were soon snoring like weary hunters. Mark pillowed his
head on a log, and was sound asleep in ten minutes in spite of his
promise to be sentinel.

Gwen's chair was the least easy of the three, and she could not forget
herself like the rest, but sat wide awake, watching the blaze, counting
the hours, and wondering why no one came to them.

The wind blew fiercely, the snow beat against the blinds, rats scuttled
about the walls, and now and then a branch fell upon the roof with a
crash. Weary, yet excited, the poor girl imagined all sorts of mishaps
to Pat and the horses, recalled various ghost stories she had heard, and
wondered if it was on such a night as this that a neighbor's house had
been robbed. So nervous did she get at last that she covered up her face
and resolutely began to count a thousand, feeling that anything was
better than having to wake Mark and own she was frightened.

Before she knew it she fell into a drowse and dreamed that they were
all cast away on an iceberg and a polar bear was coming up to devour
Gus, who innocently called to the big white dog and waited to caress
him.

"A bear! a bear! oh, boys, save him!" murmured Gwen in her sleep, and
the sound of her own distressed voice waked her.

The fire was nearly out, for she had slept longer than she knew, the
room was full of shadows, and the storm seemed to have died away. In the
silence which now reigned, unbroken even by a snore, Gwen heard a sound
that made her start and tremble. Some one was coming softly up the back
stairs. All the outer doors were locked, she was sure; all the boys lay
in their places, for she could see and count the three long figures and
little Gus in a bunch on the sofa. The girls had not stirred, and this
was no rat's scamper, but a slow and careful tread, stealing nearer and
nearer to the study door, left ajar when the last load of wood was
brought in.

"Pat would knock or ring, and papa would speak, so that we might not be
scared. I want to scream, but I won't till I see that it really is some
one," thought Gwen, while her heart beat fast and her eyes were fixed on
the door, straining to see through the gloom.

The steps drew nearer, paused on the threshold, and then a head appeared
as the door noiselessly swung wider open. A man's head in a fur cap, but
it was neither papa nor Pat nor Uncle Ed. Poor Gwen would have called
out then, but her voice was gone, and she could only lie back, looking,
mute and motionless. A tiny spire of flame sprung up and flickered for a
moment on the tall dark figure in the doorway, a big man with a beard,
and in his hand something that glittered. Was it a pistol or a dagger or
a dark lantern? thought the girl, as the glimmer died away, and the
shadows returned to terrify her.

The man seemed to look about him keenly for a moment, then vanished, and
the steps went down the hall to the front door, which was opened from
within and some one admitted quietly. Whispers were heard, and then feet
approached again, accompanied by a gleam of light.

"Now I must scream!" thought Gwen; and scream she did with all her
might, as two men entered, one carrying a lantern, the other a bright
tin can.

"Boys! Robbers! Fire! Tramps! Oh, do wake up!" cried Gwen, frantically
pulling Mark by the hair, and Bob and Tony by the legs, as the quickest
way of rousing them.

Then there was a scene! The boys sprung up and rubbed their eyes, the
girls hid theirs and began to shriek, while the burglars laughed aloud,
and poor Gwen, quite worn out, fainted away on the rug. It was all over
in a minute, however; for Mark had his wits about him, and his first
glance at the man with the lantern allayed his fears.

"Hullo, Uncle Ed! We are all right. Got tired of waiting for you, so we
went to sleep."

"Stop screaming, girls, and quiet those children! Poor little Gwen is
badly frightened. Get some snow, Tom, while I pick her up," commanded
the uncle, and order was soon established.

The boys were all right at once, and Ruth and Alice devoted themselves
to the children, who were very cross and sleepy in spite of their
fright. Gwen was herself in a moment, and so ashamed of her scare that
she was glad there was no more light to betray her pale cheeks.

"I should have known you, uncle, at once, but to see a strange man
startled me, and he didn't speak, and I thought that can was a pistol,"
stammered Gwen, when she had collected her wits a little.

"Why, that's my old friend and captain, Tom May. Don't you remember him,
child? He thought you were all asleep, so crept out to tell me and let
me in."

"How did he get in himself?" asked Gwen, glad to turn the conversation.

"Found the shed door open, and surprised the camp by a flank movement.
You wouldn't do for picket duty, boys," laughed Captain Tom, enjoying
the dismay of the lads.

"Oh, thunder! I forgot to bolt it when we first went for the wood. Had
to open it, the place was so plaguy dark," muttered Bob, much disgusted.

"Where's Pat?" asked Tony, with great presence of mind, feeling anxious
to shift all blame to his broad shoulders.

Uncle Ed shook the snow from his hair and clothes, and, poking up the
fire, leisurely sat down and took Gus on his knee before he
replied,--"Serve out the grog, Tom, while I spin my yarn."

Round went the can of hot coffee, and a few sips brightened up the young
folks immensely, so that they listened with great interest to the tale
of Pat's mishaps.

"The scamp was half-seas over when he started, and deserves all he got.
In the first place he lost his way, then tumbled overboard, and let the
horses go. He floundered after them a mile or two, then lost his
bearings in the storm, pitched into a ditch, broke his head, and lay
there till found. The fellows carried him to a house off the road, and
there he is in a nice state; for, being his countrymen, they dosed him
with whiskey till he was 'quite and aisy,' and went to sleep, forgetting
all about you, the horses, and his distracted mistress at home. The
animals were stopped at the cross-roads, and there we found them after a
lively cruise round the country. Then we hunted up Pat; but what with
the blow and too many drops of 'the crayther,' his head was in a muddle,
and we could get nothing out of him. So we went home again, and then
your mother remembered that you had mentioned stopping here, and we
fitted out a new craft and set sail, prepared for a long voyage. Your
father was away, so Tom volunteered, and here we are."

"A jolly lark! now let us go home and go to bed," proposed Mark, with a
gape.

"Isn't it most morning?" asked Tony, who had been sleeping like a
dormouse.

"Just eleven. Now pack up and let us be off. The storm is over, the moon
coming out, and we shall find a good supper waiting for the loved and
lost. Bear a hand, Tom, and ship this little duffer, for he's off
again."

Uncle Ed put Gus into the captain's arms, and, taking Rita himself, led
the way to the sleigh which stood at the door. In they all bundled, and
after making the house safe, off they went, feeling that they had had a
pretty good time on the whole.

"I will learn cooking and courage, before I try camping out again,"
resolved Gwen, as she went jingling homeward; and she kept her word.




IX.

MY LITTLE SCHOOL-GIRL.


The first time that I saw her was one autumn morning as I rode to town
in a horse-car. It was early, and my only fellow-passenger was a crusty
old gentleman, who sat in a corner, reading his paper; so when the car
stopped, I glanced out to see who came next, hoping it would be a
pleasanter person. No one appeared for a minute, and the car stood
still, while both driver and conductor looked in the same direction
without a sign of impatience. I looked also, but all I could see was a
little girl running across the park, as girls of twelve or thirteen
seldom run nowadays, if any one can see them.

"Are you waiting for her?" I asked of the pleasant-faced conductor, who
stood with his hand on the bell, and a good-natured smile in his eyes.

"Yes, ma'am, we always stop for little missy," he answered; and just
then up she came, all rosy and breathless with her run.

"Thank you very much. I'm late to-day, and was afraid I should miss my
car," she said, as he helped her in with a fatherly air that was
pleasant to see.

Taking a corner seat, she smoothed the curly locks, disturbed by the
wind, put on her gloves, and settled her books in her lap, then modestly
glanced from the old gentleman in the opposite corner to the lady near
by. Such a bright little face as I saw under the brown hat-rim, happy
blue eyes, dimples in the ruddy cheeks, and the innocent expression
which makes a young girl so sweet an object to old eyes.

The crusty gentleman evidently agreed with me, for he peeped over the
top of the paper at his pleasant little neighbor as she sat studying a
lesson, and cheering herself with occasional sniffs at a posy of
mignonette in her button-hole.

When the old gentleman caught my eye, he dived out of sight with a loud
"Hem!" but he was peeping again directly, for there was something
irresistibly attractive about the unconscious lassie opposite; and one
could no more help looking at her than at a lovely flower or a playful
kitten.

Presently she shut her book with a decided pat, and an air of relief
that amused me. She saw the half-smile I could not repress, seemed to
understand my sympathy, and said with a laugh,--

"It _was_ a hard lesson, but I've got it!"

So we began to talk about school and lessons, and I soon discovered that
the girl was a clever scholar, whose only drawback was, as she confided
to me, a "love of fun."

We were just getting quite friendly, when several young men got in, one
of whom stared at the pretty child till even she observed it, and showed
that she did by the color that came and went in her cheeks. It annoyed
me as much as if she had been my own little daughter, for I like
modesty, and have often been troubled by the forward manners of
schoolgirls, who seem to enjoy being looked at. So I helped this one
out of her little trouble by making room between the old gentleman and
myself, and motioning her to come and sit there.

She understood at once, thanked me with a look, and nestled into the
safe place so gratefully, that the old gentleman glared over his
spectacles at the rude person who had disturbed the serenity of the
child.

Then we rumbled along again, the car getting fuller and fuller as we got
down town. Presently an Irishwoman, with a baby, got in, and before I
could offer my seat, my little school-girl was out of hers, with a
polite--

"Please take it, ma'am; I can stand perfectly well."

It was prettily done, and I valued the small courtesy all the more,
because it evidently cost the bashful creature an effort to stand up
alone in a car full of strangers; especially as she could not reach the
strap to steady herself, and found it difficult to stand comfortably.

Then it was that the crusty man showed how he appreciated my girl's good
manners, for he hooked his cane in the strap, and gave it to her,
saying, with a smile that lighted up his rough face like sunshine,--

"Hold on to that, my dear."

"Ah," thought I, "how little we can judge from appearances! This grim
old soul is a gentleman, after all."

Turning her face towards us, the girl held on to the stout cane, and
swayed easily to and fro as we bumped over the rails. The Irishwoman's
baby, a sickly little thing, was attracted by the flowers, and put out a
small hand to touch them, with a wistful look at the bright face above.

"Will baby have some?" said my girl, and made the little creature happy
with some gay red leaves.

"Bless your heart, honey, it's fond he is of the like o' them, and
seldom he gets any," said the mother, gratefully, as she settled baby's
dirty hood, and wrapped the old shawl round his feet.

Baby stared hard at the giver of posies, but his honest blue eyes gave
no offence, and soon the two were so friendly that baby boldly clutched
at the bright buttons on her sack, and crowed with delight when he got
one, while we all smiled at the pretty play, and were sorry when the
little lady, with a bow and a smile to us, got out at the church corner.

"Now, I shall probably never see that child again, yet what a pleasant
picture she leaves in my memory!" I thought to myself, as I caught a
last glimpse of the brown hat going round the corner.

But I did see her again many times that winter; for not long after, as I
passed down a certain street near my winter quarters, I came upon a
flock of girls, eating their luncheon as they walked to and fro on the
sunny side,--pretty, merry creatures, all laughing and chattering at
once, as they tossed apples from hand to hand, munched candy, or
compared cookies. I went slowly, to enjoy the sight, as I do when I meet
a party of sparrows on the Common, and was wondering what would become
of so many budding women, when, all of a sudden, I saw _my_ little
school-girl.

Yes, I knew her in a minute, for she wore the same brown hat, and the
rosy face was sparkling with fun, as she told secrets with a chosen
friend, while eating a wholesome slice of bread-and-butter as only a
hungry school-girl could.

She did not recognize me, but I took a good look at her as I went by,
longing to know what the particular secret was that ended in such a gale
of laughter.

After that, I often saw my girl as I took my walks abroad, and one day
could not resist speaking to her when I met her alone; for usually her
mates clustered round her like bees about their queen, which pleased me,
since it showed how much they loved the sunshiny child.

I had a paper of grapes in my hand, and when I saw her coming, whisked
out a handsome bunch, all ready to offer, for I had made up my mind to
speak this time. She was reading a paper, but looked up to give me the
inside of the walk.

Before her eyes could fall again, I held out the grapes and said, just
as I had heard her say more than once to a schoolmate at lunch-time,
"Let's go halves."

She understood at once, laughed, and took the bunch, saying with
twinkling eyes,--

"Oh, thank you! they are beauties!"

Then, as we went on to the corner together, I told her why I did it, and
recalled the car-ride.

"I'd forgotten all about that, but my conductor is very kind, and always
waits for me," she said, evidently surprised that a stranger should take
an interest in her small self.

I did not have half time enough with her, for a bell rang, and away she
skipped, looking back to nod and smile at the queer lady who had taken a
fancy to her.

A few days afterward a fine nosegay of flowers was left at the door for
me, and when I asked the servant who sent them he answered,--

"A little girl asked if a lame lady didn't live here, and when I said
yes, she told me to give you these, and say the grapes were very nice."

I knew at once who it was, and enjoyed the funny message immensely; for
when one leads a quiet life, little things interest and amuse.

Christmas was close by, and I planned a return for the flowers, of a
sort, that I fancied my young friend would appreciate.

I knew that Christmas week would be a holiday, so, the day before it
began, I went to the school just before recess, and left a frosted plum
cake, directed to "Miss Goldilocks, from she knows who."

At first I did not know how to address my nice white parcel, for I never
had heard the child's name. But after thinking over the matter, I
remembered that she was the only girl there with yellow curls hanging
down her back, so I decided to risk the cake with the above direction.

The maid who took it in (for my girl went to a private school) smiled,
and said at once she knew who I meant. I left my cake, and strolled
round the corner to the house of a friend, there to wait and watch for
the success of my joke, for the girls always went that way at recess.

Presently the little hats began to go bobbing by, the silent street to
echo with laughter, and the sidewalk to bloom with gay gowns, for the
girls were all out in winter colors now.

From behind a curtain I peeped at them, and saw, with great
satisfaction, that nearly all had bits of my cake in their hands, and
were talking it over with the most flattering interest. My particular
little girl, with a friend on each arm, passed so near me that I could
see the happy look in her eyes, and hear her say, with a toss of the
bright hair,--

"Mother will plan it for me, and I can get it done by New Year. Won't it
be fun to hang it on the door some day, and then run?"

I fancied that she meant to make something for me, and waited with
patience, wondering how this odd frolic with my little school-girl would
end.

New Year's Day came and passed, but no gift hung on my door; so I made
up my mind it was all a mistake, and, being pretty busy about that time,
thought no more of the matter till some weeks later, as I came into town
one day after a visit in the country.

I am fond of observing faces, and seldom forget one if anything has
particularly attracted my attention to it. So this morning, as I rode
along, I looked at the conductor, as there was no one else to observe,
and he had a pleasant sort of face. Somehow, it looked familiar, and
after thinking idly about it for a minute, I remembered where I had
seen it before.

He was the man who waited for "little missy," and I at once began to
hope that she would come again, for I wanted to ask about the holidays,
remembering how "fond of fun" she was.

When we came to the South End Square, where I met her first, I looked
out, expecting to see the little figure running down the wide path
again, and quite willing to wait for it a long time if necessary. But no
one was to be seen but two boys and a dog. The car did not stop, and
though the conductor looked out that way, his hand was not on the strap,
and no smile on his face.

"Don't you wait for the little girl now?" I asked, feeling disappointed
at not seeing my pretty friend again.

"I wish I could, ma'am," answered the man, understanding at once, though
of course he did not remember me.

"New rules, perhaps?" I added, as he did not explain, but stood
fingering his punch, and never minding an old lady, wildly waving her
bag at him from the sidewalk.

"No, ma'am; but it's no use waiting for little missy any more,
because"--here he leaned in and said, very low,--"she is dead;" then
turned sharply round, rung the bell, put the old lady in and shut the
door.

How grieved I was to have that pleasant friendship end so sadly, for I
had planned many small surprises for my girl, and now I could do no
more, could never know all about her, never see the sunny face again, or
win another word from lips that seemed made for smiling.

Only a little school-girl, yet how many friends she seemed to have,
making them unconsciously by her gentle manners, generous actions, and
innocent light-heartedness. I could not bear to think what home must be
without her, for I am sure I was right in believing her a good, sweet
child, because real character shows itself in little things, and the
heart that always keeps in tune makes its music heard everywhere.

The busy man of the horse-car found time to miss her, the schoolmates
evidently mourned their queen, for when I met them they walked quietly,
talked low, and several wore black bows upon the sleeve; while I,
although I never knew her name, or learned a single fact about her, felt
the sweetness of her happy nature, and have not yet forgotten my little
school-girl.




X.

WHAT A SHOVEL DID.


As my friend stood by the window, watching the "soft falling snow," I
saw him smile,--a thoughtful yet a very happy smile, and, anxious to
know what brought it, I asked,--

"What do you see out there?"

"Myself," was the answer that made me stare in surprise, as I joined him
and looked curiously into the street.

All I saw was a man shovelling snow; and, thoroughly puzzled, I turned
to Richard, demanding an explanation. He laughed, and answered
readily,--

"While we wait for Kate and the children, I'll tell you a little
adventure of mine. It may be useful to you some day.

"Fifteen years ago, on a Sunday morning like this, I stood at the window
of a fireless, shabby little room, without one cent in my pocket, and
no prospect of getting one.

"I had gone supperless to bed, and spent the long night asking, 'What
shall I do?' and, receiving no reply but that which is so hard for eager
youth to accept, 'Wait and trust.'

"I was alone in the world, with no fortune but my own talent, and even
that I was beginning to doubt, because it brought no money. For a year I
had worked and hoped, with a brave spirit; had written my life into
poems and tales; tried a play; turned critic and reviewed books; offered
my pen and time to any one who would employ them, and now was ready for
the hardest literary work, and the poorest pay, for starvation stared me
in the face.

"All my ventures failed, and my paper boats freighted with so many high
hopes, went down one after another, leaving me to despair. The last
wreck lay on my table then,--a novel, worn with much journeying to and
fro, on which I had staked my last chance, and lost it.

"As I stood there at my window, cold and hungry, solitary and
despairing, I said to myself, in a desperate mood,--

"'It is all a mistake; I have no talent, and there is no room in the
world for me, so the quicker I get out of it the better.'

"Just then a little chap came from a gate opposite, with a shovel on his
shoulder, and trudged away, whistling shrilly, to look for a job. I
watched him out of sight, thinking bitterly,--

"'Now look at the injustice of it! Here am I, a young man full of
brains, starving because no one will give me a chance; and there is that
ignorant little fellow making a living with an old shovel!'"

A voice seemed to answer me, saying,--

"'Why don't you do the same? If brains don't pay, try muscles, and thank
God that you have health.'

"Of course it was only my own pluck and common sense; but I declare to
you I was as much struck by the new idea as if a strange voice _had_
actually spoken; and I answered, heartily,--

"'As I live I _will_ try it! and not give up while there is any honest
work for these hands to do.'

"With sudden energy I put on my shabbiest clothes,--and they were _very_
shabby, of course, added an old cap and rough comforter, as disguise,
and stole down to the shed where I had seen a shovel. It was early, and
the house was very quiet, for the other lodgers were hard workers all
the week, and took their rest Sunday morning.

"Unseen by the sleepy girl making her fires, I got the shovel and stole
away by the back gate, feeling like a boy out on a frolic. It was bitter
cold, and a heavy snow-storm had raged all night. The streets were full
of drifts, and the city looked as if dead, for no one was stirring yet
but milkmen, and other poor fellows like me, seeking for an early job.

"I made my way to the West End, and was trying to decide at which of the
tall houses to apply first, when the door of one opened, and a pretty
housemaid appeared, broom in hand.

"At sight of the snowy wilderness she looked dismayed, and with a few
unavailing strokes of her broom at the drift on the steps, was about to
go in, when her eye fell on me.

"My shovel explained my mission, and she beckoned with an imperious wave
of her duster to the shabby man opposite. I ploughed across, and
received in silence the order to--

"'Clear them steps and sidewalk, and sweep 'em nice, for our folks
always go to church, rain or shine.'

"Then leaving her broom outside, the maid slammed the door with a
shiver, and I fell to work manfully. It was a heavy job, and my hands,
unused to any heavier tool than a pen, were soon blistered; but I tugged
away, and presently found myself much stimulated by the critical and
approving glances bestowed upon me by the pretty girl, taking breakfast
in the basement with a buxom cook and a friend, who had evidently
dropped in on her way home from early Mass.

"I was a young fellow, and in spite of my late despair, the fun of the
thing tickled me immensely, and I laughed behind my old tippet, as I
shovelled and swept with a vigor that caused the stout cook to smile
upon me.

"When the job was done, and I went to the lower door for my well-earned
pay, the maid said, with condescension, as she glanced coquettishly at
my ruddy face and eyes that twinkled under the old cap, I suspect,--

"'You can wait here while I run up, and get the money, if master is
awake.'

"'Ye haven't the heart of a woman, Mary, to kape the poor crater out
there when it's kilt wid the could he is,' said the buxom cook; adding,
in a motherly tone, 'Come in wid yez, my man, and set till the fire, for
it's bitter weather the day.'

"'Faix an' it is, ma'm, thankin' ye kindly,' I answered, with a fine
brogue, for as a lad I had played the Irishman with success.

"The good soul warmed to me at once, and, filling a mug with coffee,
gave it to me with a hearty--

"'A hot sup will do you no harrum, me b'y, and sure in the blessid
Christmas time that's just fore-ninst us, the master won't begrudge ye a
breakfast; so take a biscuit and a sassage, for it's like ye haven't had
a mouthful betwixt your lips the day.'

"'That I will,' said I; 'and it's good luck and a long life to ye I'm
drinkin' in this illegint coffee.'

"'Bless the b'y! but it's a grateful heart he has, and a blue eye as
like my Pat as two pays,' cried the cook, regarding me with increasing
favor, as I bolted the breakfast which I should have been too proud to
accept from any hand less humble.

"Here the guest asked a question concerning Pat, and instantly the
mother gushed into praises of her boy, telling in a few picturesque
words, as only an Irishwoman could do it, how Pat had come to 'Ameriky'
first when things went hard with them in the 'ould country,' and how
good he was in sending home his wages till she could join him.

"How she came, but could not find her 'b'y, because of the loss of the
letter with his address, and how for a year she waited and watched, sure
that he would find her at last. How the saints had an eye on him, and
one happy day answered her prayers in a way that she considered 'aquil
to any merrycle ever seen.' For, looking up from her work, who should
she see, in a fine livery, sitting on the box of a fine carriage at the
master's door, but 'her own b'y, like a king in his glory.'

"'Arrah, ye should have seen me go up thim steps, Katy, and my Pat come
off that box like an angel flyin', and the way he tuk me in his arms,
never mindin' his illigint coat, and me all dirt a-blackin' me range.
Ah'r, but I was a happy crayter that day!'

"Here the good soul stopped to wipe away the tears that were shining on
her fat cheeks, and Mary appeared with a dollar, 'for master said it was
a tough job and well done.'

"'May his bed be aisy above, darlin', and many thanks, and the
compliments of the sayson to ye, ladies.'

"With which grateful farewell I trudged away, well pleased at the
success of my first attempt. Refreshed and cheered by the kindness of my
humble hostess, I took heart, and worked away at my next job with
redoubled energy, and by the time the first bells rang for church, I had
three dollars in my pocket. My blood danced in my veins, and all my
despair seemed shovelled away with the snow I had cleared from other
people's paths.

"My back ached, and my palms were sore, but heart and soul were in tune
again, and hurrying home, I dressed and went to church, feeling that a
special thanksgiving was due for the lesson I had learned.

"Christmas garlands hung upon the walls, Christmas music rolled through
the church, and Christmas sermon, prayer, and psalm cheered the hearts
of all. But the shabby young man in the back seat found such beauty and
comfort in the service of that day that he never forgot it, for it was
the turning-point of his life."

My friend fell silent for a minute, and I sat, contrasting that past of
his, with the happy present, for he was a prosperous man now, with an
honored name, a comfortable fortune, and best of all, a noble wife, and
some brave lads to follow in his footsteps.

Presently I could not resist asking,--

"Did you go on shovelling, Dick?"

"Not long, for there was no need of it, thanks to Pat's mother," he
answered smiling.

"Come, I _must_ have all the story, for I know it has a sequel!"

"A very happy one. Yes, I owe to that kind soul and her little story,
the turn that Fortune gave her wheel. Nay, rather say, the touch of
nature that makes the whole world kin. For when I went home that day, I
sat down and made a simple tale from the hint she gave, and something of
her own humor and pathos must have got into it, for it was accepted, and
more stories solicited, to my great surprise.

"I wrote it to please myself, for I was in a happy mood; and though my
room was cold, the sun shone; though my closet was bare, honest money
was in my pocket, and I felt as rich as a king.

"I remember I laughed at myself as I posted the manuscript on Monday
morning, called it infatuation, and thought no more of it for days,
being busy with my new friend, the shovel.

"Snow was gone, but coal remained, and I put in tons of it with a will,
for this active labor was the tonic my overwrought nerves needed, and my
spirits rose wonderfully, as muscles earned the daily bread that brains
had failed to win.

"Ah! but they brought me something better than bread, dearer than fame;
and to that old shovel I owe the happiness of my life! The very day I
got the letter accepting the little story, I was gaily putting in my
last ton of coal, for I felt that now I might take up the pen again,
since in a kitchen I had discovered the magic that wins listeners.

"Bless my heart! how I worked and how I whistled, I was so happy, and
felt so lifted above all doubt and fear by the knowledge that my talent
was _not_ a failure, and the fact that my own strong arms could keep the
wolf from the door!

"I was so busy that I had not observed a lady watching me from the
window. She had opened it to feed the hungry sparrows, and my whistle
caught her ear, for it was an air she knew, and had heard a certain
young man sing before he dropped out of her circle, and left her
wondering sadly what had befallen him.

"All this I learned afterward; then I unconsciously piped away till my
job was done, wiped my hot face, and went in to get my money. To my
surprise I was told to 'go into the dining room, and missis would
attend to it.'

"I went and found myself face to face, not with 'missis,' but the woman
I had loved hopelessly but faithfully all that hard year, since I had
gone away to fight my battle alone.

"For a moment I believed she did not know me, in my shabby suit and
besmirched face. But she did, and with a world of feeling in her own
sweet face, she offered me, not money, but her hand, saying in a voice
that made my heart leap up,--

"'Richard, I was afraid you had gone down as so many disappointed young
men go when their ambitious hopes fail; but I am so glad, so proud to
see in your face that you still work and wait, like a brave and honest
man. I _must_ speak to you!'

"What could I do after that but hold the white hand fast in both my
grimy ones, while I told my little story, and the hope that had come at
last. Heaven knows I told it very badly, for those tender eyes were upon
me all the time, so full of unspoken love and pity, admiration and
respect, that I felt like one in a glorified dream, and forgot I was a
coal-heaver.

"That was the last of it, though, and the next time I came to see my
Kate it was with clean hands, that carried her, as a first love-token,
the little tale which was the foundation-stone of this happy home."

He stopped there, and his face brightened beautifully, for the sound of
little feet approached, and childish voices cried eagerly,--

"Papa! papa! the snow has come! May we go and shovel off the steps?"

"Yes, my lads, and mind you do it well; for some day you may have to
earn your breakfast," answered Dick, as three fine boys came prancing
in, full of delight at the first snow-fall.

"These fellows have a passion for shovelling which they inherit from
their father," he added, with a twinkle of the eye that told Mrs. Kate
what we had been talking about.

It was sweet to see with what tender pride she took the hand he
stretched out to her, and holding it in both her own, said, with her
eyes upon her boys,--

"I hope they _will_ inherit not only their father's respect for honest
work, but the genius that can see and paint truth and beauty in the
humble things of this world."




XI.

CLAMS.

A GHOST STORY.


"I haven't a room in the house, ma'am, but if you don't mind going down
to the cottage, and coming up here to your meals, I can accommodate you,
and would be glad to," said Mrs. Grant, in answer to my demand for
board.

"Where is the cottage?" and I looked about me, feeling ready to accept
anything in the way of shelter, after the long, hot journey from
broiling Boston, to breezy York Harbor.

"Right down there, just a step, you see. It's all in order, and next
week it will be full, for many folks prefer it because of the quiet."

At the end of a precipitous path, which offered every facility for
accidents of all sorts, from a sprained ankle to a broken neck, stood
the cottage, a little white building with a pretty woodbine over the
porch, gay flowers in the garden, and the blue Atlantic rolling up at
the foot of the cliff.

"A regular 'Cottage by the Sea.' It will suit me exactly if I can have
that front upper room. I don't mind being alone, so have my trunk taken
down, please, and I'll get ready for tea," said I, congratulating myself
on my good luck. Alas, how little I knew what a night of terror I was to
pass in that picturesque abode!

An hour later, refreshed by my tea and invigorated by the delicious
coolness, I plunged recklessly into the gayeties of the season, and
accepted two invitations for the evening,--one to a stroll on Sunset
Hill, the other to a clam-bake on the beach.

The stroll came first, and while my friend paused at one of the
fishily-fragrant houses by the way, to interview her washerwoman, I went
on to the hill-top, where a nautical old gentleman with a spy-glass,
welcomed me with the amiable remark,--

"Pretty likely place for a prospeck."

Entering into a conversation with this ancient mariner, I asked if he
knew any legend or stories concerning the old houses all about us.

"Sights of 'em; but it aint allers the _old_ places as has the most
stories concernin' 'em. Why, that cottage down yonder aint more 'n fifty
year old, and they say there's been a lot of ghosts seen there, owin' to
a man's killin' of himself in the back bedroom."

"What, that house at the end of the lane?" I asked, with sudden
interest.

"Jes' so; nice place, but lonesome and dampish. Ghosts and toadstools is
apt to locate in houses of that sort," placidly responded the venerable
tar.

The dampness scared me more than the goblins, for I never saw a ghost
yet, but I had been haunted by rheumatism, and found it a hard fiend to
exorcise.

"I've taken a room there, so I'm rather interested in knowing what
company I'm to have."

"Took a room, hev you? Wal, I dare say you won't be troubled. Some folks
have a knack of seeing sperrits, and then agin some hasn't. My wife is
uncommon powerful that way, but I aint; my sight's dreadful poor for
that sort of critter."

There was such a sly twinkle in the starboard eye of the old fellow as
he spoke, that I laughed outright, and asked, sociably,--

"Has she ever seen the ghosts of the cottage? I think _I_ have rather a
knack that way, and I'd like to know what to expect."

"No, her sort is the rappin' kind. Down yonder the only ghost I take
much stock in is old Bezee Tucker's. He killed himself in the back
bedroom, and some folks say they've heard him groanin' there nights, and
a drippin' sound; he bled to death, you know. It was kep' quiet at the
time, and is forgotten now by all but a few old chaps like me. Bezee was
allers civil to the ladies, so I guess he won't bother you, ma'am;" and
the old fellow laughed.

"If he does, I'll let you know;" and with that I departed, for my friend
called to me that the beach party was clamoring for our company.

In the delights of that festive hour, I forgot the croaking of the
ancient mariner, for I was about to taste a clam for the first time in
my life, and it was a most absorbing moment. Perched about on the rocks
like hungry penguins, we watched the jovial cooks with breathless
interest, as they struggled with refractory frying-pans, fish that
stubbornly refused to brown, steaming seaweed and hot stones.

A certain captivating little Margie waited upon me so prettily that I
should have been tempted to try a sea porcupine unskinned if she had
offered it, so irresistible was her chirping way of saying, "Oh, here's
a perfectly lovely one! Do take him by his little black head and eat him
quick."

So beguiled, I indulged recklessly in clams, served hot between two
shells, little dreaming what a price I was to pay for that marine
banquet.

We kept up till late, and then I was left at my own door by my friend,
who informed me that York was a very primitive, safe place, where people
slept with unlocked doors, and nothing ever went amiss o'nights.

I said nothing of the ghosts, being ashamed to own that I quaked a
little at the idea of the "back bedroom," as I shut out the friendly
faces and bolted myself in.

A lamp and matches stood in the hall, and lighting the lamp, I whisked
up stairs with suspicious rapidity, locked my door and retired to bed,
firmly refusing to own even to myself that I had ever heard the name of
Bezee Tucker.

Being very tired, I soon fell asleep; but fried potatoes and a dozen or
two of hot clams are not viands best fitted to insure quiet repose, so a
fit of nightmare brought me to a realizing sense of my indiscretion.

From a chaos of wild dreams was finally evolved a gigantic clam, whose
mission it was to devour me as I had devoured its relatives. The sharp
shells gaped before me, a solemn voice said, "Take her by her little
head and eat her quick." Retribution was at hand, and, with a despairing
effort to escape by diving, I bumped my head smartly against the wall,
and woke up feeling as if there was an earthquake under the bed.

Collecting my scattered wits, I tried to compose myself to slumber
again; but alas! that fatal feast had murdered sleep, and I vainly tried
to lull my wakeful senses with the rustle of woodbine leaves about the
window, and the breaking waves upon the beach.

In one of the pauses between the ebb and flow of the waves, I heard a
curious sound in the house,--a muffled sort of moan, coming at regular
intervals. And, as I sat up to make out where it was, another sound
caught my attentive ear. Drip, drip, drip, went something out in the
hall, and in an instant the tale told me on Sunset Hill came back with
unpleasant vividness.

"Nonsense! it is raining, and the roof leaks," I said to myself, while a
disagreeable thrill went through me, and fancy, aided by indigestion,
began to people the house with uncanny inmates.

No rain had fallen for weeks, and peeping through my curtain I saw the
big, bright stars shining in a cloudless sky; so that explanation
failed, and still the drip, drip, drip went on. Likewise the moaning, so
distinctly now that it was evident the little back bedroom was next the
chamber in which I was quaking at that identical moment.

"Some one is sleeping there," I said, and then recollected that all the
rooms were locked, and all the keys but mine in Mrs. Grant's pocket up
at the house.

"Well, let the goblins enjoy themselves; I won't disturb them if they
let me alone. Some of the ladies thought me brave to dare to sleep here,
and it will never do to own I was scared by a foolish story and an odd
sound."

So down I lay, and said the multiplication table industriously for
several minutes, trying to turn a deaf ear to the outer world, and curb
my unruly thoughts. But it was a failure, and, when I found myself
saying over and over "Four times twelve is twenty-four," I gave up
affecting courage, and went in for a good honest scare.

As a cheerful subject for midnight meditation I kept thinking of B.
Tucker, in spite of every effort to abstain. In vain I recalled the fact
that the departed gentleman was "allers civil to the ladies." I still
was in mortal fear lest he might think it necessary to come and
apologize in person for "bothering" me.

Presently a clock struck three, and I involuntarily gave a groan that
beat the ghost's all hollow, so full of anguish was I at the thought of
several hours of weary waiting in such awesome suspense.

I was not sure at what time the daylight would appear, and bitterly
regretted not gathering useful information about sunrise, tides, and
such things, instead of listening to the foolish gossip of Uncle Peter
on the hill-top.

Minute after minute dragged slowly on, and I was just thinking that I
should be obliged to shout "Fire!" as the only means of relief in my
power, when a stealthy step under the window gave me a new sensation.

This was a start, not a scare, for the new visitor was a human foe, and
I had little fear of such, being possessed of good lungs, strong arms,
and a Roman dagger nearly as big as a carving-knife. That step broke the
spell, and, creeping noiselessly to the window, I peeped out to see a
dark figure coming up the stem of the tall tree close by, hand over
hand, like a sailor or a monkey.

"Two can play at that game, my friend; you scare me, and I'll scare
you;" and with an actual sense of relief in breaking the oppressive
silence, I suddenly flung up the curtain, and, leaning out, brandished
my dagger with what I intended to be an awe-inspiring screech, but,
owing to the flutter of my breath, the effort ended in a curious
mixture of howl and bray.

A most effective sound nevertheless; for the rascal dropped as if shot,
and, with one upward glance at the white figure dimly seen in the
starlight, fled as if a legion of goblins were at his heels.

"What next?" thought I, wondering whether tragedy or comedy would close
this eventful night.

I sat and waited, chilly, but valiant, while the weird sounds went on
within, and silence reigned without, till the cheerful crow of the
punctual "cockadoo," as Margie called him, announced the dawn and laid
the ghosts. A red glow in the east banished my last fear, and, wrapping
the drapery of my couch about me, I soon lay down to quiet slumber,
quite worn out.

The sun shining in my face waked me; a bell ringing spasmodically warned
me to hurry, and a childish voice calling out, "Bet-fast is most weady,
Miss Wee," assured me that sweet little spirits haunted the cottage as
well as ghostly ones.

As I left my room to join Margie, who was waiting in the porch, and
looking like a rosy morning-glory half-way up the woodbine trellis, I
saw two things which caused me to feel that the horrors of the night
were not all imaginary.

Just outside the back bedroom door was a damp place, as if that part of
the floor had been newly washed; and when, goaded by curiosity, I peeped
through the keyhole of the haunted chamber, my eye distinctly saw an
open razor lying on a dusty table.

My vision was limited to that one object, but it was quite enough, and I
went up the hill brooding darkly over the secret hidden in my breast. I
longed to tell some one, but was ashamed, and, when asked why so pale
and absent-minded, I answered, with a gloomy smile,--

"It is the clams."

All day I hid my sufferings pretty well, but as night approached, and I
thought of another lonely vigil in the haunted cottage, my heart began
to fail, and, when we sat telling stories in the dusk, a brilliant idea
came into my head.

I would relate my ghost story, and rouse the curiosity of the listeners
to such a pitch that some of them would offer to share my quarters, in
hopes of seeing the spirit of the restless Tucker.

Cheered by this delusive fancy, when my turn came I made a thrilling
tale of the night's adventures, and, having worked my audience up to a
flattering state of excitement, paused for applause.

It came in a most unexpected form, however, for Mrs. Grant burst out
laughing, and the two boys, Johnny and Joe, rolled off the piazza in
convulsions of merriment.

Much disgusted at this unseemly demonstration, I demanded the cause of
it, and involuntarily joined in the general shout when Mrs. Grant
demolished my ghost by informing me that Bezee Tucker lived, died in,
and haunted the tumble-down house at the _other_ end of the lane.

"Then who or what made those mysterious noises?" I asked, relieved but
rather nettled at the downfall of my romance.

"My brother Seth," replied Mrs. Grant, still laughing. "I thought you
might be afraid to be there all alone, so he slipped into the bedroom,
and I forgot to tell you. He's a powerful snorer, and that's one of the
awful sounds. The other was the dripping of salt water; for you wanted
some, and the girl got it in a leaky pail. Seth wiped up the slops when
he came out early in the morning."

I said nothing about the keyhole view of the harmless razor, but,
feeling that I did deserve some credit for my heroic reception of the
burglar, I mildly asked if it was the custom in York for men as well as
turkeys to roost in trees.

An explosion from the boys extinguished my last hope of glory, for as
soon as he could speak Joe answered, unable to resist the joke, though
telling it betrayed his own transgressions.

"Johnny planned to be up awful early, and pick the last cherries off
that tree. I wanted to get ahead of him, so I sneaked down before light
to humbug him, for I was going a-fishing, and we have to be off by
four."

"Did you get your cherries?" I asked, bound to have some of the laugh on
my side.

"Guess I didn't," grumbled Joe, rubbing his knees, while Johnny added,
with an exulting chuckle,--

"He got a horrid scare and a right good scraping, for he didn't know any
one was down there. Couldn't go fishing either, he was so lame, and I
had the cherries after all. Served him right, didn't it?"

No answer was necessary, for the two lads indulged in a friendly scuffle
among the hay-cocks, while Mrs. Grant went off to repeat the tale in the
kitchen, whence the sound of a muffled roar soon assured me that Seth
was enjoying the joke as well as the rest of us.




XII.

KITTY'S CATTLE SHOW.


Little Kitty was an orphan, and she lived in the poor-house, where she
ran errands, tended babies, and was everybody's servant. A droll,
happy-hearted child, who did her best to be good, and was never tired of
hoping that something pleasant would happen.

She had often heard of Cattle Shows, but had never been to one, though
she lived in a town where there was one every year.

As October came, and people began to get ready for the show, Kitty was
seized with a strong desire to go, and asked endless questions about it
of old Sam, who lived in the house.

"Did you say anybody could go in for nothing if they took something to
show?" she asked.

"Yes; and them that has the best fruit, or cows, or butter, or whatever
it is, they gets a premium," said Sam, chopping away.

"What's a primmynum?" asked Kitty, forgetting to pick up chips, in her
interest.

"It's money; some gets a lot, and some only a dollar, or so."

"I wish I had something nice to show, but I don't own anything but
puss," and the little girl stroked the plump, white kitten that was
frisking all over her.

"Better send her; she's pretty enough to fetch a prize anywheres," said
Sam, who was fond of both Kittys.

"Do they have cats there?" asked the child, soberly.

"Ought to, if they don't, for, if cats aint cattle, I don't see what
they be," and old Sam laughed, as if he had made a joke.

"I mean to take her and see the show, any way, for that will be
splendid, even if she don't get any money! O, puss, will you go, and
behave well, and get a primmynum for me, so I can buy a book of
stories?" cried Kitty, upsetting her basket in her sudden skip at the
fine plan.

Puss turned a somersault, raced after a chicken, and then rushed up her
mistress' back, and, perching demurely on her shoulder, peeped into her
face, as if asking if pranks like these wouldn't win a prize anywhere.

"You are going to take Mr. Green's hens for him; can't I go with you? I
won't be any trouble, and I do so want to see the fun," added Kitty,
after thinking over her plan a few minutes.

Now, Sam meant to take her, but had not told her so yet, and now, being
a waggish old fellow, he thought he would let her take her cat, for the
joke of it, so he said soberly,--

"Yes, I'll tuck you in somewheres, and you'd better put puss into the
blackbird's old cage, else she will get scared, and run away. You stand
it among the chicken-coops, and folks will admire her, I aint a doubt."

Innocent little Kitty was in raptures at the prospect, though the people
in the house laughed at her. But she firmly believed it was all right,
and made her preparations with solemn care.

The old cage was scrubbed till the wires shone, then she trimmed it up
with evergreen, and put a bed of scarlet leaves for snowy puss to lie
on. Puss was washed, and combed, and decked with a blue bow on the grand
day, and, when she had been persuaded to enter her pretty prison, the
effect was charming.

A happier little lass was seldom seen than Kitty when, dressed in her
clean, blue check frock, and the old hat, with a faded ribbon, she rode
away with Sam; and behind, among the hen-coops, was Miss Puss, much
excited by the clucking and fluttering of her fellow-travellers.

When the show grounds were reached, Kitty thought the bustle and the
noise quite as interesting as the cattle; and when, after putting his
poultry in its place, Sam led her up into the great hall where the fruit
and flowers were, she began to imagine that the fairy tales were coming
true.

While she stood staring at some very astonishing worsted-work pictures,
a lady, who was arranging fruit near by, upset a basket of fine peaches,
and they rolled away under tables and chairs.

"I'll pick 'em up, ma'am," cried Kitty, who loved to be useful; and down
she went on her hands and knees, and carefully picked up every runaway.

"What is your name, my obliging little girl?" asked the lady, as she
brushed up the last yellow peach.

"Kitty; and I live at the poor-house; and I never saw a Cattle Show
before, 'cause I didn't have any thing to bring," said the child,
feeling as important with her cat as a whole agricultural society.

"What did you bring,--patchwork?"

"O, no, ma'am, a lovely cat, and she is down stairs with the hens,--all
white, with blue eyes and a blue bow," cried Kitty.

"I want to see her," said a little girl, popping her head up from behind
the table, where she had bashfully hidden from the stranger.

The lady consented, and the children went away together.

While they were gone, Sam came to find his little friend, and the kind
lady, amused at the cat story, asked about the child.

"She aint no friends but me and the kitten, so I thought I'd give the
poor little soul a bit of pleasure. The quarter I'll get for fetching
Green's hens will get Kitty some dinner, and a book maybe, or something
to remember Cattle Show by. Shouldn't wonder if I earned a trifle more
doing chores round to-day; if so, I shall give it to her for a premium,
'cause I fetched the cat for fun, and wouldn't like to disappoint the
child."

As Sam laughed, and rubbed his rough hands over the joke of surprising
Kitty, the lady looked at his kind old face, and resolved to give him a
pleasure, too, and of the sort he liked.

She was rich and generous, and, when her little girl came back, begging
her to buy the lovely kitten, she said she would, and put five dollars
into Sam's hands, telling him that was Kitty's premium, to be used in
buying clothes and comforts for the motherless child.

Kitty was quite willing to sell puss, for five dollars seemed a splendid
fortune to her. Such a happy day as that was, for she saw everything,
had a good dinner, bought "Babes in the Wood" of a peddler, and, best of
all, made friends.

Miss Puss was brought up by her new mistress, and put on a table among
the flowers, where the pretty cage and the plump, tricksy kitten
attracted much attention, for the story was told, and the little girl's
droll contribution much laughed over.

But the poor-house people didn't laugh, for they were so surprised and
delighted at this unexpected success that they were never tired of
talking about Kitty's Cattle Show.




XIII.

WHAT BECOMES OF THE PINS.


Miss Ellen was making a new pincushion, and a very pretty one it
promised to be, for she had much taste, and spent half her time
embroidering chair-covers, crocheting tidies, and all sorts of dainty
trifles. Her room was full of them; and she often declared that she did
wish some one would invent a new sort of fancy-work, since she had tried
all the old kinds till she was tired of them. Painting china, carving
wood, button-holing butterflies and daisies onto Turkish towelling, and
making peacock-feather trimming, amused her for a time; but as she was
not very successful she soon gave up trying these branches, and wondered
if she would not take a little plain sewing for a change.

The old cushion stood on her table beside the new one; which was ready
for its trimming of lace and ribbon. A row of delicate new pins also lay
waiting to adorn the red satin mound, and in the old blue one still
remained several pins that had evidently seen hard service.

Miss Ellen was putting a dozen needles into her book, having just picked
them out of the old cushion, and, as she quilted them through the
flannel leaves, she said half aloud,--

"It is very evident where the needles go, but I really do wish I knew
what becomes of the pins."

"I can tell you," answered a small, sharp voice, as a long brass pin
tried to straighten itself up in the middle of a faded blue cornflower,
evidently prepared to address the meeting.

Miss Ellen stared much surprised, for she had used this big pin a good
deal lately, but never heard it speak before. As she looked at it she
saw for the first time that its head had a tiny face, with silvery hair,
two merry eyes, and a wee mouth out of which came the metallic little
voice that pierced her ear, small as it was.

"Dear me!" she said; then added politely, "if you can tell I should be
very happy to hear, for it has long been a great mystery, and no one
could explain it."

The old pin tried to sit erect, and the merry eye twinkled as it went on
like a garrulous creature, glad to talk after long silence:--

"Men make many wonderful discoveries, my dear, but they have never found
that out, and never will, because we belong to women, and only a
feminine ear can hear us, a feminine mind understand our mission, or
sympathize with our trials, experiences, and triumphs. For we have all
these as well as human beings, and there really is not much difference
between us when we come to look into the matter."

This was such a curious statement that Miss Ellen forgot her work to
listen intently, and all the needles fixed their eyes on the audacious
pin. Not a whit abashed it thus continued:--

"I am called 'Granny' among my friends, because I have had a long and
eventful life. I am hearty and well, however, in spite of this crick in
my back, and hope to serve you a good while yet, for you seem to
appreciate me, stout and ordinary as I look.

"Yes, my dear, pins and people _are_ alike, and that rusty
darning-needle need not stare so rudely, for I shall prove what I say.
We are divided into classes by birth and constitution, and each can do
much in its own sphere. I am a shawl pin, and it would be foolish in me
to aspire to the duties of those dainty lace pins made to fasten a
collar. I am contented with my lot, however, and, being of a strong make
and enterprising spirit, have had many adventures, some perils, and
great satisfactions since I left the factory long ago. I well remember
how eagerly I looked about me when the paper in which I lived, with some
hundreds of relations, was hung up in a shop window, to display our
glittering ranks and tempt people to buy. At last a purchaser came, a
dashing young lady who bought us with several other fancy articles, and
carried us away in a smart little bag, humming and talking to herself,
in what I thought a very curious way.

"When we were taken out I was all in a flutter to see where I was and
what would happen next. There were so many of us, I could hardly hope to
go first, for I was in the third row, and most people take us in order.
But Cora was a hasty, careless soul, and pulled us out at random, so I
soon found myself stuck up in a big untidy cushion, with every sort of
pin you can imagine. Such a gay and giddy set I never saw, and really,
my dear, their ways and conversation were quite startling to an ignorant
young thing like me. Pearl, coral, diamond, jet, gold, and silver heads,
were all around me as well as vulgar brass knobs, jaunty black pins,
good for nothing as they snap at the least strain, and my own relations,
looking eminently neat and respectable among this theatrical rabble. For
I will not disguise from you, Miss Ellen, that my first mistress was an
actress, and my life a very gay one at the beginning. Merry, kind, and
careless was the pretty Cora, and I am bound to confess I enjoyed myself
immensely, for I was taken by chance with half a dozen friends to pin up
the folds of her velvet train and mantle, in a fairy spectacle where she
played the queen. It was very splendid, and, snugly settled among the
soft folds, I saw it all, and probably felt that I too had my part;
humble as it was, it was faithfully performed, and I never once deserted
my post for six weeks.

"Among the elves who went flitting about with silvery wings and spangled
robes was one dear child who was the good genius of the queen, and was
always fluttering near her, so I could not help seeing and loving the
dear creature. She danced and sung, came out of flowers, swung down from
trees, popped up from the lower regions, and finally, when all the
queen's troubles are over, flew away on a golden cloud, smiling through
a blaze of red light, and dropping roses as she vanished.

"When the play ended, I used to see her in an old dress, a thin shawl,
and shabby hat, go limping home with a tired-looking woman who dressed
the girls.

"I thought a good deal about 'Little Viola,' as they called her,--though
her real name was Sally, I believe,--and one dreadful night I played a
heroic part, and thrill now when I remember it."

"Go on, please, I long to know," said Miss Ellen, dropping the
needle-book into her lap, and leaning forward to listen better.

"One evening the theatre took fire," continued the old pin impressively.
"I don't know how, but all of a sudden there was a great uproar, smoke,
flames, water pouring, people running frantically about, and such a wild
panic I lost my small wits for a time. When I recovered them, I found
Cora was leaning from a high window, with something wrapped closely in
the velvet mantle that I pinned upon the left shoulder just under a
paste buckle that only sparkled while _I_ did all the work.

"A little golden head lay close by me, and a white face looked up from
the crimson folds, but the sweet eyes were shut, the lips were drawn
with pain, a horrible odor of burnt clothes came up to me, and the small
hand that clutched Cora's neck was all blistered with the cruel fire
which would have devoured the child if my brave mistress had not rescued
her at the risk of her own life. _She_ could have escaped at first, but
she heard Sally cry to her through the blinding smoke, and went to find
and rescue her. I dimly recalled that, and pressed closer to the white
shoulder, full of pride and affection for the kind soul whom I had often
thought too gay and giddy to care for anything but pleasure.

"Now she was calling to the people in the street to put up a ladder,
and, as she leaned and called, I could see the crowds far down, the
smoke and flame bursting out below, and hear the hiss of water as it
fell upon the blazing walls. It was a most exciting moment, as we hung
there, watching the gallant men fix the long ladder, and one come
climbing up till we could see his brave face, and hear him shout
cheerily,--

"'Swing from the window-sill, I'll catch you.'

"But Cora answered, as she showed the little yellow head that shone in
the red glare,--

"'No, save the child first!'

"'Drop her then, and be quick: it's hot work here,' and the man held up
his arms with a laugh, as the flames licked out below as if to eat away
the frail support he stood on.

"All in one breathless moment, Cora had torn off the mantle, wrapped the
child in it, bound her girdle about it, and finding the gaudy band would
not tie, caught out the first pin that came to hand, and fastened it.
_I_ was that pin; and I felt that the child's life almost depended upon
me, for as the precious bundle dropped into the man's hands he caught it
by the cloak, and, putting it on his shoulder, went swiftly down. The
belt strained, the velvet tore, I felt myself bending with the weight,
and expected every minute to see the child slip, and fall on the stones
below. But I held fast, I drove my point deeply in, I twisted myself
round so that even the bend should be a help, and I called to the man,
'Hold tight, I'm trying my best, but what can one pin do!'

"Of course he did not hear me, but I really believe my desperate efforts
were of some use; for, we got safely down, and were hurried away to the
hospital where other poor souls had already gone.

"The good nurse who undid that scorched, drenched, and pitiful bundle,
stuck me in her shawl, and resting there, I saw the poor child laid in a
little bed, her burns skilfully cared for, and her scattered senses
restored by tender words and motherly kisses. How glad I was to hear
that she would live, and still more rejoiced to learn next day that Cora
was near by, badly burned but not in danger, and anxious to see the
child she had saved.

"Nurse Benson took the little thing in her arms to visit my poor
mistress, and I went too. But alas! I never should have known the gay
and blooming girl of the day before. Her face and hands were terribly
burnt, and she would never again be able to play the lovely queen on any
stage, for her fresh beauty was forever lost.

"Hard days for all of us; I took my share of trouble with the rest,
though I only suffered from the strain to my back. Nurse Benson
straightened me out and kept me in use, so I saw much of pain and
patience in that great house, because the little gray shawl which I
fastened covered a tender heart, and on that motherly bosom many aching
heads found rest, many weary creatures breathed their last, and more
than one unhappy soul learned to submit.

"Among these last was poor Cora, for it was very hard to give up beauty,
health, and the life she loved, so soon. Yet I do not think she ever
regretted the sacrifice when she saw the grateful child well and safe,
for little Sally was her best comforter, and through the long weeks she
lay there half blind and suffering, the daily visit of the little one
cheered her more than anything else. The poor mother was lost in the
great fire, and Cora adopted the orphan as her own, and surely she had a
right to what she had so dearly bought.

"They went away together at last, one quite well and strong again, the
other a sad wreck, but a better woman for the trial, I think, and she
carried comfort with her. Poor little Sally led her, a faithful guide, a
tender nurse, a devoted daughter to her all her life."

Here the pin paused, out of breath, and Miss Ellen shook a bright drop
off the lace that lay in her lap, as she said in a tone of real
interest,--

"What happened next? How long did you stay in the hospital?"

"I stayed a year, for Nurse used me one day to pin up a print at the
foot of a poor man's bed, and he took such comfort in it they let it
hang till he died. A lovely picture of a person who held out his arms to
all the suffering and oppressed, and they gathered about him to be
comforted and saved. The forlorn soul had led a wicked life, and now lay
dying a long and painful death, but something in that divine face taught
him to hope for pardon, and when no eye but mine saw him in the lonely
nights he wept, and prayed, and struggled to repent. I think he was
forgiven, for when at last he lay dead a smile was on his lips that
never had been there before. Then the print was taken down, and I was
used to pin up a bundle of red flannel by one of the women, and for
months I lay in a dark chest, meditating on the lessons I had already
learned.

"Suddenly I was taken out, and when a queer round pin-ball of the
flannel had been made by a nice old lady, I was stuck in it with a party
of fat needles, and a few of my own race, all with stout bodies and big
heads.

"'The dear boy is clumsy with his fingers, and needs strong things to
use,' said the old lady, as she held the tomato cushion in both hands
and kissed it before she put it into a soldier's 'comfort bag.'

"'Now I shall have a lively time!' I thought, and looked gaily about me,
for I liked adventures, and felt that I was sure of them now.

"I cannot begin to tell you all I went through with that boy, for he was
brave as a lion and got many hard knocks. We marched, and camped, and
fought, and suffered, but we _never_ ran away, and when at last a Minie
ball came smashing through the red cushion (which Dick often carried in
his pocket as a sort of charm to keep him safe, for men seldom use
pins), I nearly lost my head, for the stuffing flew out, and we were all
knocked about in a dreadful way. The cushion and the old wallet together
saved Dick's life, however, for the ball did not reach his brave heart,
and the last I saw of him as I fell out of the hasty hand that felt for
a wound was a soft look in the brave bright eyes, as he said to himself
with a smile,--

"'Dear old mother hasn't lost her boy yet, thank God!'

"A colored lad picked me up, as I lay shining on the grass, and pins
being scarce in those parts, gave me to his mammy, who kept me to fasten
her turban. Quite a new scene I found, for in the old cabin were a dozen
children and their mothers making ready to go North. The men were all
away fighting or serving the army, so mammy led the little troop, and
they marched off one day following the gay turban like a banner, for she
had a valiant soul, and was bound to find safety and freedom for her
children at all risks.

"In my many wanderings to and fro, I never made so strange a journey as
that one, but I enjoyed it, full of danger, weariness and privation as
it was; and every morning when mammy put on the red and yellow
handkerchief I was proud to sit aloft on that good gray head, and lead
the forlorn little army toward a land of liberty.

"We got there at last, and she fell to work over a washtub to earn the
bread for the hungry mouths. I had stood by her through all those weary
weeks, and did not want to leave her now, but went off pinning a paper
round some clean clothes on a Saturday morning.

"'Now I wonder what will come next!' I thought, as Thomas Jefferson, or
'Jeff,' as they called him, went whistling away with the parcel through
the streets.

"Crossing the park, he spied a lovely butterfly which had strayed in
from the country; caught and pinned it on his hat to please little Dinah
when he got home. The pretty creature soon writhed its delicate life
away, but its beauty attracted the eye of a pale girl hurrying along
with a roll of work under her arm.

"'Will you sell me that?' she asked, and Jeff gladly consented,
wondering what she would do with it. So did I, but when we got to her
room I soon saw, for she pinned the impaled butterfly against a bit of
blue paper, and painted it so well that its golden wings seemed to
quiver as they did in life. A very poor place it was, but full of lovely
things, and I grew artistic with just looking about me at the pictures
on the walls, the flowers blooming on plates and panels, birds and
insects kept for copies, and gay bits of stuff used as back-grounds.

"But more beautiful than anything she made was the girl's quiet, busy
life alone in the big city; for, she was hoping to be an artist, and
worked day and night to compass her desire. So poor, but so happy, I
used to wonder why no one helped her and kept her from such hard, yet
patient, waiting. But no one did, and I could watch her toiling away as
I held the butterfly against the wall, feeling as if it was a symbol of
herself, beating her delicate wings in that close place till her heart
was broken, by the cruel fate that held her there when she should have
been out in the free sunshine. But she found a good customer for her
pretty work, in a rich lady who had nothing to do but amuse herself, and
spent much time and money in fancy-work.

"I know all about it; for, one day an order came from the great store
where her designs were often bought, and she was very happy painting
some purple pansies upon velvet, and she copied her yellow butterfly to
float above them.

"The poor insect was very dry, and crumbled at a touch, so my task there
was done, and as my mistress rolled up the packet, she took me to fasten
it securely, singing as she did so, for every penny was precious.

"We all went together to the rich lady, and she embroidered the flowers
on a screen very like that one yonder. I thought she would throw me
away, I was so battered now, but she took a fancy to use me in various
ways about her canvas work, and I lived with her all winter. A kind
lady, my dear, but I often wished I could suggest to her better ways of
spending her life than everlasting fancy-work. She never seemed to see
the wants of those about her, never lent an ear to the poor, or found
delight in giving of her abundance to those who had little, to brighten
their lives; but sighed because she had nothing to do when the world was
full of work, and she blessed with so many good gifts to use and to
enjoy. I hope she will see her mistake some day, and not waste all her
life on trifles, else she will regret it sadly by and by."

Here the pin paused with a keen glance at Miss Ellen, who had suddenly
begun to sew with a bright color in her cheeks, for the purple pansies
were on the screen that stood before her fire-place, and she recognized
the portrait of herself in that last description. But she did not fancy
being lectured by a pin, so she asked with a smile as she plaited up her
lace,--

"That is all very interesting, but you have not yet told me what becomes
of the pins, Granny."

"Pins, like people, shape their own lives, in a great measure, my dear,
and go to their reward when they are used up. The good ones sink into
the earth and turn to silver, to come forth again in a new and precious
form. The bad ones crumble away to nothing in cracks and dust heaps,
with no hope of salvation, unless some human hand lifts them up and
gives them a chance to try again. Some are lazy, and slip out of sight
to escape service, some are too sharp, and prick and scratch wherever
they are. Others are poor, weak things, who bend up and lose their heads
as soon as they are used. Some obtrude themselves on all occasions, and
some are never to be found in times of need. All have the choice to wear
out or to rust out. I chose the former, and have had a useful, happy
life so far. I'm not as straight as I once was, but I'm bright still, my
point is sharp, my head firm, and age has not weakened me much, I hope,
but made me wiser, better, and more contented to do my duty wherever I
am, than when I left my native paper long ago."

Before Miss Ellen could express her respect for the worthy old pin, a
dismal groan was heard from the blue cushion, and a small voice croaked
aloud,--

"Alas, alas, I chose to rust out, and here I am, a miserable, worthless
thing, whom no one can use or care for. Lift the ruffle, and behold a
sad contrast to the faithful, honest, happy Granny, who has told us such
a varied tale."

"Bless me, what possesses everything to-day!" exclaimed Miss Ellen,
looking under the frill of the old cushion to see who was speaking now.
There to be sure she found a pin hidden away, and so rusty that she
could hardly pull it out. But it came creaking forth at the third tug,
and when it was set up beside Granny, she cried out in her cheery way,--

"Try Dr. Emery, he can cure most cases of rust, and it is never too late
to mend, neighbor."

"Too late for me!" sighed the new comer. "The rust of idleness has eaten
into my vitals while I lay in my silken bed, and my chance is gone
forever. I was bright, and strong, and sharp once, but I feared work and
worry, and I hid, growing duller, dimmer, and more useless every day. I
am good for nothing, throw me away, and let the black pins mourn for a
wasted life."

"No," said Miss Ellen, "you are not useless, for you two shall sit
together in my new cushion, a warning to me, as well as to the other
pins, to choose the right way in time, and wear out with doing our duty,
rather than rust out as so many do. Thank you, Granny, for your little
lecture. I will not forget it, but go at once and find that poor girl,
and help her all I can. Rest here, you good old soul, and teach these
little things to follow your example."

As she spoke, Miss Ellen set the two pins in the middle of the red satin
cushion, stuck the smaller pins round them, and hastened to put on her
shawl lest something should prevent her from going.

"Take me with you; I'm not tired, I love to work! use me, dear mistress,
and let me help in the good work!" cried Granny, with a lively skip that
sent her out upon the bureau.

So Miss Ellen pinned her shawl with the old pin instead of the fine
brooch she had in her hand, and they went gaily away together, leaving
the rusty one to bemoan itself, and all the little ones to privately
resolve that they would not hide away from care and labor, but take
their share bravely and have a good record to show when they went, at
last where the good pins go.

THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


LITTLE MEN; OR, LIFE AT PLUMFIELD WITH JO'S BOYS. Price, $1.50.

[Illustration: "'I'm not hurt, all right in a minute,' he said, sitting
up, a little pale and dizzy, as the boys gathered round him, full of
admiration and alarm."--PAGE 251.]


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS


WORK:

_A STORY OF EXPERIENCE._

[Illustration]

"An endless significance lies in work; in idleness alone is there perpetual
despair."--CARLYLE.

PRICE, $1.75.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


ROSE IN BLOOM.

[Illustration]

A SEQUEL TO

"EIGHT COUSINS."

Price $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.


CUPID AND CHOW-CHOW, ETC.

[Illustration]

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


[Illustration: "Sing, Tessa; sing!" cried Tommo, twanging away with all
his might.--PAGE 47.]

AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG: Containing "My Boys," "Shawl-Straps," "Cupid and
Chow-Chow," "My Girls," "Jimmy's Cruise in the Pinafore." 5 vols. Price
of each, $1.00.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.

[Illustration: "One hand stirred gruel for sick America, and the other
hugged baby Africa."--PAGE 76.]

HOSPITAL SKETCHES. Price, $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


MICE AT PLAY.


[Illustration: "I pulled it full of water, and then I poked the pipe end
into her ear, and then I let it fly."]

"WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY, THE MICE WILL PLAY."

A STORY FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY.

By NEIL FOREST. Price $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


[Illustration]

AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL.

PRICE $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


LITTLE WOMEN; OR, MEG, JO, BETH, AND AMY. Parts First and Second. Price
of each, $1.50.

[Illustration: JO IN A VORTEX.--Every few weeks she would shut herself
up in her room, put on her scribbling suit, and "fall into a vortex," as
she expressed it.--PAGE 44.]


       *       *       *       *       *


SUSAN COOLIDGE'S POPULAR BOOKS.


[Illustration: NANNY'S SUBSTITUTE.

Nanny at the Fair, taking orders and carrying trays.--PAGE 171.]

MISCHIEF'S THANKSGIVING,

_AND OTHER STORIES_.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ADDIE LEDYARD.

_One handsome square 16mo volume, bound in cloth, black and gilt
lettered. Price $1.50._


       *       *       *       *       *


BOB BROWN'S BOY-BOOK.


[Illustration: "WILL BRADLEY AND I."]

WE BOYS.

Written by one of us for the amusement of Pa's and Ma's in general, Aunt
Lovisa in particular.

PRICE $1.00.


       *       *       *       *       *


H. H.'S YOUNG FOLKS' BOOK.


BITS OF TALK,
_IN VERSE AND PROSE_,
FOR YOUNG FOLKS.

BY H. H.,

AUTHOR OF "BITS OF TALK ABOUT HOME MATTERS," "BITS OF TRAVEL," "VERSES."

[Illustration:

     "----in all the lands
No such morning-glory."

--PAGE 133.]

PRICE $1.00.


       *       *       *       *       *


JOLLY GOOD TIMES;


[Illustration]

OR,

CHILD LIFE ON A FARM.

BY P. THORNE. Price $1.25.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON'S STORIES.


[Illustration: JUST A LITTLE BIT OF CHRISTMAS.--PAGE 153.]

BED-TIME STORIES.

MORE BED-TIME STORIES.

_With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard._

Two handsome square 16mo volumes, bound in cloth, black and gilt
lettered. Price, $1.50 each.


       *       *       *       *       *


HAMERTON'S BOY-BOOK.


[Illustration]

HARRY BLOUNT. Passages in a Boy's Life on Land and Sea. By PHILIP
GILBERT HAMERTON. Price $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


SUSAN COOLIDGE'S POPULAR BOOKS.


[Illustration: ENTERING PARADISE.--PAGE 23.

So in they marched, Katy and Cecy heading the procession, and Dorry,
with his great trailing bunch of boughs, bringing up the rear.]

WHAT KATY DID. With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. One handsome, square
16mo volume, bound in cloth, black and gilt lettered. Price, $1.50.


_These books are sold by all booksellers and newsdealers
everywhere. When not to be found, send the advertised amount by
mail, to the Publishers_,

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS,

_Boston_.



Behind a Mask _or_ A Woman's Power By A.M. Barnard




_chapter I_


JEAN MUIR

"Has she come?"

"No, Mamma, not yet."

"I wish it were well over. The thought of it worries and excites me. A
cushion for my back, Bella."

And poor, peevish Mrs. Coventry sank into an easy chair with a nervous
sigh and the air of a martyr, while her pretty daughter hovered about
her with affectionate solicitude.

"Who are they talking of, Lucia?" asked the languid young man lounging
on a couch near his cousin, who bent over her tapestry work with a happy
smile on her usually haughty face.

"The new governess, Miss Muir. Shall I tell you about her?"

"No, thank you. I have an inveterate aversion to the whole tribe. I've
often thanked heaven that I had but one sister, and she a spoiled child,
so that I have escaped the infliction of a governess so long."

"How will you bear it now?" asked Lucia.

"Leave the house while she is in it."

"No, you won't. You're too lazy, Gerald," called out a younger and more
energetic man, from the recess where he stood teasing his dogs.

"I'll give her a three days' trial; if she proves endurable I shall not
disturb myself; if, as I am sure, she is a bore, I'm off anywhere,
anywhere out of her way."

"I beg you won't talk in that depressing manner, boys. I dread the
coming of a stranger more than you possibly can, but Bella _must_ not be
neglected; so I have nerved myself to endure this woman, and Lucia is
good enough to say she will attend to her after tonight."

"Don't be troubled, Mamma. She is a nice person, I dare say, and when
once we are used to her, I've no doubt we shall be glad to have her,
it's so dull here just now. Lady Sydney said she was a quiet,
accomplished, amiable girl, who needed a home, and would be a help to
poor stupid me, so try to like her for my sake."

"I will, dear, but isn't it getting late? I do hope nothing has
happened. Did you tell them to send a carriage to the station for
her, Gerald?"

"I forgot it. But it's not far, it won't hurt her to walk" was the
languid reply.

"It was indolence, not forgetfulness, I know. I'm very sorry; she will
think it so rude to leave her to find her way so late. Do go and see
to it, Ned."

"Too late, Bella, the train was in some time ago. Give your orders to me
next time. Mother and I'll see that they are obeyed," said Edward.

"Ned is just at an age to make a fool of himself for any girl who
comes in his way. Have a care of the governess, Lucia, or she will
bewitch him."

Gerald spoke in a satirical whisper, but his brother heard him and
answered with a good-humored laugh.

"I wish there was any hope of your making a fool of yourself in that
way, old fellow. Set me a good example, and I promise to follow it. As
for the governess, she is a woman, and should be treated with common
civility. I should say a little extra kindness wouldn't be amiss,
either, because she is poor, and a stranger."

"That is my dear, good-hearted Ned! We'll stand by poor little Muir,
won't we?" And running to her brother, Bella stood on tiptoe to offer
him a kiss which he could not refuse, for the rosy lips were pursed up
invitingly, and the bright eyes full of sisterly affection.

"I do hope she has come, for, when I make an effort to see anyone, I
hate to make it in vain. Punctuality is _such_ a virtue, and I know this
woman hasn't got it, for she promised to be here at seven, and now it is
long after," began Mrs. Coventry, in an injured tone.

Before she could get breath for another complaint, the clock struck
seven and the doorbell rang.

"There she is!" cried Bella, and turned toward the door as if to go and
meet the newcomer.

But Lucia arrested her, saying authoritatively, "Stay here, child. It is
her place to come to you, not yours to go to her."

"Miss Muir," announced a servant, and a little black-robed figure stood
in the doorway. For an instant no one stirred, and the governess had
time to see and be seen before a word was uttered. All looked at her,
and she cast on the household group a keen glance that impressed them
curiously; then her eyes fell, and bowing slightly she walked in. Edward
came forward and received her with the frank cordiality which nothing
could daunt or chill.

"Mother, this is the lady whom you expected. Miss Muir, allow me to
apologize for our apparent neglect in not sending for you. There was a
mistake about the carriage, or, rather, the lazy fellow to whom the
order was given forgot it. Bella, come here."

"Thank you, no apology is needed. I did not expect to be sent for." And
the governess meekly sat down without lifting her eyes.

"I am glad to see you. Let me take your things," said Bella, rather
shyly, for Gerald, still lounging, watched the fireside group with
languid interest, and Lucia never stirred. Mrs. Coventry took a second
survey and began:

"You were punctual, Miss Muir, which pleases me. I'm a sad invalid, as
Lady Sydney told you, I hope; so that Miss Coventry's lessons will be
directed by my niece, and you will go to her for directions, as she
knows what I wish. You will excuse me if I ask you a few questions, for
Lady Sydney's note was very brief, and I left everything to her
judgment."

"Ask anything you like, madam," answered the soft, sad voice.

"You are Scotch, I believe."

"Yes, madam."

"Are your parents living?"

"I have not a relation in the world."

"Dear me, how sad! Do you mind telling me your age?"

"Nineteen." And a smile passed over Miss Muir's lips, as she folded her
hands with an air of resignation, for the catechism was evidently to be
a long one.

"So young! Lady Sydney mentioned five-and-twenty, I think, didn't
she, Bella?"

"No, Mamma, she only said she thought so. Don't ask such questions. It's
not pleasant before us all," whispered Bella.

A quick, grateful glance shone on her from the suddenly lifted eyes of
Miss Muir, as she said quietly, "I wish I was thirty, but, as I am not,
I do my best to look and seem old."

Of course, every one looked at her then, and all felt a touch of pity at
the sight of the pale-faced girl in her plain black dress, with no
ornament but a little silver cross at her throat. Small, thin, and
colorless she was, with yellow hair, gray eyes, and sharply cut,
irregular, but very expressive features. Poverty seemed to have set its
bond stamp upon her, and life to have had for her more frost than
sunshine. But something in the lines of the mouth betrayed strength, and
the clear, low voice had a curious mixture of command and entreaty in
its varying tones. Not an attractive woman, yet not an ordinary one;
and, as she sat there with her delicate hands lying in her lap, her head
bent, and a bitter look on her thin face, she was more interesting than
many a blithe and blooming girl. Bella's heart warmed to her at once,
and she drew her seat nearer, while Edward went back to his dogs that
his presence might not embarrass her.

"You have been ill, I think," continued Mrs. Coventry, who considered
this fact the most interesting of all she had heard concerning the
governess.

"Yes, madam, I left the hospital only a week ago."

"Are you quite sure it is safe to begin teaching so soon?"

"I have no time to lose, and shall soon gain strength here in the
country, if you care to keep me."

"And you are fitted to teach music, French, and drawing?"

"I shall endeavor to prove that I am."

"Be kind enough to go and play an air or two. I can judge by your touch;
I used to play finely when a girl."

Miss Muir rose, looked about her for the instrument, and seeing it at
the other end of the room went toward it, passing Gerald and Lucia as if
she did not see them. Bella followed, and in a moment forgot everything
in admiration. Miss Muir played like one who loved music and was perfect
mistress of her art. She charmed them all by the magic of this spell;
even indolent Gerald sat up to listen, and Lucia put down her needle,
while Ned watched the slender white fingers as they flew, and wondered
at the strength and skill which they possessed.

"Please sing," pleaded Bella, as a brilliant overture ended.

With the same meek obedience Miss Muir complied, and began a little
Scotch melody, so sweet, so sad, that the girl's eyes filled, and Mrs.
Coventry looked for one of her many pocket-handkerchiefs. But suddenly
the music ceased, for, with a vain attempt to support herself, the
singer slid from her seat and lay before the startled listeners, as
white and rigid as if struck with death. Edward caught her up, and,
ordering his brother off the couch, laid her there, while Bella chafed
her hands, and her mother rang for her maid. Lucia bathed the poor
girl's temples, and Gerald, with unwonted energy, brought a glass of
wine. Soon Miss Muir's lips trembled, she sighed, then murmured,
tenderly, with a pretty Scotch accent, as if wandering in the past,
"Bide wi' me, Mither, I'm sae sick an sad here all alone."

"Take a sip of this, and it will do you good, my dear," said Mrs.
Coventry, quite touched by the plaintive words.

The strange voice seemed to recall her. She sat up, looked about her, a
little wildly, for a moment, then collected herself and said, with a
pathetic look and tone, "Pardon me. I have been on my feet all day, and,
in my eagerness to keep my appointment, I forgot to eat since morning.
I'm better now; shall I finish the song?"

"By no means. Come and have some tea," said Bella, full of pity
and remorse.

"Scene first, very well done," whispered Gerald to his cousin.

Miss Muir was just before them, apparently listening to Mrs. Coventry's
remarks upon fainting fits; but she heard, and looked over her shoulders
with a gesture like Rachel. Her eyes were gray, but at that instant they
seemed black with some strong emotion of anger, pride, or defiance. A
curious smile passed over her face as she bowed, and said in her
penetrating voice, "Thanks. The last scene shall be still better."

Young Coventry was a cool, indolent man, seldom conscious of any
emotion, any passion, pleasurable or otherwise; but at the look, the
tone of the governess, he experienced a new sensation, indefinable, yet
strong. He colored and, for the first time in his life, looked abashed.
Lucia saw it, and hated Miss Muir with a sudden hatred; for, in all the
years she had passed with her cousin, no look or word of hers had
possessed such power. Coventry was himself again in an instant, with no
trace of that passing change, but a look of interest in his usually
dreamy eyes, and a touch of anger in his sarcastic voice.

"What a melodramatic young lady! I shall go tomorrow."

Lucia laughed, and was well pleased when he sauntered away to bring her
a cup of tea from the table where a little scene was just taking place.
Mrs. Coventry had sunk into her chair again, exhausted by the flurry of
the fainting fit. Bella was busied about her; and Edward, eager to feed
the pale governess, was awkwardly trying to make the tea, after a
beseeching glance at his cousin which she did not choose to answer. As
he upset the caddy and uttered a despairing exclamation, Miss Muir
quietly took her place behind the urn, saying with a smile, and a shy
glance at the young man, "Allow me to assume my duty at once, and serve
you all. I understand the art of making people comfortable in this way.
The scoop, please. I can gather this up quite well alone, if you will
tell me how your mother likes her tea."

Edward pulled a chair to the table and made merry over his mishaps,
while Miss Muir performed her little task with a skill and grace that
made it pleasant to watch her. Coventry lingered a moment after she had
given him a steaming cup, to observe her more nearly, while he asked a
question or two of his brother. She took no more notice of him than if
he had been a statue, and in the middle of the one remark he addressed
to her, she rose to take the sugar basin to Mrs. Coventry, who was quite
won by the modest, domestic graces of the new governess.

"Really, my dear, you are a treasure; I haven't tasted such tea since my
poor maid Ellis died. Bella never makes it good, and Miss Lucia always
forgets the cream. Whatever you do you seem to do well, and that is
_such_ a comfort."

"Let me always do this for you, then. It will be a pleasure, madam." And
Miss Muir came back to her seat with a faint color in her cheek which
improved her much.

"My brother asked if young Sydney was at home when you left," said
Edward, for Gerald would not take the trouble to repeat the question.

Miss Muir fixed her eyes on Coventry, and answered with a slight tremor
of the lips, "No, he left home some weeks ago."

The young man went back to his cousin, saying, as he threw himself
down beside her, "I shall not go tomorrow, but wait till the three
days are out."

"Why?" demanded Lucia.

Lowering his voice he said, with a significant nod toward the governess,
"Because I have a fancy that she is at the bottom of Sydney's mystery.
He's not been himself lately, and now he is gone without a word. I
rather like romances in real life, if they are not too long, or
difficult to read."

"Do you think her pretty?"

"Far from it, a most uncanny little specimen."

"Then why fancy Sydney loves her?"

"He is an oddity, and likes sensations and things of that sort."

"What do you mean, Gerald?"

"Get the Muir to look at you, as she did at me, and you will understand.
Will you have another cup, Juno?"

"Yes, please." She liked to have him wait upon her, for he did it to no
other woman except his mother.

Before he could slowly rise, Miss Muir glided to them with another cup
on the salver; and, as Lucia took it with a cold nod, the girl said
under her breath, "I think it honest to tell you that I possess a quick
ear, and cannot help hearing what is said anywhere in the room. What you
say of me is of no consequence, but you may speak of things which you
prefer I should not hear; therefore, allow me to warn you." And she was
gone again as noiselessly as she came.

"How do you like that?" whispered Coventry, as his cousin sat looking
after the girl, with a disturbed expression.

"What an uncomfortable creature to have in the house! I am very sorry I
urged her coming, for your mother has taken a fancy to her, and it will
be hard to get rid of her," said Lucia, half angry, half amused.

"Hush, she hears every word you say. I know it by the expression of her
face, for Ned is talking about horses, and she looks as haughty as ever
you did, and that is saying much. Faith, this is getting interesting."

"Hark, she is speaking; I want to hear," and Lucia laid her hand on her
cousin's lips. He kissed it, and then idly amused himself with turning
the rings to and fro on the slender fingers.

"I have been in France several years, madam, but my friend died and I
came back to be with Lady Sydney, till--" Muir paused an instant, then
added, slowly, "till I fell ill. It was a contagious fever, so I went of
my own accord to the hospital, not wishing to endanger her."

"Very right, but are you sure there is no danger of infection now?"
asked Mrs. Coventry anxiously.

"None, I assure you. I have been well for some time, but did not leave
because I preferred to stay there, than to return to Lady Sydney."

"No quarrel, I hope? No trouble of any kind?"

"No quarrel, but--well, why not? You have a right to know, and I will
not make a foolish mystery out of a very simple thing. As your family,
only, is present, I may tell the truth. I did not go back on the young
gentleman's account. Please ask no more."

"Ah, I see. Quite prudent and proper, Miss Muir. I shall never allude to
it again. Thank you for your frankness. Bella, you will be careful not
to mention this to young friends; girls gossip sadly, and it would annoy
Lady Sydney beyond everything to have this talked of."

"Very neighborly of Lady S. to send the dangerous young lady here,
where there are _two_ young gentlemen to be captivated. I wonder why
she didn't keep Sydney after she had caught him," murmured Coventry to
his cousin.

"Because she had the utmost contempt for a titled fool." Miss Muir
dropped the words almost into his ear, as she bent to take her shawl
from the sofa corner.

"How the deuce did she get there?" ejaculated Coventry, looking as if he
had received another sensation. "She has spirit, though, and upon my
word I pity Sydney, if he did try to dazzle her, for he must have got a
splendid dismissal."

"Come and play billiards. You promised, and I hold you to your word,"
said Lucia, rising with decision, for Gerald was showing too much
interest in another to suit Miss Beaufort.

"I am, as ever, your most devoted. My mother is a charming woman, but I
find our evening parties slightly dull, when only my own family are
present. Good night, Mamma." He shook hands with his mother, whose pride
and idol he was, and, with a comprehensive nod to the others, strolled
after his cousin.

"Now they are gone we can be quite cozy, and talk over things, for I
don't mind Ned any more than I do his dogs," said Bella, settling
herself on her mother's footstool.

"I merely wish to say, Miss Muir, that my daughter has never had a
governess and is sadly backward for a girl of sixteen. I want you to
pass the mornings with her, and get her on as rapidly as possible. In
the afternoon you will walk or drive with her, and in the evening sit
with us here, if you like, or amuse yourself as you please. While in the
country we are very quiet, for I cannot bear much company, and when my
sons want gaiety, they go away for it. Miss Beaufort oversees the
servants, and takes my place as far as possible. I am very delicate and
keep my room till evening, except for an airing at noon. We will try
each other for a month, and I hope we shall get on quite comfortably
together."

"I shall do my best, madam."

One would not have believed that the meek, spiritless voice which
uttered these words was the same that had startled Coventry a few
minutes before, nor that the pale, patient face could ever have kindled
with such sudden fire as that which looked over Miss Muir's shoulder
when she answered her young host's speech.

Edward thought within himself, Poor little woman! She has had a hard
life. We will try and make it easier while she is here; and began his
charitable work by suggesting that she might be tired. She acknowledged
she was, and Bella led her away to a bright, cozy room, where with a
pretty little speech and a good-night kiss she left her.

When alone Miss Muir's conduct was decidedly peculiar. Her first act was
to clench her hands and mutter between her teeth, with passionate force,
"I'll not fail again if there is power in a woman's wit and will!" She
stood a moment motionless, with an expression of almost fierce disdain
on her face, then shook her clenched hand as if menacing some unseen
enemy. Next she laughed, and shrugged her shoulders with a true French
shrug, saying low to herself, "Yes, the last scene _shall_ be better
than the first. _Mon dieu_, how tired and hungry I am!"

Kneeling before the one small trunk which held her worldly possessions,
she opened it, drew out a flask, and mixed a glass of some ardent
cordial, which she seemed to enjoy extremely as she sat on the carpet,
musing, while her quick eyes examined every corner of the room.

"Not bad! It will be a good field for me to work in, and the harder the
task the better I shall like it. _Merci_, old friend. You put heart and
courage into me when nothing else will. Come, the curtain is down, so I
may be myself for a few hours, if actresses ever are themselves."

Still sitting on the floor she unbound and removed the long abundant
braids from her head, wiped the pink from her face, took out several
pearly teeth, and slipping off her dress appeared herself indeed, a
haggard, worn, and moody woman of thirty at least. The metamorphosis was
wonderful, but the disguise was more in the expression she assumed than
in any art of costume or false adornment. Now she was alone, and her
mobile features settled into their natural expression, weary, hard,
bitter. She had been lovely once, happy, innocent, and tender; but
nothing of all this remained to the gloomy woman who leaned there
brooding over some wrong, or loss, or disappointment which had darkened
all her life. For an hour she sat so, sometimes playing absently with
the scanty locks that hung about her face, sometimes lifting the glass
to her lips as if the fiery draught warmed her cold blood; and once she
half uncovered her breast to eye with a terrible glance the scar of a
newly healed wound. At last she rose and crept to bed, like one worn out
with weariness and mental pain.




_chapter II_


A GOOD BEGINNING

Only the housemaids were astir when Miss Muir left her room next morning
and quietly found her way into the garden. As she walked, apparently
intent upon the flowers, her quick eye scrutinized the fine old house
and its picturesque surroundings.

"Not bad," she said to herself, adding, as she passed into the adjoining
park, "but the other may be better, and I will have the best."

Walking rapidly, she came out at length upon the wide green lawn which
lay before the ancient hall where Sir John Coventry lived in solitary
splendor. A stately old place, rich in oaks, well-kept shrubberies, gay
gardens, sunny terraces, carved gables, spacious rooms, liveried
servants, and every luxury befitting the ancestral home of a rich and
honorable race. Miss Muir's eyes brightened as she looked, her step grew
firmer, her carriage prouder, and a smile broke over her face; the smile
of one well pleased at the prospect of the success of some cherished
hope. Suddenly her whole air changed, she pushed back her hat, clasped
her hands loosely before her, and seemed absorbed in girlish admiration
of the fair scene that could not fail to charm any beauty-loving eye.
The cause of this rapid change soon appeared. A hale, handsome man,
between fifty and sixty, came through the little gate leading to the
park, and, seeing the young stranger, paused to examine her. He had only
time for a glance, however; she seemed conscious of his presence in a
moment, turned with a startled look, uttered an exclamation of surprise,
and looked as if hesitating whether to speak or run away. Gallant Sir
John took off his hat and said, with the old-fashioned courtesy which
became him well, "I beg your pardon for disturbing you, young lady.
Allow me to atone for it by inviting you to walk where you will, and
gather what flowers you like. I see you love them, so pray make free
with those about you."

With a charming air of maidenly timidity and artlessness, Miss Muir
replied, "Oh, thank you, sir! But it is I who should ask pardon for
trespassing. I never should have dared if I had not known that Sir John
was absent. I always wanted to see this fine old place, and ran over the
first thing, to satisfy myself."

"And _are_ you satisfied?" he asked, with a smile.

"More than satisfied--I'm charmed; for it is the most beautiful spot I
ever saw, and I've seen many famous seats, both at home and abroad," she
answered enthusiastically.

"The Hall is much flattered, and so would its master be if he heard
you," began the gentleman, with an odd expression.

"I should not praise it to him--at least, not as freely as I have to
you, sir," said the girl, with eyes still turned away.

"Why not?" asked her companion, looking much amused.

"I should be afraid. Not that I dread Sir John; but I've heard so many
beautiful and noble things about him, and respect him so highly, that I
should not dare to say much, lest he should see how I admire and--"

"And what, young lady? Finish, if you please."

"I was going to say, love him. I will say it, for he is an old man, and
one cannot help loving virtue and bravery."

Miss Muir looked very earnest and pretty as she spoke, standing there
with the sunshine glinting on her yellow hair, delicate face, and
downcast eyes. Sir John was not a vain man, but he found it pleasant to
hear himself commended by this unknown girl, and felt redoubled
curiosity to learn who she was. Too well-bred to ask, or to abash her by
avowing what she seemed unconscious of, he left both discoveries to
chance; and when she turned, as if to retrace her steps, he offered her
the handful of hothouse flowers which he held, saying, with a gallant
bow, "In Sir John's name let me give you my little nosegay, with thanks
for your good opinion, which, I assure you, is not entirely deserved,
for I know him well."

Miss Muir looked up quickly, eyed him an instant, then dropped her eyes,
and, coloring deeply, stammered out, "I did not know--I beg your
pardon--you are too kind, Sir John."

He laughed like a boy, asking, mischievously, "Why call me Sir John? How
do you know that I am not the gardener or the butler?"

"I did not see your face before, and no one but yourself would say that
any praise was undeserved," murmured Miss Muir, still overcome with
girlish confusion.

"Well, well, we will let that pass, and the next time you come we will
be properly introduced. Bella always brings her friends to the Hall, for
I am fond of young people."

"I am not a friend. I am only Miss Coventry's governess." And Miss Muir
dropped a meek curtsy. A slight change passed over Sir John's manner.
Few would have perceived it, but Miss Muir felt it at once, and bit her
lips with an angry feeling at her heart. With a curious air of pride,
mingled with respect, she accepted the still offered bouquet, returned
Sir John's parting bow, and tripped away, leaving the old gentleman to
wonder where Mrs. Coventry found such a piquant little governess.

"That is done, and very well for a beginning," she said to herself as
she approached the house.

In a green paddock close by fed a fine horse, who lifted up his head and
eyed her inquiringly, like one who expected a greeting. Following a
sudden impulse, she entered the paddock and, pulling a handful of
clover, invited the creature to come and eat. This was evidently a new
proceeding on the part of a lady, and the horse careered about as if
bent on frightening the newcomer away.

"I see," she said aloud, laughing to herself. "I am not your master, and
you rebel. Nevertheless, I'll conquer you, my fine brute."

Seating herself in the grass, she began to pull daisies, singing idly
the while, as if unconscious of the spirited prancings of the horse.
Presently he drew nearer, sniffing curiously and eyeing her with
surprise. She took no notice, but plaited the daisies and sang on as if
he was not there. This seemed to pique the petted creature, for, slowly
approaching, he came at length so close that he could smell her little
foot and nibble at her dress. Then she offered the clover, uttering
caressing words and making soothing sounds, till by degrees and with
much coquetting, the horse permitted her to stroke his glossy neck and
smooth his mane.

It was a pretty sight--the slender figure in the grass, the
high-spirited horse bending his proud head to her hand. Edward Coventry,
who had watched the scene, found it impossible to restrain himself any
longer and, leaping the wall, came to join the group, saying, with
mingled admiration and wonder in countenance and voice, "Good morning,
Miss Muir. If I had not seen your skill and courage proved before my
eyes, I should be alarmed for your safety. Hector is a wild, wayward
beast, and has damaged more than one groom who tried to conquer him."

"Good morning, Mr. Coventry. Don't tell tales of this noble creature,
who has not deceived my faith in him. Your grooms did not know how to
win his heart, and so subdue his spirit without breaking it."

Miss Muir rose as she spoke, and stood with her hand on Hector's neck
while he ate the grass which she had gathered in the skirt of her dress.

"You have the secret, and Hector is your subject now, though heretofore
he has rejected all friends but his master. Will you give him his
morning feast? I always bring him bread and play with him before
breakfast."

"Then you are not jealous?" And she looked up at him with eyes so bright
and beautiful in expression that the young man wondered he had not
observed them before.

"Not I. Pet him as much as you will; it will do him good. He is a
solitary fellow, for he scorns his own kind and lives alone, like his
master," he added, half to himself.

"Alone, with such a happy home, Mr. Coventry?" And a softly
compassionate glance stole from the bright eyes.

"That was an ungrateful speech, and I retract it for Bella's sake.
Younger sons have no position but such as they can make for themselves,
you know, and I've had no chance yet."

"Younger sons! I thought--I beg pardon." And Miss Muir paused, as if
remembering that she had no right to question.

Edward smiled and answered frankly, "Nay, don't mind me. You thought I
was the heir, perhaps. Whom did you take my brother for last night?"

"For some guest who admired Miss Beaufort. I did not hear his name, nor
observe him enough to discover who he was. I saw only your land mother,
your charming little sister, and--"

She stopped there, with a half-shy, half-grateful look at the young man
which finished the sentence better than any words. He was still a boy,
in spite of his one-and-twenty years, and a little color came into his
brown cheek as the eloquent eyes met his and fell before them.

"Yes, Bella is a capital girl, and one can't help loving her. I know
you'll get her on, for, really, she is the most delightful little dunce.
My mother's ill health and Bella's devotion to her have prevented our
attending to her education before. Next winter, when we go to town, she
is to come out, and must be prepared for that great event, you know," he
said, choosing a safe subject.

"I shall do my best. And that reminds me that I should report myself to
her, instead of enjoying myself here. When one has been ill and shut up
a long time, the country is so lovely one is apt to forget duty for
pleasure. Please remind me if I am negligent, Mr. Coventry."

"That name belongs to Gerald. I'm only Mr. Ned here," he said as they
walked toward the house, while Hector followed to the wall and sent a
sonorous farewell after them.

Bella came running to meet them, and greeted Miss Muir as if she had
made up her mind to like her heartily. "What a lovely bouquet you have
got! I never can arrange flowers prettily, which vexes me, for Mamma is
so fond of them and cannot go out herself. You have charming taste," she
said, examining the graceful posy which Miss Muir had much improved by
adding feathery grasses, delicate ferns, and fragrant wild flowers to
Sir John's exotics.

Putting them into Bella's hand, she said, in a winning way, "Take them
to your mother, then, and ask her if I may have the pleasure of making
her a daily nosegay; for I should find real delight in doing it, if it
would please her."

"How kind you are! Of course it would please her. I'll take them to her
while the dew is still on them." And away flew Bella, eager to give both
the flowers and the pretty message to the poor invalid.

Edward stopped to speak to the gardener, and Miss Muir went up the steps
alone. The long hall was lined with portraits, and pacing slowly down it
she examined them with interest. One caught her eye, and, pausing before
it, she scrutinized it carefully. A young, beautiful, but very haughty
female face. Miss Muir suspected at once who it was, and gave a decided
nod, as if she saw and caught at some unexpected chance. A soft rustle
behind her made her look around, and, seeing Lucia, she bowed, half
turned, as if for another glance at the picture, and said, as if
involuntarily, "How beautiful it is! May I ask if it is an ancestor,
Miss Beaufort?"

"It is the likeness of my mother" was the reply, given with a softened
voice and eyes that looked up tenderly.

"Ah, I might have known, from the resemblance, but I scarcely saw you
last night. Excuse my freedom, but Lady Sydney treated me as a friend,
and I forget my position. Allow me."

As she spoke, Miss Muir stooped to return the handkerchief which had
fallen from Lucia's hand, and did so with a humble mien which touched
the other's heart; for, though a proud, it was also a very generous one.

"Thank you. Are you better, this morning?" she said, graciously. And
having received an affirmative reply, she added, as she walked on, "I
will show you to the breakfast room, as Bella is not here. It is a very
informal meal with us, for my aunt is never down and my cousins are very
irregular in their hours. You can always have yours when you like,
without waiting for us if you are an early riser."

Bella and Edward appeared before the others were seated, and Miss Muir
quietly ate her breakfast, feeling well satisfied with her hour's
work. Ned recounted her exploit with Hector, Bella delivered her
mother's thanks for the flowers, and Lucia more than once recalled,
with pardonable vanity, that the governess had compared her to her
lovely mother, expressing by a look as much admiration for the living
likeness as for the painted one. All kindly did their best to make the
pale girl feel at home, and their cordial manner seemed to warm and
draw her out; for soon she put off her sad, meek air and entertained
them with gay anecdotes of her life in Paris, her travels in Russia
when governess in Prince Jermadoff's family, and all manner of witty
stories that kept them interested and merry long after the meal was
over. In the middle of an absorbing adventure, Coventry came in,
nodded lazily, lifted his brows, as if surprised at seeing the
governess there, and began his breakfast as if the ennui of another
day had already taken possession of him. Miss Muir stopped short, and
no entreaties could induce her to go on.

"Another time I will finish it, if you like. Now Miss Bella and I should
be at our books." And she left the room, followed by her pupil, taking
no notice of the young master of the house, beyond a graceful bow in
answer to his careless nod.

"Merciful creature! she goes when I come, and does not make life
unendurable by moping about before my eyes. Does she belong to the
moral, the melancholy, the romantic, or the dashing class, Ned?" said
Gerald, lounging over his coffee as he did over everything he attempted.

"To none of them; she is a capital little woman. I wish you had seen her
tame Hector this morning." And Edward repeated his story.

"Not a bad move on her part," said Coventry in reply. "She must be an
observing as well as an energetic young person, to discover your chief
weakness and attack it so soon. First tame the horse, and then the
master. It will be amusing to watch the game, only I shall be under the
painful necessity of checkmating you both, if it gets serious."

"You needn't exert yourself, old fellow, on my account. If I was not
above thinking ill of an inoffensive girl, I should say you were the
prize best worth winning, and advise you to take care of your own heart,
if you've got one, which I rather doubt."

"I often doubt it, myself; but I fancy the little Scotchwoman will not
be able to satisfy either of us upon that point. How does your highness
like her?" asked Coventry of his cousin, who sat near him.
