country that the rate of profit is habitually within, as it were, a hand’s
breadth of the minimum, and the country, therefore, on the very verge of
the stationary state. My meaning is, that it would require but a short
time to reduce profits to the minimum, if capital continued to increase at
its present rate, and no circumstances having a tendency to raise the rate
of profit occurred in the mean time.

In England, the ordinary rate of interest on government securities, in
which the risk is next to nothing, may be estimated at a little more than
three per cent: in all other investments, therefore, the interest or
profit calculated upon (exclusively of what is properly a remuneration for
talent or exertion) must be as much more than this amount as is equivalent
to the degree of risk to which the capital is thought to be exposed. Let
us suppose that in England even so small a net profit as one per cent,
exclusive of insurance against risk, would constitute a sufficient
inducement to save, but that less than this would not be a sufficient
inducement. I now say that the mere continuance of the present annual
increase of capital, if no circumstance occurred to counteract its effect,
would suffice in a small number of years to reduce the rate of net profit
to one per cent.

To fulfill the conditions of the hypothesis, we must suppose an entire
cessation of the exportation of capital for foreign investment. We must
suppose the entire savings of the community to be annually invested in
really productive employment within the country itself, and no new
channels opened by industrial inventions, or by a more extensive
substitution of the best-known processes for inferior ones.

The difficulty in finding remunerative employment every year for so much
new capital would not consist in any want of a market. If the new capital
were duly shared among many varieties of employment, it would raise up a
demand for its own produce, and there would be no cause why any part of
that produce should remain longer on hand than formerly. What would really
be, not merely difficult, but impossible, would be to employ this capital
without submitting to a rapid reduction of the rate of profit.

As capital increased, population either would also increase, or it would
not. If it did not, wages would rise, and a greater capital would be
distributed in wages among the same number of laborers. There being no
more labor than before, and no improvements to render the labor more
efficient, there would not be any increase of the produce; and, as the
capital, however largely increased, would only obtain the same gross
return, the whole savings of each year would be exactly so much subtracted
from the profits of the next and of every following year.

                             [Illustration.]


    This can be illustrated by supposing that the whole capital is
    handed out to the producers in a vessel which is returned full at
    the end of the period of production with the original outlay, plus
    an advance called profit. B C represents the total outlay, A C the
    total produce, and A B the profit on B C. Now, since the
    conditions of production remain the same, the same number of
    laborers can produce, as before, no more than A C; even though in
    the second year some of last year’s profit, represented by D B, is
    saved and added to the outlay by the capitalist. If D C is now the
    outlay of capital, the profit can only be A C, minus D C, or A D;
    that is, the profit of the second year is diminished by D B,
    exactly the amount of savings of the year before. And this would
    be repeated each successive year, each saving added to B C being
    “exactly so much subtracted from the profits of the next and of
    every following year.”


It is hardly necessary to say that in such circumstances profits would
very soon fall to the point at which further increase of capital would
cease. An augmentation of capital, much more rapid than that of
population, must soon reach its extreme limit, unless accompanied by
increased efficiency of labor (through inventions and discoveries, or
improved mental and physical education), or unless some of the idle
people, or of the unproductive laborers, became productive.

If population did increase with the increase of capital and in proportion
to it, the fall of profits would still be inevitable. Increased population
implies increased demand for agricultural produce. In the absence of
industrial improvements, this demand can only be supplied at an increased
cost of production, either by cultivating worse land, or by a more
elaborate and costly cultivation of the land already under tillage. The
cost of the laborer’s subsistence is therefore increased, and, unless the
laborer submits to a deterioration of his condition, profits must fall. In
an old country like England, if, in addition to supposing all improvement
in domestic agriculture suspended, we suppose that there is no increased
production in foreign countries for the English market, the fall of
profits would be very rapid. If both these avenues to an increased supply
of food were closed, and population continued to increase, as it is said
to do, at the rate of a thousand a day, all waste land which admits of
cultivation in the existing state of knowledge would soon be cultivated,
and the cost of production and price of food would be so increased that,
if the laborers received the increased money wages necessary to compensate
for their increased expenses, profits would very soon reach the minimum.
The fall of profits would be retarded if money wages did not rise, or rose
in a less degree; but the margin which can be gained by a deterioration of
the laborers’ condition is a very narrow one: in general, they _can not_
bear much reduction; when they can, they have also a higher standard of
necessary requirements, and _will_ not. On the whole, therefore, we may
assume that in such a country as England, if the present annual amount of
savings were to continue, without any of the counteracting circumstances
which now keep in check the natural influence of those savings in reducing
profit, the rate of profit would speedily attain the minimum, and all
further accumulation of capital would for the present cease.


    Mr. Carey, on the other hand, asserts the existence of a law of
    increasing returns from land, and that, while wages are constantly
    increasing with the progress of society, there is a diminution in
    the rate of profit, although the increasing returns permit an
    increase of absolute, if not of proportional, profit. That is,
    although wages increase more in proportion than profit, there is
    still a larger gross amount to be divided among capitalists as
    profit, out of a larger product.



§ 4. —prevented from reaching it by commercial revulsions.


What, then, are these counteracting circumstances which, in the existing
state of things, maintain a tolerably equal struggle against the downward
tendency of profits, and prevent the great annual savings which take place
in this country from depressing the rate of profit much nearer to that
lowest point to which it is always tending, and which, left to itself, it
would so promptly attain? The resisting agencies are of several kinds.

First among them is the waste of capital in periods of overtrading and
rash speculation, and in the commercial revulsions by which such times are
always followed. Mines are opened, railways or bridges made, and many
other works of uncertain profit commenced, and in these enterprises much
capital is sunk which yields either no return, or none adequate to the
outlay. Factories are built and machinery erected beyond what the market
requires, or can keep in employment. Even if they are kept in employment,
the capital is no less sunk; it has been converted from circulating into
fixed capital, and has ceased to have any influence on wages or profits.
Besides this, there is a great unproductive consumption of capital during
the stagnation which follows a period of general overtrading.
Establishments are shut up, or kept working without any profit. Such are
the effects of a commercial revulsion; and that such revulsions are almost
periodical is a consequence of the very tendency of profits which we are
considering. By the time a few years have passed over without a crisis, so
much additional capital has been accumulated that it is no longer possible
to invest it at the accustomed profit; all public securities rise to a
high price, the rate of interest on the best mercantile security falls
very low, and the complaint is general among persons in business that no
money is to be made. But the diminished scale of all safe gains inclines
persons to give a ready ear to any projects which hold out, though at the
risk of loss, the hope of a higher rate of profit; and speculations ensue,
which, with the subsequent revulsions, destroy, or transfer to foreigners,
a considerable amount of capital, produce a temporary rise of interest and
profit, make room for fresh accumulations, and the same round is
recommenced.

This, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests profits in their
descent to the minimum, by sweeping away from time to time a part of the
accumulated mass by which they are forced down. But this is not, as might
be inferred from the language of some writers, the principal cause. If it
were, the capital of the country would not increase; but in England it
does increase greatly and rapidly. This is shown by the increasing
productiveness of almost all taxes, by the continual growth of all the
signs of national wealth, and by the rapid increase of population, while
the condition of the laborers certainly is not on the whole
declining.(301)



§ 5. —by improvements in Production.


This brings us to the second of the counter-agencies, namely, improvements
in production. These evidently have the effect of extending what Mr.
Wakefield terms the field of employment, that is, they enable a greater
amount of capital to be accumulated and employed without depressing the
rate of profit; provided always that they do not raise, to a proportional
extent, the habits and requirements of the laborer. If the laboring-class
gain the full advantage of the increased cheapness, in other words, if
money wages do not fall, profits are not raised, nor their fall retarded.
But, if the laborers people up to the improvement in their condition, and
so relapse to their previous state, profits will rise. All inventions
which cheapen any of the things consumed by the laborers, unless their
requirements are raised in an equivalent degree, in time lower money
wages, and, by doing so, enable a greater capital to be accumulated and
employed, before profits fall back to what they were previously.

Improvements which only affect things consumed exclusively by the richer
classes do not operate precisely in the same manner. The cheapening of
lace or velvet has no effect in diminishing the cost of labor; and no mode
can be pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as to make
room for a larger capital before the minimum is attained. It, however,
produces an effect which is virtually equivalent; it lowers, or tends to
lower, the minimum itself. In the first place, increased cheapness of
articles of consumption promotes the inclination to save, by affording to
all consumers a surplus which they may lay by, consistently with their
accustomed manner of living. In the next place, whatever enables people to
live equally well on a smaller income inclines them to lay by capital for
a lower rate of profit. If people can live on an independence of [$1,000]
a year in the same manner as they formerly could on one of [$2,000], some
persons will be induced to save in hopes of the one, who would have been
deterred by the more remote prospect of the other. All improvements,
therefore, in the production of almost any commodity tend in some degree
to widen the interval which has to be passed before arriving at the
stationary state.



§ 6. —by the importation of cheap Necessaries and Implements.


Equivalent in effect to improvements in production is the acquisition of
any new power of obtaining cheap commodities from foreign countries. If
necessaries are cheapened, whether they are so by improvements at home or
importation from abroad, is exactly the same thing to wages and profits.
Unless the laborer obtains and, by an improvement of his habitual
standard, keeps the whole benefit, the cost of labor is lowered and the
rate of profit raised. As long as food can continue to be imported for an
increasing population without any diminution of cheapness, so long the
declension of profits through the increase of population and capital is
arrested, and accumulation may go on without making the rate of profit
draw nearer to the minimum. And on this ground it is believed by some that
the repeal of the corn laws has opened to [England] a long era of rapid
increase of capital with an undiminished rate of profit.

Before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable, one remark must
be made, which is much at variance with commonly received notions. Foreign
trade does not necessarily increase the field of employment for capital.
When foreign trade makes room for more capital at the same profit, it is
by enabling the necessaries of life, or the habitual articles of the
laborer’s consumption, to be obtained at smaller cost. It may do this in
two ways: by the importation either of those commodities themselves, or of
the means and appliances for producing them. Cheap iron has, in a certain
measure, the same effect on profits and the cost of labor as cheap corn,
because cheap iron makes cheap tools for agriculture and cheap machinery
for clothing. But a foreign trade, which neither directly nor by any
indirect consequence increases the cheapness of anything consumed by the
laborers, does not, any more than an invention or discovery in the like
case, tend to raise profits or retard their fall; it merely substitutes
the production of goods for foreign markets in the room of the home
production of luxuries, leaving the employment for capital neither greater
nor less than before.

It must, of course, be supposed that, with the increase of capital,
population also increases; for, if it did not, the consequent rise of
wages would bring down profits, in spite of any cheapness of food.
Suppose, then, that the population of Great Britain goes on increasing at
its present rate, and demands every year a supply of imported food
considerably beyond that of the year preceding. This annual increase in
the food demanded from the exporting countries can only be obtained either
by great improvements in their agriculture, or by the application of a
great additional capital to the growth of food. The former is likely to be
a very slow process, from the rudeness and ignorance of the agricultural
classes in the food-exporting countries of Europe, while the British
colonies and the United States are already in possession of most of the
improvements yet made, so far as suitable to their circumstances. There
remains, as a resource, the extension of cultivation. And on this it is to
be remarked that the capital by which any such extension can take place is
mostly still to be created. In Poland, Russia, Hungary, Spain, the
increase of capital is extremely slow. In America it is rapid, but not
more rapid than the population. The principal fund at present available
for supplying this country with a yearly increasing importation of food is
that portion of the annual savings of America which has heretofore been
applied to increasing the manufacturing establishments of the United
States, and which free trade in corn may possibly divert from that purpose
to growing food for our market. This limited source of supply, unless
great improvements take place in agriculture, can not be expected to keep
pace with the growing demand of so rapidly increasing a population as that
of Great Britain; and, if our population and capital continue to increase
with their present rapidity, the only mode in which food can continue to
be supplied cheaply to the one is by sending the other abroad to produce
it.

Chart XVII. _Grain-Crops of the United States._

Year.   Bushels.
1865    1,127,499,187
1866    1,343,027,868
1867    1,329,729,400
1868    1,450,789,000
1869    1,491,412,100
1870    1,629,027,600
1871    1,528,776,100
1872    1,664,331,600
1873    1,538,892,891
1874    1,455,180,200
1875    2,032,235,300
1876    1,962,821,600
1877    2,178,934,646
1878    2,302,254,950
1879    2,434,884,541
1880    2,448,079,181
1881    2,699,394,496
1882    2,699,394,496
1883    2,623,319,089


    Not even Americans have any adequate knowledge of the productive
    capacity of the United States. The grain-fields are not yet all
    occupied; and we can easily produce the total cotton consumption
    of the world on that quantity of land in Texas alone by which the
    whole cultivable area of that State exceeds the corresponding area
    of the empire of Austria-Hungary (see Chart No. XVIII, which shows
    the remarkable proportion of land possessed by the United States
    as compared with European countries); and the exports of
    agricultural food from the United States are now six times what
    they were in 1850, about the time when Mr. Mill made the above
    statements. Immense areas of our soil have not yet been broken by
    the plow, and the quantities of cereals grown in the United States
    seem to be steadily increasing. In fact, the greatest grain-crop
    yet grown in this country was that of 1882. The comparison of the
    crops of late years with those just succeeding the war (as seen in
    Chart No. XVII) shows a very suggestive increase; since it
    indicates where employment has been given to vast numbers of
    laborers, and where investment has been found for our rapidly
    growing capital.(302)



§ 7. —by the emigration of Capital.


This brings us to the last of the counter-forces which check the downward
tendency of profits in a country whose capital increases faster than that
of its neighbors, and whose profits are therefore nearer to the minimum.
This is, the perpetual overflow of capital into colonies or foreign
countries, to seek higher profits than can be obtained at home. I believe
this to have been for many years one of the principal causes by which the
decline of profits in England has been arrested. It has a twofold
operation: In the first place, it does what a fire, or an inundation, or a
commercial crisis would have done—it carries off a part of the increase of
capital from which the reduction of profits proceeds; secondly, the
capital so carried off is not lost, but is chiefly employed either in
founding colonies, which become large exporters of cheap agricultural
produce, or in extending and perhaps improving the agriculture of older
communities.

In countries which are further advanced in industry and population, and
have therefore a lower rate of profit, than others, there is always, long
before the actual minimum is reached, a practical minimum, viz., when
profits have fallen so much below what they are elsewhere that, were they
to fall lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. As long as there
are old countries where capital increases very rapidly, and new countries
where profit is still high, profits in the old countries will not sink to
the rate which would put a stop to accumulation: the fall is stopped at
the point which sends capital abroad.




Chapter IV. Consequences Of The Tendency Of Profits To A Minimum, And The
Stationary State.



§ 1. Abstraction of Capital not necessarily a national loss.


The theory of the effect of accumulation on profits must greatly abate, or
rather, altogether destroy, in countries where profits are low, the
immense importance which used to be attached by political economists to
the effects which an event or a measure of government might have in adding
to or subtracting from the capital of the country. We have now seen that
the lowness of profits is a proof that the spirit of accumulation is so
active, and that the increase of capital has proceeded at so rapid a rate,
as to outstrip the two counter-agencies, improvements in production and
increased supply of cheap necessaries from abroad. A sudden abstraction of
capital, unless of inordinate amount, [would not] have any real effect in
impoverishing the country. After a few months or years, there would exist
in the country just as much capital as if none had been taken away. The
abstraction, by raising profits and interest, would give a fresh stimulus
to the accumulative principle, which would speedily fill up the vacuum.
Probably, indeed, the only effect that would ensue would be that for some
time afterward less capital would be exported, and less thrown away in
hazardous speculation.

In the first place, then, this view of things greatly weakens, in a
wealthy and industrious country, the force of the economical argument
against the expenditure of public money for really valuable, even though
industriously unproductive, purposes. In poor countries, the capital of
the country requires the legislator’s sedulous care; he is bound to be
most cautious of encroaching upon it, and should favor to the utmost its
accumulation at home, and its introduction from abroad. But in rich,
populous, and highly cultivated countries, it is not capital which is the
deficient element, but fertile land; and what the legislator should desire
and promote, is not a greater aggregate saving, but a greater return to
savings, either by improved cultivation, or by access to the produce of
more fertile lands in other parts of the globe.

The same considerations enable us to throw aside as unworthy of regard one
of the common arguments against emigration as a means of relief for the
laboring-class. Emigration, it is said, can do no good to the laborers,
if, in order to defray the cost, as much must be taken away from the
capital of the country as from its population. If one tenth of the
laboring people of England were transferred to the colonies, and along
with them one tenth of the circulating capital of the country, either
wages, or profits, or both, would be greatly benefited, by the diminished
pressure of capital and population upon the fertility of the land. The
landlords alone would sustain some loss of income; and even they, only if
colonization went to the length of actually diminishing capital and
population, but not if it merely carried off the annual increase.



§ 2. In opulent countries, the extension of machinery not detrimental but
beneficial to Laborers.


From the same principles we are now able to arrive at a final conclusion
respecting the effects which machinery, and generally the sinking of
capital for a productive purpose, produce upon the immediate and ultimate
interests of the laboring-class. The characteristic property of this class
of industrial improvements is the conversion of circulating capital into
fixed: and it was shown in the first book(303) that, in a country where
capital accumulates slowly, the introduction of machinery, permanent
improvements of land, and the like, might be, for the time, extremely
injurious; since the capital so employed might be directly taken from the
wages fund, the subsistence of the people and the employment for labor
curtailed, and the gross annual produce of the country actually
diminished. But in a country of great annual savings and low profits no
such effects need be apprehended. It merely draws off at one orifice what
was already flowing out at another; or, if not, the greater vacant space
left in the reservoir does but cause a greater quantity to flow in.
Accordingly, in spite of the mischievous derangements of the money market
which have been occasioned by the great sums in process of being sunk in
railways, I can not agree with those who apprehend any mischief, from this
source, to the productive resources of the country. Not on the absurd
ground (which to any one acquainted with the elements of the subject needs
no confutation) that railway expenditure is a mere transfer of capital
from hand to hand, by which nothing is lost or destroyed. This is true of
what is spent in the purchase of the land; a portion too of what is paid
to agents, counsels, engineers, and surveyors, is saved by those who
receive it, and becomes capital again: but what is laid out in the _bona
fide_ construction of the railway itself is lost and gone; when once
expended, it is incapable of ever being paid in wages or applied to the
maintenance of laborers again; as a matter of account, the result is, that
so much food and clothing and tools have been consumed, and the country
has got a railway instead.

It already appears, from these considerations, that the conversion of
circulating capital into fixed, whether by railways, or manufactories, or
ships, or machinery, or canals, or mines, or works of drainage and
irrigation, is not likely, in any rich country, to diminish the gross
produce or the amount of employment for labor. There is hardly any
increase of fixed capital which does not enable the country to contain
eventually a larger circulating capital than it otherwise could possess
and employ within its own limits; for there is hardly any creation of
fixed capital which, when it proves successful, does not cheapen the
articles on which wages are habitually expended.


    As regards the effects upon the material condition of the
    wages-receiving class, since it seems clear that capital increases
    faster than improvements, and probably faster even than
    population, it follows that in countries where the
    laboring-classes are evidently growing in intelligence, they gain
    in wages with the progress of society. Such certainly seems to be
    the teaching of Mr. Giffen’s late studies (see Book IV, Chap. III,
    § 5).



§ 3. Stationary state of wealth and population dreaded by some writers,
but not in itself undesirable.


Toward what ultimate point is society tending by its industrial progress?
When the progress ceases, in what condition are we to expect that it will
leave mankind?

It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly, by political
economists, that the increase of wealth is not boundless; that at the end
of what they term the progressive state lies the stationary state, that
all progress in wealth is but a postponement of this, and that each step
in advance is an approach to it. We have now been led to recognize that
this ultimate goal is at all times near enough to be fully in view; that
we are always on the verge of it, and that, if we have not reached it long
ago, it is because the goal itself flies before us. The richest and most
prosperous countries would very soon attain the stationary state, if no
further improvements were made in the productive arts, and if there were a
suspension of the overflow of capital from those countries into the
uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the earth. Adam Smith always
assumes that the condition of the mass of the people, though it may not be
positively distressed, must be pinched and stinted in a stationary
condition of wealth, and can only be satisfactory in a progressive state.
The doctrine that, to however distant a time incessant struggling may put
off our doom, the progress of society must “end in shallows and in
miseries,” far from being, as many people still believe, a wicked
invention of Mr. Malthus, was either expressly or tacitly affirmed by his
most distinguished predecessors, and can only be successfully combated on
his principles.

Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a conscientious
or prudential restraint on population is indispensable, to prevent the
increase of numbers from outstripping the increase of capital, and the
condition of the classes who are at the bottom of society from being
deteriorated. Where there is not, in the people, or in some very large
proportion of them, a resolute resistance to this deterioration—a
determination to preserve an established standard of comfort—the condition
of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive state, to the lowest
point which they will consent to endure. The same determination would be
equally effectual to keep up their condition in the stationary state, and
would be quite as likely to exist.

I can not, therefore, regard the stationary state of capital and wealth
with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested toward it by
political economists of the old school. I am inclined to believe that it
would be, on the whole, a very considerable improvement on our present
condition.

It is only in the backward countries of the world that increased
production is still an important object; in those most advanced, what is
economically needed is a better distribution, of which one indispensable
means is a stricter restraint on population. On the other hand, we may
suppose this better distribution of property attained, by the joint effect
of the prudence and frugality of individuals, and of a system of
legislation favoring equality of fortunes, so far as is consistent with
the just claim of the individual to the fruits, whether great or small, of
his or her own industry. We may suppose, for instance (according to the
suggestion thrown out in a former chapter(304)), a limitation of the sum
which any one person may acquire by gift or inheritance, to the amount
sufficient to constitute a moderate independence. Under this twofold
influence, society would exhibit these leading features: a well-paid and
affluent body of laborers; no enormous fortunes, except what were earned
and accumulated during a single lifetime; but a much larger body of
persons than at present, not only exempt from the coarser toils, but with
sufficient leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical details, to
cultivate freely the graces of life, and afford examples of them to the
classes less favorably circumstanced for their growth. This condition of
society, so greatly preferable to the present, is not only perfectly
compatible with the stationary state, but, it would seem, more naturally
allied with that state than with any other.

There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old countries, for a
great increase of population, supposing the arts of life to go on
improving, and capital to increase. But even if innocuous, I confess I see
very little reason for desiring it. The density of population necessary to
enable mankind to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the advantages both
of co-operation and of social intercourse, has, in all the most populous
countries, been attained. If the earth must lose that great portion of its
pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth
and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling
it to support a larger but not a better or a happier population, I
sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be content to be
stationary, long before necessity compels them to it.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition of capital
and population implies no stationary state of human improvement. Even the
industrial arts might be as earnestly and as successfully cultivated, with
this sole difference, that instead of serving no purpose but the increase
of wealth, industrial improvements would produce their legitimate effect,
that of abridging labor. Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical
inventions yet made have lightened the day’s toil of any human being. They
have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery and
imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make
fortunes. They have increased the comforts of the middle classes.


    The statement that inventions have not “lightened the day’s toil
    of any human being” has been persistently misquoted by many
    persons and has been taken out of its connection. Mr. Mill
    distinctly holds that the laborer’s lot could have been improved
    had there been any limitation of population; that it is the
    constant growth of population as society progresses which destroys
    the gains afforded to the laboring-classes by improvements. But it
    is quite certain that the material facts of Mr. Mill’s statement
    are no longer true. In the United States wages have risen, with an
    additional gain in lower prices; and Mr. Giffen shows the same
    progress in England. Moreover, travelers on the Continent speak of
    a similar movement already noticeable there. Mr. Giffen’s
    statement in his comparison(305) with fifty years ago, is as
    follows:

    “While the money wages have increased as we have seen, the hours
    of labor have diminished. It is difficult to estimate what the
    extent of this diminution has been, but collecting one or two
    scattered notices I should be inclined to say very nearly 20 per
    cent. There has been at least this reduction in the textile,
    engineering, and house-building trades. The workman gets from 50
    to 100 per cent more money for 20 per cent less work; in round
    figures he has gained from 70 to 120 per cent in fifty years in
    money return. It is just possible, of course, that the workman may
    do as much, or nearly as much, in the shorter period as he did in
    his longer hours. Still, there is the positive gain in his being
    less time at his task, which many of the classes still tugging
    lengthily day by day at the oar would appreciate.”




Chapter V. On The Possible Futurity Of The Laboring-Classes.



§ 1. The possibility of improvement while Laborers remain merely receivers
of Wages.


    There has probably never been a time when more attention has been
    called to the material and social conditions of the
    working-classes than in the last few years. The great increase of
    literature and the extension of the newspaper has brought to every
    reader, even where public and private charities have not sent
    eye-witnesses into direct contact with distress, a more explicit
    knowledge of the working-classes than ever before. The revelation
    of existing poverty and misery is, often wrongly, taken to be a
    proof of the increasing degradation of the working-men, and the
    cause has been ascribed to the grasping cruelty of capitalists.
    Instances of injustice arising from the relations of employers and
    employed will occur so long as human nature remains imperfect. But
    the world hopes that some other relation than that of master and
    workman may be evolved in which not only many admitted wrongs may
    be avoided, but also new forces may be applied to raise the
    laborer out of his dependence on other classes in the community.

    We are, at present, living under a _régime_ of private property
    and competition. But certainly the progress of the laborer is not
    that which can excite enthusiastic hopes for the future, so long
    as he remains a mere receiver of wages. The progress of industrial
    improvements has resulted, says Mr. Cairnes, in “a temporary
    improvement of the laborer’s condition, followed by an increase of
    population and an enlarged demand for the cheapened commodity....
    Laborers’ commodities, however, are for the most part commodities
    of raw produce, or in which the raw material constitutes the chief
    element of the value (clothing is, in truth, the only important
    exception); and of all such commodities it is the well-known law
    that an augmentation of quantity can only be obtained, other
    things being the same, at an increasing proportional cost. Thus,
    it has happened that the gain in productiveness obtained by
    improved processes has, after a generation, to a great extent been
    lost—lost, that is to say, for any benefit that can be derived
    from it in favor of wages and profits.... The large addition to
    the wealth of the country has gone neither to profits nor to
    wages, nor yet to the public at large [as consumers], but to swell
    a fund ever growing even while its proprietors sleep—the rent-roll
    of the owners of the soil.... The aggregate return from the land
    has immensely increased; but the cost of the costliest portion of
    the produce, which is that which determines the price of the
    whole, remains pretty nearly as it was. Profits, therefore, have
    not risen at all, and the real remuneration of the laborer, taking
    the whole field of labor, in but a slight degree—at all events in
    a degree very far from commensurate with the general progress of
    industry.”(306)

    Under these conditions, it seems that the only hope of an
    improvement for the laboring-classes lies in the limitation of
    population—or at least in an increase of numbers less than the
    increase of capital and improvements. It is possible, however,
    that Mr. Cairnes, with many others, has failed to recognize the
    full extent of the improvement which is taking place in the wages
    of the laborer under the existing social order. Although we hear
    much of the wrongs of the working-men—and they no doubt exist—yet
    it is unquestionable that their condition has vastly improved
    within the last fifty years; largely, in my opinion, because
    improvements have outstripped population, and because wide areas
    of fertile land in new and peaceful countries have drawn off the
    surplus population in the older countries, and because the
    available spots in the newer countries like the United States have
    not yet been covered over with a population sufficiently dense to
    keep real wages anything below a relatively high standard. The
    facts to substantiate this opinion, so far as regards Great
    Britain, are to be found in a recent investigation(307) by Mr.
    Giffen, the statistician of the English Board of Trade. For a very
    considerable reduction in hours of daily labor, the workman now
    receives wages on an average about 70 per cent higher than fifty
    years ago, as may be seen by the following table:


Occupation.       Place.            Wages        Wages,      Increase
                                    fifty        present     or
                                    years ago,   time, per   decrease,
                                    per week.    week.       amount,
                                                             per cent.
Carpenters        Manchester        24 0         34 0        10 0 (+)
                                                             42
                  Glasgow           14 0         26 0        12 0 (+)
                                                             85
Bricklayers       Manchester(308)   24 0         36 0        12 0 (+)
                                                             50
                  Glasgow           15 0         27 0        12 0 (+)
                                                             80
Masons            Manchester(309)   24 0         29 10       5 10 (+)
                                                             24
                  Glasgow           14 0         23 8        9 8 (+) 69
Miners            Staffordshire     2 8(310)     4 0(311)    1 4 (+) 50
Pattern-weavers   Huddersfield      16 0         25 0        9 0 (+) 55
Wool-scourers     "                 17 0         22 0        5 0 (+) 30
Mule-spinners     "                 25 6         30 0        4 6 (+) 20
Weavers           "                 12 0         26 0        14 0 (+)
                                                             115
Warpers and       "                 17 0         27 0        10 0 (+)
beamers                                                      58
Winders and       "                 6 0          11 0        5 0 (+) 83
reelers
Weavers (men)     Bradford          8 3          20 6        12 3 (+)
                                                             150
Reeling and       "                 7 9          15 6        7 9 (+)
warping                                                      100
Spinning          "                 4 5          11 6        7 1 (+)
(children)                                                   160


    With increased wages, prices are not much higher than fifty years
    ago. But the clearest evidence as to their bettered material
    condition is to be found in the following table, which shows the
    amount of food consumed per head by the total population of Great
    Britain:

    Articles.              1840.   1881.
    Bacon and hams,        0.01    13.93
    Pounds.
    Butter, Pounds.        1.05    6.36
    Cheese, Pounds.        0.92    5.77
    Currants and           1.45    4.34
    raisins, Pounds.
    Eggs, No.              3.63    21.65
    Potatoes, Pounds.      0.01    12.5
    Rice, Pounds.          0.90    16.32
    Cocoa, Pounds.         0.08    0.31
    Coffee, Pounds.        1.08    0.89
    Corn, wheat, and       42.47   216.92
    wheat-flour, Pounds.
    Raw sugar, Pounds.     15.20   58.92
    Refined sugar,         Nil.    8.44
    Pounds.
    Tea, Pounds.           1.22    4.58
    Tobacco, Pounds.       0.86    1.41
    Wine, Gallons.         0.25    0.45
    Spirits, Gallons.      0.97    1.08
    Malt, Bushels.         1.59    1.91(312)

    The question then at once arises, whether capital has been shown
    by the statistics to have gained accordingly, or whether there has
    been a proportionally less increase than in wages. Says Mr.
    Giffen: “If the return to capital had doubled, as the wages of the
    working-classes appear to have doubled, the aggregate income of
    the capitalist classes returned to the income-tax would now be
    £800,000,000 instead of £400,000,000.... The capitalist, as such,
    gets a low interest for his money, and the aggregate returns to
    capital is not a third part of the aggregate income of the
    country, which may be put at not less than £1,200,000,000.” It is
    found, moreover—as a suggestion that property is more generally
    diffused—that while there were 25,368 estates entered to probate
    in 1838, of an average value of £2,160 each, there were 55,359
    estates in 1882 of an average value of £2,500 each.

    But yet the vast increase of wealth made possible by improvements
    and the growth of capital would have bettered the condition of all
    still more had population been somewhat more limited. As it is,
    the material gain has been large in spite of an increase in the
    population from 16,500,000 in 1831 to nearly 30,000,000 in 1881.
    In other words, the landlords have been great gainers, while the
    laborers have intercepted much more than Mr. Cairnes supposed.

    There are at hand some very striking data relating to the United
    States which point in the same direction as those of Mr. Giffen.
    Charts No. XIX and XX show vividly how far the increased
    productiveness of an industry, arising from greater skill and
    greater efficiency of labor in the connection of improved
    machinery, has enabled manufacturers to steadily lower the price
    of their goods, and yet increase the wages paid to their
    operatives. What was true of these two cotton-mills was true of
    others within New England; for the rate of wages paid by these
    mills was the rate current in the country in 1830 and in 1884.
    While each spindle and loom has become vastly more effective, we
    see by Chart No. XIX that the average production of each operative
    constantly increased from 4,321 yards per year in 1830, to 28,032
    yards in 1884; and this it was which made possible the
    corresponding increase in the rate of wages from $164 in 1830, to
    $290 in 1884. The sum of $290 a year as an average for each
    operative, is a stipend too small to cause any general
    satisfaction; but he must be gloomy indeed who does not see that
    $290 is a cheerful possession as compared with $164. There is,
    then, abundant ground for believing that in the past fifty years
    the condition of the working-classes in the United States has been
    materially improved. The diminishing proportion of the price which
    goes to the capital is a significant fact, and illustrates the
    tendency of profits to fall with the increase of capital.(313) The
    same truth seems to be seen in the table given in a previous
    chapter,(314) where the wages have been increased, but the hours
    have fallen per day from thirteen to eleven since 1840.



§ 2.—through small holdings, by which the landlord’s gain is shared.


    So far we have considered the chances for improvement in an
    industrial order in which the present separation of capitalists
    from laborers is maintained. But this does not take into account
    that future time when cultivation in the United States shall be
    forced down upon inferior land, and no more remains to be
    occupied, and when capital may no longer increase as fast as
    population. What must be the ultimate outlook for wages-receivers?
    Or, more practically, what is the outlook now for those who are
    wages-receivers, and for whom a more equitable distribution of the
    product seems desirable? How can they escape the thralldom of
    dependence on the accumulations of others?

    In this connection, and of primary importance, is the avenue
    opened to all holders of small properties to share in the increase
    which goes to owners of land. It has been seen that owners of the
    soil constantly gain from the inevitable tendencies of industrial
    progress. If one large owner gains, why should not the increment
    be the same if ten owners held the property instead of one? The
    more the land is subdivided, the more the vast increase arising
    from rent will be shared by a larger number. This, in my opinion,
    is the strongest reason for the encouragement of small holdings in
    every country. The greater the extension of small properties among
    the working-class, the more will they gain a share of that part of
    the product which goes to the owner of land by the persistent
    increase of population. If, then, the gain arising from
    improvements is largely passed to the credit of land-owners, as
    Mr. Cairnes believes, it should be absolutely necessary to spread
    among the working-classes the doctrine that if they own their own
    homes, and buy the land they live on, to that extent will they
    “grow rich while they sleep,” independently of their other
    exertions. Land worth $500 to-day when bought by the savings of a
    laborer, besides the self-respect(315) it gives him, will increase
    in value with the density of population, and become worth $600 or
    more without other sacrifice of his.



§ 3. —through co-operation, by which the manager’s wages are shared.


    It will be found, however, that, of the various industrial
    rewards, profits tend to diminish, meaning by “profits” only the
    interest and insurance given for abstinence and risk in the use of
    capital; but that the manager’s wages (wages of superintendence)
    are larger than is commonly supposed in relation to other
    industrial rewards, owing to the position of monopoly practically
    held by such executive ability as is competent to successfully
    manage large business interests. To the laborer this large payment
    to the manager seems to be paid for the possession of capital.
    This we now know to be wrong. The manager’s wages are payments of
    exactly the same nature as any laborer’s wages. It makes no
    difference whether wages are paid for manual or mental labor. The
    payment to capital, purely as such, known as interest (with
    insurance for risk), is unmistakably decreasing, even in the
    United States. And yet we see men gain by industrial operations
    enormous rewards; but these returns are in their essence solely
    manager’s wages. For in many instances, as hitherto discussed, we
    have seen that the manager is not the owner of the capital he
    employs. To what does this lead us? Inevitably to the conclusion
    that the laborer, if he would become something more than a
    receiver of wages, in the ordinary sense, must himself move up in
    the scale of laborers until he reaches the skill and power also to
    command manager’s wages. The importance of this principle to the
    working-man can not be exaggerated, and there flows from it
    important consequences to the whole social condition of the lower
    classes. It leads us directly to the means by which the lower
    classes may raise themselves to a higher position—the actual
    details of which, of course, are difficult, but, as they are not
    included in political economy, they must be left to sociology—and
    forms the essential basis of hope for any proper extension of
    productive co-operation. In short, co-operation owes its existence
    to the possibility of dividing the manager’s wages, to a greater
    or less degree, among the so-called wages-receivers, or the
    “laboring-class.” And it is from this point of view that
    co-operation is seen more truly and fitly than in any other way.
    For it is to be said that in some of its forms co-operation gives
    the most promising economic results as regards the condition of
    the laborer which have yet been reached in the long discussion
    upon the relations of labor and capital.



§ 4.  Distributive Co-operation.


    It will be my object, then, to describe the chief forms in which
    the co-operative principle has manifested itself. These may be
    said, in general, to be four: (1) distributive co-operation, by
    which goods already produced are bought and sold to members
    without the aid of retail dealers; (2) productive co-operation, by
    which associations are formed for producing and manufacturing
    goods for the market; (3) partial productive co-operation in the
    form of industrial partnerships between laborers and employers,
    without dispensing with the latter; and (4) co-operative, or
    People’s, banks. There are, of course, many other forms in which
    the principle of co-operation has been applied; but these four are
    probably the most characteristic.

    Distributive co-operation is at once the simplest and the most
    successful form, not merely because it requires less for capital
    than any other for its inception, but also because it calls for
    less business and executive capacity. The number of persons
    capable of managing a small retail store is vastly greater than
    the class fit to assume control of the very complex duties
    involved in the care of wholesale houses—or, at all events, of
    mills and factories. Distributive co-operation has its origin in
    the fact that the expenses of a middle-man between the producer
    and consumer may be entirely dispensed with, and in the fact that
    more capital had collected in the business of distribution than
    could economically be so employed. Its educating power on the men
    concerned in teaching them to save, in showing the need of
    business methods, and in instilling the elements of industrial
    management, is of no little importance. It is, therefore, the best
    gateway to any further or more difficult co-operative
    experiments—such experiments as can be attempted only after the
    proper capital is saved, and the necessary executive capacity is
    discovered, or developed by training. In England co-operation
    began its history in distributive stores, and has finally led to
    such a stimulus of self-help in the laborer, that now co-operative
    gymnasiums, libraries, gardens, and other results have proved the
    wisdom of calling upon the laborers for their own exertions. Under
    the system which separates employers and the employed, high wages
    are not found to be the only boon which the receivers could wish;
    for it is sometimes found that the best-paid workmen are the most
    unwise and intemperate.(316) For the most ignorant and unskilled
    of the workmen in the lowest strata the object would seem to be to
    give not merely more wages, but give more in such a way as might
    excite new and better motives, a desire as well as a possibility
    of improvement. Self-help must be stimulated, not deadened by
    stifling dependence on a class of superiors, or on the state. The
    extraordinary growth of co-operation is one of the most cheering
    signs of modern times. Distributive co-operation originated in
    Rochdale, in England, about 1844, with a few laborers desirous of
    saving themselves from the high prices paid for poor provisions.
    By uniting, they purchased tea by the chest, sugar by the
    hogshead, which they sold to each member at market prices. They
    were surprised to find a large profit by the operation, which they
    divided proportionally to the capital subscribed. Others soon
    joined them; they took a store-room, and in 1882 there were 10,894
    members, with a share capital of $1,576,215, and with realized
    profits in that year of $162,885. They have erected expensive
    steam flour-mills, and the society occupies eighteen branch
    establishments in Rochdale. Libraries containing more than 15,000
    volumes, and classes in science, language, and the technical arts,
    attended by 500 students, have been maintained. The extension of
    the Rochdale store led to the necessity of a wholesale
    establishment of their own. It is now a large institution with
    branches in London and Newcastle. “It owns manufactories in
    London, Manchester, Newcastle, Leicester, Durham, and Crumpsall;
    and it has depots in Cork, Limerick, Kilmallock, Waterford,
    Tipperary, Tralee, and Armagh, for the purchase of butter,
    potatoes, and eggs. It has buyers in New York and Copenhagen, and
    it owns two steamships. It has a banking department with a
    turn-over of more than £12,000,000 annually.”(317)

    The following figures for England and Wales tell their own story
    as to the progress of co-operation:(318)

                        1862.       1881.
    Number of members   90,000      525,000
    Capital: Share      428,000     5,881,000
    Capital: Loan       55,000      1,267,000
    Sales               2,333,000   20,901,000
    Net profit          165,000     1,617,000

    Several persons each subscribe a sum to make up the share capital
    of a store, and a person is selected to take charge of the
    purchase and care of the goods. The advantages of the plan are:
    (1) A division among the co-operators of all the net profits of
    the retail trade; (2) a saving in advertisements, since members
    are always purchasers without solicitation; (3) no loss by bad
    debts, since only cash sales are permitted; and (4) security
    against fraud as to the character of the goods, because there is
    no inducement to make gains by adulterations. It is often found
    that the capital is turned over ten times in the course of a year;
    while the cost of management in the wholesale Rochdale stores does
    not amount to one per cent on the returns.

    The arrangement of obligations in due order of their priority,
    which has been recommended by Mr. Holyoake,(319) is as follows: of
    funds in the store, payment should be made, (1) of the expenses of
    management; (2) of interest due on all loans; (3) of an amount
    equivalent to ten per cent of the value of the fixed stock to
    cover the annual depreciation from wear and tear; (4) of dividends
    on the subscribed capital of the members;(320) (5) of such a sum
    as may be necessary for an extension of the business; (6) of two
    and a half per cent of the remaining profit, after all the above
    items are provided for, for educational purposes; (7) of the
    residue, and that only, among all the persons employed, and
    members of the store, in proportion to the amount of their wages,
    or of their respective purchases during the quarter.(321) The
    payment of dividends to customers on their purchases seems now to
    be considered an essential element of success.



§ 5. Productive Co-Operation.


    Productive co-operation presents many serious difficulties, the
    chief of which is the need of managing ability. Some one in the
    association must know the wholesale markets well, the expectation
    of crops connected with his materials used, the proper time to
    buy; he must know the processes of the special production
    thoroughly, the best machinery, the best adaptation of labor to
    the given end; he must know the whims of purchasers, and be ready
    to change his products accordingly—in short, a man eminently
    fitted for success in his own factory is essential to the
    profitable management of one belonging to a body of co-operators.
    It has been already seen how large a variation in profit is due to
    manager’s wages; and it is very often only his skill, prudence,
    and experience that make the difference between a failure and a
    success in business. Unless co-operators are willing to pay as
    large a sum for the services of a good manager as he could get in
    his own establishment, they can not secure the talent which will
    make their venture succeed.(322)

    In France the national workshops of Louis Blanc, established in
    1848, were a failure. Nowhere has it been more clearly seen that
    state help has been disastrous than in France, where the
    Constituent Assembly voted 3,000,000 francs for co-operative
    experiments, all of which failed. Curiously enough, distributive
    co-operation has not succeeded in France, because, owing to a
    wide-spread dislike of the wages system, workmen will try nothing
    less than productive schemes. And their success in this has been
    no greater than might be expected, when inexperience is put to a
    task beyond its powers.(323)

    In Great Britain and the United States there have been some
    successful experiments in production; and Mr. Holyoake(324) holds
    that, although workmen certainly do begrudge the manager’s salary,
    productive associations are possible when managed by a board of
    elected directors. He urges, moreover, that, as in distributive
    co-operation, if profits are shared with customers, there will be
    insured both popularity and continuity of custom without the cost
    of advertising, and such expenses as those of travelers and
    commissions. The plan of actual operations upon which successes
    have been reached in England seems to be briefly this: (1) To save
    capital, chiefly through co-operative associations; (2) to
    purchase or lease premises; (3) to engage managers, accountants,
    and officers at the ordinary salaries which such men can command
    in the market according to their ability; (4) to borrow capital on
    the credit of the association; (5) to pay upon capital subscribed
    by members the same rate of interest as that upon borrowed
    capital; (6) to regard as profit only that which remains after
    making payment for rent, materials, wages, all business outlays,
    and interest on capital; and (7) to divide the profits according
    to the salaries of all officers, wages of workmen, and purchases
    of customers. Those mills and factories which have sprung out of
    the extension of distributive associations, as at Rochdale, seem,
    and naturally so, to have been most successful. They have
    gradually trained themselves somewhat for the work, and their
    customers were beforehand secured. That is, where the difficulties
    of the manager’s function have been lessened, they have a better
    chance of success. And yet it must be said that productive
    associations will gain largely from the efficiency of the labor
    when working for its own interest; and this is an important
    consideration to be urged in favor of such associations.

    The Sun Mill,(325) at Oldham, England, was established for
    spinning cotton in 1861 by the exertions of some co-operative
    bodies. Beginning with a share capital of $250,000, and a loan
    capital of a like amount, it set 80,000 spindles in operation. In
    1874 they had a share capital of $375,000 (all subscribed except
    $1,000), and an equal amount of loan capital, while the whole
    plant was estimated as worth $615,000. Two and a half per cent per
    annum has been set apart for the depreciation in the value of the
    mill, and seven and a half per cent for the machinery; so that in
    the first ten years a total sum of $160,000 was set aside for
    depreciation of the property. The profits have varied from two to
    forty per cent; and, while only five per cent interest was paid on
    the loan capital, large dividends were made on the share capital.
    During the last few years the Sun Mill has on an average realized
    a profit of 12-½ per cent, although it is known that the cotton
    trade has suffered during this time from a serious depression.

    Many experiments, however, have proved failures; and sometimes,
    when they are successful (as in the case of the Hatters’
    Association in Newark, New Jersey(326)), the workmen have no
    desire to share their benefits with others, and practically form a
    corporation by themselves. The mere fact that they do sometimes
    succeed is an important thing. Then, too, they have an opportunity
    of securing by salaries that executive ability in the community
    which exists separate from the possession of capital. And in these
    days, in large corporations, the manager is not necessarily
    (although he often is) a large owner of capital. The last annual
    report of the Co-operative Congress (1882) shows the existence in
    England and Scotland of productive associations for the
    manufacture of cloth, flannel, fustian, hosiery, quilts, worsted,
    nails, watches, linen, and silk, as well as those for engineering,
    printing, and quarrying; and these were but a few of them.(327)

    In the United States there have been some successes as well as
    failures. In January, 1872, a number of machinists and other
    working-men organized in the town of Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, a
    Co-operative Foundry Association for the manufacture of stoves,
    hollow-ware, and fine castings. On a small capital of only $4,000
    they have steadily prospered, paid the market rate of wages, and
    also paid annual dividends, over and above all expenses and
    interest on the plant, of from twelve to fifteen per cent. In 1867
    thirty workmen started a co-operative foundry in Somerset,
    Massachusetts, with a capital of about $14,000. In the years
    1874-1875 the company spent $5,400 for new flasks and patterns,
    and yet showed a net gain of $11,914. In 1876 it had a capital of
    $30,000, and a surplus fund of $28,924.(328)



§ 6. Industrial Partnership.


    The difficulties of productive co-operation arising from the need
    of skilled management, together with the existing unsatisfactory
    relation between employers and laborers when wholly separate from
    each other, have led to a most promising plan of industrial
    partnership by which the manager retains the control of the
    business operations, but shares his profits with the workmen. The
    gain through increased efficiency, greater economy, and superior
    workmanship, recoups the manager for the voluntary subtraction
    from his share, and yet the laborers receive an additional share;
    but more than this, it educates the laborer in industrial methods,
    discloses the difficulties of management, and stimulates him to
    saving habits and greater regularity of work. This system is
    particularly adapted to reaching those laborers who would not
    themselves rise to the demands of productive co-operation.

    The principle was tried on one of the Belgian railways.
    “Ninety-five kilogrammes of coke were consumed for every league of
    distance run, but this was known to be more than necessary; but
    how to remedy the evil was the problem. A bonus of 3-½_d._ on
    every hectolitre of coke saved on this average of ninety-five to
    the league was offered to the men concerned, and this trifling
    bonus worked the miracle. The work was done equally well, or
    better, with forty-eight kilogrammes of coke instead of
    ninety-five; just one half, or nearly, saved by careful work, at
    an expense of probably less than one tenth of the saving.”(329)

    The experiment which has attracted most attention in the past has
    been that of the Messrs. Briggs, at their collieries in Yorkshire,
    England.(330) The relations between the owners and the laborers
    were as bad as they could well be. “All coal-masters is devils,
    and Briggs is the prince of devils,” ran the talk of the miners,
    when they did not choose to send letters threatening to shoot the
    owners. In 1865 Messrs. Briggs tried the plan of an industrial
    partnership with their men, purely from business considerations.
    Seventy per cent of the cost of raising coal consisted of wages,
    and fully fifteen per cent of materials which were habitually
    wasted. The whole property was valued, and divided into shares of
    $50 each, of which the owners retained two thirds, together with
    the control of the business. The remaining one third of the shares
    was offered to the employés. If any subscriber was too poor to pay
    $50 for a share, the subsequent dividends and payments were to be
    applied to purchasing the share. After reserving a fair allowance
    for expenses, like the redemption of capital, whenever the
    remaining profits exceeded ten per cent on the capital, that
    excess was to be divided into two equal parts, one of which was to
    be distributed among all persons employed by the company in
    proportion to their wages, and the other was to be retained by the
    capital. In previous years but once had they made ten per cent
    profit on their capital, and twice only five per cent. In the
    first year after the new system came into operation, the total
    profits were fourteen per cent, and the four per cent of excess
    was divided, two to the laborers’ bonus, and two to the capital,
    so that capital received twelve per cent. In the second year the
    profits were sixteen per cent, in the third year seventeen per
    cent; the first year the work-people received in addition to their
    wages $9,000, in the second $13,500, in the third $15,750. The
    moral effect was striking. Work was done regularly, forbearance
    was exercised, habits improved, and the faces of the men were set
    toward improvement in life. The scheme worked successfully for
    years, but was finally ended by the pressure of the outside
    trades-unions, who compelled the workmen to give up the
    arrangement.

    A similar experiment was tried by the Messrs. Brewster,
    carriage-manufacturers, of New York. They offered to their workmen
    ten per cent of their profits, before any allowance was made for
    interest on the capital invested, or before any payment was made
    for the services of the firm as managers. In one year as much as
    $11,000 was divided among the laborers. Again, as in the case of
    the Briggs colliery, the experiment was brought to an end by an
    unreasoning submission to the pressure of outside workmen during a
    strike.(331)

    But, all in all, industrial partnership(332) offers a great field
    for that kind of improvement which is worth more than a mere
    increase of wages, and seems to make it possible to reach the
    heavy weight of sluggishness among the lower and more hopeless
    strata of society. And it is possible that it will stir in them
    the powers which may afterward find employment in the harder
    problems of productive co-operation.(333)



§ 7. People’s Banks.


    In Germany the struggle between the two theories—self-help and
    state-help—was fought out by Schultze-Delitsch—that is, Schultze
    of Delitsch, a town in Saxony—and Lasalle, and the victory given
    to the former. Schultze-Delitsch, as a consequence, was successful
    in directing the co-operative principle in Germany to giving
    workmen credit in purchasing tools, etc., when he had no security
    but his character. This form of co-operation works to give the
    energetic and industrious workmen a lever by which, through the
    possession of credit, they can raise themselves to the position of
    small capitalists, and thus widen the field of possible
    improvement. While the former schemes of co-operation described
    above have given the wages-receivers a share of the unearned
    increment from land, and tend to give them a share of the
    manager’s wages, the plan of Schultze was to assist them to gain a
    share in the advantages belonging to the possession of capital.
    The capital was to be accumulated by their own exertions, and, in
    his scheme depended on the principle of self-help. The following
    is the plan of banks adopted:

    “Every member is obliged to make a certain weekly payment into the
    common stock. As soon as it reaches a certain sum he is allowed to
    raise a loan exceeding his share in the inverse ratio of the
    amount of his deposit. For instance, after he has deposited one
    dollar, he is allowed to borrow five or six; but, if he had
    deposited twenty dollars, he is allowed only to borrow thirty. The
    security he is compelled to offer is his own and that of two other
    members of the association, who become jointly and severally
    liable. He may have no assets whatever beyond the amount of his
    deposits, nor may his guarantors; the bank relies simply on the
    character of the three, and the two securities rely on the
    character of their principal; and the remarkable fact is, that the
    security has been found sufficient, that the interest of the men
    in the institutions and the fear of the opinion of their fellows
    has produced a display of honesty and punctuality such as perhaps
    is not to be found in the history of any other banking
    institutions. Such is the confidence inspired by these
    institutions that they hold on deposit, or as loans from third
    parties, an amount exceeding by more than three fourths the total
    amount of their own capital. The monthly contributions of the
    members may be as low as ten cents, but the amount which each
    member is allowed to have in some banks is not more than seven or
    eight dollars, in none more than three hundred dollars. He has a
    right to borrow to the full amount of his deposit without giving
    security; if he desires to borrow a larger sum, he must furnish
    security in the manner we have described. The liability of the
    members is unlimited. The plan of limiting the liability to the
    amount of the capital deposited was tried at first, but it
    inspired no confidence, and the enterprise did not succeed till
    every member was made generally liable. Each member, on entering,
    is obliged to pay a small fee, which goes toward forming or
    maintaining a reserve fund, apart from the active capital. The
    profits are derived from the interest paid by borrowers, which
    amounts to from eight to ten per cent, which may not sound very
    large in our ears, but in Germany is very high. Not over five per
    cent is paid on capital borrowed from outsiders. All profits are
    distributed in dividends among the members of the association, in
    the proportion of the amount of their deposits—after the payment
    of the expenses of management, of course—and the apportionment of
    a certain percentage to the reserve-fund. Every member, as we have
    said, has a right to borrow to the extent of his deposit without
    security; but then, if he seeks to borrow more, whether he shall
    obtain any loan, and, if so, how large a one, is decided by the
    board of management, who are guided in making their decision just
    as all bank officers are—by a consideration of the circumstances
    of the bank as well as those of the borrower. All the affairs of
    the association are discussed and decided in the last resort by a
    general assembly composed of all the members.”(334) The main part
    of the capital loaned by the banks is obtained from outside
    sources on the credit of the associations. In 1865 there were 961
    of these institutions in Germany; in 1877 there were 1,827, with
    over 1,000,000 members, owning $40,000,000 of capital, with
    $100,000,000 more on loan, and doing a business of
    $550,000,000.(335)





BOOK V. ON THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT.




Chapter I. On The General Principles Of Taxation.



§ 1. Four fundamental rules of Taxation.


One of the most disputed questions, both in political science and in
practical statesmanship at this particular period, relates to the proper
limits of the functions and agency of governments.

We shall first consider the economical effects arising from the manner in
which governments perform their necessary and acknowledged functions.

We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences of what I have
termed the optional kind (i.e., overstepping the boundaries of the
universally acknowledged functions) which have heretofore taken place, and
in some cases still take place, under the influence of false general
theories.

The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscellaneous character:
since the necessary functions of government, and those which are so
manifestly expedient that they have never or very rarely been objected to,
are too various to be brought under any very simple classification. We
commence, [under] the first head, with the theory of Taxation.

The qualities desirable, economically speaking, in a system of taxation,
have been embodied by Adam Smith in four maxims or principles, which,
having been generally concurred in by subsequent writers, may be said to
have become classical, and this chapter can not be better commenced than
by quoting them:(336)

“1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute to the support of the
government, as nearly as possible in proportion to their respective
abilities: that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively
enjoy under the protection of the state. In the observation or neglect of
this maxim consists what is called the equality or inequality of taxation.

“2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be certain, and
not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the quantity to
be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor, and to every
other person. The certainty of what each individual ought to pay is, in
taxation, a matter of so great importance, that a very considerable degree
of inequality, it appears, I believe, from the experience of all nations,
is not near so great an evil as a very small degree of uncertainty.

“3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in which
it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. Taxes
upon such consumable goods as are articles of luxury are all finally paid
by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very convenient to him.
He pays them little by little, as he has occasion to buy the goods. As he
is at liberty, too, either to buy or not to buy, as he pleases, it must be
his own fault if he ever suffers any considerable inconvenience from such
taxes.

“4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep out
of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and above what it
brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax may either take out or
keep out of the pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings
into the public treasury in the four following ways: First, the levying of
it may require a great number of officers, whose salaries may eat up the
greater part of the produce of the tax, and whose perquisites may impose
another additional tax upon the people.” Secondly, it may divert a portion
of the labor and capital of the community from a more to a less productive
employment. “Thirdly, by the forfeitures and other penalties which those
unfortunate individuals incur who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax
it may frequently ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which
the community might have derived from the employment of their capitals. An
injudicious tax offers a great temptation to smuggling. Fourthly, by
subjecting the people to the frequent visits and the odious examination of
the tax-gatherers it may expose them to much unnecessary trouble,
vexation, and oppression”: to which may be added that the restrictive
regulations to which trades and manufactures are often subjected, to
prevent evasion of a tax, are not only in themselves troublesome and
expensive, but often oppose insuperable obstacles to making improvements
in the processes.



§ 2. Grounds of the principle of Equality of Taxation.


The first of the four points, equality of taxation, requires to be more
fully examined, being a thing often imperfectly understood, and on which
many false notions have become to a certain degree accredited, through the
absence of any definite principles of judgment in the popular mind.

For what reason ought equality to be the rule in matters of taxation? For
the reason that it ought to be so in all affairs of government. A
government ought to make no distinction of persons or classes in the
strength of their claims on it. If any one bears less than his fair share
of the burden, some other person must suffer more than his share. Equality
of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics, means equality of
sacrifice. It means apportioning the contribution of each person toward
the expenses of government, so that he shall feel neither more nor less
inconvenience from his share of the payment than every other person
experiences from his. There are persons, however, who regard the taxes
paid by each member of the community as an equivalent for value received,
in the shape of service to himself; and they prefer to rest the justice of
making each contribute in proportion to his means upon the ground that he
who has twice as much property to be protected receives, on an accurate
calculation, twice as much protection, and ought, on the principles of
bargain and sale, to pay twice as much for it. Since, however, the
assumption that government exists solely for the protection of property is
not one to be deliberately adhered to, some consistent adherents of the
_quid pro quo_ principle go on to observe that protection being required
for persons as well as property, and everybody’s person receiving the same
amount of protection, a poll-tax of a fixed sum per head is a proper
equivalent for this part of the benefits of government, while the
remaining part, protection to property, should be paid for in proportion
to property. But, in the first place, it is not admissible that the
protection of persons and that of property are the sole purposes of
government. In the second place, the practice of setting definite values
on things essentially indefinite, and making them a ground of practical
conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in the false views of social questions.
It can not be admitted that to be protected in the ownership of ten times
as much property is to be ten times as much protected. If we wanted to
estimate the degrees of benefit which different persons derive from the
protection of government, we should have to consider who would suffer most
if that protection were withdrawn: to which question, if any answer could
be made, it must be, that those would suffer most who were weakest in mind
or body, either by nature or by position.



§ 3. Should the same percentage be levied on all amounts of Income?


Setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacrifices ought to be
demanded from all, we have next to inquire whether this is in fact done,
by making each contribute the same percentage on his pecuniary means. Many
persons maintain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from a small
income is a heavier burden than the same fraction deducted from one much
larger; and on this is grounded the very popular scheme of what is called
a graduated property-tax, viz., an income-tax in which the percentage
rises with the amount of the income.

On the best consideration I am able to give to this question, it appears
to me that the portion of truth which the doctrine contains arises
principally from the difference between a tax which can be saved from
luxuries and one which trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the
necessaries of life. To take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten
thousand would not deprive him of anything really conducive either to the
support or to the comfort of existence; and, if such _would_ be the effect
of taking five pounds from one whose income is fifty, the sacrifice
required from the last is not only greater than, but entirely
incommensurable with, that imposed upon the first. The mode of adjusting
these inequalities of pressure which seems to be the most equitable is
that recommended by Bentham, of leaving a certain minimum of income,
sufficient to provide the necessaries of life, untaxed. Suppose [$250] a
year to be sufficient to provide the number of persons ordinarily
supported from a single income with the requisites of life and health, and
with protection against habitual bodily suffering, but not with any
indulgence. This then should be made the minimum, and incomes exceeding it
should pay taxes not upon their whole amount, but upon the surplus. If the
tax be ten per cent, an income of [$300] should be considered as a net
income of [$50], and charged with [$5] a year, while an income of [$5,000]
should be charged as one of [$4,750]. An income not exceeding [$250]
should not be taxed at all, either directly or by taxes on necessaries;
for, as by supposition this is the smallest income which labor ought to be
able to command, the government ought not to be a party to making it
smaller.

Both in England and on the Continent a graduated property-tax (_l’impôt
progressif_) has been advocated, on the avowed ground that the state
should use the instrument of taxation as a means of mitigating the
inequalities of wealth. I am as desirous as any one that means should be
taken to diminish those inequalities, but not so as to relieve the
prodigal at the expense of the prudent. To tax the larger incomes at a
higher percentage than the smaller is to lay a tax on industry and
economy; to impose a penalty on people for having worked harder and saved
more than their neighbors. It is not the fortunes which are earned, but
those which are unearned, that it is for the public good to place under
limitation. With respect to the large fortunes acquired by gift or
inheritance, the power of bequeathing is one of those privileges of
property which are fit subjects for regulation on grounds of general
expediency; and I have already suggested,(337) as the most eligible mode
of restraining the accumulation of large fortunes in the hands of those
who have not earned them by exertion, a limitation of the amount which any
one person should be permitted to acquire by gift, bequest, or
inheritance. I conceive that inheritances and legacies, exceeding a
certain amount, are highly proper subjects for taxation; and that the
revenue from them should be as great as it can be made without giving rise
to evasions, by donation _inter vivos_ or concealment of property, such as
it would be impossible adequately to check. The principle of graduation
(as it is called), that is, of levying a larger percentage on a larger
sum, though its application to general taxation would be in my opinion
objectionable, seems to me both just and expedient as applied to legacy
and inheritance duties.

The objection to a graduated property-tax applies in an aggravated degree
to the proposition of an exclusive tax on what is called “realized
property,” that is, property not forming a part of any capital engaged in
business, or rather in business under the superintendence of the owner; as
land, the public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares in stock
companies. Except the proposal of applying a sponge to the national debt,
no such palpable violation of common honesty has found sufficient support
in this country, during the present generation, to be regarded as within
the domain of discussion. It has not the palliation of a graduated
property-tax, that of laying the burden on those best able to bear it; for
“realized property” includes the far larger portion of the provision made
for those who are unable to work, and consists, in great part, of
extremely small fractions. I can hardly conceive a more shameless
pretension than that the major part of the property of the country, that
of merchants, manufacturers, farmers, and shopkeepers, should be exempted
from its share of taxation; that these classes should only begin to pay
their proportion after retiring from business, and if they never retire
should be excused from it altogether. But even this does not give an
adequate idea of the injustice of the proposition. The burden thus
exclusively thrown on the owners of the smaller portion of the wealth of
the community would not even be a burden on that _class_ of persons in
perpetual succession, but would fall exclusively on those who happened to
compose it when the tax was laid on. As land and those particular
securities would thenceforth yield a smaller net income, relatively to the
general interest of capital and to the profits of trade, the balance would
rectify itself by a permanent depreciation of those kinds of property.
Future buyers would acquire land and securities at a reduction of price,
equivalent to the peculiar tax, which tax they would, therefore, escape
from paying; while the original possessors would remain burdened with it
even after parting with the property, since they would have sold their
land or securities at a loss of value equivalent to the fee-simple of the
tax. Its imposition would thus be tantamount to the confiscation for
public uses of a percentage of their property equal to the percentage laid
on their income by the tax.


    The above proposition has been extended, by those in the United
    States who appeal to class prejudice, to a proposal to tax the
    incomes of those who hold government bonds. It so happened that,
    for example, the six dollars income on a one-hundred-dollar bond
    of the United States was not, in the war period, deemed a
    sufficient equivalent for the risk of loaning one hundred dollars
    to the state; and Congress, therefore, agreed to relieve them of
    taxation. It is the same thing to a lender if he receive six per
    cent directly from the Government, or if he receive seven per
    cent, and is obliged to pay back one per cent to the treasury in
    the form of taxation; but to the Government it is another thing,
    because if it sell a taxed bond at seven per cent interest, it
    does not receive back the whole of the one per cent tax, but the
    one per cent tax less the expense of levying it. In other words
    the Government, in the latter case, pays six per cent interest
    plus the cost of levying the tax; and consequently borrowed more
    cheaply in the form of an untaxed bond, as was the hope when the
    provision was made. If, then, a tax were now to be put upon the
    bonds, it would fall exclusively on the present holders of them;
    for, since it diminishes the net income from the bond, it lowers
    the selling price of the bond itself, as before explained.(338)



§ 4. Should the same percentage be levied on Perpetual and on Terminable
Incomes?


Whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be taxed at a lower rate
than incomes derived from interest or rent is part of the more
comprehensive question whether life-incomes should be subjected to the
same rate of taxation as perpetual incomes; whether salaries, for example,
or annuities, or the gains of professions, should pay the same percentage
as the income from inheritable property.

The existing tax [in England] treats all kinds of incomes exactly
alike,(339) taking its [fivepence] in the pound as well from the person
whose income dies with him as from the landholder, stockholder, or
mortgagee, who can transmit his fortune undiminished to his descendants.
This is a visible injustice; yet it does not arithmetically violate the
rule that taxation ought to be in proportion to means. When it is said
that a temporary income ought to be taxed less than a permanent one, the
reply is irresistible that it is taxed less: for the income which lasts
only ten years pays the tax only ten years, while that which lasts forever
pays forever. The claim in favor of terminable incomes does not rest on
grounds of arithmetic, but of human wants and feelings. It is not because
the temporary annuitant has smaller means, but because he has greater
necessities, that he ought to be assessed at a lower rate.

In spite of the nominal equality of income, A, an annuitant of £1,000 a
year, can not so well afford to pay £100 out of it as B, who derives the
same annual sum from heritable property; A having usually a demand on his
income which B has not, namely, to provide by saving for children or
others; to which, in the case of salaries or professional gains, must
generally be added a provision for his own later years; while B may expend
his whole income without injury to his old age, and still have it all to
bestow on others after his death. If A, in order to meet these exigencies,
must lay by £300 of his income, to take £100 from him as income-tax is to
take £100 from £700, since it must be retrenched from that part only of
his means which he can afford to spend on his own consumption. Were he to
throw it ratably on what he spends and on what he saves, abating £70 from
his consumption and £30 from his annual saving, then indeed his immediate
sacrifice would be proportionally the same as B’s; but then his children
or his old age would be worse provided for in consequence of the tax. The
capital sum which would be accumulated for them would be one tenth less,
and on the reduced income afforded by this reduced capital they would be a
second time charged with income-tax; while B’s heirs would only be charged
once.

The principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, interpreted in its only
just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires that a person who has no means
of providing for old age, or for those in whom he is interested, except by
saving from income, should have the tax remitted on all that part of his
income which is really and _bona fide_ applied to that purpose.

If, indeed, reliance could be placed on the conscience of the
contributors, or sufficient security taken for the correctness of their
statements by collateral precautions, the proper mode of assessing an
income-tax would be to tax only the part of income devoted to expenditure,
exempting that which is saved. For when saved and invested (and all
savings, speaking generally, are invested) it thenceforth pays income-tax
on the interest or profit which it brings, notwithstanding that it has
already been taxed on the principal. Unless, therefore, savings are
exempted from income-tax, the contributors are twice taxed on what they
save, and only once on what they spend. To tax the sum invested, and
afterward tax also the proceeds of the investment, is to tax the same
portion of the contributor’s means twice over.

No income-tax is really just from which savings are not exempted; and no
income-tax ought to be voted without that provision, if the form of the
returns and the nature of the evidence required could be so arranged as to
prevent the exemption from being taken fraudulent advantage of, by saving
with one hand and getting into debt with the other, or by spending in the
following year what had been passed tax-free as saving in the year
preceding. But, if no plan can be devised for the exemption of actual
savings, sufficiently free from liability to fraud, it is necessary, as
the next thing in point of justice, to take into account, in assessing the
tax, what the different classes of contributors _ought_ to save. In fixing
the proportion between the two rates, there must inevitably be something
arbitrary; perhaps a deduction of one fourth in favor of life-incomes
would be as little objectionable as any which could be made.

Of the net profits of persons in business, a part, as before observed, may
be considered as interest on capital, and of a perpetual character, and
the remaining part as remuneration for the skill and labor of
superintendence. The surplus beyond interest depends on the life of the
individual, and even on his continuance in business, and is entitled to
the full amount of exemption allowed to terminable incomes.



§ 5. The increase of the rent of land from natural causes a fit subject of
peculiar Taxation.


Suppose that there is a kind of income which constantly tends to increase,
without any exertion or sacrifice on the part of the owners: those owners
constituting a class in the community, whom the natural course of things
progressively enriches, consistently with complete passiveness on their
own part. In such a case it would be no violation of the principles on
which private property is grounded, if the state should appropriate this
increase of wealth, or part of it, as it arises. This would not properly
be taking anything from anybody; it would merely be applying an accession
of wealth, created by circumstances, to the benefit of society, instead of
allowing it to become an unearned appendage to the riches of a particular
class.

Now, this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary progress of a
society which increases in wealth is at all times tending to augment the
incomes of landlords; to give them both a greater amount and a greater
proportion of the wealth of the community, independently of any trouble or
outlay incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as it were, in their
sleep, without working, risking, or economizing. What claim have they, on
the general principle of social justice, to this accession of riches? In
what would they have been wronged if society had, from the beginning,
reserved the right of taxing the spontaneous increase of rent, to the
highest amount required by financial exigencies? The only admissible mode
of proceeding would be by a general measure. The first step should be a
valuation of all the land in the country. The present value of all land
should be exempt from the tax; but after an interval had elapsed, during
which society had increased in population and capital, a rough estimate
might be made of the spontaneous increase which had accrued to rent since
the valuation was made. Of this the average price of produce would be some
criterion: if that had risen, it would be certain that rent had increased,
and (as already shown) even in a greater ratio than the rise of price. On
this and other data, an approximate estimate might be made how much value
had been added to the land of the country by natural causes; and in laying
on a general land-tax, which for fear of miscalculation should be
considerably within the amount thus indicated, there would be an assurance
of not touching any increase of income which might be the result of
capital expended or industry exerted by the proprietor.

With reference to such a tax, perhaps a safer criterion than either a rise
of rents or a rise of the price of corn, would be a general rise in the
price of land. It would be easy to keep the tax within the amount which
would reduce the market value of land below the original valuation; and up
to that point, whatever the amount of the tax might be, no injustice would
be done to the proprietors.


    In 1870 Mr. Mill became President of the Land Tenure Association,
    one of whose objects was: “To claim for the benefit of the State
    the Interception by Taxation of the Future Unearned Increase of
    the Rent of Land (so far as the same can be ascertained), or a
    great part of that increase, which is continually taking place,
    without any effort or outlay by the proprietors, merely through
    the growth of population and wealth; reserving to owners the
    option of relinquishing their property to the state at the market
    value which it may have acquired at the time when this principle
    may be adopted by the Legislature.” It is urged against this plan
    that, if the Government take for itself the increase from rent, it
    should also make compensation for loss arising from declining
    rents, whenever there happens to be any readjustment of values in
    land.(340)



§ 6. Taxes falling on Capital not necessarily objectionable.


In addition to the preceding rules, another general rule of taxation is
sometimes laid down—namely, that it should fall on income and not on
capital.

To provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income, and not at all on
capital, is beyond the power of any system of fiscal arrangements. There
is no tax which is not partly paid from what would otherwise have been
saved; no tax, the amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly employed
in increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an addition to
capital. All taxes, therefore, are in some sense partly paid out of
capital; and in a poor country it is impossible to impose any tax which
will not impede the increase of the national wealth. But, in a country
where capital abounds and the spirit of accumulation is strong, this
effect of taxation is scarcely felt. To take from capital by taxation what
emigration would remove, or a commercial crisis destroy, is only to do
what either of those causes would have done—namely, to make a clear space
for further saving.

I can not, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy country, to the
objection made against taxes on legacies and inheritances, that they are
taxes on capital. It is perfectly true that they are so. As Ricardo
observes, if £100 are taken from any one in a tax on houses or on wine, he
will probably save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper house,
consuming less wine, or retrenching from some other of his expenses; but,
if the same sum be taken from him because he has received a legacy of
£1,000, he considers the legacy as only £900, and feels no more inducement
than at any other time (probably feels rather less inducement) to
economize in his expenditure. The tax, therefore, is wholly paid out of
capital; and there are countries in which this would be a serious
objection. But, in the first place, the argument can not apply to any
country which has a national debt and devotes any portion of revenue to
paying it off, since the produce of the tax, thus applied, still remains
capital, and is merely transferred from the tax-payer to the fund-holder.
But the objection is never applicable in a country which increases rapidly
in wealth.




Chapter II. Of Direct Taxes.



§ 1. Direct taxes either on income or expenditure.


Taxes are either direct or indirect. A direct tax is one which is demanded
from the very persons who, it is intended or desired, should pay it.
Indirect taxes are those which are demanded from one person in the
expectation and intention that he shall indemnify himself at the expense
of another: such as the excise or customs. The producer or importer of a
commodity is called upon to pay tax on it, not with the intention to levy
a peculiar contribution upon him, but to tax through him the consumers of
the commodity, from whom it is supposed that he will recover the amount by
means of an advance in price.

Direct taxes are either on income or on expenditure. Most taxes on
expenditure are indirect, but some are direct, being imposed, not on the
producer or seller of an article, but immediately on the consumer. A
house-tax, for example, is a direct tax on expenditure, if levied, as it
usually is, on the occupier of the house. If levied on the builder or
owner, it would be an indirect tax. A window-tax is a direct tax on
expenditure; so are the taxes on horses and carriages.

The sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. This includes every
sort of income, except gift or plunder. Taxes may be laid on any one of
the three kinds of income, or a uniform tax on all of them. We will
consider these in their order.



§ 2. Taxes on rent.


A tax on rent falls wholly on the landlord. There are no means by which he
can shift the burden upon any one else. It does not affect the value or
price of agricultural produce, for this is determined by the cost of
production in the most unfavorable circumstances, and in those
circumstances, as we have so often demonstrated, no rent is paid.

This, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the rent which is the
result either of natural causes, or of improvements made by tenants. When
the landlord makes improvements which increase the productive power of his
land, he is remunerated for them by an extra payment from the tenant; and
this payment, which to the landlord is properly a profit on capital, is
blended and confounded with rent. A tax on rent, if extending to this
portion of it, would discourage landlords from making improvements; but
whatever hinders improvements from being made in the manner in which
people prefer to make them, will often prevent them from being made at
all; and on this account a tax on rent would be inexpedient unless some
means could be devised of excluding from its operation that portion of the
nominal rent which may be regarded as landlord’s profit.



§ 3. —on profits.


A tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at least in its immediate
operation, fall wholly on the payer. All profits being alike affected, no
relief can be obtained by a change of employment. If a tax were laid on
the profits of any one branch of productive employment, the tax would be
virtually an increase of the cost of production, and the value and price
of the article would rise accordingly; by which the tax would be thrown
upon the consumers of the commodity, and would not affect profits. But a
general and equal tax on all profits would not affect general prices, and
would fall, at least in the first instance, on capitalists alone.

There is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and prosperous
country, requires to be taken into account. It may operate in two
different ways: (1.) The curtailment of profit, and the consequent
increased difficulty in making a fortune or obtaining a subsistence by the
employment of capital, may act as a stimulus to inventions, and to the use
of them when made. If improvements in production are much accelerated, and
if these improvements cheapen, directly or indirectly, any of the things
habitually consumed by the laborer, profits may rise, and rise
sufficiently to make up for all that is taken from them by the tax. In
that case the tax will have been realized without loss to any one, the
produce of the country being increased by an equal, or what would in that
case be a far greater, amount. The tax, however, must even in this case be
considered as paid from profits, because the receivers of profits are
those who would be benefited if it were taken off.

But (2.) though the artificial abstraction of a portion of profits would
have a real tendency to accelerate improvements in production, no
considerable improvements might actually result, or only of such a kind as
not to raise general profits at all, or not to raise them so much as the
tax had diminished them. If so, the rate of profit would be brought closer
to that practical minimum to which it is constantly approaching. At its
first imposition the tax falls wholly on profits; but the amount of
increase of capital, which the tax prevents, would, if it had been allowed
to continue, have tended to reduce profits to the same level; and at every
period of ten or twenty years there will be found less difference between
profits as they are and profits as they would in that case have been,
until at last there is no difference, and the tax is thrown either upon
the laborer or upon the landlord. The real effect of a tax on profits is
to make the country possess at any given period a smaller capital and a
smaller aggregate production, and to make the stationary state be attained
earlier, and with a smaller sum of national wealth.

Even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to be always within a
short interval of the stationary state, it seems impossible that, if
capital is accumulating at all, its accumulation should not be in some
degree retarded by the abstraction of a portion of its profit; and, unless
the effect in stimulating improvements be a full counterbalance, it is
inevitable that a part of the burden will be thrown off the capitalist,
upon the laborer or the landlord. One or other of these is always the
loser by a diminished rate of accumulation. If population continues to
increase as before, the laborer suffers; if not, cultivation is checked in
its advance, and the landlords lose the accession of rent which would have
accrued to them. The only countries in which a tax on profits seems likely
to be permanently a burden on capitalists exclusively are those in which
capital is stationary, because there is no new accumulation. In such
countries the tax might not prevent the old capital from being kept up
through habit, or from unwillingness to submit to impoverishment, and so
the capitalists might continue to bear the whole of the tax.



§ 4. —on Wages.


We now turn to Taxes on Wages. The incidence of these is very different,
according as the wages taxed as those of ordinary unskilled labor, or are
the remuneration of such skilled or privileged employments, whether manual
or intellectual, as are taken out of the sphere of competition by a
natural or conferred monopoly.

I have already remarked that, in the present low state of popular
education, all the higher grades of mental or educated labor are at a
monopoly price, exceeding the wages of common workmen in a degree very far
beyond that which is due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time
required in qualifying for the employment. Any tax levied on these gains,
which still leaves them above (or not below) their just proportion, falls
on those who pay it; they have no means of relieving themselves at the
expense of any other class. The same thing is true of ordinary wages, in
cases like that of the United States, or of a new colony, where, capital
increasing as rapidly as population can increase, wages are kept up by the
increase of capital, and not by the adherence of the laborers to a fixed
standard of comforts. In such a case, some deterioration of their
condition, whether by a tax or otherwise, might possibly take place
without checking the increase of population. The tax would in that case
fall on the laborers themselves, and would reduce them prematurely to that
lower state to which, on the same supposition with regard to their habits,
they would in any case have been reduced ultimately, by the inevitable
diminution in the rate of increase of capital, through the occupation of
all the fertile land.

Some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages can not be
detrimental to the laborers, since the money raised by it, being expended
in the country, comes back to the laborers again through the demand for
labor. Without, however, reverting to general principles, we may rely on
an obvious _reductio ad absurdum_. If to take money from the laborers and
spend it in commodities is giving it back to the laborers, then, to take
money from other classes, and spend it in the same manner, must be giving
it to the laborers; consequently, the more a government takes in taxes,
the greater will be the demand for labor, and the more opulent the
condition of the laborers—a proposition the absurdity of which no one can
fail to see.

In the condition of most communities, wages are regulated by the habitual
standard of living to which the laborers adhere, and on less than which
they will not multiply. Where there exists such a standard, a tax on wages
will indeed for a time be borne by the laborers themselves; but, unless
this temporary depression has the effect of lowering the standard itself,
the increase of population will receive a check, which will raise wages,
and restore the laborers to their previous condition. On whom, in this
case, will the tax fall? A rise of wages occasioned by a tax must, like
any other increase of the cost of labor, be defrayed from profits. To
attempt to tax day-laborers, in an old country, is merely to impose an
extra tax upon all employers of common labor; unless the tax has the much
worse effect of permanently lowering the standard of comfortable
subsistence in the minds of the poorest class.

We find in the preceding considerations an additional argument for the
opinion, already expressed, that direct taxation should stop short of the
class of incomes which do not exceed what is necessary for healthful
existence. These very small incomes are mostly derived from manual labor;
and, as we now see, any tax imposed on these, either permanently degrades
the habits of the laboring-class, or falls on profits, and burdens
capitalists with an indirect tax, in addition to their share of the direct
taxes; which is doubly objectionable, both as a violation of the
fundamental rule of equality, and for the reasons which, as already shown,
render a peculiar tax on profits detrimental to the public wealth, and
consequently to the means which society possesses of paying any taxes
whatever.



§ 5. —on Income.


We now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of income, to a tax
attempted to be assessed fairly upon all kinds; in other words, an
Income-Tax. The discussion of the conditions necessary for making this tax
consistent with justice has been anticipated in the last chapter. We shall
suppose, therefore, that these conditions are complied with. They are,
first, that incomes below a certain amount should be altogether untaxed.
This minimum should not be higher than the amount which suffices for the
necessaries of the existing population. The second condition is, that
incomes above the limit should be taxed only in proportion to the surplus
by which they exceed the limit. Thirdly, that all sums saved from income
and invested should be exempt from the tax; or, if this be found
impracticable, that life-incomes and incomes from business and professions
should be less heavily taxed than inheritable incomes.

An income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would be, in point of
justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes. The objection to it, in the
present state of public morality, is the impossibility of ascertaining the
real incomes of the contributors. Notwithstanding, too, what is called the
inquisitorial nature of the tax, no amount of inquisitorial power which
would be tolerated by a people the most disposed to submit to it could
enable the revenue officers to assess the tax from actual knowledge of the
circumstances of contributors. Rents, salaries, annuities, and all fixed
incomes, can be exactly ascertained. But the variable gains of
professions, and still more the profits of business, which the person
interested can not always himself exactly ascertain, can still less be
estimated with any approach to fairness by a tax-collector. The main
reliance must be placed, and always has been placed, on the returns made
by the person himself. The tax, therefore, on whatever principles of
equality it may be imposed, is in practice unequal in one of the worst
ways, falling heaviest on the most conscientious.

It is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which belongs to the
principle of an income-tax can not be made to attach to it in practice.
This consideration would lead us to concur in the opinion which, until of
late, has usually prevailed—that direct taxes on income should be reserved
as an extraordinary resource for great national emergencies, in which the
necessity of a large additional revenue overrules all objections.

The difficulties of a fair income-tax have elicited a proposition for a
direct tax of so much per cent, not on income but on expenditure; the
aggregate amount of each person’s expenditure being ascertained as the
amount of income now is, from statements furnished by the contributors
themselves. The only security would still be the veracity of individuals,
and there is no reason for supposing that their statements would be more
trustworthy on the subject of their expenses than on that of their
revenues. The taxes on expenditure at present in force, either in this or
in other countries, fall only on particular kinds of expenditure, and
differ no otherwise from taxes on commodities than in being paid directly
by the person who consumes or uses the article, instead of being advanced
by the producer or seller, and reimbursed in the price. The taxes on
horses and carriages, on dogs, on servants, are of this nature. They
evidently fall on the persons from whom they are levied—those who use the
commodity taxed. A tax of a similar description, and more important, is a
house-tax, which must be considered at somewhat greater length.



§ 6. A House-Tax.


The rent of a house consists of two parts, the ground-rent, and what Adam
Smith calls the building-rent. The first is determined by the ordinary
principles of rent. It is the remuneration given for the use of the
portion of land occupied by the house and its appurtenances; and varies
from a mere equivalent for the rent which the ground would afford in
agriculture to the monopoly rents paid for advantageous situations in
populous thoroughfares. The rent of the house itself, as distinguished
from the ground, is the equivalent given for the labor and capital
expended on the building. The fact of its being received in quarterly or
half-yearly payments makes no difference in the principles by which it is
regulated. It comprises the ordinary profit on the builder’s capital, and
an annuity, sufficient at the current rate of interest, after paying for
all repairs chargeable on the proprietor, to replace the original capital
by the time the house is worn out, or by the expiration of the usual term
of a building-lease.

A tax of so much per cent on the gross rent falls on both those portions
alike. The more highly a house is rented, the more it pays to the tax,
whether the quality of the situation or that of the house itself is the
cause. The incidence, however, of these two portions of the tax must be
considered separately.

As much of it as is a tax on building-rent must ultimately fall on the
consumer, in other words, the occupier. For, as the profits of building
are already not above the ordinary rate, they would, if the tax fell on
the owner and not on the occupier, become lower than the profits of
untaxed employments, and houses would not be built. It is probable,
however, that for some time after the tax was first imposed, a great part
of it would fall, not on the renter, but on the owner of the house. A
large proportion of the consumers either could not afford, or would not
choose, to pay their former rent with the tax in addition, but would
content themselves with a lower scale of accommodation. Houses, therefore,
would be for a time in excess of the demand. The consequence of such
excess, in the case of most other articles, would be an almost immediate
diminution of the supply; but so durable a commodity as houses does not
rapidly diminish in amount. New buildings, indeed, of the class for which
the demand had decreased, would cease to be erected, except for special
reasons; but in the mean time the temporary superfluity would lower rents,
and the consumers would obtain, perhaps, nearly the same accommodation as
formerly, for the same aggregate payment, rent and tax together. By
degrees, however, as the existing houses wore out, or as increase of
population demanded a greater supply, rents would again rise; until it
became profitable to recommence building, which would not be until the tax
was wholly transferred to the occupier. In the end, therefore, the
occupier bears that portion of a tax on rent which falls on the payment
made for the house itself, exclusively of the ground it stands on.

The case is partly different with the portion which is a tax on
ground-rent. As taxes on rent, properly so called, fall on the landlord, a
tax on ground-rent, one would suppose, must fall on the ground-landlord,
at least after the expiration of the building-lease. It will not, however,
fall wholly on the landlord, unless with the tax on ground-rent there is
combined an equivalent tax on agricultural rent. The lowest rent of land
let for building is very little above the rent which the same ground would
yield in agriculture: since it is reasonable to suppose that land, unless
in case of exceptional circumstances, is let or sold for building as soon
as it is decidedly worth more for that purpose than for cultivation. If,
therefore, a tax were laid on ground-rents without being also laid on
agricultural rents, it would, unless of trifling amount, reduce the return
from the lowest ground-rents below the ordinary return from land, and
would check further building quite as effectually as if it were a tax on
building-rents, until either the increased demand of a growing population,
or a diminution of supply by the ordinary causes of destruction, had
raised the rent by a full equivalent for the tax. But whatever raises the
lowest ground-rents raises all others, since each exceeds the lowest by
the market value of its peculiar advantages. If, therefore, the tax on
ground-rents were a fixed sum per square foot, the more valuable
situations paying no more than those least in request, this fixed payment
would ultimately fall on the occupier. Suppose the lowest ground-rent to
be $50 per acre, and the highest $5,000, a tax of $5 per acre on
ground-rents would ultimately raise the former to $55, and the latter
consequently to $5,005, since the difference of value between the two
situations would be exactly what it was before: the annual $5, therefore,
would be paid by the occupier. But a tax on ground-rent is supposed to be
a portion of a house-tax which is not a fixed payment, but a percentage on
the rent. The cheapest site, therefore, being supposed as before to pay
$5, the dearest would pay $500, of which only the $5 could be thrown upon
the occupier, since the rent would still be only raised to $5,005.
Consequently, $495 of the $500 levied from the expensive site would fall
on the ground-landlord.(341) A house-tax thus requires to be considered in
a double aspect, as a tax on all occupiers of houses, and a tax on
ground-rents.

In the vast majority of houses the ground-rent forms but a small
proportion of the annual payment made for the house, and nearly all the
tax falls on the occupier. It is only in exceptional cases, like that of
the favorite situations in large towns, that the predominant element in
the rent of the house is the ground-rent; and, among the very few kinds of
income which are fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these ground-rents
hold the principal place, being the most gigantic example extant of
enormous accessions of riches acquired rapidly, and in many cases
unexpectedly, by a few families, from the mere accident of their
possessing certain tracts of land without their having themselves aided in
the acquisition by the smallest exertion, outlay, or risk. So far,
therefore, as a house-tax falls on the ground-landlord, it is liable to no
valid objection.

In so far as it falls on the occupier, if justly proportioned to the value
of the house, it is one of the fairest and most unobjectionable of all
taxes. No part of a person’s expenditure is a better criterion of his
means, or bears, on the whole, more nearly the same proportion to them.
The equality of this tax can only be seriously questioned on two grounds.
The first is, that a miser may escape it. This objection applies to all
taxes on expenditure; nothing but a direct tax on income can reach a
miser. The second objection is, that a person may require a larger and
more expensive house, not from having greater means, but from having a
larger family. Of this, however, he is not entitled to complain, since
having a large family is at a person’s own choice; and, so far as concerns
the public interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged than
promoted.(342)

A valuation should be made of the house, not at what it would sell for,
but at what would be the cost of rebuilding it, and this valuation might
be periodically corrected by an allowance for what it had lost in value by
time, or gained by repairs and improvements. The amount of the amended
valuation would form a principal sum, the interest of which, at the
current price of the public funds, would form the annual value at which
the building should be assessed to the tax.

As incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt from income-tax, so
ought houses below a certain value from house-tax, on the universal
principle of sparing from all taxation the absolute necessaries of
healthful existence. In order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as
of houses, might benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption, it
might be optional with the owners to have every portion of a house which
is occupied by a separate tenant valued and assessed separately.




Chapter III. Of Taxes On Commodities, Or Indirect Taxes.



§ 1. A Tax on all commodities would fall on Profits.


By taxes on commodities are commonly meant those which are levied either
on the producers, or on the carriers or dealers who intervene between them
and the final purchasers for consumption; the phrase being, by custom,
confined to indirect taxes—those which are advanced by one person, to be,
as is expected and intended, reimbursed by another.

Taxes on commodities are either on production within the country, or on
importation into it, or on conveyance or sale within it, and are classed
respectively as excise, customs, or tolls and transit duties. To whichever
class they belong, and at whatever stage in the progress of the community
they may be imposed, they are equivalent to an increase of the cost of
production; using that term in its most enlarged sense, which includes the
cost of transport and distribution, or, in common phrase, of bringing the
commodity to market.

When the cost of production is increased artificially by a tax, the effect
is the same as when it is increased by natural causes. If only one or a
few commodities are affected, their value and price rise, so as to
compensate the producer or dealer for the peculiar burden; but if there
were a tax on all commodities, exactly proportioned to their value, no
such compensation would be obtained; there would neither be a general rise
of values, which is an absurdity, nor of prices, which depend on causes
entirely different. There would, however, as Mr. McCulloch has pointed
out, be a disturbance of values, some falling, others rising, owing to a
circumstance, the effect of which on values and prices we formerly
discussed—the different durability of the capital employed in different
occupations. The gross produce of industry consists of two parts; one
portion serving to replace the capital consumed, while the other portion
is profit. Now, equal capital in two branches of production must have
equal expectations of profit; but if a greater portion of the one than of
the other is fixed capital, or if that fixed capital is more durable,
there will be a less consumption of capital in the year, and less will be
required to replace it, so that the profit, if absolutely the same, will
form a greater proportion of the annual returns. To derive from a capital
of $1,000 a profit of $100, the one producer may have to sell produce to
the value of $1,100, the other only to the value of $500. If on these two
branches of industry a tax be imposed of five per cent _ad valorem_, the
last will be charged only with $25, the first with $55; leaving to the one
$75 profit, to the other only $45. To equalize, therefore, their
expectation of profit, the one commodity must rise in price, or the other
must fall, or both.(343) Commodities made chiefly by immediate labor must
rise in value, as compared with those which are chiefly made by machinery.
It is unnecessary to prosecute this branch of the inquiry any further.



§ 2. Taxes on particular commodities fall on the consumer.


A tax on any one commodity, whether laid on its production, its
importation, its carriage from place to place, or its sale, and whether
the tax be a fixed sum of money for a given quantity of the commodity, or
an _ad valorem_ duty, will, as a general rule, raise the value and price
of the commodity by at least the amount of the tax. There are few cases in
which it does not raise them by more than that amount. In the first place,
there are few taxes on production on account of which it is not found or
deemed necessary to impose restrictive regulations on the manufacturers or
dealers, in order to check evasions of the tax. These regulations are
always sources of trouble and annoyance, and generally of expense, for all
of which, being peculiar disadvantages, the producers or dealers must have
compensation in the price of their commodity. These restrictions also
frequently interfere with the processes of manufacture, requiring the
producer to carry on his operations in the way most convenient to the
revenue, though not the cheapest or most efficient for purposes of
production. Any regulations whatever, enforced by law, make it difficult
for the producer to adopt new and improved processes. Further, the
necessity of advancing the tax obliges producers and dealers to carry on
their business with larger capitals than would otherwise be necessary, on
the whole of which they must receive the ordinary rate of profit, though a
part only is employed in defraying the real expenses of production or
importation. The price of the article must be such as to afford a profit
on more than its natural value, instead of a profit on only its natural
value. Neither ought it to be forgotten that whatever renders a larger
capital necessary in any trade or business limits the competition in that
business, and, by giving something like a monopoly to a few dealers, may
enable them either to keep up the price beyond what would afford the
ordinary rate of profit, or to obtain the ordinary rate of profit with a
less degree of exertion for improving and cheapening their commodity. In
these several modes, taxes on commodities often cost to the consumer,
through the increased price of the article, much more than they bring into
the treasury of the state. There is still another consideration: the
higher price necessitated by the tax almost always checks the demand for
the commodity; and, since there are many improvements in production which,
to make them practicable, require a certain extent of demand, such
improvements are obstructed, and many of them prevented altogether. It is
a well-known fact that the branches of production in which fewest
improvements are made are those with which the revenue-officer interferes;
and that nothing, in general, gives a greater impulse to improvements in
the production of a commodity than taking off a tax which narrowed the
market for it.



§ 3. Peculiar effects of taxes on Necessaries.


Such are the effects of taxes on commodities, considered generally; but,
as there are some commodities (those composing the necessaries of the
laborer) of which the values have an influence on the distribution of
wealth among different classes of the community, it is requisite to trace
the effects of taxes on those particular articles somewhat further. If a
tax be laid, say on corn, and the price rises in proportion to the tax,
the rise of price may operate in two ways: First, it may lower the
condition of the laboring-classes; temporarily, indeed, it can scarcely
fail to do so. If it diminishes their consumption of the produce of the
earth, or makes them resort to a food which the soil produces more
abundantly, and therefore more cheaply, it to that extent contributes to
throw back agriculture upon more fertile lands or less costly processes,
and to lower the value and price of corn; which therefore ultimately
settles at a price, increased not by the whole amount of the tax, but by
only a part of its amount. Secondly, however, it may happen that the
dearness of the taxed food does not lower the habitual standard of the
laborer’s requirements, but that wages, on the contrary, through an action
on population, rise, in shorter or longer periods, so as to compensate the
laborers for their portion of the tax, the compensation being of course at
the expense of profits. Taxes on necessaries must thus have one of two
effects: either they lower the condition of the laboring-classes, or they
exact from the owners of capital, in addition to the amount due to the
state on their own necessaries, the amount due on those consumed by the
laborers. In the last case, the tax on necessaries, like a tax on wages,
is equivalent to a peculiar tax on profits; which is, like all other
partial taxation, unjust, and is specially prejudicial to the increase of
the national wealth.

It remains to speak of the effect on rent. Assuming (what is usually the
fact) that the consumption of food is not diminished, the same cultivation
as before will be necessary to supply the wants of the community; the
margin of cultivation, to use Dr. Chalmers’s expression, remains where it
was; and the same land or capital, which, as the least productive, already
regulated the value and price of the whole produce, will continue to
regulate them. The effect which a tax on agricultural produce will have on
rent depends on its affecting or not affecting the difference between the
return to this least productive land or capital and the returns to other
lands and capitals. Now, this depends on the manner in which the tax is
imposed. If it is an _ad valorem_ tax, or, what is the same thing, a fixed
proportion of the produce, such as tithe for example, it evidently lowers
corn-rents. For it takes more corn from the better lands than from the
worse, and exactly in the degree in which they are better, land of twice
the productiveness paying twice as much to the tithe. Whatever takes more
from the greater of two quantities than from the less, diminishes the
difference between them. The imposition of a tithe on corn would take a
tithe also from corn-rent: for, if we reduce a series of numbers by a
tenth each, the differences between them are reduced one tenth.

For example, let there be five qualities of land, which severally yield,
on the same extent of ground and with the same expenditure, 100, 90, 80,
70, and 60 bushels of wheat, the last of these being the lowest quality
which the demand for food renders it necessary to cultivate. The rent of
these lands will be as follows:

The land producing 100 bushels will yield a rent of 100-60, or 40
bushels.
That producing 90 bushels, a rent of 90-60, or 30 bushels.
That producing 80 bushels, a rent of 80-60, or 20 bushels.
That producing 70 bushels, a rent of 70-60, or 10 bushels.
That producing 60 bushels, will yield no rent.

Now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five pieces of land 10,
9, 8, 7, and 6 bushels respectively, the fifth quality still being the one
which regulates the price, but returning to the farmer, after payment of
tithe, no more than 54 bushels:

The land producing 100 bushels reduced to 90 will yield a rent of 90-54,
or 36 bushels.
That producing 90 bushels reduced to 81, a rent of 81-54, or 27 bushels.
That producing 80 bushels reduced to 72, a rent of 72-54, or 18 bushels.
That producing 70 bushels reduced to 63, a rent of 63-54, or 9 bushels.

and that producing 60 bushels, reduced to 54, will yield, as before, no
rent. So that the rent of the first quality of land has lost four bushels;
of the second, three; of the third, two; and of the fourth, one: that is,
each has lost exactly one tenth. A tax, therefore, of a fixed proportion
of the produce lowers, in the same proportion, corn-rent.

But it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent estimated in money,
or in any other commodity. For, in the same proportion as corn-rent is
reduced in quantity, the corn composing it is raised in value. Under the
tithe, 54 bushels will be worth in the market what 60 were before; and
nine tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the whole ten tenths
previously sold for. The landlords will therefore be compensated in value
and price for what they lose in quantity, and will suffer only so far as
they consume their rent in kind, or, after receiving it in money, expend
it in agricultural produce; that is, they only suffer as consumers of
agricultural produce, and in common with all the other consumers.
Considered as landlords, they have the same income as before; the tithe,
therefore, falls on the consumer, and not on the landlord.

The same effect would be produced on rent if the tax, instead of being a
fixed proportion of the produce, were a fixed sum per quarter or per
bushel. A tax which takes a shilling for every bushel takes more shillings
from one field than from another, just in proportion as it produces more
bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, except that tithe is not only
the same proportion on all lands, but is also the same proportion at all
times, while a fixed sum of money per bushel will amount to a greater or
less proportion, according as corn is cheap or dear.

There are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would affect rent
differently. A tax proportioned to the rent would fall wholly on the rent,
and would not at all raise the price of corn, which is regulated by the
portion of the produce that pays no rent. A fixed tax of so much per
cultivated acre, without distinction of value, would have effects directly
the reverse. Taking no more from the best qualities of land than from the
worst, it would leave the differences the same as before, and consequently
the same corn-rents, and the landlords would profit to the full extent of
the rise of price. To put the thing in another manner: the price must rise
sufficiently to enable the worst land to pay the tax, thus enabling all
lands which produce more than the worst to pay not only the tax, but also
an increased rent to the landlords. These, however, are not so much taxes
on the produce of land as taxes on the land itself. Taxes on the produce,
properly so called, whether fixed or _ad valorem_, do not affect rent, but
fall on the consumer, profits, however, generally bearing either the whole
or the greatest part of the portion which is levied on the consumption of
the laboring-classes.



§ 4. —how modified by the tendency of profits to a minimum.


The preceding is, I apprehend, a correct statement of the manner in which
taxes on agricultural produce operate when first laid on. When, however,
they are of old standing, their effect may be different. Now, the effect
of accumulation, when attended by its usual accompaniment, an increase of
population, is to increase the value and price of food, to raise rent, and
to lower profits; that is, to do precisely what is done by a tax on
agricultural produce, except that this does not raise rent. The tax,
therefore, merely anticipates the rise of price and fall of profits which
would have taken place ultimately through the mere progress of
accumulation, while it at the same time prevents, or at least retards,
that progress. If the rate of profit was such that the effect of the tithe
reduces it to the practical minimum, after a lapse of time which would
have admitted of a rise of one tenth from the natural progress of wealth,
the consumer will be paying no more than he would have paid if the tithe
had never existed; he will have ceased to pay any portion of it, and the
person who will really pay it is the landlord, whom it deprives of the
increase of rent which would by that time have accrued to him. At every
successive point in this interval of time, less of the burden will rest on
the consumer, and more of it on the landlord; and, in the ultimate result,
the minimum of profits will be reached with a smaller capital and
population and a lower rental than if the course of things had not been
disturbed by the imposition of the tax. If, on the other hand, the tithe
or other tax on agricultural produce does not reduce profits to the
minimum, but to something above the minimum, accumulation will not be
stopped, but only slackened; and, if population also increases, the
twofold increase will continue to produce its effects—a rise of the price
of corn and an increase of rent. These consequences, however, will not
take place with the same rapidity as if the higher rate of profit had
continued. At the end of twenty years the country will have a smaller
population and capital than, but for the tax, it would by that time have
had; the landlords will have a smaller rent, and the price of corn, having
increased less rapidly than it would otherwise have done, will not be so
much as a tenth higher than what, if there had been no tax, it would by
that time have become. A part of the tax, therefore, will already have
ceased to fall on the consumer and devolved upon the landlord, and the
proportion will become greater and greater by lapse of time.

But though tithes and other taxes on agricultural produce, when of long
standing, either do not raise the price of food and lower profits at all,
or, if at all, not in proportion to the tax, yet the abrogation of such
taxes, when they exist, does not the less diminish price, and, in general,
raise the rate of profit. The abolition of a tithe takes one tenth from
the cost of production, and consequently from the price, of all
agricultural produce; and, unless it permanently raises the laborer’s
requirements, it lowers the cost of labor and raises profits. Rent,
estimated in money or in commodities, generally remains as before;
estimated in agricultural produce, it is raised. The country adds as much,
by the repeal of a tithe, to the margin which intervenes between it and
the stationary state as was cut off from that margin by the tithe when
first imposed. Accumulation is greatly accelerated, and, if population
also increases, the price of corn immediately begins to recover itself and
rent to rise, thus gradually transferring the benefit of the remission
from the consumer to the landlord.



§ 5. Effects of discriminating Duties.


We have hitherto inquired into the effects of taxes on commodities, on the
assumption that they are levied impartially on every mode in which the
commodity can be produced or brought to market. Another class of
considerations is opened, if we suppose that this impartiality is not
maintained, and that the tax is imposed, not on the commodity, but on some
particular mode of obtaining it.

Suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by two different
processes—as a manufactured commodity may be produced either by hand or by
steam-power—sugar may be made either from the sugar-cane or from
beet-root, cattle fattened either on hay and green crops or on oil-cake
and the refuse of breweries. It is the interest of the community that, of
the two methods, producers should adopt that which produces the best
article at the lowest price. This being also the interest of the
producers, unless protected against competition, and shielded from the
penalties of indolence, the process most advantageous to the community is
that which, if not interfered with by Government, they ultimately find it
to their advantage to adopt. Suppose, however, that a tax is laid on one
of the processes, and no tax at all, or one of smaller amount, on the
other. If the taxed process is the one which the producers would not have
adopted, the measure is simply nugatory. But if the tax falls, as it is of
course intended to do, upon the one which they would have adopted, it
creates an artificial motive for preferring the untaxed process, though
the inferior of the two. If, therefore, it has any effect at all, it
causes the commodity to be produced of worse quality, or at a greater
expense of labor; it causes so much of the labor of the community to be
wasted, and the capital employed in supporting and remunerating that labor
to be expended as uselessly as if it were spent in hiring men to dig holes
and fill them up again. This waste of labor and capital constitutes an
addition to the cost of production of the commodity, which raises its
value and price in a corresponding ratio, and thus the owners of the
capital are indemnified. The loss falls on the consumers; though the
capital of the country is also eventually diminished, by the diminution of
their means of saving, and, in some degree, of their inducements to save.

The kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general denomination of
a discriminating duty, transgresses the rule that taxes should take as
little as possible from the taxpayer beyond what they bring into the
treasury of the state. A discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two
distinct taxes, only one of which is paid to the Government, and that
frequently the less onerous of the two. If a tax were laid on sugar
produced from the cane, leaving the sugar from beet-root untaxed, then in
so far as cane-sugar continued to be used, the tax on it would be paid to
the treasury, and might be as unobjectionable as most other taxes; but if
cane-sugar, having previously been cheaper than beet-root sugar, was now
dearer, and beet-root sugar was to any considerable amount substituted for
it, and fields laid out and manufactories established in consequence, the
Government would gain no revenue from the beet-root sugar, while the
consumers of it would pay a real tax. They would pay for beet-root sugar
more than they had previously paid for cane-sugar, and the difference
would go to indemnify producers for a portion of the labor of the country
actually thrown away, in producing by the labor of (say) three hundred men
what could be obtained by the other process with the labor of two hundred.


    An interesting illustration, in late years, of the operation of a
    discriminating duty is to be found in the case of different grades
    of sugar imported into the United States. Our tariff levied
    certain duties on different grades of sugar classified by color,
    on the theory that color was a test of saccharine strength.
    Cargoes were examined and compared with graded sugars hermetically
    sealed in glass bottles and distributed by the Dutch authorities,
    whence came the name of “Dutch standard.” Grades from No. 1
    (melado) to No. 10 must go to the refiner before consumption; but
    the grades to No. 13, although some might have gone into immediate
    consumption, were usually sent to be manufactured into the highest
    grades of soft and hard sugars. So long as the sugar was secured
    by evaporation in open coppers, or by passing the molasses through
    a layer of clay, saccharine strength and color went fairly well
    together. But with the invention of the vacuum-pan and the
    centrifugal wheel, by which the sugar is reduced through a shorter
    and more effective process, sugar of a certain grade of color by
    the Dutch standard contained a much greater degree of sweetness
    than that produced by the old methods. Cuban planters, therefore,
    were permitted to send sugar into this country at a duty which was
    really levied on grades much inferior, and so paid a less duty
    than other sugars. The products of one country were discriminated
    against in favor of another. The difficulty was settled by using
    the polariscope, which gave an absolute chemical test of the
    sweetness, irrespective of color.


One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties is that of a tax on
the importation of a commodity capable of being produced at home,
unaccompanied by an equivalent tax on the home production. A commodity is
never permanently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at a
smaller cost of labor and capital, on the whole, than is necessary for
producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the importation, it is rendered
cheaper to produce the article than to import it, an extra quantity of
labor and capital is expended, without any extra result. The labor is
useless, and the capital is spent in paying people for laboriously doing
nothing. All custom duties which operate as an encouragement to the home
production of the taxed article are thus an eminently wasteful mode of
raising a revenue.

This character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom duties on the
produce of land, unless countervailed by excise duties on the home
production. Such taxes bring less into the public treasury, compared with
what they take from the consumers, than any other imposts to which
civilized nations are usually subject. If the wheat produced in a country
is twenty millions of quarters, and the consumption twenty-one millions, a
million being annually imported, and if on this million a duty is laid
which raises the price ten shillings per quarter, the price which is
raised is not that of the million only, but of the whole twenty-one
millions. Taking the most favorable but extremely improbable supposition,
that the importation is not at all checked, nor the home production
enlarged, the state gains a revenue of only half a million, while the
consumers are taxed ten millions and a half, the ten millions being a
contribution to the home growers, who are forced by competition to resign
it all to the landlords. The consumer thus pays to the owners of land an
additional tax, equal to twenty times that which he pays to the state. Let
us now suppose that the tax really checks importation. Suppose importation
stopped altogether in ordinary years; it being found that the million of
quarters can be obtained, by a more elaborate cultivation, or by breaking
up inferior land, at a less advance than ten shillings upon the previous
price—say, for instance, five shillings a quarter. The revenue now obtains
nothing, except from the extraordinary imports which may happen to take
place in a season of scarcity. But the consumers pay every year a tax of
five shillings on the whole twenty-one millions of quarters, amounting to
£5,250,000 sterling. Of this the odd £250,000 goes to compensate the
growers of the last million of quarters for the labor and capital wasted
under the compulsion of the law. The remaining £5,000,000 go to enrich the
landlords as before.

Such is the operation of what are technically termed corn laws, when first
laid on; and such continues to be their operation so long as they have any
effect at all in raising the price of corn. The difference between a
country without corn laws and a country which has long had corn laws is
not so much that the last has a higher price or a larger rental, but that
it has the same price and the same rental with a smaller aggregate capital
and a smaller population. The imposition of corn laws raises rents, but
retards that progress of accumulation which would in no long period have
raised them fully as much. The repeal of corn laws tends to lower rents,
but it unchains a force which, in a progressive state of capital and
population, restores and even increases the former amount.

What we have said of duties on importation generally is equally applicable
to discriminating duties which favor importation from one place, or in one
particular manner, in contradistinction to others; such as the preference
given to the produce of a colony, or of a country with which there is a
commercial treaty; or the higher duties formerly imposed by our navigation
laws on goods imported in other than British shipping. Whatever else may
be alleged in favor of such distinctions, whenever they are not nugatory,
they are economically wasteful. They induce a resort to a more costly mode
of obtaining a commodity in lieu of one less costly, and thus cause a
portion of the labor which the country employs in providing itself with
foreign commodities to be sacrificed without return.



§ 6. Effects produced on international Exchange by Duties on Exports and
on Imports.


There is one more point, relating to the operation of taxes on commodities
conveyed from one country to another, which requires notice: the
influences which they exert on international exchanges. Every tax on a
commodity tends to raise its price, and consequently to lessen the demand
for it in the market in which it is sold. All taxes on international trade
tend, therefore, to produce a disturbance, and a readjustment of what we
have termed the equation of international demand.

Taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds—taxes on imports and on exports.
On the first aspect of the matter it would seem that both these taxes are
paid by the consumers of the commodity; that taxes on exports consequently
fall entirely on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the home consumer.
The true state of the case, however, is much more complicated.

“By taxing exports we may, in certain circumstances, produce a division of
the advantage of the trade more favorable to ourselves. In some cases we
may draw into our coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not only the
whole tax, but more than the tax; in other cases we should gain exactly
the tax; in others, less than the tax. In this last case a part of the tax
is borne by ourselves; possibly the whole, possibly even, as we shall
show, more than the whole.”

Reverting to the supposititious case employed of a trade between England
and the United States in iron and corn, suppose that the United States
taxes her export of corn, the tax not being supposed high enough to induce
England to produce corn for herself. The price at which corn can be sold
in England is augmented by the tax. This will probably diminish the
quantity consumed. It may diminish it so much that, even at the increased
price, there will not be required so great a money value as before. Or it
may not diminish it at all, or so little that, in consequence of the
higher price, a greater money value will be purchased than before. In this
last case, the United States will gain, at the expense of England, not
only the whole amount of the duty, but more; for, the money value of her
exports to England being increased, while her imports remain the same,
money will flow into the United States from England. The price of corn
will rise in the United States, and consequently in England; but the price
of iron will fall in England, and consequently in the United States. We
shall export less corn and import more iron, till the equilibrium is
restored. It thus appears (what is at first sight somewhat remarkable)
that, by taxing her exports, the United States would, in some conceivable
circumstances, not only gain from her foreign customers the whole amount
of the tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She would get them
cheaper in two ways, for she would obtain them for less money, and would
have more money to purchase them with. England, on the other hand, would
suffer doubly: she would have to pay for her corn a price increased not
only by the duty, but by the influx of money into the United States, while
the same change in the distribution of the circulating medium would leave
her less money to purchase it with.(344)

This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If, after the
imposition of the duty, England requires so diminished a quantity of corn
that its total value is exactly the same as before, the balance of trade
would be undisturbed; the United States will gain the duty, England will
lose it, and nothing more. If, again, the imposition of the duty occasions
such a falling off in the demand that England requires a less pecuniary
value than before, our exports will no longer pay for our imports; money
must pass from the United States into England; and England’s share of the
advantage of the trade will be increased. By the change in the
distribution of money, corn will fall in the United States, and therefore
it will, of course, fall in England. Thus England will not pay the whole
of the tax. From the same cause, iron will rise in England, and
consequently in the United States. When this alteration of prices has so
adjusted the demand that the corn and the iron again pay for one another,
the result is that England has paid only a part of the tax, and the
remainder of what has been received into our treasury has come indirectly
out of the pockets of our own consumers of iron, who pay a higher price
for that imported commodity in consequence of the tax on our exports,
while at the same time they, in consequence of the efflux of money and the
fall of prices, have smaller money incomes wherewith to pay for the iron
at that advanced price.

It is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our exports we might
not only gain nothing from the foreigner, the tax being paid out of our
own pockets, but might even compel our own people to pay a second tax to
the foreigner. Suppose, as before, that the demand of England for corn
falls off so much on the imposition of the duty that she requires a
smaller money value than before, but that the case is so different with
iron in the United States that when the price rises the demand either does
not fall off at all, or so little that the money value required is greater
than before. The first effect of laying on the duty is, as before, that
the corn exported will no longer pay for the iron imported.

Money will therefore flow out of the United States into England. One
effect is to raise the price of iron in England, and consequently in the
United States. But this, by the supposition, instead of stopping the
efflux of money, only makes it greater; because, the higher the price, the
greater the money value of the iron consumed. The balance, therefore, can
only be restored by the other effect, which is going on at the same time,
namely, the fall of corn in the American and consequently in the English
market. Even when corn has fallen so low that its price with the duty is
only equal to what its price without the duty was at first, it is not a
necessary consequence that the fall will stop; for the same amount of
exportation as before will not now suffice to pay the increased money
value of the imports; and although the English consumers have now not only
corn at the old price, but likewise increased money incomes, it is not
certain that they will be inclined to employ the increase of their incomes
in increasing their purchases of corn. The price of corn, therefore, must
perhaps fall, to restore the equilibrium, more than the whole amount of
the duty; England may be enabled to import corn at a lower price when it
is taxed than when it was untaxed; and this gain she will acquire at the
expense of the American consumers of iron, who, in addition, will be the
real payers of the whole of what is received at their own custom-house
under the name of duties on the export of corn.

In general, however, there could be little doubt that a country which
imposed such taxes would succeed in making foreign countries contribute
something to its revenue; but, unless the taxed article be one for which
their demand is extremely urgent, they will seldom pay the whole of the
amount which the tax brings in.(345)


    The result of this investigation may, then, be generally
    formulated as follows: That country which has the strongest demand
    for the commodities of other countries as compared with the demand
    of other countries for its own commodities will pay the burden of
    the export duty.


Thus far of duties on exports. We now proceed to the more ordinary case of
duties on imports: “We have had an example of a tax on exports, that is,
on foreigners, falling in part on ourselves. We shall therefore not be
surprised if we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly
falling upon foreigners.

“Instead of taxing the corn which we export, suppose that we tax the iron
which we import. The duty which we are now supposing must not be what is
termed a protecting duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to induce us
to produce the article at home. If it had this effect, it would destroy
entirely the trade both in corn and in iron, and both countries would lose
the whole of the advantage which they previously gained by exchanging
those commodities with one another. We suppose a duty which might diminish
the consumption of the article, but which would not prevent us from
continuing to import, as before, whatever iron we did consume.

“The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition of the tax
diminished, in the slightest degree, the quantity of iron consumed. For,
as the tax is levied at our own custom-house, the English exporter only
receives the same price as formerly, though the American consumer pays a
higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the quantity bought,
although a larger sum of money may be actually laid out in the article, a
smaller one will be due from the United States to England: this sum will
no longer be an equivalent for the sum due from England to the United
States for corn, the balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices will
fall in England and rise in the United States; iron will fall in the
English market; corn will rise in the American. The English will pay a
higher price for corn, and will have smaller money incomes to buy it with;
while the Americans will obtain iron cheaper, that is, its price will
exceed what it previously was by less than the amount of the duty, while
their means of purchasing it will be increased by the increase of their
money incomes.

“If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand, it will leave
the trade exactly as it was before. We shall import as much, and export as
much; the whole of the tax will be paid out of our own pockets.

“But the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost always diminishes the
demand more or less; and it can never, or scarcely ever, increase the
demand. It may, therefore, be laid down as a principle that a tax on
imported commodities, when it really operates as a tax, and not as a
prohibition either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon the
foreigners who consume our goods; and that this is a mode in which a
nation may appropriate to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger
share than would otherwise belong to it of the increase in the general
productiveness of the labor and capital of the world, which results from
the interchange of commodities among nations.”

Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes on imports are
partly paid by foreigners; but they are mistaken when they say that it is
by the foreign producer. It is not on the person from whom we buy, but on
all those who buy from us, that a portion of our custom duties
spontaneously falls. It is the foreign consumer of our exported
commodities who is obliged to pay a higher price for them because we
maintain revenue duties on foreign goods.

There are but two cases in which duties on commodities can in any degree,
or in any manner, fall on the producer. One is, when the article is a
strict monopoly, and at a scarcity price. The price in this case being
only limited by the desires of the buyer—the sum obtained for the
restricted supply being the utmost which the buyers would consent to give
rather than go without it—if the treasury intercepts a part of this, the
price can not be further raised to compensate for the tax, and it must be
paid from the monopoly profits. A tax on rare and high-priced wines will
fall wholly on the growers, or rather, on the owners of the vineyards. The
second case, in which the producer sometimes bears a portion of the tax,
is more important: the case of duties on the produce of land or of mines.
These might be so high as to diminish materially the demand for the
produce, and compel the abandonment of some of the inferior qualities of
land or mines. Supposing this to be the effect, the consumers, both in the
country itself and in those which dealt with it, would obtain the produce
at smaller cost; and a part only, instead of the whole, of the duty would
fall on the purchaser, who would be indemnified chiefly at the expense of
the land-owners or mine-owners in the producing country.

Duties on importation may, then, be divided “into two classes: (1) those
which have the effect of encouraging some particular branch of domestic
industry [protective duties], (2) and those which have not [revenue
duties]. The former are purely mischievous, both to the country imposing
them and to those with whom it trades. They prevent a saving of labor and
capital, which, if permitted to be made, would be divided in some
proportion or other between the importing country and the countries which
buy what that country does or might export.

“The other class of duties are those which do not encourage one mode of
procuring an article at the expense of another, but allow interchange to
take place just as if the duty did not exist, and to produce the saving of
labor which constitutes the motive to international as to all other
commerce. Of this kind are duties on the importation of any commodity
which could not by any possibility be produced at home, and duties not
sufficiently high to counterbalance the difference of expense between the
production of the article at home and its importation. Of the money which
is brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this last
description, a part only is paid by the people of that country; the
remainder by the foreign consumers of their goods.

“Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle as ineligible as
the former, though not precisely on the same ground. A protecting duty can
never be a cause of gain, but always and necessarily of loss, to the
country imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end. A
non-protecting duty, on the contrary, would in most cases be a source of
gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing part of the weight
of its taxes upon other people is a gain; but it would be a means which it
could seldom be advisable to adopt, being so easily counteracted by a
precisely similar proceeding on the other side.

“If the United States, in the case already supposed, sought to obtain for
herself more than her natural share of the advantage of the trade with
England, by imposing a duty upon iron, England would only have to impose a
duty upon corn sufficient to diminish the demand for that article about as
much as the demand for iron had been diminished in the United States by
the tax. Things would then be as before, and each country would pay its
own tax—unless, indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the entire
advantage of the trade, for in that case the trade and its advantage would
cease entirely.

“There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing duties of this kind
with a view to gain by them in the manner which has been pointed out. But,
when any part of the revenue is derived from taxes on commodities, these
may often be as little objectionable as the rest. It is evident, too, that
considerations of reciprocity, which are quite unessential when the matter
in debate is a protecting duty, are of material importance when the repeal
of duties of this other description is discussed. A country can not be
expected to renounce the power of taxing foreigners unless foreigners will
in return practice toward itself the same forbearance. The only mode in
which a country can save itself from being a loser by the revenue duties
imposed by other countries on its commodities is, to impose corresponding
revenue duties on theirs. Only it must take care that those duties be not
so high as to exceed all that remains of the advantage of the trade, and
put an end to importation altogether, causing the article to be either
produced at home, or imported from another and a dearer market.”


    By “reciprocity” is meant that, when one country admits goods free
    of duty from a second country, this latter country will also admit
    the commodities of the former free of duty; or, as is often the
    case, if not free of duty, at a less than the usual rate. Until
    the last few years we have had a reciprocity treaty with Canada,
    but it is not now in force; and an arrangement for closer
    commercial relations with Mexico is now under consideration.




Chapter IV. Comparison Between Direct And Indirect Taxation.



§ 1. Arguments for and against direct Taxation.


Are direct or indirect taxes the most eligible? A man dislikes not so much
the payment as the act of paying. He dislikes seeing the face of the
tax-collector, and being subjected to his peremptory demand. Perhaps, too,
the money which he is required to pay directly out of his pocket is the
only taxation which he is quite sure that he pays at all. That a tax of
two shillings per pound on tea, or of three shillings per bottle on wine,
raises the price of each pound of tea and bottle of wine which he
consumes, by that and more than that amount, can not, indeed, be denied;
it is the fact, and is intended to be so, and he himself, at times, is
perfectly aware of it; but it makes hardly any impression on his practical
feelings and associations, serving to illustrate the distinction between
what is merely known to be true and what is felt to be so. The
unpopularity of direct taxation, contrasted with the easy manner in which
the public consent to let themselves be fleeced in the prices of
commodities, has generated in many friends of improvement a directly
opposite mode of thinking to the foregoing. They contend that the very
reason which makes direct taxation disagreeable makes it preferable. Under
it every one knows how much he really pays; and, if he votes for a war, or
any other expensive national luxury, he does so with his eyes open to what
it costs him. If all taxes were direct, taxation would be much more
perceived than at present, and there would be a security, which now there
is not, for economy in the public expenditure.

Although this argument is not without force, its weight is likely to be
constantly diminishing. The real incidence of indirect taxation is every
day more generally understood and more familiarly recognized. The mere
distinction between paying money directly to the tax-collector and
contributing the same sum through the intervention of the tea-dealer or
the wine-merchant no longer makes the whole difference between dislike or
opposition and passive acquiescence.

If our present revenue [of $400,000,000 in 1883] were all raised by direct
taxes, an extreme dissatisfaction would certainly arise at having to pay
so much; but while men’s minds are so little guided by reason, as such a
change of feeling from so irrelevant a cause would imply, so great an
aversion to taxation might not be an unqualified good. Of the
[$400,000,000] in question, nearly [$60,000,000] are pledged, under the
most binding obligations, to those whose property has been borrowed and
spent by the state; and, while this debt remains unredeemed, a greatly
increased impatience of taxation would involve no little danger of a
breach of faith. That part, indeed, of the public expenditure which is
devoted to the maintenance of civil and military establishments
[$206,000,000] (that is, all except the interest of the national debt),
affords, in many of its details, ample scope for retrenchment. If so great
an addition were made to the public dislike of taxation as might be the
consequence of confining it to the direct form, the classes who profit by
the misapplication of public money might probably succeed in saving that
by which they profit, at the expense of that which would only be useful to
the public.

There is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect taxation, which
must be altogether rejected as grounded on a fallacy. We are often told
that taxes on commodities are less burdensome than other taxes, because
the contributor can escape from them by ceasing to use the taxed
commodity. He certainly can, if that be his object, deprive the Government
of the money; but he does so by a sacrifice of his own indulgences, which
(if he chose to undergo it) would equally make up to him for the same
amount taken from him by direct taxation. Suppose a tax laid on wine,
sufficient to add [$25] to the price of the quantity of wine which he
consumes in a year. He has only (we are told) to diminish his consumption
of wine by [$25], and he escapes the burden. True, but if the [$25],
instead of being laid on wine, had been taken from him by an income-tax,
he could, by expending [$25] less in wine, equally save the amount of the
tax, so that the difference between the two cases is really illusory. If
the Government takes from the contributor [$25] a year, whether in one way
or another, exactly that amount must be retrenched from his consumption to
leave him as well off as before; and in either way the same amount of
sacrifice, neither more nor less, is imposed on him.

On the other hand, it is some advantage on the side of indirect taxes that
what they exact from the contributor is taken at a time and in a manner
likely to be convenient to him. It is paid at a time when he has at any
rate a payment to make; it causes, therefore, no additional trouble, nor
(unless the tax be on necessaries) any inconvenience but what is
inseparable from the payment of the amount. He can also, except in the
case of very perishable articles, select his own time for laying in a
stock of the commodity, and consequently for payment of the tax. The
producer or dealer who advances these taxes is, indeed, sometimes
subjected to inconvenience; but, in the case of imported goods, this
inconvenience is reduced to a minimum by what is called the Warehousing
System, under which, instead of paying the duty at the time of
importation, he is only required to do so when he takes out the goods for
consumption, which is seldom done until he has either actually found, or
has the prospect of immediately finding, a purchaser.

The strongest objection, however, to raising the whole or the greater part
of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the impossibility of assessing them
fairly without a conscientious co-operation on the part of the
contributors, not to be hoped for in the present low state of public
morality. In the case of an income-tax, we have already seen that, unless
it be found practicable to exempt savings altogether from the tax, the
burden can not be apportioned with any tolerable approach to fairness upon
those whose incomes are derived from business or professions; and this is
in fact admitted by most of the advocates of direct taxation who, I am
afraid, generally get over the difficulty by leaving those classes
untaxed, and confining their projected income-tax to “realized property,”
in which form it certainly has the merit of being a very easy form of
plunder. But enough has been said in condemnation of this expedient. We
have seen, however, that a house-tax is a form of direct taxation not
liable to the same objections as an income-tax, and indeed liable to as
few objections of any kind as perhaps any of our indirect taxes. But it
would be impossible to raise, by a house-tax alone, the greatest part of
the revenue, without producing a very objectionable overcrowding of the
population, through the strong motive which all persons would have to
avoid the tax by restricting their house accommodation.

A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be obtained without
injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. Besides (1) the land-tax,(346) and
(2) an equivalent for the revenue derived from stamp duties on the
conveyance of land, some further taxation might, I have contended, at some
future period be imposed, (3) to enable the state to participate in the
progressive increase of the incomes of landlords from natural causes. (4)
Legacies and inheritances, we have also seen, ought to be subjected to
taxation sufficient to yield a considerable revenue. With these taxes, and
(5) a house-tax of suitable amount, we should, I think, have reached the
prudent limits of direct taxation. The remainder of the revenue would have
to be provided by taxes on consumption, and the question is, which of
these are the least objectionable.



§ 2. What forms of indirect taxation are most eligible?


There are some forms of indirect taxation which must be peremptorily
excluded. (1.) Taxes on commodities, for revenue purposes, must not
operate as protecting duties, but must be levied impartially on every mode
in which the articles can be obtained, whether produced in the country
itself, or imported. (2.) An exclusion must also be put upon all taxes on
the necessaries of life, or on the materials or instruments employed in
producing those necessaries. Such taxes are always liable to encroach on
what should be left untaxed, the incomes barely sufficient for healthful
existence; and on the most favorable supposition, namely, that wages rise
to compensate the laborers for the tax, it operates as a peculiar tax on
profits, which is at once unjust and detrimental to national wealth.(347)
What remain are taxes on luxuries. And these have some properties which
strongly recommend them. In the first place, they can never, by any
possibility, touch those whose whole income is expended on necessaries;
while they do reach those by whom what is required for necessaries is
expended on indulgences. In the next place, they operate in some cases as
a useful, and the only useful, kind of sumptuary law. A great portion of
the expense of the higher and middle classes in most countries is not
incurred for the sake of the pleasure afforded by the things on which the
money is spent, but from regard to opinion, and an idea that certain
expenses are expected from them, as an appendage of station; and I can not
but think that expenditure of this sort is a most desirable subject of
taxation. When a thing is bought, not for its use but for its costliness,
cheapness is no recommendation.



§ 3. Practical rules for indirect taxation.


In order to reduce as much as possible the inconveniences, and increase
the advantages, incident to taxes on commodities, the following are the
practical rules which suggest themselves: 1. To raise as large a revenue
as conveniently may be, from those classes of luxuries which have most
connection with vanity, and least with positive enjoyment; such as the
more costly qualities of all kinds of personal equipment and ornament. But
with regard to horses and carriages, as there are many persons to whom,
from health or constitution, these are not so much luxuries as
necessaries, the tax paid by those who have but one riding-horse, or but
one carriage, especially of the cheaper descriptions, should be low; while
taxation should rise very rapidly with the number of horses and carriages,
and with their costliness. 2. Whenever possible, to demand the tax, not
from the producer, but directly from the consumer, since, when levied on
the producer, it raises the price always by more, and often by much more,
than the mere amount of the tax. 3. But as the only indirect taxes which
yield a large revenue are those which fall on articles of universal or
very general consumption, and as it is therefore necessary to have some
taxes on real luxuries, that is, on things which afford pleasure in
themselves, and are valued on that account rather than for their cost,
these taxes should, if possible, be so adjusted as to fall with the same
proportional weight on small, on moderate, and on large incomes. This is
not an easy matter; since the things which are the subjects of the more
productive taxes are in proportion more largely consumed by the poorer
members of the community than by the rich. Tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco,
fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed that the poor shall not bear more
than their due share of the burden. Something might be done by making the
duty on the superior qualities, which are used by the richer consumers,
much higher in proportion to the value; but in some cases the difficulty
of at all adjusting the duty to the value, so as to prevent evasion, is
said, with what truth I know not, to be insuperable; so that it is thought
necessary to levy the same fixed duty on all the qualities alike. 4. As
far as is consistent with the preceding rules, taxation should rather be
concentrated on a few articles than diffused over many, in order that the
expenses of collection may be smaller, and that as few employments as
possible may be burdensomely and vexatiously interfered with. 5. Among
luxuries of general consumption, taxation should by preference attach
itself to stimulants, because these, though in themselves as legitimate
indulgences as any others, are more liable than most others to be used in
excess, so that the check to consumption, naturally arising from taxation,
is on the whole better applied to them than to other things. 6. As far as
other considerations permit, taxation should be confined to imported
articles, since these can be taxed with a less degree of vexatious
interference, and with fewer incidental bad effects, than when a tax is
levied on the field or on the workshop. Custom duties are, _cæteris
paribus_, much less objectionable than excise: but they must be laid only
on things which either can not, or at least will not, be produced in the
country itself; or else their production there must be prohibited (as in
England is the case with tobacco), or subjected to an excise duty of
equivalent amount. 7. No tax ought to be kept so high as to furnish a
motive to its evasion, too strong to be counteracted by ordinary means of
prevention; and especially no commodity should be taxed so highly as to
raise up a class of lawless characters—smugglers, illicit distillers, and
the like.


    The experience of the United States is pregnant with lessons in
    this direction. During the war we imposed an internal-revenue tax
    on distilled spirits of so large an amount that it not only
    produced less revenue than a smaller tax would have done, but it
    created gigantic frauds, public corruption, and infinite devices
    to escape the payment. The following table will show how the
    production, as indicated by the tax, fell off when the tax was
    excessive. It forced evasions by distillers. It has been found by
    various experiences that with a less rate the revenue is largely
    increased.

    Year.       Revenue.     Production   Amount of tax.
                             indicated
                             by the tax
                             (gallons).
    1862-1863   $3,200,000   16,000,000   July, 1862, 20 c.
                                          per gallon.
    1867-1868   14,200,000   7,000,000    Jan., 1865, $2 per
                                          gallon.
    1868-1869   34,200,000   16,000,000   July, 1868, 50 c.
                                          per gallon.
    1869-1870   39,200,000   18,000,000

    The actual amount reached by taxation is very much less than that
    known to be actually used by from ten to fifteen millions of
    gallons, or nearly one half the product. The openness of the
    frauds can be judged by the fact that proof spirits were “openly
    sold in the market, and even quoted in price-currents, at from
    five to fifteen cents less per gallon than the rate of tax and the
    average cost of manufacture.”(348)


In what manner the finer articles of manufacture, consumed by the rich,
might most advantageously be taxed, I must leave to be decided by those
who have the requisite practical knowledge. The difficulty would be, to
effect it without an inadmissible degree of interference with production.
In countries which, like the United States, import the principal part of
the finer manufactures which they consume, there is little difficulty in
the matter; and, even where nothing is imported but the raw material, that
may be taxed, especially the qualities of it which are exclusively
employed for the fabrics used by the richer class of consumers. Thus, in
England a high custom duty on raw silk would be consistent with principle;
and it might perhaps be practicable to tax the finer qualities of cotton
or linen yarn, whether spun in the country itself or imported.



§ 4. Taxation systems of the United States and other Countries.


    It will now well repay study to examine Chart No. XXI, which shows
    in what manner the United States have raised their revenues, and
    to consider how far the right rules of taxation have been
    followed.

    I. For means of comparison, I shall give the last annual budget of
    the United States in order to make clear from what sources the
    country derives its revenues:

    Chart XXI.

    United States Budget, Year Ending June 30, 1883.

    [In millions and tenths of millions.]

    _Receipts:_
    Customs                 $214.7
    Internal revenue         144.7
    Direct tax                  .1
    Sale of public lands       7.9
    Miscellaneous             30.8
    Net ordinary receipts   $398.2

    _Expenditures:_
    War Department               $48.9
    Navy Department               15.3
    Indians                        7.3
    Pensions                      66.0
    Miscellaneous                 68.7
    Net ordinary expenditures   $206.2
    Interest on public debt       59.2
    Total                       $265.4

    This leaves a surplus of $132,839,444 above all expenditures, and
    our problem is now where to reduce taxation. The annual interest
    charge is lessening with the payment of the public debt, having
    fallen from its highest figure of $143,781,591 in 1867, to
    $59,160,131 in 1883.(349) Our national taxation is practically all
    indirect, that of internal taxation being chiefly levied on
    tobacco and distilled spirits, and our customs falling on almost
    all articles which can be imported, materials as well as
    manufactures.

    In the United States direct taxation on real and personal property
    is very generally levied for State, county, and municipal
    purposes. In fact, nearly all the perceptible taxation is the
    property tax, and, inasmuch as the State and county tax is very
    light, the burden is almost always owing to municipal and town
    expenditures. People do not seem to be aware of the enormous
    national burden, because the taxes are indirect, and only increase
    the prices of commodities. Other countries, it will be seen, make
    a greater use of direct taxation than the United States. In fact,
    the comparison of the ways by which different countries collect
    their revenues may naturally show us where we may gain by their
    experience.

    II. The English system is especially interesting, because, after
    having had an extended scheme of customs duties, they abandoned
    it, and raised their revenue, some on imported articles, it is
    true (generally on those which could not be produced in England),
    but by the income-tax, and other forms.(350)

    In 1842 Sir Robert Peel found 1,200 articles subject to
    customs-duties. He began (1) by removing all prohibitions; (2) by
    reducing duties on raw materials to 5 per cent or less; (3) by
    limiting the rates on partially manufactured goods to 12 per cent;
    and (4) those on wholly manufactured goods to 20 per cent. Now
    customs-duties are levied only on beer, cards, chiccory,
    chocolate, cocoa, coffee, dried fruit, plate, spirits, tea,
    tobacco, and wine. The following budget gives the sources of
    revenue for Great Britain:(351)

    Budget Of Great Britain, 1883.

    [In millions and tenths of millions.]

    _Receipts:_
    Customs                           $98.4
    Excise (such as on tobacco and    134.9
    spirits)
    Stamps                             58.5
    Land tax                            5.2
    House duty                          8.9
    Income tax                         60.9
    Post-Office                        36.5
    Telegraph                           8.6
    Crown lands                         2.0
    Interest (on loans, Suez            6.1
    Canal, etc.)
    Miscellaneous                      26.4
    Total                            $446.4

    _Expenditures:_
    Interest on national debt       $148.4
    Army, navy, etc.                 157.1
    Cost of revenue departments       45.1
    Public works                       9.1
    Public departments, salaries,     12.5
    etc.
    Law and justice                   35.7
    Education, science, and art       22.9
    Colonial and consular              3.4
    Civil list                         2.0
    Pensions                           2.0
    Miscellaneous                      6.8
    Total expenditures              $445.0

    From this it will be seen that in the land, income, and house
    taxes, Great Britain raises by direct taxation about $75,000,000,
    and in customs and excise, by indirect taxation, about
    $233,000,000.

    III. The following is the system adopted by Germany (Prussia):

    German Budget, 1881-1882.

    [In millions and tenths of millions.]

    _Receipts:_
    (1.) Property income from    $11.7
    domains and forests
    From mines and salt-works      2.5
    From railways                 22.5
    Miscellaneous                  5.0
                                 $41.7
    (2.) Royal Lottery             1.0
    (3.) Bureau of Justice       $12.7
    Harbors and bridges             .5
                                  13.2
    (4.) Direct taxes            $35.5
    (5.) Indirect taxes (for      12.3
    Prussia)
    Total receipts              $103.6

    _Expenditures:_
    (1.) Civil list               3.0
    (2.) Debt                    25.0
    (3.) Various ministries,     49.5
    schools, etc.
    (4.) Pensions                 4.0
    (5.) Miscellaneous           19.5
    Total expenditures(352)    $101.0

    The Prussian _direct_ taxes include (1) a land-tax, (2) a
    house-tax, (3) an income-tax, (4) a class-tax, (5) a trade-tax,
    and (6) miscellaneous taxes.

    IV. How the French supply themselves may be seen by the following
    statement:(353)

    French Budget, 1881.

    [In millions and tenths of millions.]

    _Receipts:_
    Direct taxes                    $75.9
    Similar taxes                     4.7
    Registry, stamps, etc           135.1
    Forests                           7.6
    Customs (and salt duty $3.5)     65.4
    Indirect taxes (including       209.7
    tobacco)
    Post-Office and telegraph        27.2
    Miscellaneous                    29.8
    Total receipts                 $555.4

    _Expenditures:_
    Public debt, etc.               $249.0
    General functions of the         243.7
    ministries
    Administrative expenses, cost     58.5
    of revenue collections, etc.
    Miscellaneous                      3.5
    Total expenditures              $554.7

    The direct taxes are (1) on property; (2) one nearly like our
    poll-tax together with a species of income-tax; (3) a tax on doors
    and windows; and (4) one on licenses.



§ 5. A _Résumé_ of the general principles of taxation.


After the manner of our classification and _résumé_ of the subject of
value and money, it may be convenient to here insert a recapitulation of
the various principles under the treatment of taxation.(354)

Comparison Between Direct And Indirect Taxation.

Adam Smith’s “Canons of Taxation.”—A tax should be: I. _Equal_ (in amount
of _sacrifice_ entailed). II. _Certain._ III. _Timely._ IV. _All for the
state._

A Tax is either:
Direct.
Indirect (on commodities.)

Direct taxes are:
On Income.
On Expenditure.

Taxes on Income are:
General.
Special.

General income taxes. The best of taxes, if people were all honest. As it
is, it falls most heavily on the conscientious. Should be reserved for
emergency. All _savings_ and a fixed amount in _all_ incomes should be
exempt.

Special taxes are on:
Rent.
Wages.
Profits.

Taxes on Rent. Agricultural rent is meant. It falls entirely on the
landlord, and, if not balanced by taxes on other classes, is unjust. May
be blended with a tax on profits, if on rent due to landlord’s
improvements.

Taxes on Wages are:
On Skilled.
On Unskilled.

Skilled wages are at a monopoly price, and taxes on them are paid by the
laborers, so long as wages are not reduced below their just proportion.

Unskilled wages. (1) _Population diminished by it._ Paid by profits. (2)
_Population left stationary._ Shared between profits and wages. (3)
_Population increasing in spite of it._ Falls entirely on wages.

Taxes on Profits. May possible stimulate production, and is then a good
all round, contributing to the state, and leaving no one any poorer. If
not, if profits are really diminished by the tax, capital may be
diminished also. This (a) may, or (b) may not diminish population. If (a),
then the margin of cultivation ceases to be extended, and part of the tax,
_pro tanto_, falls on the landlords. If (b), then wages fall, and part of
the tax falls on the laborer. Total result is a nearer approach to the
stationary state.

Taxes on Expenditure are open to the same objections as the general
income-tax. They may be:
Assessed taxes.
House-tax.

Assessed taxes, such as on servants, dogs, etc. These are rigidly
_direct_.

House-taxes are:
On building-rent.
On ground-rent.

House-taxes on building-rent are paid by occupier. This tax is _indirect_.

House-taxes on ground-rent are (1.) with, or (2.) without an equivalent
tax on agricultural rent. (1.) Are paid by ground landlord wholly, and
therefore _direct_. (2.) Are part by occupier, and therefore _indirect_.

Indirect taxes are: Excise,
Customs, or
Tolls.

Indirect taxes may be on (1.) Long or (2.) Short investments of capital.

Indirect taxes on Long investments are always unadvisable, in view of
Canon IV.

Indirect taxes on Short investments are subject to the laws of indirect
taxation. 1. Tax vanities rather than positive enjoyments (e.g., liveries
rather than servants). 2. The consumer and not the producer should pay the
tax collector (Canon IV). That is, collect the tax as near the actual
consumer as possible. 3. Taxes on real enjoyments to be kept as equal as
possible for large and small means. 4. Tax as few articles as possible.
England taxes only a very small number of imports. The United States taxes
nearly everything imported. 5. Tax stimulants freely. The United States
collect $91,000,000 from spirits and liquors, and $42,000,000 from tobacco
(1883). 6. Tax imports of commodities not made at home, or whose home
production is under an excise (internal revenue) duty equal to the customs
tax. 7. Keep the rate of tax low, in order to get most revenue.




Chapter V. Of A National Debt.



§ 1. Is it desirable to defray extraordinary public expenses by loans?


The question must now be considered, how far it is right or expedient to
raise money for the purposes of government, not by laying on taxes to the
amount required, but by taking a portion of the capital of the country in
the form of a loan, and charging the public revenue with only the
interest.

This question has already been touched upon in the First Book.(355) We
remarked, that if the capital taken in loans is abstracted from funds
either engaged in production, or destined to be employed in it, their
diversion from that purpose is equivalent to taking the amount from the
wages of the laboring-classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a
substitute for raising the supplies within the year. A government which
borrows does actually take the amount within the year, and that too by a
tax exclusively on the laboring-classes, than which it could have done
nothing worse, if it had supplied its wants by avowed taxation; and in
that case the transaction, and its evils, would have ended with the
emergency; while, by the circuitous mode adopted, the value exacted from
the laborers is gained, not by the state, but by the employers of labor,
the state remaining charged with the debt besides, and with its interest
in perpetuity. The system of public loans, in such circumstances, may be
pronounced the very worst which, in the present state of civilization, is
still included in the catalogue of financial expedients.

We, however, remarked that there are other circumstances in which loans
are not chargeable with these pernicious consequences: namely, first, when
what is borrowed is foreign capital, the overflowings of the general
accumulation of the world; or, secondly, when it is capital which either
would not have been saved at all, unless this mode of investment had been
open to it, or, after being saved, would have been wasted in unproductive
enterprises, or sent to seek employment in foreign countries. When the
progress of accumulation has reduced profits either to the ultimate or to
the practical minimum—to the rate less than which would either put a stop
to the increase of capital, or send the whole of the new accumulations
abroad—government may annually intercept these new accumulations, without
trenching on the employment or wages of the laboring-classes in the
country itself, or perhaps in any other country. To this extent,
therefore, the loan system may be carried, without being liable to the
utter and peremptory condemnation which is due to it when it overpasses
this limit. What is wanted is an index to determine whether, in any given
series of years, as during the last great war, for example, the limit has
been exceeded or not.

Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious one. Did the
Government, by its loan operations, augment the rate of interest? If it
only opened a channel for capital which would not otherwise have been
accumulated, or which, if accumulated, would not have been employed within
the country, this implies that the capital, which the Government took and
expended, could not have found employment at the existing rate of
interest. So long as the loans do no more than absorb this surplus, they
prevent any tendency to a fall of the rate of interest, but they can not
occasion any rise. [But] To the full extent to which the loans of
government, during the war, caused the rate of interest to exceed what it
was before, and what it has been since, those loans are chargeable with
all the evils which have been described. If it be objected that interest
only rose because profits rose, I reply that this does not weaken, but
strengthens, the argument. If the Government loans produced the rise of
profits by the great amount of capital which they absorbed, by what means
can they have had this effect, unless by lowering the wages of labor? It
will, perhaps, be said that what kept profits high during the war was not
the drafts made on the national capital by the loans, but the rapid
progress of industrial improvements. This, in a great measure, was the
fact; and it, no doubt, alleviated the hardship to the laboring-classes,
and made the financial system which was pursued less actively mischievous,
but not less contrary to principle. These very improvements in industry
made room for a larger amount of capital; and the Government, by draining
away a great part of the annual accumulations, did not indeed prevent that
capital from existing ultimately (for it started into existence with great
rapidity after the peace), but prevented it from existing at the time, and
subtracted just so much, while the war lasted, from distribution among
productive laborers. If the Government had abstained from taking this
capital by loan, and had allowed it to reach the laborers, but had raised
the supplies which it required by a direct tax on the laboring-classes, it
would have produced (in every respect but the expense and inconvenience of
collecting the tax) the very same economical effects which it did produce,
except that we should not now have had the debt. The course it actually
took was therefore worse than the very worst mode which it could possibly
have adopted of raising the supplies within the year; and the only excuse,
or justification, which it admits of (so far as that excuse could be truly
pleaded) was hard necessity; the impossibility of raising so enormous an
annual sum by taxation, without resorting to taxes which from their
odiousness, or from the facility of evasion, it would have been found
impracticable to enforce.(356)

When government loans are limited to the overflowings of the national
capital, or to those accumulations which would not take place at all
unless suffered to overflow, they are at least not liable to this grave
condemnation. In this case, therefore, the question really is, what it is
commonly supposed to be in all cases—namely, a choice between a great
sacrifice at once, and a small one indefinitely prolonged. On this matter
it seems rational to think that the prudence of a nation will dictate the
same conduct as the prudence of an individual; to submit to as much of the
privation immediately as can easily be borne, and, only when any further
burden would distress or cripple them too much, to provide for the
remainder by mortgaging their future income. It is an excellent maxim to
make present resources suffice for present wants; the future will have its
own wants to provide for. On the other hand, it may reasonably be taken
into consideration that, in a country increasing in wealth, the necessary
expenses of government do not increase in the same ratio as capital or
population; any burden, therefore, is always less and less felt; and,
since those extraordinary expenses of government which are fit to be
incurred at all are mostly beneficial beyond the existing generation,
there is no injustice in making posterity pay a part of the price, if the
inconvenience would be extreme of defraying the whole of it by the
exertions and sacrifices of the generation which first incurred it.



§ 2. Not desirable to redeem a national Debt by a general Contribution.


When a country, wisely or unwisely, has burdened itself with a debt, is it
expedient to take steps for redeeming that debt? In principle it is
impossible not to maintain the affirmative.

Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a national debt: either at
once by a general contribution, or gradually by a surplus revenue. The
first would be incomparably the best, if it were practicable; and it would
be practicable if it could justly be done by assessment on property alone.
If property bore the whole interest of the debt, property might, with
great advantage to itself, pay it off; since this would be merely
surrendering to a creditor the principal sum, the whole annual proceeds of
which were already his by law, and would be equivalent to what a
land-owner does when he sells part of his estate, to free the remainder
from a mortgage. But property, it need hardly be said, does not pay, and
can not justly be required to pay, the whole interest of the debt.
Whatever is the fitting contribution from property to the general expenses
of the state, in the same, and in no greater proportion, should it
contribute toward either the interest or the repayment of the national
debt. This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the
extinction of the debt by a general assessment on the community. Persons
of property could pay their share of the amount by a sacrifice of
property, and have the same net income as before.

                             [Illustration.]


    If a person owns a property, A B, which returns him $1,000 income,
    and if he pays $10 a year in taxes as his share of interest on the
    public debt, suppose that part of his estate represented by X,
    which returns him annually $10 (and which return he has annually
    handed over to the state), to be carved out of it, and that he is
    to be hereafter relieved of his share of taxes. He would then,
    after having paid the capitalized value (X) of that which was his
    share of the annual tax to the state on account of the public
    debt, have the same net income as before; for he was never able to
    enjoy the income of X.


If those who have no accumulations, but only incomes, were required to
make up by a single payment the equivalent of the annual charge laid on
them by the taxes maintained to pay the interest of the debt, they could
only do so by incurring a private debt equal to their share of the public
debt; while, from the insufficiency, in most cases, of the security which
they could give, the interest would amount to a much larger annual sum
than their share of that now paid by the state. Besides, a collective debt
defrayed by taxes has, over the same debt parceled out among individuals,
the immense advantage that it is virtually a mutual insurance among the
contributors. If the fortune of a contributor diminishes, his taxes
diminish; if he is ruined, they cease altogether, and his portion of the
debt is wholly transferred to the solvent members of the community. If it
were laid on him as a private obligation, he would still be liable to it,
even when penniless.

When the state possesses property, in land or otherwise, which there are
not strong reasons of public utility for its retaining at its disposal,
this should be employed, as far as it will go, in extinguishing debt. Any
casual gain, or god-send, is naturally devoted to the same purpose. Beyond
this, the only mode which is both just and feasible, of extinguishing or
reducing a national debt, is by means of a surplus revenue.



§ 3. In what cases desirable to maintain a surplus revenue for the
redemption of Debt.


The desirableness, _per se_, of maintaining a surplus for this purpose
does not, I think, admit of a doubt.

It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a surplus revenue
for the extinction of debt. The advantage of paying off the national debt
is, that it would enable us to get rid of the worst half of our taxation.
But of this worst half some portions must be worse than others, and to get
rid of those would be a greater benefit proportionally than to get rid of
the rest. If renouncing a surplus revenue would enable us to dispense with
a tax, we ought to consider the very worst of all our taxes as precisely
the one which we are keeping up for the sake of ultimately abolishing
taxes not so bad as itself. In a country advancing in wealth, whose
increasing revenue gives it the power of ridding itself from time to time
of the most inconvenient portions of its taxation, I conceive that the
increase of revenue should rather be disposed of by taking off taxes, than
by liquidating debt, as long as any very objectionable imposts remain. In
the present state of England, therefore, I hold it to be good policy in
the Government, when it has a surplus of an apparently permanent
character, to take off taxes, provided these are rightly selected. Even
when no taxes remain but such as are not unfit to form part of a permanent
system, it is wise to continue the same policy by experimental reductions
of those taxes, until the point is discovered at which a given amount of
revenue can be raised with the smallest pressure on the contributors.
After this, such surplus revenue as might arise from any further increase
of the produce of the taxes should not, I conceive, be remitted, but
applied to the redemption of debt. Eventually, it might be expedient to
appropriate the entire produce of particular taxes to this purpose; since
there would be more assurance that the liquidation would be persisted in,
if the fund destined to it were kept apart, and not blended with the
general revenues of the state. The succession duties would be peculiarly
suited to such a purpose, since taxes paid as they are, out of capital,
would be better employed in reimbursing capital than in defraying current
expenditure. If this separate appropriation were made, any surplus
afterward arising from the increasing produce of the other taxes, and from
the saving of interest on the successive portions of debt paid off, might
form a ground for a remission of taxation.


    The relative amount of the United States public debt may be seen,
    by Chart No. XXII, from an early date down to 1880. Since the war,
    the surplus revenue of the United States has been constantly
    appropriated for the payment of the public debt incurred during
    the late war, until, what with the reduction of debt and the fall
    in the interest charge, our income is now so much greater than
    expenditure that we are (1884) actually in difficulties owing to
    the surplus. To the present time the Treasury has been able to use
    its excess of receipts in redeeming matured debt; but the rapidity
    of the payment has been such that in two years or more no matured
    debt will exist to be redeemed: $250,000,000 of 4-½ per cent bonds
    remain, but they do not fall due until 1891; and the 4 per cent
    bonds to the amount of $737,620,700 do not mature until 1907.
    Having once raised a large revenue under war pressure, it seems
    very difficult for people to understand now why heavy duties were
    originally levied, and the extraordinary suggestion is often made
    that the surplus should remain, and new channels of expenditure
    should be made (such as enormous pensions), simply in order to
    keep up the heavy taxation. The difficulty is, however, that the
    unnecessary surplus exists because of customs duties levied for
    war purposes. But the heavy burden of war taxation ought not to be
    continued, adding to the cost of production in all industries,
    without doing a greater wrong than would be done by the
    passing—and only possible—trouble of a redistribution of capital
    in a few cases; especially since that distribution of capital will
    be one from less productive to more productive industries;
    otherwise, no change would be made.

    The condition of foreign debts, and the progress made in their
    reduction, may be studied in Chart No. XXIII. That of the United
    States is exceptional. The interest-bearing debt, as given by the
    last report of the Secretary of the Treasury, 1883, has been
    reduced to $1,312,446,050, and the reduction is more striking than
    is indicated in the chart for the year 1880.

                       [Illustration: Chart XXIII.]

      Chart XXIII. Reduction of National Debts in Various Countries.




Chapter VI. Of An Interference Of Government Grounded On Erroneous
Theories.



§ 1. The doctrine of Protection to Native Industry.


We proceed to the functions of government which belong to what I have
termed, for want of a better designation, the optional class; those which
are sometimes assumed by governments and sometimes not, and which it is
not unanimously admitted that they ought to exercise. We will begin by
passing in review false theories which have from time to time formed the
ground of acts of government more or less economically injurious.

Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of Protection to
Native Industry—a phrase meaning the prohibition, or the discouragement by
heavy duties, of such foreign commodities as are capable of being produced
at home. If the theory involved in this system had been correct, the
practical conclusions grounded on it would not have been unreasonable. The
theory was that, to buy things produced at home was a national benefit,
and the introduction of foreign commodities generally a national loss. It
being at the same time evident that the interest of the consumer is to buy
foreign commodities in preference to domestic whenever they are either
cheaper or better, the interest of the consumer appeared in this respect
to be contrary to the public interest; he was certain, if left to his own
inclinations, to do what according to the theory was injurious to the
public.

It was shown, however, in our analysis of the effects of international
trade, as it had been often shown by former writers, that the importation
of foreign commodities, in the common course of traffic, never takes place
except when it is, economically speaking, a national good, by causing the
same amount of commodities to be obtained at a smaller cost of labor and
capital to the country. To prohibit, therefore, this importation, or
impose duties which prevent it, is to render the labor and capital of the
country less efficient in production than they would otherwise be, and
compel a waste of the difference between the labor and capital necessary
for the home production of the commodity and that which is required for
producing the things with which it can be purchased from abroad. The
amount of national loss thus occasioned is measured by the excess of the
price at which the commodity is produced over that at which it could be
imported. In the case of manufactured goods the whole difference between
the two prices is absorbed in indemnifying the producers for waste of
labor, or of the capital which supports that labor. Those who are supposed
to be benefited, namely, the makers of the protected articles (unless they
form an exclusive company, and have a monopoly against their own
countrymen as well as against foreigners), do not obtain higher profits
than other people. All is sheer loss to the country as well as to the
consumer.


    Of the industries in a country some are said to “need protection”
    and others not—that is, those industries which are carried on at a
    relative disadvantage are the only ones which need protection in
    order that they may continue in operation. By relative
    disadvantage is meant a greater relative cost, or sacrifice, to
    the same amount of labor and capital. Those industries which can
    not yield so great a value for the labor and capital engaged in
    them as other more profitable industries are those which are said
    to “need protection.” Wherever protective duties exist it is
    implied by those who lay them on that there production is carried
    on under more onerous conditions than in other competing places or
    occupations. After duties are thus supposed to have protected the
    less advantageously situated occupations, it may be said that all
    industries will then have an equal chance. “No doubt,” as Mr.
    Cairnes says, “they would be equalized just as by compelling every
    one to move about with a weight attached to his leg. The weight
    would, indeed, be an impediment to locomotion, but, provided it
    were in each case exactly proportioned to the strength of the limb
    which drew it, no one ... would have any reason to complain. No
    one would walk as fast as if his limbs were free, but then his
    neighbor would be equally fettered, and, if it took him twice as
    long to reach his destination as before, he would at least have
    company on his journey.”(357)



§ 2. —had its origin in the Mercantile System.


The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally grounded on what is
called the Mercantile System, which, representing the advantage of foreign
trade to consist solely in bringing money into the country, gave
artificial encouragement to exportation of goods, and discountenanced
their importation. The only exceptions to the system were those required
by the system itself. The materials and instruments of production were the
subject of a contrary policy, directed, however, to the same end; they
were freely imported, and not permitted to be exported, in order that
manufacturers, being more cheaply supplied with the requisites of
manufacture, might be able to sell cheaper, and therefore to export more
largely. For a similar reason importation was allowed and even favored,
when confined to the productions of countries which were supposed to take
from the country still more than it took from them, thus enriching it by a
favorable balance of trade. As part of the same system colonies were
founded, for the supposed advantage of compelling them to buy our
commodities, or at all events not to buy those of any other country: in
return for which restriction we were generally willing to come under an
equivalent obligation with respect to the staple productions of the
colonists. The consequences of the theory were pushed so far that it was
not unusual even to give bounties on exportation, and induce foreigners to
buy from [England] rather than from other countries by a cheapness which
[England] artificially produced, by paying part of the price for them out
of [their] own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the point yet reached by
any private tradesman in his competition for business. No shopkeeper, I
should think, ever made a practice of bribing customers by selling goods
to them at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from other funds in
his possession.

The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up even by writers and
governments who still cling to the restrictive system. Whatever hold that
system has over men’s minds, independently of the private interests
exposed to real or apprehended loss by its abandonment, is derived from
fallacies other than the old notion of the benefits of heaping up money in
the country. The most effective of these is the specious plea of employing
our own countrymen and our national industry, instead of feeding and
supporting the industry of foreigners. The answer to this, from the
principles laid down in former chapters, is evident. Without reverting to
the fundamental theorem discussed in an early part of the present
treatise,(358) respecting the nature and sources of employment for labor,
it is sufficient to say, what has usually been said by the advocates of
free trade, that the alternative is not between employing our own people
and foreigners, but between employing one class and another of our own
people. The imported commodity is always paid for, directly or indirectly,
with the produce of our own industry: that industry being, at the same
time, rendered more productive, since, with the same labor and outlay, we
are enabled to possess ourselves of a greater quantity of the article.
Those who have not well considered the subject are apt to suppose that our
exporting an equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign articles we
consume, depends on contingencies—on the consent of foreign countries to
make some corresponding relaxation of their own restrictions, or on the
question whether those from whom we buy are induced by that circumstance
to buy more from us; and that, if these things, or things equivalent to
them, do not happen, the payment must be made in money. Now, in the first
place, there is nothing more objectionable in a money payment than in
payment by any other medium, if the state of the market makes it the most
advantageous remittance; and the money itself was first acquired, and
would again be replenished, by the export of an equivalent value of our
own products. But, in the next place, a very short interval of paying in
money would so lower prices as either to stop a part of the importation,
or raise up a foreign demand for our produce, sufficient to pay for the
imports. I grant that this disturbance of the equation of international
demand would be in some degree to our disadvantage, in the purchase of
other imported articles; and that a country which prohibits some foreign
commodities, does, _cæteris paribus_, obtain those which it does not
prohibit at a less price than it would otherwise have to pay. To express
the same thing in other words: a country which destroys or prevents
altogether certain branches of foreign trade, thereby annihilating a
general gain to the world, which would be shared in some proportion
between itself and other countries, does, in some circumstances, draw to
itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger share than would else
belong to it of the gain arising from that portion of its foreign trade
which it suffers to subsist. But even this it can only be enabled to do,
if foreigners do not maintain equivalent prohibitions or restrictions
against its commodities. In any case, the justice or expediency of
destroying one of two gains, in order to engross a rather larger share of
the other, does not require much discussion; the gain, too, which is
destroyed, being, in proportion to the magnitude of the transactions, the
larger of the two, since it is the one which capital, left to itself, is
supposed to seek by preference.



§ 3. —supported by pleas of national subsistence and national defense.


Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine finds support in
some particular cases from considerations which, when really in point,
involve greater interests than mere saving of labor—the interests of
national subsistence and of national defense.(359) The discussions on the
Corn Laws have familiarized everybody with the plea that we ought to be
independent of foreigners for the food of the people; and the Navigation
Laws were grounded, in theory and profession, on the necessity of keeping
up a “nursery of seamen” for the navy. On this last subject I at once
admit that the object is worth the sacrifice; and that a country exposed
to invasion by sea, if it can not otherwise have sufficient ships and
sailors of its own to secure the means of manning on an emergency an
adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those means, even at an
economical sacrifice in point of cheapness of transport. When the English
navigation laws were enacted, the Dutch, from their maritime skill and
their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other nations,
England included, at cheaper rates than those nations could carry for
themselves: which placed all other countries at a great comparative
disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for their ships of war. The
navigation laws, by which this deficiency was remedied, and at the same
time a blow struck against the maritime power of a nation with which
England was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were probably, though
economically disadvantageous, politically expedient. But English ships and
sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of any other country,
maintaining at least an equal competition with the other maritime nations
even in their own trade. The ends which may once have justified navigation
laws require them no longer, and afford no reason for maintaining this
invidious exception to the general rule of free trade.


    Since the introduction of steamships and the advance of invention
    in naval contrivances, the plea for navigation laws on the ground
    that they keep up a “nursery of seamen” for the navy is
    practically obsolete. The “seaman” employed on the modern naval
    ships more nearly resembles the artisan in a manufacturing
    establishment; he need have but comparatively little knowledge of
    the sea, since the days of sailing-vessels have passed by, so far
    as naval warfare is concerned. Steam and mechanical appliances now
    do what was before done by wind and sail.

    While Mr. Mill thinks navigation laws were economically—that is,
    so far as increase of wealth is concerned—disadvantageous, yet he
    believes that they may have been “politically expedient.” It is
    possible, for example, that retaliation by the United States and
    other countries against England early in this century brought
    about the remission of the English restrictions on foreign
    shipping. But it is quite another thing to say that such laws
    produced an ability to sail ships more cheaply. That the English
    navigation acts of 1651 built up English shipping is not supported
    by many proofs; whereas it is very distinctly shown that English
    shipping languished and suffered under them.(360) Moreover, under
    the _régime_ of steam and iron (which drew out England’s peculiar
    advantages in iron and coal), in all its history English shipping
    never prospered more than it has since the abolition in 1849 of
    the navigation laws—events which have taken place since Mr. Mill
    wrote.

    The United States is still weighed down by navigation laws adapted
    to mediæval conditions, and the relics of a time when retaliation
    was the cause of their enactment. So long as wooden vessels did
    the carrying-trade, the natural advantages of the United States
    gave us a proud position on the ocean. Now, however, when it is a
    question of cheaper iron, steel, and coal for vessels of iron and
    steel, we are at a possible disadvantage, and the bulk of
    navigation laws proposed in these days are intended to draw
    capital either by raising prices through duties on ships and
    materials, or by outright bounties and subsidies from industries
    in which we have advantages, to building ships. And until of late
    no distinction has been made between ship-building and ship-owning
    (or ship-sailing). Within the last year (1884) many burdens on
    ship-sailing have been removed; but even when we are permitted to
    sail ships on equal terms with foreigners, we can not yet build
    them with as small a cost as England (which is proved by the very
    demand of the builders of iron vessels for the retention of
    protective duties), and our laws do not as yet allow us to buy
    ships abroad and sail them under our own flag.(361)


With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists has been so
often and so triumphantly met, that it requires little notice here. That
country is the most steadily as well as the most abundantly supplied with
food which draws its supplies from the largest surface. It is ridiculous
to found a general system of policy on so improbable a danger as that of
being at war with all the nations of the world at once; or to suppose
that, even if inferior at sea, a whole country could be blockaded like a
town, or that the growers of food in other countries would not be as
anxious not to lose an advantageous market as we should be not to be
deprived of their corn.

In countries in which the system of Protection is declining, but not yet
wholly given up, such as the United States, a doctrine has come into
notice which is a sort of compromise between free trade and restriction,
namely, that protection for protection’s sake is improper, but that there
is nothing objectionable in having as much protection as may incidentally
result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in England regret is
sometimes expressed that a “moderate fixed duty” was not preserved on
corn, on account of the revenue it would yield. Independently, however, of
the general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this doctrine
overlooks the fact that revenue is received only on the quantity imported,
but that the tax is paid on the entire quantity consumed. To make the
public pay much, that the treasury may receive a little, is no eligible
mode of obtaining a revenue. In the case of manufactured articles the
doctrine involves a palpable inconsistency. The object of the duty as a
means of revenue is inconsistent with its affording, even incidentally,
any protection. It can only operate as protection in so far as it prevents
importation, and to whatever degree it prevents importation it affords no
revenue.



§ 4. —on the ground of encouraging young industries; colonial policy.


The only case in which, on mere principles of political economy,
protecting duties can be defensible, is when they are imposed temporarily
(especially in a young and rising nation) in hopes of naturalizing a
foreign industry, in itself perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the
country. The superiority of one country over another in a branch of
production often arises only from having begun it sooner. There may be no
inherent advantage on one part, or disadvantage on the other, but only a
present superiority of acquired skill and experience. A country which has
this skill and experience yet to acquire may in other respects be better
adapted to the production than those which were earlier in the field; and,
besides, it is a just remark of Mr. Rae that nothing has a greater
tendency to promote improvements in any branch of production than its
trial under a new set of conditions. But it can not be expected that
individuals should, at their own risk, or rather to their certain loss,
introduce a new manufacture, and bear the burden of carrying it on, until
the producers have been educated up to the level of those with whom the
processes are traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a reasonable
time, will sometimes be the least inconvenient mode in which the nation
can tax itself for the support of such an experiment. But the protection
should be confined to cases in which there is good ground of assurance
that the industry which it fosters will after a time be able to dispense
with it; nor should the domestic producers ever be allowed to expect that
it will be continued to them beyond the time necessary for a fair trial of
what they are capable of accomplishing.


    The great difficulty with this proposal is that it introduces
    (what is inconsistent with Mr. Mill’s general system) the
    Socialistic basis of state-help, instead of self-help. If
    industries will never support themselves, then, of course, it is a
    misappropriation of the property of its citizens whenever a
    government takes a slice by taxation from productive industries
    and gives it to a less productive one to make up its deficiencies.
    The only possible theory of protection to young industries is
    that, if protected for a season, the industries may soon grow
    strong and stand alone. Mr. Mill never contemplated anything else.
    But the difficulty is constantly met with, in putting this theory
    into practice, that the industry, once that it has learned to
    depend on the help of the state, never reaches a stage when it is
    willing to give up the assistance of the duties. Dependence on
    legislation begets a want of self-reliance, and destroys the
    stimulus to progress and good management. It is said: “There has
    never been an instance in the history of the country where the
    representatives of such industries, who have enjoyed protection
    for a long series of years, have been willing to submit to a
    reduction of the tariff, or have proposed it. But, on the
    contrary, their demands for still higher and higher duties are
    insatiable, and never intermitted.”(362) The question of fact, as
    to whether or not the United States is indebted for its present
    manufacturing position to protection when our industries were
    young, seems to be capable of answer, and an answer which shows
    that protection was imposed generally after the industries got a
    foothold, and that very little assistance was derived from the
    duties on imports.(363)

    The following explanation by Mr. Mill(364) of the meaning put upon
    his argument of protection to young industries by those who have
    applied it to the United States will be of no slight interest:


“The passage has been made use of to show the inapplicability of free
trade to the United States, and for similar purpose in the Australian
colonies, erroneously in my opinion, but certainly with more plausibility
than can be the case in the United States, for Australia really is a new
country whose capabilities for carrying on manufactures can not yet be
said to have been tested; but the manufacturing parts of the United
States—New England and Pennsylvania—are no longer new countries; they have
carried on manufactures on a large scale, and with the benefit of high
protecting duties, for at least two generations; their operatives have had
full time to acquire the manufacturing skill in which those of England had
preceded them; there has been ample experience to prove that the alleged
inability of their manufactures to compete in the American market with
those of Great Britain does not arise merely from the more recent date of
their establishment, but from the fact that American labor and capital
can, in the present circumstances of America, be employed with greater
return, and greater advantage to the national wealth, in the production of
other articles. I have never for a moment recommended or countenanced any
protecting industry except for the purpose of enabling the protected
branch of industry, in a very moderate time, to become independent of
protection. That moderate time in the United States has been exceeded, and
if the cotton and iron of America still need protection against those of
the other hemisphere, it is in my eyes a complete proof that they aught
not to have it, and that the longer it is continued the greater the
injustice and the waste of national resources will be.”

There is only one part of the protectionist scheme which requires any
further notice: its policy toward colonies and foreign dependencies; that
of compelling them to trade exclusively with the dominant country. A
country which thus secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its
commodities, undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distribution
of the general gains of the commercial world. Since, however, it causes
the industry and capital of the colony to be diverted from channels which
are proved to be the most productive, inasmuch as they are those into
which industry and capital spontaneously tend to flow, there is a loss, on
the whole, to the productive powers of the world, and the mother-country
does not gain so much as she makes the colony lose. If, therefore, the
mother-country refuses to acknowledge any reciprocity of obligations, she
imposes a tribute on the colony in an indirect mode, greatly more
oppressive and injurious than the direct.



§ 5. —on the ground of high wages.


    The discussion by Mr. Cairnes on the question of wages as affected
    by the tariff is such that I have quoted it as fully as possible:
    “The position taken in the United States is that protection is
    only needed and only asked for where American industry is placed
    under a disadvantage, as compared with the industry of foreign
    countries.... The rates of wages measured in money are higher in
    the United States than in Europe, and, therefore, it is argued,
    the cost of producing commodities is higher.... The high rates of
    wages in the United States are not peculiar to any branch of
    industry, but are universal throughout its whole range. If,
    therefore, a high rate of wages proves a high cost of production,
    and a high cost of production proves a need of protection, it
    follows that the farmers of Illinois and the cotton-planters of
    the Southern States stand in as much need of fostering legislation
    as the cotton-spinners of New England or the iron-masters of
    Pennsylvania! A criterion which leads to such results must, I
    think, be regarded as sufficiently condemned. The fallacy is, in
    truth, ... that all industries are not in each country equally
    favored or disfavored by nature, and have not, therefore, equal
    need of this protecting care. If American protectionists are not
    prepared to demand protective duties in favor of the Illinois
    farmer against the competition of his English rival, they are
    bound to admit either that a high cost of production is not
    incompatible with effective competition, or else that a high rate
    of wages does not prove a high cost of production; and if this is
    not so in Illinois, then I wish to know why the case should be
    different in Pennsylvania or in New England. If a high rate of
    wages in the first of these States be consistent with a low cost
    of production, why may not a high rate of wages in Pennsylvania be
    consistent with a low cost of producing coal and iron?

    “The rate of wages, whether measured in money or in the real
    remuneration of the laborer, affords an approximate criterion of
    the cost of production,(365) either of money, or of the
    commodities that enter into the laborer’s real remuneration, _but
    in a sense the inverse of that in which it is understood in the
    argument under consideration_: in other words, a high rate of
    wages indicates not a high but a low cost of production.(366) ...
    Thus in the United States the rate of wages is high, whether
    measured in gold or in the most important articles of the
    laborer’s consumption—a fact which proves that the cost of
    producing gold, as well as that of producing those other
    commodities, is low in the United States.... I would ask
    [objectors] to consider what are the true causes of the high
    remuneration of American industry. It will surely be admitted
    that, in the last resort, these resolve themselves into the one
    great fact of its high productive power.... I must, therefore,
    contend that the high scale of industrial remuneration in America,
    instead of being evidence of a high cost of production in that
    country, is distinctly evidence of a low cost of production—of a
    low cost of production, that is to say, in the first place, of
    gold, and, in the next, of the commodities which mainly constitute
    the real wages of labor—a description which embraces at once the
    most important raw materials of industry and the most important
    articles of general consumption. As regards commodities not
    included in this description, the criterion of wages stands in no
    constant relation of any kind to their cost, and is, therefore,
    simply irrelevant to the point at issue. And now we may see what
    this claim for protection to American industry, _founded on the
    high scale of American remuneration_, really comes to: it is a
    demand for special legislative aid in consideration of the
    possession of special industrial facilities—a complaint, in short,
    against the exceptional bounty of nature.

    “Perhaps I shall here be asked, How, if the case be so—if the high
    rate of industrial remuneration in America be only evidence of a
    low cost of production—the fact is to be explained, since fact it
    undoubtedly is, that the people of the United States are unable to
    compete in neutral markets, in the sale of certain important
    wares, with England and other European countries?(367) No one will
    say that the people of New England, New York, and Pennsylvania,
    are deficient in any industrial qualities possessed by the workmen
    of any country in the world. How happens it, then, that, enjoying
    industrial advantages superior to other countries, they are yet
    unable to hold their own against them in the general markets of
    commerce? I shall endeavor to meet this objection fairly, and, in
    the first place, let me state what my contention is with regard to
    the cost of production in America. I do not contend that it is low
    in the case of all commodities capable of being produced in the
    country, but only in that of a large, very important, but still
    limited group. With regard to commodities lying outside this
    group, I hold that the rate of wages is simply no evidence as to
    the cost of their production, one way or the other. But, secondly,
    I beg the reader to consider what is meant by the alleged
    ‘inability’ of New England and Pennsylvania to compete, let us
    say, with Manchester and Sheffield, in the manufacture of calico
    and cutlery. What it means, and what it only can mean, is that
    they are unable to do so _consistently with obtaining that rate of
    remuneration on their industry which is current in the United
    States_. If only American laborers and capitalists would be
    content with the wages and profits current in Great Britain, there
    is nothing that I know of to prevent them from holding their own
    in any markets to which Manchester and Sheffield can send their
    wares. And this brings us to the heart of the question. Over a
    large portion of the great field of industry the people of the
    United States enjoy, as compared with those of Europe, (1)
    advantages of a very exceptional kind; over the rest (2) the
    advantage is less decided, or (3) they stand on a par with
    Europeans, or (4) possibly they are, in some instances, at a
    disadvantage. Engaging in the branches of industry in which their
    advantage over Europe is great, they reap industrial returns
    proportionally great; and, so long as they confine themselves to
    these occupations, they can compete in neutral markets against all
    the world, and still secure the high rewards accruing from their
    exceptionally rich resources. But the people of the Union decline
    to confine themselves within these liberal bounds. They would
    cover the whole domain of industrial activity, and think it hard
    that they should not reap the same rich harvests from every part
    of the field. They must descend into the arena with Sheffield and
    Manchester, and yet secure the rewards of Chicago and St. Louis.
    They must employ European conditions of production, and obtain
    American results. What is this but to quarrel with the laws of
    nature? These laws have assigned to an extensive range of
    industries carried on in the United States a high scale of return,
    far in excess of what Europe can command, to a few others a return
    on a scale not exceeding the European proportion. American
    enterprise would engage in all departments alike, and obtain upon
    all the high rewards which nature has assigned only to some. Here
    we find the real meaning of the ‘inability’ of Americans to
    compete with the ‘pauper labor’ of Europe. They can not do so, and
    at the same time secure the American rate of return on their work.
    The inability no doubt exists, but it is one created, not by the
    drawbacks, but by the exceptional advantages of their position. It
    is as if a skilled artisan should complain that he could not
    compete with the hedger and ditcher. Let him only be content with
    the hedger and ditcher’s rate of pay, and there will be nothing to
    prevent him from entering the lists even against this rival.”(368)

    It is often said that wages are kept at a high rate in the United
    States by the existence of protected industries. On the other
    hand, the truth is that the protected industries must pay the
    current high rate of wages fixed by the general productiveness of
    all industries in the country. When the facts are investigated, it
    is surprising how small a portion of the laborers of the United
    States are employed in occupations which owe their existence to
    the tariff. A general view of the relative numbers engaged in
    different occupations may be seen by reference to Chart No. XXIV,
    based on the returns for the census of 1880. The data are well
    worth examination:(369)

    (1.) Agriculture                  7,670,493
    (2.) Manufacturing,               3,837,112
    mechanical, and mining
    (3.) Trade and transportation     1,810,256
    (4.) Professional and personal    4,074,238
    services
    All occupations                  17,392,099

                       [Illustration: Chart XXIV.]

      Chart XXIV. _Chart showing for the United States, in 1880, the
     ratio between the total population over ten years of age and the
     number of persons reported as engaged in each principal class of
       gainful occupations. Compiled from the returns of the Tenth
     Census, by the Editor._ NOTE.—The interior square represents the
    proportion of the population which is accounted for as engaged in
      gainful occupations. The unshaded space between the inner and
     outer squares represents the proportion of the population not so
                              accounted for.


    Of the second class, less than 450,000 work-people are engaged in
    the chief protected industries—cotton, woolen, and iron and steel,
    combined. This class, it is to be noted, in the census returns,
    includes bakers, blacksmiths, brick-makers, builders, butchers,
    cabinet-makers, carpenters, carriage-makers, and so on through the
    whole list of similar occupations practically unaffected by the
    tariff (so far as protection to them is concerned). So that, at
    the most, there are less than a million laborers engaged in
    industries directly dependent on the tariff, and the number is
    undoubtedly very much less than a million. When some writers
    assert, therefore, that the existence of customs-duties allows
    industries (even including all those employed in producing cotton,
    wool, iron, and steel) to employ less than a million laborers in
    such a way that the remuneration is fixed for the remaining
    16,000,000 laborers in the United States, keeping wages high for
    16,000,000 by paying current wages for less than a million, the
    extravagance and ignorance of the statement are at once apparent;
    while, on the other hand, it is distinctly seen that the causes
    fixing the generally high rates of wages for the 16,000,000 are
    those governing the majority of occupations, and that the less
    than one million must be paid the wages which can be obtained
    elsewhere in the more productive industries. The facts thus
    strikingly bear out the principles as stated above.

    Confirmation—if confirmation now seems necessary—may be found in a
    study(370) by our ablest statistician, Francis A. Walker, upon the
    causes which have operated on the growth of American manufactures.
    This growth has not been commensurate, he finds, with the
    remarkable inventive and industrial capacity of our people, and
    with the richness of our national resources: “I answer that the
    cause of that comparative failure is found, primarily and
    principally, in the extraordinary success of our agriculture, as
    already intimated in what has been said of the investment of
    capital. The enormous profits of cultivating a virgin soil without
    the need of artificial fertilization; the advantages which a
    sparse population derives from the privilege of selecting for
    tillage only the choicest spots,(371) those most accessible, most
    fertile, most easily brought under the plow; and the consequent
    abundance of food and other necessaries enjoyed by the
    agricultural class, have tended continually to disparage
    mechanical industries, in the eyes alike of the capitalist,
    looking to the most remunerative investment of his savings, and of
    the laborer, seeking that avocation which should promise the most
    liberal and constant support.

    “It has been the competition of the farm with the shop which,
    throughout the entire century of our national independence, has
    most effectually hindered the growth of manufactures. A people who
    are privileged to cultivate a reasonably fertile soil, under the
    conditions indicated above, can secure for themselves subsistence
    up to the highest limit of physical well-being. If that people
    possess the added advantage of great skill in the use of tools,
    and great adroitness in meeting the large and the little
    exigencies of the occupation and cultivation of the soil, the
    fruits of their labor will include not only everything which is
    essential to health and comfort, but much that is of the nature of
    luxury.”

    It remains to be said in this connection that workmen are already
    discerning the practical and real causes at work affecting their
    wages—affecting them more directly than any tariff system possibly
    could—by showing no small alarm at the immigration of foreigners,
    such as the Hungarian miners and Italian laborers, who willingly
    underbid them. In other words, they are beginning to realize, in a
    practical way, the truth that increasing numbers are far more
    potent than anything else in reducing wages. So long as
    immigration is free to any race or nationality, there is no such
    thing as “protection to home laborers”; the only protection to
    them—not that I am urging the desirability of such measures—can
    come solely from forces which limit the number of workmen who
    enter into competition with them. Any other protection to
    laboring-men than the prohibition of immigration—which no one
    thinks of (except for the Chinese)—is an economic delusion.
    Instead of “protecting” them to the extent of affording higher
    wages, the tariff increases the cost of woolen clothing and other
    articles of their consumption, in addition to forcing capital into
    employments which yield a less return, and so insure lower wages.



§ 6. —on the ground of creating a diversity of industries.


    It must be kept in mind that Political Economy deals only with the
    phenomena of material wealth; it does not supply ethical or
    political grounds of action. It is quite conceivable that a
    legislator, in coming to a decision, may have to balance economic
    gains against moral or political losses, and may choose to give up
    the former to prevent the latter. But the economic truth remains
    unchanged. Political economy, for instance, to the question, Is
    there any gain in international trade? answers, unequivocally,
    yes. Would it be a loss of wealth to the community to have the
    goods formerly bought abroad now produced at home? The answer is,
    certainly it would. But here it has been ably urged by intelligent
    writers that a state has other ends to gain than the accumulation
    of mere riches; that it must aim to secure the greatest moral,
    social, and elevating influences possible for the working-classes;
    and that while free exchange of goods may add to wealth, it may
    injure the social and political well-being of a nation. So far as
    these are social and political questions they do not belong to
    Political Economy. But the commonest form of argument is that,
    under free exchange, the United States would become purely an
    “agricultural” country, its social horizon would become narrowed,
    and a lower standard of industrial activity would then ensue;
    instead of which, it is said, we should, by protection, keep in
    existence diversified industries by which the national mind may be
    better stimulated, and greater enterprise may be encouraged in all
    branches of industry. This argument for “diversity of industries,”
    however, is not merely a sociological question; it can only be
    fully discussed from an economic stand-point, and deserves even
    more than the brief attention we can give it here.

    In the first place, as soon as any purely agricultural country
    gains even a slight density of population—a density only such as
    to warrant the introduction of the principle of division of
    labor—there comes an inevitable differentiation of pursuits,
    wholly outside of legislation, and through the operation of
    natural causes. Not all of any population is required in
    agriculture to provide the whole with food. By a division of
    labor, one man in agriculture can produce the sustenance of
    himself and many others. “The United States have at the present
    time but five persons engaged in agriculture for each square mile
    of settled area.” By the side of the farm must early spring up a
    wide circle of industries—the shoemaker, the carpenter, the
    blacksmith, the wagon-maker, the painter, the builder, the mason,
    and all the ordinary employments which arise in any small
    community from the earliest division of labor. Moreover,
    “agriculture” is often used in a too limited sense as confined to
    producing food alone (although even in that limited sense
    employing nearly one half of the total number of our laborers). In
    a new country the natural field of employment is found in the
    “extractive industries,” which include the preparation for the
    market not only of food, but also of all ores, coal, minerals,
    oils, hides, leather, wool, lumber, and the industries intimately
    connected with them; all the employments which transport these
    from one part of the country to another (employing at present over
    one ninth of all our laborers); and professional and personal
    services of an extended variety. Even, therefore, if we were
    obliged to forego manufactures entirely, the “extractive
    industries” would necessarily involve a very extensive diversity
    of employments.

    The real question, however, for most persons, centers in the next
    stage of the industrial evolution—that of the manufactures of
    these above-mentioned products of the “extractive industries.” It
    will be remembered, here, that a country does not possess an equal
    ability in producing each of these or any commodities: the timber
    formerly near great rivers may vanish into the interior; the
    oil-sources may be more or less fertile; or the ore-deposits may
    be more or less rich, more or less accessible, than those of other
    countries. This being understood, then, as soon as the demand in
    the country calls for an increased quantity of a particular
    article, the cost may increase under the law of diminishing
    returns until a foreign country—having inferior agents of
    production as compared with our best—may be able to send supplies
    into our markets. It all depends on whether the United States
    wants more articles than can be produced on grades of natural
    agents superior to those possessed by foreigners, taking cost of
    carriage to this country into consideration. Even though foreign
    competition appears when we reach poorer grades of natural agents,
    it does not follow that some of the particular articles will not
    be produced. What ought to be clear is, that untrammeled exchange
    between countries will not prevent the existence of various
    industries, but only limit production to those grades of agents
    which are its best. This may be better seen by a simple diagram:

    Iron and Coal: England         7   6   5   4   3   2   1
    Iron and Coal: United States   4   3   2   1
    Wheat: England                 4   3   2   1
    Wheat: United States           7   6   5   4   3   2   1

    England may have seven different grades of productiveness in her
    iron and coal supplies, of which her grades 1, 2, and 3 are
    superior to the best grade of the United States, while grades 1,
    2, 3, and 4 in the United States may compare only with grades 4,
    5, 6, 7 of England. So long as England can supply herself and the
    United States also with coal and iron from the three superior
    grades, the United States can not work grade 1 at home. But if the
    supply for England and the world requires grade 5 to be worked,
    then the United States can begin the industry on her best grade,
    although that is far inferior to the best grade in England.
    Likewise, if the United States has three grades of wheat-land
    superior to England’s best grade, the ability of England to grow
    wheat depends on whether the United States can, or can not, supply
    both herself and England from grades 1, 2, and 3. If we must
    resort to grade 4, then England can begin to grow wheat as well as
    we. In short, under a system of free exchange, as great a
    diversity as under protection is probably possible, but only in
    such a way that the best possible advantages in each particular
    industry are employed. Smaller amounts in some branches, and
    greater amounts in others, may be produced under a free than under
    a restrictive system, but with all the greater gain which arises
    from a proper and healthy adjustment of trade. The most poorly
    endowed enterprises in each occupation would be given up, but not
    the whole industry itself. No class of persons feel the
    competition of rivals more than English farmers since American
    wheat has come into English markets, and yet it does not follow
    that England can not grow a bushel of wheat. The fact is, merely,
    that some kinds of lands were thrown out of cultivation, and a
    readjustment made, to the benefit of those wanting cheaper food.
    So with us: we should not, by the free exchange, be forced to give
    up the iron and coal industries entirely; for the best mines would
    still keep that occupation in existence to “diversify” the others.

    So far the explanation covers the “extractive industries” only, or
    those industries affected by the law of diminishing returns when a
    larger quantity is demanded. The real question arises as to the
    manufactures of these materials. But we count upon larger
    industrial rewards, in the form of wages, and profits, here than
    in England; we must get more from an industry than England in
    order to satisfy us. Our grades of occupations, therefore, must be
    more productive to a certain extent, grade for grade, than English
    grades, in order to allow of their remaining free from
    competition. But we have this superiority, as regards our home
    market, owing to natural causes: (1) cheap raw materials (if we
    except wool and other commodities whose price is raised by the
    tariff); (2) advantage over England in cost of transportation of
    raw products; and (3) in the cost of transportation, again, of the
    finished goods in reaching our markets. Now, the processes of
    manufacture which do not put much labor upon the materials,
    especially where the articles are bulky, are conducted in this
    country without fear of foreign competition. And the range of this
    class of manufactures is surprisingly large. It includes the
    manufactures of iron, such as stoves, and the common utensils of
    every-day life; of hides, such as leather, harnesses, etc.; and of
    wood, such as all the furniture of common use. The list is too
    long to be fully stated here. These industries are not kept in
    existence by the tariff; and a diversity as wide as this would
    arise under a system of free exchange, as well as of restriction.
    Indeed, if duties were removed from so-called “raw materials,” it
    is altogether probable that a wider diversity would exist than
    ever before.

    And yet, it will be said, there are some things we can not produce
    in free competition with England. Of course there are; and it is
    to be hoped it will long continue so. If there are not some kinds
    of commodities which foreigners can produce to better advantage
    than we, then there will be no possibility of any foreign trade
    whatever; since, if they can send us nothing, they can take
    nothing from us. To deny this position, is to say that the export
    and import trade of the United States (amounting in 1883 to more
    than $1,500,000,000) is of no profit, and had best be entirely
    destroyed, in order that a few industries in which we have no
    natural advantages (and which employ less than one seventeenth of
    the laborers in the United States) should be continued at a loss
    to the general productiveness of our labor and capital, and so to
    a general diminution of wages and profits.



§ 7. —on the ground that it lowers prices.


    The argument—heard less frequently now than formerly—has been
    advanced, drawn inductively from statistics, that protection does
    not raise prices; because, after duties are put on, a larger
    quantity is produced, the advantages of large production are
    reaped, and then the price of the manufactured commodity falls
    lower here than it was before the duty was imposed. The position
    is then held that protection does not raise prices. It is, of
    course, understood to mean the prices of protected commodities—a
    necessary precaution, because we find our own agricultural
    (unprotected) commodities cited to show that prices are lower here
    than in England.

    No one, however, will deny that there has been a fall in the
    prices of textile fabrics and manufactured goods. That is the
    result of a general law of value, and of the tendencies of a
    progressive state of industry.(372) The causes of this
    acknowledged fall would be at work, no matter whether tariffs
    existed or not. It is the result of the general forward march of
    improvements, as evidenced in the application of new inventions
    and the display of skill and ingenuity in new processes. To say
    that it comes because of a tariff, is a complete _non sequitur._
    How true this is may be seen by observing that a country like
    England, without tariffs, shares in the general fall of prices of
    manufactured goods equally with the country which has heavy
    customs-duties. The causes must be wider than tariffs, if they are
    seen working alike in tariff and non-tariff countries.

    But the fact itself can not be gainsaid that protection does raise
    the prices of the protected goods in the home market. The
    comparison is not to be made between prices as they now are in
    this country and as they were twenty or forty years ago also in
    this country, for this would show only the general march of
    improvements in this country; but a comparison is to be made
    between prices in this country to-day and present prices in
    foreign countries. Does, for instance, the tariff increase the
    price of woolen goods and clothing to every consumer far beyond
    what the price would be if the duty on imported woolens were
    removed? The very existence of a protecting duty is the answer to
    this. If the duty does not raise the price, then why does the
    woolen industry wish a continuance of the duties? If goods can be
    sold as cheaply here as the foreign goods, why do protectionists
    want any duties? The duties are intended to keep foreign goods out
    of our markets; and they would be unnecessary if our goods could
    be sold as cheaply as the foreign wares.

    The facts, however, are at hand to show that the statement of
    principle as made above is corroborated by the statistics. In
    1883, although average weekly wages in Massachusetts were over 77
    per cent higher than in England, the American laborer had to pay
    more for the articles entering into his real wages; and to that
    extent lost the advantage of his higher reward in this country.
    This is to be seen in the following figures,(373) which show, in
    percentages, whether prices are higher or lower here than in
    England:

    Classes of Articles.          Higher Percent.   Lower Percent.
    Groceries                                  16
    Provisions, including meat,                                 23
    eggs, butter, and potatoes
    Dry goods (all grades)                     13
    Boots, shoes, and slippers                 62
    Clothing                                   45

    And yet, in spite of the high prices, 31 per cent of the
    Massachusetts workman’s expenditure represents more comfort and
    better home surroundings than is enjoyed by the English workman.
    If the American could purchase at English prices, he would have no
    less than 37 per cent of a surplus for additional enjoyments
    (after making due allowance for the higher rents paid here than in
    England). In other words, higher prices cut off the American
    laborer from reaping all the superiority in comfort which might be
    expected from knowing that he had an advantage over the English
    laborer of 77 per cent in the money wages received.

    In order that the reader may easily find the arguments of the
    protectionists, he is referred to the following books:

    Carey’s “Principles of Social Science” (3 vols.). The form of
    argument is, briefly, that all industries should be kept going
    within the bounds of a country so as to avoid foreign trade. The
    change of form into the finished commodity should, he holds, take
    place near the spot where the raw materials are produced, so that
    not so great a share should go to the mere middle-men, or
    transporters.

    Bowen’s “Political Economy,” Chap. XX, advocates protection on the
    ground that it is needed to secure diversity of industries, and
    that it lowers the prices of imported goods.

    Sir J. B. Byles’s “Sophisms of Free Trade” is an answer to
    Bastiat’s “Sophisms of Protection,” the latter having been
    translated into English by Horace White.

    Erastus B. Bigelow’s “The Tariff Question.” This is one of the
    ablest discussions, from the protectionist point of view, based on
    statistical tables and comparisons of the policy of England and
    the United States.

    Stebbins’s “Protectionists’ Manual” is a brief and handy
    statement.

    Ellis H. Roberts’s “Government Revenue” is the form into which he
    has thrown his lectures at Cornell University (1884) on
    protection, and is the latest statement emanating from that side
    of the discussion. He goes at length into the history of taxes in
    various countries; holds that wages are higher here than in
    England because of protection; that our manufactures are more
    flourishing than our agriculture, etc.

    Frederick List’s “National Economy” is the German statement of
    protection, much on Carey’s own grounds.

    “The Congressional Globe” contains numerous speeches of members of
    Congress on the tariff; and the Iron and Steel Association of
    Philadelphia send out pamphlets explaining the protectionist
    position.

    The free-trade arguments may be found also in W. M. Grosvenor’s
    “Does Protection Protect?” He studies the results of the various
    tariffs of the United States, and gives many very valuable tables
    and collections of statistics bearing upon this question.

    W. G. Sumner’s “History of Protection in the United States” is a
    very vigorous account of the evils of the various tariffs and the
    protective system.

    D. A. Wells’s “Reports” as Special Commissioner of the Revenue,
    and his numerous pamphlets (see Putnams’ publisher’s catalogue),
    are full of facts, and give the results of special study of the
    subject as affecting the United States.

    A. L. Perry’s “Political Economy” gives a radical free-trade view.

    Henry Fawcett’s “Free Trade and Protection” explains the causes
    which have retarded the more general adoption of free trade.

    J. E. Cairnes’s “Leading Principles of Political Economy” gives
    the ablest discussion of the economic principles involved in the
    question which has yet been offered to the reader. Moreover,
    almost all our systematic writers on political economy (excepting,
    perhaps, Bowen and R. E. Thompson) give the system of free
    exchange their support on economic grounds.





APPENDIX I. BIBLIOGRAPHIES.




A Brief Bibliography Of The Tariffs Of The United States.


I. _General Works._—Young’s “Special Report on the Customs-Tariff
Legislation of the United States” contains useful extracts from debates of
Congress, and also valuable tables of duties; in the Index, p. cciii,
under “Tariff Act,” will be found references to, and dates of, all acts to
1870. See, also, Sumner’s “History of American Currency,” and his
“Lectures on Protection in the United States”; A. L. Perry’s “Political
Economy,” chap. xiii; Grosvenor’s “Does Protection Protect?” A valuable
study is E. J. James’s “Studien über den Amerikanischen Zoll tariff.” For
different views, see Carey’s “Social Science”; Bolles’s “Financial History
of the United States,” vol. ii, Bk. i, chap. v, Bk. iii, chaps. iii to x;
and Stebbins’s “American Protectionists’ Manual.”

II. _Earlier Periods._—H. C. Adams’s “Taxation in the United States,
1789-1816”; F. W. Taussig’s “Protection to Young Industries”; the works of
Hamilton, Madison, Jefferson, Webster, and Clay; “The Statesman’s Manual”;
and of course the Debates in Congress, etc. See, also, Bristed’s
“Resources of the United States”; Pitkin’s “Statistical View of the
Commerce of the United States”; Seybert’s “Statistical Annals” (1818); and
the “American Almanac.”

III. _Noteworthy Documents._—Hamilton’s Reports: “Report on Manufactures,”
Works, ii, pp. 192-284, or American State Papers, Finance, i, 123-144.
Dallas, Treasury Report of 1816, American State Papers, Finance, iii,
87-91.

A report which is of the greatest importance and weight is Albert
Gallatin’s “Memorial in Favor of Tariff Reform” (1832). Printed
separately. Unfortunately, not in his collected works.

Walker’s Report, see Finance Report, December 3, 1845.

J. Q. Adams’s Report of 1832, Congressional Documents, 1831-1832, H. R.
No. 481.

D. A. Wells’s “Reports as Special Commissioner of the Revenue,” 1866,
Senate Documents, second session, Thirty-ninth Congress, vol. i, No. 2;
1868, House Executive Documents, second session, Fortieth Congress, vol.
ix, No. 81; 1869, House Executive Documents, third session, Fortieth
Congress, vol. vii, No. 16; 1869, House Executive Documents, second
session, Forty-first Congress, vol. v, No. 27; and his paper in the Cobden
Club Essays (second series).

W. D. Kelley’s “Speeches, Addresses, and Letters.”

“Report of the Tariff Commission,” 1882 (two vols). H. R. Miscellaneous
Documents, No. 6, Part I, Forty-seventh Congress, second session.

IV. _Pauper-Labor Argument._—See Taussig, “Protection to Young
Industries,” p. 69, note 1; Calhoun’s speech, Works, iv, pp. 201-212;
Greeley’s speech of 1843; Cooper’s “Politics,” pp. 99-109; Webster’s
Works, v, pp. 161-235; Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” pp. 382-388.
Fifteenth Annual Report of the Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics (1884),
by Carroll D. Wright. D. A. Wells, “Princeton Review,” November, 1883, p.
261; Schoenhof, “Wages and Trade.”

V. _View of Early Manufactures._—Bishop, “History of American
Manufactures”; Batchelder’s “Introduction and Early Progress of the Cotton
Manufacture in the United States”; N. Appleton, “Origin of Lowell”; G. S.
White, “Memoir of Samuel Slater”; B. F. French, “History of the Rise and
Progress of the Iron Trade of the United States for 1621-1857”; H.
Scrivenor, “History of the Iron Trade”; “Bulletin of the National
Association of Woolen Manufactures,” ii, pp. 479-488. Tench Coxe,
“Statement of the Arts and Manufactures of the United States for 1810”
(1814).

VI. _Later View of Manufactures_:

(1.) THE IRON MANUFACTURE.—See Swank’s “Reports of Iron and Steel
Association,” 1882; ibid., “Census Report,” 1880; ibid., “Iron Trade,”
1876; J. S. Newberry, for an excellent article in “International Review,”
i, pp. 768-780.

For Bessemer steel, Swank, “Census Report,” 1880, pp. 149-153; and
Schoenhof, “Destructive Influences of the Tariff,” chap. vii. A. S.
Hewett, Speech in Congress, May 16, 1882. Separately printed.

(2.) WOOL, WOOLENS, AND COTTONS.—Production and importation of wool, see
“United States Statistical Abstract”; “Tariff Commission Report,” i, pp.
1782-1785; ii, p. 2432.

Production and importation of woolens, see “Bulletin of Woolen
Manufacturers,” vii, p. 359; “Commerce and Navigation Reports.”

Prosperity of woolen manufacturers after 1867, see Wells, “Wool and the
Tariff” (a letter to the “New York Tribune,” March 20, 1873); R. W.
Robinson, article of December, 1872, in “Bulletin of Woolen
Manufacturers,” iii, p. 354. Edward Harris, “Memorial of the Manufacturers
of Woolen Goods to the Committee of Ways and Means,” Washington, 1872.
John L. Hayes, “The Fleece and the Loom.”

Production and importation of cottons, see “Commerce and Navigation
Reports”; Census Report of 1880.

(3.) SILK.—Manufacture since 1860, see “Silk Association Reports”;
Wyckoff, “Silk Manufacture in the United States” (1883) for recent
history, pp. 42-51. Wyckoff, “The Silk Goods of America” (1880), on
methods of manufacture, chaps. ii, iv, vi.

(4.) SUGAR DUTIES.—D. A. Wells, “Princeton Review,” vi (November, 1880),
pp. 319-335; and “The Sugar Industry of the United States and the Tariff”
(1878).

VII. _Present Tariff._—Heyl’s “United States Duties on Imports” (1881)
contains all acts in force to date of publication, and gives all acts
since the year 1861 in full. It is used by the United States officials.

“Imports Duties from 1867 to 1883 inclusive” (House of Representatives,
Miscellaneous Documents, No. 49, Forty-eighth Congress, first session)
gives duties on each article by years, and reduces specific to _ad
valorem_ rates.

“The Existing Tariff on Imports into the United States,” 1884 (Senate
Document, Report, No. 12, Forty-eighth Congress, first session).




A Brief Bibliography Of Bimetallism.


“The Report of the International Monetary Conference, 1878” (p. 754),
contains an extended bibliography on money, by S. Dana Horton. Chevalier’s
third volume of his “Cours d’Économie politique,” entitled “Monnaie,” also
gives a bibliography.

I. _Standard of Value._—See Jevons, “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,”
chaps iii, xxv; S. Dana Horton, “Gold and Silver,” chap. iv, p. 36; F. A.
Walker, “Political Economy,” pp. 363-368, “Money, Trade, and Industry,”
pp. 56-77; Wolowski, “L’Or et l’Argent,” pp. 7, 22, 207; Mill, “Principles
of Political Economy,” book iii, chap. xv; Walras, “Journal des
Économistes,” October, 1882, pp. 5-13.

II. _Bimetallic Theory._—Horton, “Gold and Silver,” p. 29; F. A. Walker,
“Money, Trade, and Industry,” p. 157, “Political Economy,” p. 408; Giffen,
“Fortnightly Review,” vol. xxxii (1879), p. 279; Wolowski, “L’Or et
l’Argent,” p. 35; Jevons, ibid., chap, xii; A. J. Wilson, “Reciprocity,
Bimetallism, and Land Reform,” p. 107; S. Bourne, “Trade, Population, and
Food,” p. 227; Seyd, “The Decline of Prosperity,” and the various
pamphlets of Cernuschi.

III. _Operation of Gresham’s Law._—Macaulay, chap. xxi for clipped coin of
1695; Jevons, ibid., pp. 80-85, also gives an example taken from the
Japanese currency; for the case of France, see “Report of the Select
Committee of the House of Commons on the Depreciation of Silver, 1876,” p.
xlii, and Appendix, pp. 86, 148; for the United States, see _supra_, book
iii, chap. vii, § 3. See, also, Lord Liverpool’s “Treatise on the Coins of
the Realm,” chap. xii, for changes in the coin of England.

IV. _Compensatory Effect of Two Standards._—Jevons, ibid., pp. 139, 140;
F. A. Walker, “Political Economy,” pp. 411-416; Wolowski, “L’Or et
l’Argent,” p. 28; Mannequin, “Journal des Économistes,” August, 1878, p.
202.

V. _Effect of a League of States, or Law, on the Relative Value of Gold
and Silver._—Giffen, “Fortnightly Review,” vol. xxxii (1879), pp. 285-290;
Wolowski, “L’Or et l’Argent,” pp. 23, 24, 31; F. A. Walker, “Political
Economy,” p. 410, “Report of the International Monetary Conference, 1878,”
p. 74; Sumner, “Princeton Review,” vol. iv, p. 563; S. Dana Horton,
“Report of the International Monetary Conference, 1878,” p. 741; Bourne,
“Trade, Population, and Food,” pp. 228, 230; Jevons, “Contemporary
Review,” vol. xxxix (1881), p. 750; S. Newcomb, “International Review”
(1879), p. 314.

VI. _Production of Gold and Silver; Relative Value of the Two Metals._—Ad.
Soetbeer, Petermann’s “Mittheilungen,” No. 57; “House of Commons Report on
Depreciation of Silver,” 1876, Appendix, pp. 11, 12, 24; Bourne,
“Statistical Journal,” vol. xlii, p. 409, gives Sir H. Hay’s figures
corrected by him to 1878; Spofford’s “American Almanac,” 1878, gives
tables from the “Journal des Économistes”; the figures of Seyd, Hay,
Jacob, and Tooke and Newmarch are in the “House of Commons Report,” above.
Also see, _supra_, book iii, chap. vi, for references.

The relative values of gold and silver since 1834, as given in Pixley and
Abell’s (London) tables, are trustworthy. Previous to 1834 there is much
uncertainty. Soetbeer, ibid., gives Hamburg quotations since 1687. Another
table, probably incorrect in places, is that of White, see “Report of the
International Monetary Conference,” 1878, p. 647.

VII. _Demonetization of Silver by Germany._—For copy of laws of 1871 and
1873, see “Report of Directors of the United States Mint, 1873,” p. 82;
“House of Commons Report on Depreciation of Silver,” 1876, p. 18;
“Conférence Monétaire Internationale,” 1881, index, p. 215 for
“Allemagne.”

VIII. _Latin Union._—For treaty, see “Journal des Économistes,” May, 1866;
“House of Commons Report,” ibid, xxxviii, Appendix, pp. 92, 98, 106-109,
116; “Report of Monetary Conference,” 1878, pp. 779-787.

IX. _Flow of Silver to the East._—The figures of Sir Hector Hay after
1851, “House of Commons Report,” ibid., App., p. 24, are fullest, and
should be combined with Pixley and Abell’s figures for years before 1851,
ibid., Appendix, p. 21. See also Bourne, “Statistical Journal,” 1879, p.
422; Waterfield, “House of Commons Report,” ibid., Appendix, pp. 171, 172,
174; Quetteville, ibid., p. 184; “Conférence Monétaire Internationale,”
1881, p. 197; London “Economist,” February 24, 1883, Supplement, p. 7;
“Parliamentary Documents,” 1881, vol. xciii; “Report of the Director of
the United States Mint,” 1880 (in the Finance Report, 1880, p. 194); J. B.
Robertson, “Westminster Review,” vol. cxv, p. 200.

X. _Depreciation of Silver, 1876._—Causes, Bourne, ibid., pp. 206, 212,
222, 233; Wilson, ibid., p. 128; “House of Commons Report,” ibid.; Sumner,
“Princeton Review,” vol. iv., p. 570; S. Newcomb, “International Review,”
vol. vi (1879), p. 326; Cochut, “Revue des Deux Mondes,” i, December,
1883, p. 514; Cairnes, “Essays”; F. Bowen, “Minority Report of the United
States Silver Commission,” 1878.

Supposed cause of panic of 1873, see Williamson, “Contemporary Review,”
April 1879; Seyd, “Decline of Prosperity”; Bourne, ibid., pp. 226, 227.

XI. _Appreciation of Gold._—Giffen, “Statistical Journal,” vol. xlii, p.
36, started the theory for the period 1873-1879. Also see Bourne,
“Statistical Journal,” vol. xlii, p. 406; S. Newcomb, “International
Review,” 1879, p. 329; Wolowski, ibid., pp. 29, 30; Goschen, “Journal of
the Institute of Bankers” (London), vol. iv, part vi, May, 1883;
Patterson, “Statistical Journal,” vol. xliii, p. 1; for table of prices
see London “Economist” (e.g., December 28, 1878).

XII. _Bimetallism in the United States._—See _supra_, book iii, chap. vii;
for a vast array of materials, see “Report of the International Monetary
Conference,” 1878; Linderman’s “Money and Legal Tender”; the Finance
Reports of the United States; and Congressional Documents. For the coinage
laws of 1792, 1834, 1853, 1873, 1878, see pamphlet, “Extracts from the
Laws of the United States relating to Currency and Finance,” by C. F.
Dunbar. For detailed account of passage of Act of 1873, see “Report of the
Comptroller of the Currency,” 1876, p. 170. Present situation, “Atlantic
Monthly,” May, 1884, “The Silver Danger.”




A Brief Bibliography Of American Shipping.


I. _English Navigation Acts._—Macpherson’s “Annals,” ii, pp. 442, 484;
Scobell, “Collection of Acts,” p. 176; Ruffhead, “Statutes at Large,” iii,
p. 182; Roger Coke, “Treatise on Trade” (1671), p. 36; Sir Josiah Child,
“New Discourse on Trade” (1671); Sir Matthew Decker, “Essay on the Causes
of the Decline of Foreign Trade” (1744); Joshua Gee, “Trade and Navigation
of Great Britain” (1730); Lindsay, “History of Merchant Shipping and
Ancient Commerce”; McCulloch, “Dictionary of Commerce” (new edition),
articles “Navigation” and “Colonial Trade”; ibid., edition of Adam Smith,
note xii, p. 534; Huskisson, speeches, iii, 13, 351; Levi, “History of
British Commerce,” p. 158.

II. _Navigation Laws of the United States._—“United States Statutes at
Large,” i, 27, 287, 305; Act of 1817, Statutes, iii, 351; Revised Statutes
(1878), “Commerce and Navigation,” p. 795; Lord Sheffield, “Observations
on the Commerce of the United States”; Pitkin, “Statistical View of the
Commerce of the United States,” chap, i; D. A. Wells, “Our Merchant
Marine,” chap. v; Seybert’s “Statistical Annals”; Macgregor, “Commercial
Statistics of America.”

III. _Growth of American Shipping._—Rapid growth, 1840-1856. Levi,
“History of British Commerce,” p. 582; Bigelow, “Tariff Question,”
Appendix No. 57; “Harper’s Magazine,” January, 1884, p. 217; Lindsay,
“History of Merchant Shipping,” iii, p. 187; for ship-building, see Report
of the United States Bureau of Statistics, “Commerce and Navigation,”
1881, p. 927; for tonnage, ibid., pp. 928-930; also, see “United States
Statistical Abstract”; Dingley’s Report to House of Representatives,
December 15, 1882, No. 1,827, Forty-seventh Congress, second session, pp.
5, 8, 254.

IV. _Steam and Iron Ships._—Preble, “History of Steam Navigation”; Colden,
“Life of Fulton”; Porter, “Progress of the Nation,” section 3, chap. iv;
Nimmo, “Report to the Secretary of the Treasury in Relation to the Foreign
Commerce of the United States and the Decadence of American Shipping”
(1870); Dingley’s Report, pp. 4, 23; Kelley, “The Question of Ships,”
Appendix ii, p. 208.

V. _Decline of American Shipping._—“Report on Commerce and Navigation”
(1881), pp. 927, 928; Lindsay, ibid., iii, pp. 83, 187, 593, 645; ibid.,
iv, pp. 163-180, 292, 316, 376; “North American Review,” October, 1864, p.
489; “Report on Commerce and Navigation,” 1881, lxv, pp. 915, 916, 922,
934; Lynch, Report to House of Representatives on “Causes of the Reduction
of American Tonnage,” February 17, 1878, pp. ix, 80, 176, 195-213;
remission of duties, Revised Statutes of the United States (edition of
1878), section 2,513; Report on “Commerce and Navigation,” xi, 83, 210;
Dingley’s Report; Nimmo, “Decadence of American Shipping” (which gives
several charts), p. 17, “The Practical Workings of our Relations of
Maritime Reciprocity” (1871); Kelley, ibid.; Reports of the New York
Chamber of Commerce; Sumner, “Shall Americans own Ships?” in “North
American Review,” June, 1880; Codman, “Free Ships”; for high-rate profit
in the United States, Dingley’s Report, p. 4.

VI. _Burdens on Ship-Owners._—Tonnage duties, Wells, p. 179; sailors’
wages, Revised Statutes, sections 4,561, 4,578, 4,580-4,584, 4,600;
consular fees, Dingley’s Report, p. 9; pilotage, taxation, Wells, p. 172,
_et seq._; see also Act of 1884, abolishing many of these burdens.





APPENDIX II. EXAMINATION QUESTIONS.


The following problems and questions have been arranged to indicate to the
reader the character of examinations set by English(374) and American
universities. They have been taken in each case from papers actually
given. It is hardly necessary to state, perhaps, that these questions do
not exhaust the subject, and are only some of a kind of which many more
might be added:

DEFINITIONS.

1. Define briefly, Fixed Capital; Unproductive Consumption; Law of
Diminishing Returns; Effective Desire of Accumulation; Law of Increase of
Labor; Communism; Wages Fund; Wages of Superintendence; Real Wages; Value;
Price; Demand; Medium of Exchange; Gresham’s Law.

2. Explain carefully the following terms: Productive Consumption,
Effectual Demand, Margin of Cultivation, Cost of Production, Value of
Money, Cost of Labor, Wealth, and Abstinence.

3. Explain the following terms: Real Wages, Fixed Capital, Allowance
System, Margin of Cultivation, Price, Demand, Medium of Exchange,
Seignorage, Value of Money, and Bill of Exchange.

4. Define Supply, Value of Money, Productive Consumption, Cost of
Production, Cost of Labor, Exchange Value, Law of Production from Land,
Rate of Profit, Capital, and Gresham’s Law.

5. Define Political Economy: State the parts into which it may be divided,
and show how they are mutually related.

LABOR.

6. Distinguish between direct and indirect labor, and give an illustration
of the distinction.

7. Apply the distinction between productive and unproductive labor, and
productive and unproductive consumption, respectively, to each of the
following persons: a tailor, an architect, an annuitant, a sailor, and a
brick-layer.

8. Is an actor to be classed as a productive laborer? The inventor of a
machine? A confectioner?

9. In which of the two classes of laborers, productive and unproductive,
would you place the following?

      (1.) The officers of our Government.
      (2.) The maker of an organ.
      (3.) An organist.
      (4.) A schoolmaster.
      (5.) An artist.
      (6.) He who makes an article for which there is no use.

10. Classify as productive or unproductive the following laborers: a
clergyman, musical-instrument maker, actor, soldier, and lace-maker.

CAPITAL.

11. Explain fully what you understand by capital, and what function it
discharges in production. Consider whether or not the following ought to
be included in capital: (1) the original and acquired powers of the
laborer, (2) the original properties of the soil, (3) improvements on
land, (4) credit, (5) unsold stock in the hands of a merchant, (6)
articles purchased but still in the consumer’s hands.

12. Does a national loan add to the capital of a country?

13. Inquire how far, or in what cases, or in what sense, it may be said
that a common dwelling-house, an hotel, a school-house, a police-station,
a theatre, and a fortification, constitute part of the capital of the
country.

14. Discuss carefully the question whether money lying in a bank (or corn
lying in a granary) is always capital, or whether its economic nature
depends upon the intentions of the owner.

15. Are railway-shares, stocks of wine, wheat, munitions of war, and land,
to be considered capital, or not?

16. Explain fully whether you consider that United States bonds are
capital or not.

17. Is an investment in government funds capital, or not? Give your
reasons.

18. In what manner does a large expenditure for military purposes affect
the operations of capital and labor?

19. Distinguish between wealth and capital. Show that there is no
assignable limit to the employment of capital in bettering the condition
of the members of a community.

20. “If there are human beings capable of work, and food to feed them,
they may always be employed in producing something.” Explain the meaning
of this fully.

21. What is meant by saying wealth can only perform the functions of
capital by being wholly or partially consumed?

22. Explain and illustrate the statement that demand for commodities is
not demand for labor.

23. Show that expenditure of money does not necessarily increase the
demand for labor.

24. In what way would a general demand for luxuries affect productive
laborers and the wealth of the community?

25. In a community where capital is all employed, what would be the effect
if one employer gradually withdrew some of his capital, and spent this for
personal luxuries?

26. It is contended that “the demand for commodities, which can only be
got by labor, is as much a demand for labor as a demand for beef is a
demand for bullocks.” Criticise this position.

27. “It is often said that, though employment is withdrawn from labor in
one department, an exactly equivalent employment is opened for it in
others, because what the consumers save in the increased cheapness of one
particular article enables them to augment their consumption of others,
thereby increasing the demand for other kinds of labor.” Point out the
fallacy.

28. A college undergraduate, with the applause of shopkeepers, bought
twenty waistcoats, under the plea that he was doing good to trade. Examine
the economical soundness of his act.

29. A man invested a portion of his capital in a loan to a state which
subsequently repudiated its debts. The man thereupon gave up his carriage,
discharged superfluous gardeners, and reduced the number of his domestic
servants. Examine the effect of these changes on the employment of labor
in the district where he resides.

30. In the sixteenth century a great change in the mode of expenditure
took place. Retainers were dismissed, households were reduced and a demand
for commodities was substituted for a demand for labor. How would this
change affect wages, and why?

31. It is supposed by some persons that expenditure by the rich in costly
entertainments is good for trade. What is your opinion on the subject?

32. A is an absentee who spends his income abroad. B spends his income
chiefly on American pictures and other works of art. C spends most of his
income on American servants. D saves and buys United States bonds. E
employs most of his income in the production of manufactures. Explain the
various effects of these different modes of expenditure on the amount of
wealth in the United States, and on the working-classes of the country.

33. Compare the economic effects of defraying war expenditure (1) by
loans, (2) by increased taxation.

34. Define the term capital, and distinguish between fixed and circulating
capital, giving instances of each.

35. Distinguish between fixed and circulating capital, and point out how
far, or in what manner, each of the following articles belongs to one kind
or the other: a dwelling-house, a crop of corn, a wagon, a load of coal,
an ingot of gold, a railway-engine, a bale of cotton goods.

36. Of the following, which would you class under fixed and which under
circulating capital: cash in the hands of a merchant, a cotton-mill, a
plow, diamonds in a jeweler’s shop, a locomotive, a nursery-gardener’s
seeds, greenhouses, manures; a carpenter’s tools, woods, nails?

37. If in a country like this a large amount of capital becomes fixed in
the building of railroads, what effect will this change taken by itself
have upon the laboring-class, supposing the capital to be (1) domestic, or
(2) borrowed wholly or in part from abroad?

38. What conclusion is reached by Mr. Mill respecting the objections to
the use of labor-saving machinery?

39. Is the extension of machinery beneficial to laborers?

40. What is “the conclusive answer to the objections against machinery”?

EFFICIENCY OF PRODUCTION.

41. Explain briefly the chief causes on which the productiveness of labor
depends.

42. What are the principal ways in which advantage arises from the
division of labor?

43. What are the principal advantages of division of labor? In what cases
and why is it better to carry on a productive enterprise on a large scale?

44. Under what circumstances, and in what callings, can the division of
employment be carried out to the fullest extent?

45. Show how the amount of available capital and the extent of the market
for products limit division of labor.

POPULATION.

46. Give a brief statement of Malthus’s theory of population, explaining
the different checks on population in different stages of civilization.

47. Enunciate Malthus’s law of population, and give an outline of the
reasoning by which he established it. Give an account of any objections
that have been brought against Malthus’s position, and criticise those
objections.

48. When the growth of population outstrips the progress of improvements,
what are the means of relief for the laborer?

49. Does the increased facility of emigration nullify the Malthusian law
of population in your opinion or not, and why?

50. Explain the law of diminishing return and the Malthusian doctrine of
population; and trace the connection between them.

INCREASE OF PRODUCTION.

51. Compare the motives to saving in the case of savages, and of a country
like the United States. State the causes of diversity in the strength of
the effective desire of accumulation.

52. Capital is said to be accumulated by saving; what is saving? Is
hoarded money a saving while hoarded?

53. How far does the increasing productiveness of manufacturing industry
tend to neutralize the effect on profits of the diminishing productiveness
of agricultural industry?

54. What conclusion as to the limit to the increase of production does Mr.
Mill deduce from his investigation of the laws of the various requisites
of production?

PROPERTY.

55. What are the essential elements of property? Are the grounds of
property in land the same as those of property in movables?

56. Give what you conceive to be the chief arguments in favor of the
institution of private property, as opposed to common ownership.

57. What arguments does Mr. Mill suggest in favor of some redistribution
of landed property?

58. What are the economic arguments for and against Communism?

59. In what way, and by what means, do Socialists want to alter the
present distribution of wealth?

60. Sketch the principal forms of Communistic and Non-communistic
Socialism.

61. Should the power of bequest be limited?

WAGES.

62. On what, according to Mill, does the rate of wages depend? Hence, show
the fallacy of the popularly proposed remedies for low wages.

63. State and examine the principal theories which have been put forward
as to the circumstances which regulate the general rate of wages, saying
which you deem to be correct, and why so.

64. Mr. Thornton argues that the wages-fund is neither “determined” nor
“limited”: not “determined,” because there is no “law” to compel
capitalists to devote any portion of their wealth to the payment of labor,
nor are they morally “bound” to do so; and not “limited,” because there is
nothing to prevent them from adding to the portion of their wealth so
applied. Criticise this argument, and, if you dissent from Mr. Thornton’s
view, state the causes which “determine” and “limit” the fund in question.

65. State precisely what you mean by the “wages-fund,” and explain the
conditions on which its growth depends.

66. Explain generally the circumstances which determine the rate of wages.
Mention some of the reasons why wages should be higher in one occupation
than in another.

67. In what way does dearness or cheapness of food affect money wages?

68. What determines—

      (1.) The general rate of wages in a country?
      (2.) The relative rates of wages in different employments?

69. What causes different rates of wages in different employments, and by
what methods might wages be raised?

70. How do you explain the fact that some of the most disagreeable kinds
of labor are the most badly paid?

71. What, according to Mr. Mill, are the most promising means for the
improvement of the laboring-classes?

72. In the Island of Laputa a law was passed compelling each workman to
work with his left hand tied behind his back, and the law was justified on
the ground that the demand for labor was more than doubled by it. Examine
this argument.

73. Some coal-workers are calling for a diminution of the output of coal,
so as to keep up their wages. Examine how far, if at all, this result
would follow from their proposed action.

74. Discuss any remedies for low wages that have been or might be
suggested.

75. Why are the wages of women habitually lower than those of men?

PROFITS.

76. What is the cause of the existence of profits? And what, according to
Mr. Mill, are the circumstances which determine the respective shares of
the laborer and the capitalist?

77. (1.) What is the lowest rate of profit which can permanently exist?
(2.) Why is this minimum variable?

78. Analyze the remuneration received by any of the following: (1) the
proprietor of a cotton-mill managing his own mill; (2) a merchant
conducting his own business; (3) a railway shareholder; (4) a holder of
government funds.

79. Into what portions may we divide the return which is usually called
profit? Which of these portions would be received by a merchant carrying
on business with borrowed capital?

80. Analyze the payment called profits into its various elements. Point
out in what respects the earnings of the employer differ from or resemble
the wages paid to other classes of laborers.

81. It is asserted that “profits tend to an equality.” What conditions
must be satisfied before this position can be maintained?

82. How is the alleged tendency of profits to equivalence in different
employments to be reconciled with the notorious difference in the profit
of different individuals?

83. Which one of the elements in profit has the greatest effect on its
amount? Explain by comparing the causes which regulate each element.

84. How does Mill reconcile the high wages in America with Ricardo’s law
of profits?

85. Explain the proposition that the rate of profits depends on the cost
of labor, stating carefully what elements are included in cost of labor.

86. Explain what connection there may be between an increase of population
and any of the elements entering into cost of labor.

87. What effect would an increase or diminution of population have upon
cost of labor?

88. Explain Mill’s view as to the cost of labor being a function of three
variables, considering the passages in which he says, 1. “If without labor
becoming less efficient its remuneration fell, _no increase taking place
in the cost of the articles composing that remuneration_;” 2. “If the
laborer obtained a higher remuneration, _without any increased cheapness
in the things composing it_; or if, without his obtaining more, _that
which he did obtain would become more costly_”: profits in the last two
cases would suffer a diminution; and discussing—Firstly, if the
remuneration of labor falls, what can the cost of the articles composing
that remuneration signify to the capitalist? Secondly, if the laborer gets
a higher remuneration, what can the increased cheapness of the things
composing it signify to the capitalist?

89. Is the contest between capital and labor permanent and fundamental? If
not, give your reasons for your answer.

90. What is the effect on wages and profits of the introduction of
machinery?

RENT.

91. What connection exists between the law of Malthus and Ricardo’s
doctrine of rent?

92. What is the reason why land-owners can demand rent?

93. Explain and illustrate the distinction between rent and profits. In
what cases are they nearly indistinguishable?

94. It has often been observed that in America land is much less highly
cultivated than in England. Explain the economic reasons for this.

95. How does the theory of rent apply in a country like the United States,
where the farmer owns his land instead of hiring it?

96. How is it that some agricultural capital pays rent, even if resort is
not had to different grades of land?

97. Give a brief description of the theory of rent, and point out to what
payments not usually called rent the theory may be applied.

98. State briefly Ricardo’s theory of rent, and show that, if it be true,
the following statements of Adam Smith must be false:

“The most fertile coal-mine regulates the price of coals at all the other
mines in the neighborhood.”

“In the price of corn one part pays the rent of the landlord, another pays
the wages, and another the profit of the farmer.”

99. Why does the farming business pay rent, and the cotton business
(ground-rent excluded) pay none? Define rent.

100. “As population increases, rents estimated in corn increase, and the
price of corn rises; rents, therefore, doubly tend to increase.” Prove
this.

101. Professor Rogers adduces, in refutation of the common theory of rent,
the fact that land near New York pays a high rent, while land of the same
natural fertility in the Western States pays no rent. How far do you admit
the force of this objection?

102. Examine the following doctrine:


    “If invention and improvement still go on, the efficiency of labor
    will be further increased, and the amount of labor and capital
    necessary to produce a given result further diminished. The same
    causes will lead to the utilization of this new gain in productive
    power for the production of more wealth; the margin of cultivation
    will be again extended, and rent will increase, both in proportion
    and amount, without any increase in wages and interest. And so,
    ... will ... rent constantly increase, though population should
    remain stationary.”—Henry George, “Progress and Poverty” (p. 226).


103. What answer is made to Mr. Carey’s objection to Ricardo’s theory of
rent, that in point of fact the poorer, not the richer, lands are first
brought under cultivation?

104. Explain how land, “even apart from differences of situation,... would
all of it, on a certain supposition, pay rent.”

105. Explain clearly how it is possible for the land of a country which is
all of uniform fertility to pay rent.

106. “If the earth had a perfectly smooth surface the same everywhere, and
if it were all tilled and cultivated in exactly the same way, there would
be no such thing as rent.” Examine this proposition.

107. Show that rent does not increase the price of bread.

108. How is it shown that “rent does not really form any part of the
expenses of production or of the advances of the capitalist?”

109. (1.) What connection exists between the price of agricultural
products and the amount of rent paid? (2.) Can rent affect the price?

110. “Rent is the effect and not the cause of price.” Prove this.

111. Does rent enter into the cost of production of the following
commodities or not, and why: Corn, cloth, the wine of the best vineyards?

112. “Rent arises from the difference between the least fertile and the
most fertile soils, and from the fact that the former have been taken into
cultivation.... Rent is the difference between the market price of produce
and the cost of production.” Harmonize these statements.

113. In order that the actual payments made by farmers to landlords should
generally correspond with “economic rent,” what conditions must be
observed?

114. What is assumed, as to competition, in all Mr. Mill’s reasoning on
wages, profits, and rent? Explain its action in each case.

VALUE.

115. Enumerate, compare, and criticise any opinions known to you which
have been held concerning the nature, origin, or measure of value in
exchange.

116. Define precisely what it is which gives value to objects, and point
out the causes which vary the value of the same object under differing
circumstances.

117. Do men dive to the bottom of the sea to get pearls because they are
valuable; or are pearls valuable because men must dive to the bottom of
the sea to get them?

118. There are three forms of difficulty of attainment. State the law of
value applicable to each.

119. Explain the exact economic meaning of the words supply and demand.

120. When it is said that the value of certain commodities depends upon
supply and demand, what is meant by demand?

121. If the supply of all commodities were suddenly doubled, would any
changes in their relative values ensue or not, and why?

122. State the laws which regulate the permanent and temporary values of
agricultural products.

123. How far does the value of commodities depend on the quantity of labor
required for their production?

124. Has the term exchange value any precise meaning when we are comparing
times or places very remote from one another?

125. What is meant by the natural (or normal) price and the market price
of commodities? To what extent can they differ?

126. Does a general rise of wages raise the prices of commodities in
general or not, and why? Does it tend to cause any change in the relative
prices of commodities or not, and why?

127. Suppose that wages were double, would the values of commodities be
affected? What would be the effect on prices and profits of such an
increase of wages?

128. Are wages and profits influenced by prices?

129. Can employers recoup themselves by a rise of prices for a rise of—

      (a.) Wages in particular employments?
      (b.) General wages?

How does this question bear on the efficacy of trades-unionism?

130. Do values depend on wages?

131. Explain the following statement: “It is true the absolute wages paid
have no effect upon values; but neither has the absolute quantity of
labor.”

132. Explain the statement that “high general profits can not, any more
than high general wages, be a cause of high values.... In so far as
profits enter into the cost of production of all things, they can not
affect the value of any.”

133. Explain fully why it is that capitalists can not compensate
themselves for a general high cost of labor through any action on values
and prices.

134. “The value of a commodity depends on its cost of production.” Under
what conditions is this true, and what causes interfere with it?

135. Describe the hindrances which impede the free movement of capital to
those fields which apparently offer the highest return for its employment.

136. Give J. S. Mill’s analysis of the “cost of production,” and also
Professor Cairnes’s, with the arguments for and against each.

137. Analyze cost of production. What is its connection with cost of
labor?

138. Give an analysis of cost of production of any commodity.

139. Show carefully the distinction between wages, cost of labor, and cost
of production.

140. Define clearly value, price, real wages, and cost of production.

141. Define real wages, money wages, cost of labor.

MONEY.

142. Point out the difference between the scientific and popular
conceptions implied in the terms wealth and money.

143. Show the fallacy of confounding capital with money. Can there be a
glut of capital?

144. What is money? To what sort of necessity does it owe its existence?
What articles have been used for money? Enumerate the qualities which
render a commodity fit to serve as money.

145. What are the qualities requisite in any commodity in order that it
may serve as money?

146. Distinguish accurately between the functions of money.

147. How far is a fixed standard of value possible?

148. What effect does the great durability of gold and silver have upon
the value of money?

149. How far does the law of demand and supply govern the value of money?

150. Explain fully how it is that the value of the precious metals is
affected by “questions of quantity only, with little reference to cost of
production.”

151. What is to be said to the following: “Some political economists have
objected altogether to the statement that the value of money depends on
its quantity combined with the rapidity of circulation; which, they think,
is assuming a law for money that does not exist for any other commodity”?

152. Under what conditions is it true that the “value of money is
inversely as its quantity”?

153. Explain carefully the following: “The average value of gold is made
to conform to its natural value in the same manner as the values of other
things are made to conform to their natural value.”

154. In what various meanings is the phrase “the value of money” used? How
far does the value of money in each of these meanings depend on (1) the
cost of production, (2) supply and demand?

155. Are the values of gold and silver subject to exactly the same natural
laws as other commodities?

156. Give the explanations and qualifications required to render the
following proposition true: “The quantity of coin in every country is
regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be circulated by
it.”

157. Would the world be richer if every individual in it suddenly found
the quantity of money in his possession doubled?

158. How far, or in what way, do you consider it correct to say that the
general level of prices in a country depends upon the quantity of gold
coin existing in that country?

159. A single good harvest causes a considerable fall in the value of
_wheat_; but a great addition to the year’s supply of _gold_ from the
mines produces little effect on its general value. How do you account for
the difference?

160. Show the effect of establishing a double standard.

161. Show how Gresham’s law is illustrated by the history of the currency
in the United States between 1834 and 1873.

162. What effect had the discovery of gold in this century upon the
coinage of the United States?

163. What is the system upon which the small silver currency of the United
States is coined and issued?

164. State briefly the aim of the United States coinage act of 1853.

CREDIT.

165. How do you define credit? Form a classification of credit documents.

166. It has been said that “credit is capital.” Is this so or not?

167. Define capital, and examine the meaning of the term in the following
statements:

(_a._) Demand for commodities can not create capital.

(_b._) Credit is not a creation, but a transfer of capital.

(_c._) Wages depend upon the proportion between population and capital.

168. State the law of the value of money which governs general prices.
What change is to be made in the statement, if credit is to be taken into
consideration?

169. What is the part which instruments of credit, other than bank-notes,
play in the exchange of commodities?

170. Mention some of the principal features of a credit crisis.

171. What are inconvertible notes? What objections are there to currency
of this description?

172. Can an inconvertible currency be made to maintain the same value as a
convertible currency, and, if so, how? Supposing that it can, what
objections are there, nevertheless, to it?

173. “Nothing is subject to more variation than paper money, even when it
is limited, and has no guarantees; for this simple reason, that, having no
value of its own, it depends on the idea that each person forms of those
guarantees.” Comment on this passage.

174. How is it that a bad dollar does the work of buying as well as a good
one until it is found out? Is it that it makes no difference whether it is
made of gold or not?

175. To what extent is a government capable of giving fictitious value to
a paper or a metallic currency?

176. In a country with an inconvertible paper currency, how can it be
determined whether the issues are excessive or not, and why?

177. What will be the effect if the circulating medium of a country is
increased beyond its natural amount—

      (1) when the medium is coin?
      (2) when it is coin and convertible paper?
      (3) when it is inconvertible paper?

178. What is the error involved in the assumption, frequently made by
writers and public speakers, that the currency of a country ought to
increase in like ratio with its wealth and population?

179. On what does the desire to use credit depend? What connection exists
between the amount of notes and coin in circulation and the use of credit?

180. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of a metallic and paper
currency.

181. A member of Congress advocated expansion of the paper currency by the
following argument: “Our currency, as well as everything else, must keep
pace with our growth as a nation.... France has a circulation _per capita_
of thirty dollars; England, of twenty-five; and we, with our extent of
territory and improvements, certainly require more than either.” State
your opinion of this argument.

182. Trace the effects, immediate and ultimate, on general prices of (_a_)
an extended system of credit, (_b_) an enlarged issue of paper money, and
(_c_) an addition to the stock of precious metals, respectively.

183. What is the error in the common notion that “a paper currency can not
be issued in excess so long as every note _represents_ property, or has a
_foundation_ of actual property to rest on”?

184. Explain the action of the check and clearing-house system, and state
what is meant by the restoration of barter.

OVER-PRODUCTION.

185. State the relation between supply and demand as aggregates, e.g.,
between the aggregate supply of commodities in a given community and the
aggregate demand for them, and show the bearing of the principle involved
on the doctrine of “general over-production.”

186. Prove that the increase of capital and the extension of industry can
not lead to a general over-production of commodities.

187. What is the error of those who believe in the danger of
over-production?

188. Distinguish “excess of supply” from a “commercial crisis.”

189. Give the substance of Mill’s examination of the theories of excess of
supply.

190. “When production is fully equal to consumption, every discovery in
the arts, or in mechanics, is a calamity, because it only adds to the
enjoyment of consumers the opportunity of obtaining commodities at a
cheaper rate, while it deprives the producers of even life itself.”
Discuss this opinion of Sismondi.

191. Explain the difference in the theories of Dr. Chalmers and Mr. Mill
on over-production, and the excess of supply.

PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE.

192. It costs as much to produce straw as to produce grain; how, then, do
you explain the comparatively low value of straw?

193. Suppose a considerable rise in the price of wool to be foreseen, how
should farmers expect the prices of mutton to be affected, and why?

194. Explain the operation of the laws of value by which the relative
prices of wool and mutton are regulated.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND VALUES.

195. What is the meaning of the statement that “it is not a difference in
the _absolute_ cost of production which determines the interchange [of
commodities between countries], but a difference in the _comparative_
cost”?

196. What are the advantages which a country derives from foreign trade?

197. Explain clearly the following passage: “We may often, by trading with
foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense of labor and
capital than they cost to the foreigners themselves.”

198. Is there any essential difference between trade between country and
country, and trade between county and county, or even between man and man?
What is the real nature of trade in all cases?

199. Why is it necessary to make any different statement of the laws of
value for foreign than for domestic products? What is the cause for the
existence of any international trade?

200. How would a serious decline in the efficiency of England, as compared
with other countries, in the production of manufactures affect the scale
of money incomes and prices in England, and why?

201. Mr. Mill refers the value of home products to the “cost of
production”; of foreign products to the “cost of acquisition.” Examine the
truth of this distinction.

202. It is said that in the home market the value of commodities depends
on the cost of production, in the foreign market on the cost of
acquisition. Comment on this distinction.

203. Is the cost of production the regulator of international values?

204. Discuss the following statement: “International value is regulated
just as inter-provincial or inter-parishional value is. Coals and hops are
exchanged between Northumberland and Kent on absolutely the same
principles as iron and wine between Lancashire and Spain.”—Ruskin, “Munera
Pulveris,” p. 84.

205. What determines the value of imported commodities?

206. Why does cost of production fail to determine the value of
commodities brought from a foreign country? Does it also fail in the case
of commodities brought from distant parts of the same country?

207. It is on the matter of fact that there is not much migration of
capital and labor from country to country that Mr. Mill has based his
whole doctrine of “international trade and international values.” Explain
and comment on the above statement.

208. What are the causes which determine for a nation the cost of its
imports?

209. It follows from the theory of international values, as laid down by
Mill, that the permanent residence of Americans in Europe may enhance the
cost of foreign imports to Americans residing at home. Explain in what
way.

210. Suppose two countries, A and B, isolated from the rest of the world,
and a trade established between them. In consequence of the labor of A
becoming less effective, the cost of production of every article which can
be produced in that country is greatly increased, but so that the relation
between the costs of any two articles remains the same. What, if any, will
be the effect of the change on the trade between A and B? Does your answer
depend upon your using the phrase “cost of production” in a sense
different from that given to it by some economists?

211. Show that every country gets its imports at less cost in proportion
to the efficiency of its labor.

FOREIGN EXCHANGES.

212. What is the ordinary limit to the premium on foreign bills of
exchange, and why?

213. What are the chief effects on the foreign exchanges which are
produced by the breaking out of a war? Account for the fact that in 1861
the exchanges on England in America fell considerably below specie point.

214. Suppose that the next harvest in England should be very defective,
and extraordinary supplies of American grain needed. How would this
probably affect the price of bills of exchange between England and
America, and the profit on the exportation of English manufactures to the
latter, and why?

215. Trace the process by which the precious metals spread from the mines
over the world.

216. Suppose the exchange between England and the United States to be
heavily against England, how will this fact affect the export and import
trade between the two countries, and why?

217. What is meant by exchanges being against a country?

218. Enumerate the principal circumstances which affect the rate of
exchange between two countries. How is the _par_ of exchange ascertained?

219. In what way are gold and silver distributed among the different
trading countries? Between different parts of the same country?

220. Trace the effects of large and continuous issues of inconvertible
paper currency on the prices of commodities, on importation and
exportation, and on the foreign exchanges.

221. State the conditions under which international trade can permanently
exist. What will be the ultimate effect of a large movement of foreign
gold upon prices, imports, and exports in the receiving country?

222. State the theory of the value of money (i.e., “metallic money”), and
clear up any apparent inconsistencies between the following statements:
(1.) The value of money depends on the cost of production at the worst
mines; (2.) The value of money varies inversely as its quantity multiplied
by its rapidity of circulation; (3.) The countries whose products are most
in demand abroad and contain the greatest value in the smallest bulk,
which are nearest the mines and have the least demand for foreign
productions, are those in which money will be of lowest value.

228. The effects of the depreciation of the paper currency in the United
States are thus described by Mr. Wells: “It renders it impossible to sell
abroad the products which have cost too much at home, and invites from
other countries the products of a cheaper labor paid for in a sounder
currency. It exaggerates imports, while destroying our ability to pay in
kind.” State how far you agree with the deductions here drawn, assigning
your reasons where you differ.

224. When the foreign exchanges are manifestly against a country, and a
balance of indebtedness is the cause, the equilibrium can be restored in
two ways. State and explain the operation of each.

225. What are the conditions which determine for a country a high range of
general prices? How far is this advantageous?

226. What is the effect of the imposition of a tribute by one country on
another upon the course of trade between them, and the terms on which they
exchange commodities; and why?

227. For what reasons may a nation’s exports habitually exceed or fall
short of its imports?

228. Explain the real and nominal exchange.

229. Expound Mr. Mill’s theory of the influence which a convertible
currency exercises on foreign trade.

230. What is the effect of a depreciated currency on (1) foreign trade,
and (2) the exchanges?

INTEREST.

231. How does the general rate of interest determine the selling price of
stocks and land?

232. Is there any relation between the rate of interest and the value of
money?

233. What are the relations of interest and profit? On what causes does
the rate of interest depend?

234. “High interest means bad security.” Comment on this saying.

235. Is the rate of interest affected by the supply of the precious
metals?

236. What determines the rate of interest on the loanable funds? Is the
“current [or ordinary] rate of interest the measure of the relative
abundance or scarcity of capital”?

237. What are the chief causes that determine the rate of interest?

238. If it be true that in America every man, however rich, is engaged in
some business, but that in England many rich men have no trade or
profession, how is the rate of interest in each country affected in
consequence, and why?

239. How does a fall in the purchasing power of money tend to affect, if
at all, and why, (1) the rate of interest, (2) the price of land, (3) the
price of government bonds, (4) the price of gold and silver ornaments and
plate?

FOREIGN COMPETITION.

240. Explain the grounds of Mr. Mill’s proposition that general low wages
never caused any country to undersell its rivals, nor did general high
wages ever hinder it from doing so. If you think the proposition needs
qualification, give your reason.

241. (1.) What is the true theory of one country underselling another in a
foreign market? (2.) What weight should be attributed to the fact of
generally higher or lower wages in one of the competing countries?

242. Discuss the question whether a high rate of wages necessarily lays
the commerce of a country under a disadvantage with reference to a country
where the rate of wages is lower.

243. What are the conditions under which one country can permanently
undersell another in a foreign market?

244. Point out distinctly the connection between the money wages of
laborers in the United States and the productiveness of the soil.

245. In the Eastern States iron-molders earn from fourteen to seventeen
dollars a week; in California their wages run from twenty-one to
twenty-seven dollars. Account for this variation.

PROGRESS OF SOCIETY.

246. What are the reasons for the change in the normal values of
manufactured and of agricultural commodities, respectively, during the
progress of society?

247. Wages and profits in different employments and neighborhoods are not
uniformly proportional to the efforts of labor and abstinence of which
they are the respective rewards. Classify the circumstances which prevent
this correspondence, and show how far their effect is likely to be reduced
(_a_) by general economical progress, and (_b_) by the extension of the
division of labor.

248. What is the law of diminishing returns? Can you point out any
connection between this law and the following phenomena?—

      (_a._) Density of population.
      (_b._) Rate of wages.
      (_c._) Rate of profits in different countries.

249. Sketch the influence on rents and profits of an increase of
population and capital concurrently with a stationary state of the arts of
production.

250. Is there reason to believe that Mr. Mill has underrated the powers
possessed by man of extending the area of production and facilitating the
market of food? If such a statement has been made, to what extent is his
theory of population modified, and the risks he had indicated rendered
distant?

251. Compare the effects on rent, profits, and wages, of a sudden
improvement in the production (_a_) of food, (_b_) of some manufactured
articles largely consumed by the working-classes.

252. Trace the connection between Ricardo’s theory of rent and the decline
in the general rate of profits as a country increases in population.
Explain clearly the connection which exists between wages and profits.

253. What effect is produced upon rents, profits, and wages, respectively,
in a country like France, where population is stationary and capital
advancing?

254. If capital continued to increase and population did not, explain the
proposition that “the whole savings of each year would be exactly so much
subtracted from the profits of the next and of every following year,” if
improvements were stationary.

255. How does social and industrial progress tend to affect the prices of
land, raw produce, and manufactures, respectively, and why?

256. The capitalized value of land rises, in the progress of society, from
two causes—from one which affects land in common with all investments;
from another which is peculiar to land.

257. “The tendency of improved communications is to lower existing rents.”
How far is this true, and in what directions is it true?

258. What would be the effect on profits, wages, and rents of an
improvement in a manufactured article consumed by the laboring-class?

259. Explain the doctrine of the tendency of profits to a minimum, the
cause of that tendency, and the circumstances which counteract it.

260. What was Adam Smith’s doctrine as to the decline of profit in
progressive communities? Criticise his argument.

261. Mention some of the principal causes which, in the ordinary progress
of society, respectively tend to increase or to reduce the current rate of
profits.

262. Why do profits tend to fall as population increases, and how may this
result be retarded or prevented?

263. What is the effect of a general rise of money wages, apart from the
consideration of a greater efficiency of labor, in prices, profits, and
rent? Give reasons for your answer.

264. How does the general progress of society in wealth and industrial
efficiency tend to affect the rate of wages, the rate of profit, and the
rate of rent, respectively?

265. What is the general effect of the progress of society on the
land-owner, the capitalist, and the laborer?

FUTURE OF LABORING-CLASSES.

266. Examine the influences of machinery on the economic condition of the
working-classes.

267. Mention and discuss some of the popular remedies for low wages, and
especially the effect of the subdivision of landed property among peasant
proprietors.

268. Explain briefly what is meant by co-operation, and indicate the more
prominent forms assumed by the co-operative movement.

269. What is meant by the co-operative system of industry? Show ways in
which this system may affect, for good or for evil, the productiveness of
labor; and mention any moral benefits, or the opposite, in which it may be
expected to issue.

270. What are the difficulties in the way of co-operation for the
production of salable objects?

271. Explain the advantages of industrial partnership, in which the
employés share, in proportion to the wages received, half the profits of
the business beyond a certain fixed minimum which is assigned to the
employers.

TAXATION.

272. How is the state justified in undertaking any manufacture or service
which might be performed by private enterprise?

273. Enumerate Adam Smith’s canons of taxation.

274. Examine the argument in favor of the resumption by the state of what
is called the unearned increment in the value of land arising from the
development of society.

275. A picture by Gainsborough and a house in Broadway are sold in the
same year at the same price; at the end of fifty years each sells for five
times its first cost. Is there any, and, if so, what, reason why the
increase should be sequestrated for the public benefit in the one case and
not in the other?

276. Explain the incidence of taxes laid on wages.

277. Why should a tax on profits, if no improvements follow, fall on the
laborer and capitalist?

278. Explain what effect, if any, will be produced on the price of corn
by—

      (1) a tax upon rent;
      (2) a tithe;
      (3) a tax of so much per acre, irrespective of value;
      (4) a tax of so much per bushel.

279. On whom does a tax of a fixed proportion of agricultural produce
fall?

280. Discuss the question whether the income-tax ought to be a tax upon
income and property, or upon expenditure.

281. Discuss the expediency of a graduated income-tax.

282. State the arguments which you think strongest both for and against
exempting savings from the income-tax.

283. Explain the conditions which should be observed in imposing taxes on
commodities.

284. What taxes does a tradesman get back in the price of the articles he
sells, and what does he not?

285. Test by Adam Smith’s four maxims of taxation the policy of indirect
taxes on the necessaries of life.

286. All indirect taxation violates Adam Smith’s fourth canon.

287. Discuss the following:

“A man with $100,000 in United States bonds comes to Boston, hires a
house...; thus he lives in luxury.... I am in favor of taxing idle
investments such as this, and allowing manufacturing investments to go
untaxed.”

288. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of direct and indirect
taxation.

289. On what principles is this country now taxed?

290. Explain the arguments for and against the policy of maintaining a
surplus for the purpose of redeeming a national debt.

291. In estimating the ability of the United States to pay its public
debts, it is usual to include among the data of the question the increased
productiveness of industry in that country. How far is this a pertinent
consideration?

PROTECTION.

292. Mention some of the principal arguments brought forward in favor of
protective tariffs.

293. Connect the principle of the division of employments (or labor) with
the policy of free trade and the functions of government.

294. Sketch the effects of discriminating duties, including the operation
of the corn laws.

295. Examine the following argument, emending, if you think it necessary,
the free-trader’s doctrine on the point raised: The free-trader’s belief
is that a customs duty is added to the price of the article upon which it
is imposed. If the article is imported, according to his theory, the
increase of the price goes into the public treasury; if the article is
made in the country, the increase of the price goes into the pocket of the
producer. But in the former case there is no protection; and competition
will prevent the latter. Therefore protection does not increase the price
of the protected article. If a customs duty is imposed upon a commodity,
and its price is not raised in consequence, what inference can you draw?

296. Under what circumstances did Mr. Mill think nascent states might be
justified in adopting a policy of protection? Criticise his opinion, and,
if you agree with it, give some examples of its application.

297. American protectionists allege that the high rate of wages prevailing
in the United States disables them from competing with “the pauper labor”
of Europe. Examine the grounds of this statement, and consider how far it
forms a justification for protection to American industry.

298. A high rate of wages indicates, not a high, but a low cost of
production for all commodities measured in which the rate of wages is
high.

Explain and prove this proposition, and illustrate it from the
circumstances of the United States.

299. State under what limitations the proposition is correct, that profits
vary inversely with wages. Explain the circumstances which cause both a
higher rate of wages and profits to prevail in a young country, such as
the United States, than in England.

300. In America wages are much higher than in England, yet the general
rate of profits is higher also, according to Mr. Mill. How do you
reconcile the two facts?

301. Examine the following:

“It seems to me that protection is absolutely essential to the
encouragement of capital, and equally necessary for the protection of the
American laborer.... He must have good food, enough of it, good clothing,
school-houses for his children, comforts for his home, and a fair chance
to improve his condition. To this end I would protect him against
competition with the half-paid laborers of European
countries.”—_Congressional Globe_.

302. An American newspaper has said of the burning of Chicago: “The money
to replace what has been burned will not be sent abroad to enrich foreign
manufacturers; but, thanks to the wise policy of protection which has
built up American industries, it will stimulate our own manufactures, set
our mills running faster, and give employment to thousands of idle
working-men.” Comment on this passage.

303. On whom does a tax on imports, if not prohibitory, fall?

304. In what cases would duties on imported commodities fall on the
producers?

305. Are taxes on imports in any way paid by foreigners?

306. Discuss the effects of duties on exports.

307. Trace the effects of duties on the importation of raw materials, and
distinguish, with examples, between duties that violate and duties which
do not violate the principle of free trade.

308. Is it possible for any country by legislative enactments to engross a
larger share of the advantages of foreign trade than it would naturally
have? Discuss the question fully.

309. “Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes on
imports are partly paid by foreigners; but they are mistaken when they say
it is by the foreign producer. It is not on the person from whom we buy,
but on all those who buy from us, that a portion of our customs duties
spontaneously falls.” Explain and examine the reasons for this conclusion.

310. State the principle which determines the relation between the amount
of a country’s imports and that of its exports, and show how this relation
is affected by a system of protective duties.

THE END.





ADVERTISEMENTS.


SCIENCE.

*Huxley and Youmans’s Physiology and Hygiene.* By THOMAS H. HUXLEY, LL.
D., F.R.S., and WILLIAM J. YOUMANS, M.D. New and revised edition. With
numerous Illustrations. 12mo. 420 pages.

*Coming’s Class-Book of Physiology.* With 24 Plates, and numerous
Engravings on Wood. 12mo. 324 pages.

*Youmans’s Hand-Book of Household Science.* A Popular Account of Heat,
Light, Air, Aliment, and Cleansing, in their Scientific Principles and
Domestic Applications. With numerous illustrative Diagrams. 12mo. 470
pages.

*Physiography*: An Introduction to the Study of Nature. By THOMAS H.
HUXLEY. With Illustrations and Colored Plates. 12mo.

*Nicholson’s Biology.* Illustrated. 12mo. 163 pages.

*Nicholson’s Ancient Life-History of the Earth.* A Comprehensive Outline
of the Principles and Leading Facts of Paleontological Science. 12mo. 407
pages.

*Anthropology*: An Introduction to the Study of Man and Civilization. By
EDWARD B. TYLOR, D.C.L., F.R.S. With 78 Illustrations. 12mo. 448 pages.

*Science Primers.* Edited by PROFESSORS HUXLEY, ROSCOE, and BALFOUR
STEWART.

      Chemistry: H. E. ROSCOE.
      Physics: BALFOUR STEWART.
      Physical Geography: A. GEIKIE.
      Geology: A. GEIKIE.
      Physiology: M. FOSTER.
      Astronomy: J. N. LOCKYER.
      Botany: J. D. HOOKER.
      Logic: W. S. JEVONS.
      Inventional Geometry: W. G. SPENCER.
      Pianoforte: FRANKLIN TAYLOR.
      Political Economy: W. S. JEVONS.
      Natural Resources of the United States: J. HARRIS PATTON.
      Scientific Agriculture: N. T. LUPTON.

_D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,_

NEW YORK, BOSTON, CHICAGO, SAN FRANCISCO.

PHYSICS.

*Quackenbos’s Natural Philosophy.* Embracing the most Recent Discoveries
in the Various Branches of Physics. 12mo. 455 pages.

The revised edition of this standard text-book continues to be a favorite
in the schools. Its numerous illustrations (338 in number) and full
descriptions of experiments adapt it specially for use in institutions
that have little or no apparatus, and it is particularly happy in showing
the application of scientific principles in every-day life.

*Ganot’s Natural Philosophy.* For Schools and General Readers. Translated
and edited by E. ATKINSON, Ph.D., F.C.S. Revised edition. 12mo. Copiously
illustrated. 575 pages.

*Arnott’s Elements of Physics*; or, Natural Philosophy. Seventh edition,
edited by ALEXANDER BAIN, LL.D., and ALFRED SWAINE TAYLOR, M.D., F.R.S.
873 pages.

*Elementary Treatise on Natural Philosophy.* By A. PRIVAT DESCHANEL,
formerly Professor of Physics in the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, Inspector of
the Academy of Paris. Translated and edited, with Extensive Additions, by
J. D. Everett, Professor of Natural Philosophy in the Queen’s College,
Belfast. In Four Parts. 12mo. Flexible cloth. Part I. MECHANICS,
HYDROSTATICS, AND PNEUMATICS. Part II. HEAT. Part III. ELECTRICITY AND
MAGNETISM. Part IV. SOUND AND LIGHT. Complete in one volume, 8vo. 1,156
pages. Illustrated with 783 fine Engravings on Wood and Three Colored
Plates.

*Science Primer: Physics.* 18mo. Flexible cloth. 135 pages.

*Experimental Series.* By ALFRED M. MAYER and CHARLES BARNARD.

*Light:* A Series of Simple, Entertaining, and Inexpensive Experiments in
the Phenomena of Light. By ALFRED M. MAYER and CHARLES BARNARD. 12mo. 112
pages.

*Sound:* A Series of Simple, Entertaining, and Inexpensive Experiments in
the Phenomena of Sound, for the Use of Students of every Age. By ALFRED M.
MAYER. 12mo. 178 pages.

D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers,

NEW YORK, BOSTON, CHICAGO, SAN FRANCISCO.





CHARTS.


                        [Illustration: Chart XII.]

 Chart XII. Fluctuations in the Price of Gold, from January 1st 1862, to
                             December, 1865.


                       [Illustration: Chart XVIII.]

Chart XVIII. Graphical Presentation of the Comparative Areas of the States
and Territories of the United States and the Countries of Europe, omitting
                            Russia and Alaska.


                        [Illustration: Chart XIX.]

 Chart XIX. Giving the actual figures, compiled from the accounts of two
 Cotton-Mills in New England by Edward Atkinson, of Wages, Cost of Labor,
   etc., from 1830 to 1884, working on Standard Sheetings, No. 14 yarn.


                        [Illustration: Chart XX.]

Chart XX. Comparison of 1840 with 1883-1884, of the Relations of Labor and
                        Capital in the same Mills.


                    [Illustration: Chart XXI Part 1.]

                            Chart XXI Part 1.


                    [Illustration: Chart XXI Part 2.]

                            Chart XXI Part 2.


                       [Illustration: Chart XXII.]

 Chart XXII. Outstanding Principal Of The Public Debt From 1791 To 1881.






FOOTNOTES


    1 Yet Blanqui diffusively gives nearly one half of his “History of
      Political Economy” to the period before the sixteenth century, when
      politico-economic laws had not yet been recognized. A. L. Perry,
      “Political Economy” (eighteenth edition, 1883), also devotes
      thirty-five out of eighty-seven pages to the period in which there
      was no systematic study of political economy.

    2 Xenophon, “Means of increasing the Revenues of Attika,” ch. ix; also
      see his “Economics;” and Aristotle, “Politics,” b. i, ch. vi, b.
      iii, ch. i.

    3 “Republic,” b. ii.

    4 Roscher exhumed this book, entitled “De Origine, Natura, Jure et
      Mutationibus Monetarum,” and it was reprinted in 1864 by Wolowski at
      Paris, together with the treatise of Copernicus, “De Monetae
      Cudendae Ratione.”

    5 Sermon at St. Paul’s Cross, 1549 (also see Jacob, “On the Precious
      Metals,” pp. 244, 245).

    6 1530-1596. See II. Baudrillart’s “J. Bodin et son temps” (Paris,
      1853). Bodin wrote “Réponse aux paradoxes de M. de Malestroit
      touchant l’enchérissement de toutes les choses et des monnaies”
      (1568), and “Discours sur le rehaussement et la diminution des
      monnaies” (1578).

    7 “A Briefe Conceipte of English Policy” (1581). The book was
      published under the initials “W. S.,” and was long regarded as the
      production of Shakespere.

    8 For information on this as well as a later period, consult Jacob “On
      the Precious Metals” (1832), a history of the production and
      influences of gold and silver from the earliest times. He is
      considered a very high authority. Humboldt’s “Essay on New Spain”
      gives estimates and facts on the production of the precious metals
      in America. A very excellent study has been made by Levasseur in his
      “Histoire des classes ouvrières en France jusqu’à la Révolution.”
      For pauperism and its history, Nicholl’s “History of the Poor Laws”
      is, of course, to be consulted.

    9 See Cossa, “Guide,” p. 119.

   10 See Antonio Serra, “Breve Trattato delle Cause che possono fare
      abbondare li Regni d’ Oro e d’ Argento,” Naples, 1613.

   11 Thomas Mun, “England’s Treasure by Foreign Trade” (published in 1640
      and 1664); “Advice of the Council of Trade” (1660), in Lord
      Overstone’s “Select Tracts on Money”; Sir William Petty, “Political
      Arithmetic,” etc. (about 1680); Sir Josiah Child, “New Discourse of
      Trade” (1690); Sir Dudley North, “Discourse on Trade” (1691);
      Davenant’s Works (1690-1711); Joshua Gee, “Trade and Navigation of
      Great Britain” (1730); Sir Matthew Decker (according to McCulloch,
      William Richardson), “Essay on the Causes of the Decline of Foreign
      Trade” (1744); Sir James Steuart, “An Inquiry into the Principles of
      Political Economy” (1767). For this period also consult Anderson’s
      “History of Commerce” (1764), Macpherson’s “Annals of Commerce”
      (1803), and Lord Sheffield’s “Observations on the Commerce of the
      American States” (1783).

   12 The English Navigation Act of 1651 is usually described as the cause
      of the decline of Dutch shipping. The taxation necessitated by her
      wars is rather the cause, as history shows it to us. Sir Josiah
      Child (1668 and 1690) speaks of a serious depression in English
      commerce, and says the low rate of interest among the Dutch hurts
      the English trade. This does not show that the acts greatly aided
      English shipping. Moreover, Gee, a determined partisan of the
      mercantile theory, says, in 1730, that the ship-trade was
      languishing. Sir Matthew Decker (1744) confirms Gee’s impressions.
      It looks very much as if the commercial supremacy of England was
      acquired by internal causes, and in spite of her navigation acts.
      The anonymous author of “Britannia Languens” confirms this view.

   13 This was, in substance, the whole teaching of one of the leading and
      most intelligent writers, Sir James Steuart (1767), “Principles of
      Political Economy.” See also Held’s “Carey’s Socialwissenschaft und
      das Merkantilsystem” (1866), which places Carey among the
      mercantilists.

   14 Forbonnais, “Récherches sur les finances de la France” (1595-1721);
      Pierre Clément, “Histoire de Colbert et de son administration”
      (1874); “Lettres, instructions et mémoires de Colbert” (1861-1870);
      “Histoire du système protecteur en France” (1854); Martin, “Histoire
      de France,” tome xiii.

   15 “Dîme royale” (1707).

   16 “Factum de la France” (1707).

   17 When Quesnay was sixty-one years old he wrote the article,
      “Fermiers,” in the “Encyclopædia” (of Diderot and D’Alembert) in
      1756; article “Grains,” in the same, 1757; “Tableau économique,”
      1758; “Maximes générales du gouvernement économique d’un royaume”;
      “Problème économique”; “Dialogues sur le commerce et sur les travaux
      des artisans”; “Droit natural” (1768). “Collection des principaux
      économistes,” edited by E. Daire (1846), is a collection containing
      the works of Quesnay, Turgot, and Dupont de Nemours. See also
      Lavergne, “Les économistes françaises du 18e siècle” (1870); and H.
      Martin, “Histoire de France.” Quesnay’s “Tableau économique” was the
      Koran of the school.

   18 From χράτησις τῆς φύσεως, as indicating a reverence for natural
      laws.

   19 The words were not invented by Quesnay, but formed the phrase of a
      merchant, Legendre, in addressing Colbert; although it was later
      ascribed, as by Perry, “Political Economy” (p. 46), and Cossa (p.
      150), to one of the Economists, Gournay. (See Wolowski, in his Essay
      prefixed to “Roscher’s Political Economy,” p. 36, American
      translation.)

   20 The Margrave Karl Friedrich was the author of “Abrégé des principes
      de l’économie politique” (1775), and applied the physiocratic system
      of taxation to two of his villages with disastrous results.

   21 He published a first work on “Population” (1756); the “Théorie de
      l’impôt” (1760); and “Philosophie rurale” (1763). In this latter
      work Mirabeau adopted the “Tableau économique” as the key to the
      subject, and classed it with the discovery of printing and of money.

   22 In 1742 Turgot, when scarcely twenty, appeared as a sound writer on
      Paper Money in letters to Abbé Cicé. The physiocratic doctrines were
      presented in a more intelligible form in his greater work,
      “Réflexions sur la formation et la distribution des richesses”
      (1766). Three works of Turgot, on mining property, interest of
      money, and freedom in the corn-trade, bear a high reputation. For
      works treating of Turgot, see Batbie, “Turgot, philosophe,
      économiste et administrateur” (1861); Mastier, “Turgot, sa vie et sa
      doctrine” (1861); Tissot, “Turgot, sa vie, son administration et ses
      ouvrages” (1862).

   23 He was the editor of the works of Quesnay and Turgot, and wrote a
      “Mémoire de Turgot” (1817). He opposed the issue of assignats during
      the French Revolution, and, falling into disfavor, he barely escaped
      the scaffold. Having been a correspondent of Jefferson’s, when
      Napoleon returned from Elba, he came to America, and settled in
      Delaware, where he died in 1817. The connection between the
      Economists and the framers of our Constitution is interesting,
      because it explains some peculiarities introduced into our system of
      taxation in that document. The only direct taxes recognized by the
      Supreme Court under our Constitution are the poll and land taxes;
      and it is in this connection that the constitutionality of the
      income-tax (a direct tax) is doubted.

   24 One of the earliest is that of Roger Coke (1675), in which he argues
      for free trade, and attacks the navigation acts. Sir Dudley North’s
      “Discourse on Trade” (1691) urges that the whole world, as regards
      trade, is but one people, and explains that money is only
      merchandise.

   25 Joseph Harris, an official in the London Mint, published a very
      clear exposition of this subject in his “Essay upon Money and Coins”
      (1757); but, eighty years before, Rice Vaughan had given a
      satisfactory statement in his “Treatise of Money.”

   26 “Contemporary Review,” January, 1881, “Richard Cantillon.” Adam
      Smith had quoted Cantillon on his discussion of the wages of labor,
      b. i, ch. viii, and evidently knew his book.

   27 Born in 1723, and died 1790; he was eleven years younger than Hume.
      A Professor of Logic (1751) and Moral Philosophy (1752) at Glasgow,
      he published a treatise on ethical philosophy, entitled the “Theory
      of Moral Sentiments” (1739). Dugald Stewart is the authority as to
      Smith’s life, having received information from a contemporary of
      Smith’s, Professor Miller (see Playfair’s edition of Smith’s works);
      for Adam Smith destroyed all his own papers in his last illness. His
      lectures on political economy at Glasgow outlined the results as
      they appeared in the “Wealth of Nations”; it was not until 1764 that
      he resigned his professorship, and spent two years on the Continent
      (twelve months of this in France). On his return home he immured
      himself for ten years of quiet study, and published the “Wealth of
      Nations” in 1776. (See also McCulloch’s introduction to his edition
      of the “Wealth of Nations,” and Bagehot’s “Economic Studies,” iii.)

   28 A glance at Sir James Steuart’s treatise (1767) with the “Wealth of
      Nations” shows Adam Smith’s great qualities; the former was a series
      of detached essays, although of wide range, but admittedly without
      any consistent plan.

   29 (_a_.) He went into a vague discussion upon labor as a measure of
      value. (_b_.) A legal rate of interest received his support, and his
      argument was answered effectually by Bentham (“Defense of Usury”).
      (_c_.) While not agreeing with the French school that agriculture is
      the only industry producing more than it consumes, and so land pays
      rent, yet he thinks that it produces more in proportion to the labor
      than other industries; that manufactures came next; and exportation
      and commerce after them. This error, however, did not modify his
      more important conclusions. Thorold Rogers and even Chevalier,
      however, claim that Adam Smith drew his inspiration from the French
      school. (_d_.) In the discussion of rent, he failed to follow out
      his ideas to a legitimate end, and did not get at the true doctrine.
      While hinting at the right connection between price and rent, he yet
      believed that rent formed a part of price. Of the fundamental
      principle in the doctrine of rent, the law of diminishing returns,
      he had no full knowledge, but came very close to it. He points out
      that in colonies, when the good soil has all been occupied, profits
      fall. (_e_.) In saying that every animal naturally multiplies in
      proportion to, and is limited by, the means of subsistence, Adam
      Smith just missed Malthus’s law of population. In fact, Cantillon
      came quite as near it.

      Book III in his “Wealth of Nations” is concerned with the policy of
      Europe in encouraging commerce at the expense of agriculture, and
      has less interest for us. Book V considers the revenue of the
      sovereign, and much of it is now obsolete; but his discussion of
      taxation is still highly important.

   30 Among the English Liberals carried away by the French Revolution,
      and by such theories as those of Condorcet, was William Godwin, the
      author of “Political Justice” (1793) and the “Inquirer” (1797), who
      advocated the abolition of government and even marriage, since by
      the universal practice of the golden rule there would come about a
      lengthening of life. Malthus tells us that his study was brought
      forward as an answer to the doctrines of the “Inquirer,” and he
      applied his principles to Condorcet’s and Godwin’s ideas. It was a
      period when pauperism demanded attention from all. Malthus favored
      the repeal of the old poor-laws, as destroying independence of
      character among the poor.

      Malthus also wrote “Principles of Political Economy” (1821) and
      “Definitions in Political Economy” (1827), but the former did not
      increase his reputation. He believed in taxing imported corn, and he
      gave in his adherence to the doctrine of over-production. But, on
      the other hand, he was one of several writers who, almost at the
      same time, discovered the true theory of rent. His father was a
      friend of Godwin, and a correspondent of Rousseau. (See Bagehot,
      “Economic Studies,” p. 135.)

   31 See Cairnes, “Logical Method,” Lecture VII, for the best modern
      statement of the question. Also, Roscher, “Principles of Political
      Economy,” b. v, whose extended notes furnish information on facts
      and as to books. H. Carey, “Social Science” (edition of 1877), iii,
      pp. 263-312, opposes the doctrine, as also Bowen, “American
      Political Economy” (1870), ch. viii, and Henry George, “Progress and
      Poverty” (1880), pp. 81-134.

   32 J. Anderson, “An Inquiry into the Nature of the Corn Laws” (1777),
      “Agricultural Recreations,” vol. v, p. 401 (1801); Sir Edward West,
      “Essay on the Application of Capital to Land” (1815); Rev. T. R.
      Malthus, “An Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent” (1815).
      The last two appeared after Anderson’s discoveries had been
      forgotten, but he has the honor of first discovery.

   33 Born in 1772 of Jewish parentage, Ricardo died in 1824. A rich
      banker, who made a fortune on the Stock Exchange, he early in life
      retired from business. The discussions on the Restriction Act and
      the corn laws led him to investigate the laws governing the subjects
      of money and rent. He gained notice first by his “Letters on the
      High Price of Bullion” (1810). The “Reply to Mr. Bosanquet” (1811),
      and “Inquiry into Rent” (1815), were followed by his greater work,
      “Principles of Political Economy and Taxation” (1817). He entered
      the House of Commons from Portarlington, a pocket borough in
      Ireland, and was influential in the discussions on resumption.
      Although he was not on the committee, his views on depreciated paper
      are practically embodied in the famous “Bullion Report” (1810).
      Tooke, “History of Prices,” says the results of the restriction were
      not known until the time of Ricardo’s contributions. Neither Mill
      nor Say has had so great an influence as Ricardo has gained, through
      the pages of his “Political Economy.”

   34 Johann Heinrich von Thünen, a rich land-owner of Mecklenburg, in his
      “Der isolirte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirthschaft und
      National-Oekonomie” (1826), worked entirely by himself, but reached
      practically the same law of rent as Ricardo’s. In spreading the
      doctrines of Adam Smith he has influenced later German writers.

   35 The first distinct recognition of this important physical law,
      according to McCulloch (Introduction to “Wealth of Nations,” lv),
      was in a fanciful work of two volumes, entitled “Principes de tout
      gouvernement,” published in 1766: “Quand les cultivateurs, devenus
      nombreux, auront défriché toutes les bonnes terres; par leur
      augmentation successive, et par la continuité du défrichement, il se
      trouvera un point ou il sera plus avantageux à un nouveau colon de
      prendre à ferme des terres fécondes, que d’en défricher de nouvelles
      beaucoup moins bonnes” (I, p. 126). The author was, however, unaware
      of the importance of his discovery.

   36 Carey, “Social Science” (I, ch. iv, v), and Bowen, “American
      Political Economy” (ch. ix), have denied Ricardo’s doctrine of rent.
      Thesupposed connection between free trade and Ricardo’s teachings on
      rent has prejudiced protectionists against him. Free trade follows
      from the theory of international trade, and has nothing to do with
      Ricardo’s main doctrines. It is true, Ricardo was a vigorous
      free-trader. Of opposing views on rent, Carey’s argument is the most
      important.

   37 Say drew considerable attention by his theory of “gluts.” He based
      his idea of value wholly on _utility_, which has lately been taken
      up again by Professor Jevons. Say was answered on this point by
      Ricardo in a later edition of his “Political Economy.” See Cairnes,
      “Leading Principles,” p. 17. As a free-trader and opponent of
      governmental interference, he went further than his master, Adam
      Smith. Napoleon did not like this part of Say’s teaching, saying
      that it would destroy an empire of adamant, and tried to induce him
      to modify his position, but in vain. The second edition was not
      allowed to be published until 1815.

   38 Educated at Bologna, he went to Geneva in 1816, and was called
      (1833) by the French Government to succeed Say in the Collége de
      France. In 1845 he was sent as minister to Rome, led the
      revolutionary movement there, and was assassinated in 1848. His
      lectures were taken down in short-hand by one of his disciples,
      Porée, and later published.

   39 Malthus, who held that the unproductive consumption of the rich was
      desirable for the poor, supported Sismondi. The latter was answered
      by Say and McCulloch (“Edinburgh Review,” March, 1821), to which
      Sismondi replied in his second edition, in 1827, and then withdrew
      from economic discussion.

   40 A native of Riga, educated in Germany, Storch was charged by the
      Czar Alexander with the duty of instructing his sons, the Grand
      Dukes Nicholas and Michael, and his treatise is the collection of
      his lectures. Knowing little of Malthus or Ricardo, he made a near
      approach to the doctrine of rent. His unsparing denunciation of
      Russian administrative corruption caused the Government to forbid
      the publication of the Russian translation.

   41 Cossa, “Guide” (p. 173), points out Sartorius, Lüder, Kraus, and
      Schlözer as teachers of Adam Smith, in Germany, followed later by G.
      Hufeland, J. F. E. Lotz, and L. H. von Jakob; Count Hogendorp and
      Gogel, in Holland; Count Szecheny, in Hungary, and (pp. 211-213)
      Cagnazzi, Bosellini, Ressi, Sanfilippo, and Scuderi (the last two
      protectionists), in Italy. Fuoco (1825-1827), in Italy, first saw
      the value of Ricardo’s theory of rent, while Gioja opposed Adam
      Smith and Say. But K. H. Rau (died 1870), in his “Lehrbuch der
      politischen Oekonomie” (1826, fifth edition 1864), had the most
      extensive influence in Germany in expounding Adam Smith’s system,
      with proper improvements. Another important writer of this school
      was F. B. W. von Hermann, “Staatswirthschaftliche Untersuchungen”
      (1832).

   42 From 1810 to 1840, political economy was a favorite study in
      England, and many writers deserve mention. There were Huskisson, a
      great financier; Thomas Tooke (1773-1858), who began his matchless
      “History of Prices” (1823); Lord Overstone (Samuel Jones Loyd),
      “Tracts and other Publications on Metallic and Paper Currency”
      (1858); Robert Torrens (1784-1864), “Essay on the Production of
      Wealth” (1821); Archbishop Whately, “Introductory Lectures” (1831),
      and “Easy Lessons on Money Matters”; Cobden and Sir Robert Peel; N.
      W. Senior (1790-1864), Professor of Political Economy at Oxford,
      article on “Political Economy” (1836) in the “Encyclopædia
      Metropolitana,” and “Lectures on the Cost of obtaining Money”
      (1830). Senior showed great ability in analyzing cost of production,
      and stands far above McCulloch in real ability. J. R. McCulloch
      (1789-1864), who preceded Mill, wrote a good but dry textbook,
      “Principles of Political Economy” (1825), “A Treatise on the
      Principles, Practice, and History of Commerce” (1833), an excellent
      “Dictionary of Commerce” (last enlarged edition, 1882), “Literature
      of Political Economy” (1845). He edited Ricardo’s works, with a
      biography, published a “Select Collection of Scarce and Valuable
      Tracts on Money” (1856), “A Treatise on the Principles and Practical
      Influence of Taxation and the Funding System” (1845). He contributed
      nothing practically new to the study. Miss Harriet Martineau
      (1802-1876) gave some admirable although somewhat extended stories
      in illustration of the various principles of political economy,
      entitled “Illustrations of Political Economy” (1859). This period in
      England was signalized by the abolition of the Corn Laws (1846), and
      the Navigation Laws (1849), the passage of the Bank Act (which
      separated the issue from the banking department, 1844), and the
      general abandonment of protective duties. Cf. Noble, “Fiscal
      Legislation, 1842-1865” (1867).

   43 Born in 1806, he died in 1873. For his extraordinary education see
      his “Autobiography.” When thirteen years old, he began the study of
      political economy through lectures from his father while walking; he
      then (1819) read Ricardo and Adam Smith, and at fourteen he
      journeyed to France, where he lived for a time with J. B. Say. He
      entered the East India Office at seventeen, was occupied finally in
      conducting the correspondence for the directors, where he remained
      until 1858. When about twenty, Mill met twice a week in Threadneedle
      Street, from 8.30 to 10 A.M., with a political economy club,
      composed of Grote, Roebuck, Ellis, Graham, and Prescott, where they
      discussed James Mill’s and Ricardo’s books, and also Bailey’s
      “Dissertations on Value.” In these discussions, chiefly with Graham,
      Mill elaborated his theory of international values. In 1865 he
      entered Parliament for Westminster, and for three years had a
      singular, characteristic, independent, but uninfluential career. His
      adherence to two radical reforms, woman suffrage and changes in the
      tenure of land, lost him any considerable influence.

   44 He (1773-1836) wrote the “History of India” (1817-1819), and
      “Elements of Political Economy” (1821). He was intimate with
      Ricardo, Bentham, Austin, and Zachary Macaulay.

   45 In his “infant industries” argument, and his statement on navigation
      laws (B. v, ch. x, §1), he conceded a great deal of free-trade
      ground; but in a private letter, 1866 (see New York “Nation,” May
      29, 1873), he denied that he intended the “infant industries”
      argument to apply to the United States. He did not consider New
      England and Pennsylvania any longer as young countries within the
      limits of his meaning. See also Taussig’s “Protection to Young
      Industries” (1883).

   46 W. T. Thornton (1813-1880), in a volume “On Labor: its Wrongful
      Claims and Rightful Dues” (1869), attacked Mill’s position on demand
      and supply, and on wages, so that Mill in consequence abandoned his
      doctrine of wages, in the “Fortnightly Review,” May 1, 1869. Mr.
      Cairnes, however, rescued the Wages-Fund theory from Mr. Mill in his
      “Leading Principles” (1874). Thornton also wrote “Over-Population,
      and its Remedy” (1846), and an excellent book, “Plea for Peasant
      Proprietorship” (1848). See also “Nineteenth Century,” August, 1879,
      for an answer by Thornton to Mr. Cairnes on the wages question.

   47 James Eliot Cairnes was born at Drogheda, 1824; was educated at
      Trinity College, Dublin, and made Whately Professor there in 1856.
      Having been Professor of Political Economy in Queen’s College,
      Galway, he left Ireland in 1866 to accept the chair of Political
      Economy in University College, London. In that year, through an
      attack of inflammatory rheumatism, he fell under the power of a
      painful and growing malady which rendered him physically helpless,
      and portended certain death in the near future. The three years
      before his death, while working only in hopeless pain, was the
      period of his greatest literary activity. He collected his “Essays
      in Political Economy, Theoretical and Applied” (1873), in which he
      traced with great ability the effect of the gold-discoveries;
      brought out his “Leading Principles” (1874), and an enlarged edition
      of his “Logical Method” (second edition, 1875). The first edition of
      this last book was the result of lectures delivered in Dublin about
      1858. In his earlier years the interest he felt in the United States
      led him into a very vigorous and masterly study of “The Slave Power;
      its Character, Career, and Probable Dangers” (1862); “The Revolution
      in America” (1862). He then wrote “Colonization and Colonial
      Government” (1864), and “Negro Suffrage” (1866). He finally
      succumbed to his fatal disease, and passed away prematurely, July 8,
      1875. A short sketch of his personal character was written by
      Professor Fawcett, in the “Fortnightly Review,” August 1, 1875, p.
      149.

   48 Professor Jevons (1835-1882) was educated at University College,
      London, and spent the years from 1854 to 1859 in the Australian
      Royal Mint, where he became interested in the gold question. He
      wrote a study on “A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold ascertained”
      (1863), which attracted great attention. A fine metaphysician and
      mathematician, he did not give his whole time to economic work. In
      1866 he became Professor of Logic and Cobden Lecturer on Political
      Economy in Owens College, Manchester, but later became Professor of
      Political Economy in University College, London. In 1881 he gave up
      academic teaching, to devote himself to literature. He investigated
      the permanence of the English coal-supply in “The Coal Question”
      (second edition, 1866). “The Theory of Political Economy” (1871)
      contains his application of the mathematical method, and a
      bibliography of similar attempts. “The Railways and the State” are
      to be found in his “Essays and Addresses” (1874). He prepared an
      elementary book, “Primer of Political Economy” (second edition,
      1878). He was a contributor to the journals, and especially to the
      “London Statistical Journal.” His last books were “The State in
      Relation to Labor” (1882), which deals with the question of state
      interference; and “Methods of Social Reform” (1883), containing a
      paper on industrial partnerships. He also advanced the theory that
      the presence of sun-spots affected agriculture unfavorably, and
      that, coming somewhat regularly, they produced a constant succession
      of commercial crises. (See “Nature,” xix, 33, 588.) At the early age
      of forty-seven he was unfortunately drowned while bathing near
      Bexhill, England (1882).

   49 Like Cairnes, Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie was a native of Ireland,
      and educated at Trinity College, Dublin. He was called to the bar,
      but gave up the law when offered the professorship of Political
      Economy in Queen’s College, Belfast. Besides his discussion of land
      tenures, he published “Political and Moral Philosophy” (1874). He
      long suffered from bad health, and died January 28, 1882. His volume
      of “Land Systems” is now (1884) out of print, and scarce. He had
      also devoted himself to financial reform.

   50 See p. 33.

   51 Born 1826, died 1877. He was early made familiar with banking in
      connection with the Stuckey Banking Company, in Somersetshire; was
      educated at University College, London. In 1858 he married the
      daughter of James Wilson, the editor of the London “Economist,” whom
      he succeeded. He was a political student of a rare kind, as is shown
      by his “English Constitution” (second edition, 1872), “Physics and
      Politics” (1872), “Literary Studies” (second edition, 1879). He also
      wrote “Depreciation of Silver” (1877).

   52 Established in 1848, and unquestionably the most useful economic
      publication for English questions.

   53 Born 1833. His eye-sight was lost by an accidental shot in 1858, but
      he was chosen Professor of Political Economy at Cambridge in 1863.
      His “Manual” and the “Economic Position of the British Laborer”
      (1865) gave him reputation, in 1865 he entered Parliament, and since
      1880 he has been Postmaster-General in Mr. Gladstone’s
      administration. He has published “Pauperism, its Causes and
      Remedies” (1871), “Speeches” (1878), “Free Trade and Protection”
      (1878). His wife (born 1847), Millicent Garret Fawcett, reduced his
      “Manual” into “Political Economy for Beginners” (1869), and also
      wrote “Tales in Political Economy” (1874). Died November 13, 1884.

   54 He has also published “Social Economy” (1872); a small “Manual of
      Political Economy” (third edition, 1878); and a very considerable
      work, “Six Centuries of Work and Wages: the History of English
      Labor,” 1250-1883 (1884). He has edited Adam Smith’s “Wealth of
      Nations,” and written “Cobden and Modern Political Opinion” (1873),
      and “The Colonial Question,” in the Cobden Club Essays (1872).

   55 Of other books, mention should be made of G. J. Goschen’s most
      admirable “Theory of Foreign Exchanges” (eighth edition, 1875);
      “Reports and Speeches on Local Taxation” (1872); T. Brassey’s “Work
      and Wages” (third edition, 1883); E. Seyd, “Bullion and the Foreign
      Exchanges” (1868); H. D. McLeod, an eccentric writer, “Dictionary of
      Political Economy” (only one vol., A-C, 1863, published); and
      “Theory and Practice of Banking” (second edition, 1875-1876); H.
      Sidgwick, “Principles of Political Economy” (1883); J. Caird,
      “Landed Interest” (fourth edition, 1880); L. Levi, “History of
      British Commerce” (1872).

   56 Frédéric Bastiat (1801-1850) began life in a commercial house at
      Bayonne, but gained notice first by an article, “De l’influence des
      tarifs français et anglais sur l’avenir des deux peuples,” in the
      “Journal des Économistes” of 1844, and consequently had a very short
      period of literary activity. The corn-law agitation in England and
      the revolutionary movement of 1848 led him to write chiefly against
      protection and socialism. He translated Cobden’s speeches, “Cobden
      et la Ligue” (1845). His arguments against protection, “Sophismes
      économiques” (1846-1847), have been translated and published in this
      country; but the more extended exposition of his doctrine of value
      diminishing with the growth of civilization, and the harmony of all
      interests is in the “Harmonies économiques” (1850). In this his
      position is not much different from Carey’s. His other books were
      “Capital et rente” (1849), directed against gratuitous loans;
      “Protectionisme et communisme” (1849), showing protection to be
      communism for the rich; “Propriété et loi” (1848), directed against
      socialism; and “Essais sur l’économie politique” (1853); “Le
      Libre-échange” (1855). “Œuvres complètes,” 7 tom. (1855-1864).

   57 Carey, however, claimed, with probable truth, that Bastiat borrowed
      the idea from him, and Bastiat did not appear well in the
      controversy. Almost no one has followed the French writer in his
      theory except Professor A. L. Perry, of Williams College,
      Massachusetts, who has shaped his general argument according to this
      view of value. Also see Cairnes, “Essays in Political Economy,” p.
      312.

   58 Chevalier (1806-1879) first drew attention in an experiment of
      Saint-Simonism in 1830-1833. After traveling in the United States,
      and writing excellent books on the country and its railways, he
      became professor in the Collége de France, where his lectures were
      collected in a “Cours d’économie politique” (1842-1850; second
      edition, 1855-1866). His third volume, “La Monnaie,” is a standard
      treatise on money, with an extensive bibliography. His treatise
      “Examen du système commerciale connu sous le nom de système
      protecteur” (1851) is now somewhat out of date. In his book “De la
      Baisse, probable de l’or” (1859), translated by Richard Cobden, he
      held that, unless prevented, gold would drive out the French
      currency, as against Faucher, who thought the fall temporary, and
      would progressively diminish. Other books are, “De l’industrie
      manufacturière en France,” and “La liberté du travail” (1848).

   59 Émile Levasseur (born 1828) was professor at Alençon, 1852-1854, and
      elected a member of the Academy of Sciences in 1868. He has
      published “Récherches historiques sur le système de Law” (1854); “La
      question de l’or” (1858); “Histoire des classes ouvrières en France
      depuis la conquête de Jules César jusqu’à la révolution” (1859); the
      same history continued, “Depuis 1789 jusqu’à nos jours” (1867); “La
      France industriale” (1865); “Cours d’économie rurale, la France et
      ses colonies” (1868); “Précis d’économie politique” (fourth edition,
      1883).

   60 Born in Berlin in 1816, but since 1821 living in France. He was long
      connected with the Bureau de Statistique Générale, and the Ministry
      of Agriculture and Commerce, but in 1861 he left office and gave
      himself wholly to private work. In this year he received the Montyon
      prize for statistics, not given since 1857. His chief books are:
      “Des charges de l’agriculture dans les divers pays de l’Europe”
      (1850), a work crowned by the Institute; “Statistique de la France,
      comparée avec les divers états de l’Europe” (1860); “Le dictionnaire
      de l’administration française” (second edition, 1878); “Les finances
      de la France depuis 1815” (1863); “Les théoriciens du socialisme en
      Allemagne” (1872); and in connection with M. Guillaumin, “L’annuaire
      de l’économie politique,” since 1856.

   61 Jérôme-Adolphe Blanqui _ainé_ (1798-1854) in 1833 succeeded to the
      chair of J. B. Say in the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers, and was
      one of the founders of the “Journal des économistes.” Besides his
      “Histoire de l’économie politique en l’Europe” (1837-1852), he
      published a “Résumé de l’histoire du commerce et de l’industrie”
      (1826); “Précis élémentaire d’économie politique” (1826); “Rapports,
      histoire de l’exposition des produits de l’industrie française en
      1827” (1827); “Cours d’economie politique” (2 vols., 1837-1838), and
      notices of Huskisson and J. B. Say.

   62 Louis Wolowski (1810-1876), of Polish origin, was Chevalier’s chief
      antagonist, and Professor of Legislation at the Conservatoire des
      Arts et Métiers (1839); founded the first Crédit Foncier of Paris,
      and was elected to the Institute in the place of Blanqui. In 1875 he
      was chosen senator. He was a fertile writer: “Mobilisation du Crédit
      Foncier” (1839); “De l’organisation du travail” (1846); “Études de
      l’économie politique et de statistique” (1848); “Henri IV,
      économiste, introduction de l’industrie de la soie en France”
      (1855); “Introduction de l’économie politique en Italie” (1859);
      “Les finances de la Russie” (1864); “La question des banques”
      (1864); his testimony in the “Enquête sur les principes et les faits
      généraux qui régissent la circulation monétaire et fiduciaire”
      (1866); “La banque d’Angleterre et les banques d’Écosse” (1867); “La
      liberté commerciale et les résultats du traité de commerce de 1860”
      (1868); “L’or et l’argent” (1870); “La change et la circulation”;
      and a translation of Roscher.

   63 Hippolyte-Philibert Passy (1793-1880) was educated for the army, and
      served at Waterloo. He was more prominent as a statesman than as an
      economist. In 1838 he entered the Academy in the place of
      Talleyrand, but politics left him unoccupied, and he wrote “Des
      systèmes de culture et de leur influence sur l’économie sociale”
      (1846), and “Des causes de l’inégalité des richesses” (1849).

   64 M. Léonce de Lavergne (1809-1880) came from Toulouse to Paris in
      1840, elected deputy in 1846, a member of the Institute in 1855, and
      became professor in the Institut agronomique of Versailles. He was
      also the author of “L’économie rurale de l’Angleterre, de l’Écosse,
      et de l’Irlande” (1854), translated into English (1855);
      “L’agriculture et la population” (1857), a striking confirmation of
      Malthusianism; “Les économistes françaises du dixhuitième siècle”
      (1870). He also has contributed largely to the “Revue des Deux
      Mondes” and the “Journal des Économistes.” For a personal sketch by
      Cliffe Leslie, see “Fortnightly Review,” February, 1881.

   65 Born at Geneva, 1797, and died at Zurich, 1869. After studying law,
      he became an advocate, and in 1833 Professor of Law in the place of
      Rossi. In 1837 he was made Professor of Political Economy and Public
      Law at Geneva. He was also a member of the Swiss Grand Council.
      Besides his treatise, he wrote: “Richesse ou pauvreté” (1840); “Le
      socialisme, c’est la barbarie” (1848); “Études sur les causes de la
      misère” (1853); and aided in the “Dictionnaire de l’économie
      politique.”

   66 J. G. Courcelle-Seneuil (born 1813) left a commercial career to
      become a writer, first for the journals, and later for the
      “Dictionnaire politique” (edited by Pagnerre). In 1848 he was
      connected with the Ministry of Finance, and called to a
      professorship of Political Economy in Santiago, Chili, 1853-1863.
      His chief work is a “Traité théorique et pratique d’économie
      politique” (1858), but he has also published “La crédit de banque”
      (1840), reforms for the bank of France; “Traité des opérations de
      banque” (1852; sixth edition, 1876); “Traité des entreprises
      industrielles, commerciales, et agricoles” (1854); “Études sur la
      science sociale” (1862); “Leçons élémentaires d’économie politique”
      (1864); “La banque libre” (1867); “Liberté et socialisme” (1868);
      and articles in the “Dictionnaire de l’économie politique.”

   67 Died 1862; author of “De la liberté du travail” (1845).

   68 Professor of Political Economy at the Collége de France, author of
      an extended and able “Traité de la science des finances” (third
      edition, 1883). He has also published “De l’état moral et
      intellectual des populations ouvrières et de son influence sur le
      taux des salaires” (1868); “Récherches economiques, historiques, et
      statistiques sur les guerres contemporaines” (1869); “La question
      ouvrière au XIX siècle” (second edition, 1882); “L’administration
      locale en France et en Angleterre” (1872); “Le travail des femmes au
      XIX siècle” (1873); “Essai sur la répartition des richesses” (1880;
      second edition, 1883); and “De la colonisation chez les peuples
      modernes” (1882).

   69 He published two volumes on Socialism (see list of books p. 44). In
      several volumes on the “Régime des manufactures” he described the
      condition of the silk, woolen, cotton, and iron industries.

   70 The most vigorous advocate of monometallism in France. He also wrote
      well on taxation, “Traité des impôts” (4 vols., 1866-1867).

   71 His “Rapport sur l’indemnité du guerre” to the Corps Législatif
      gives the account of the most marvelous exchange operation of modern
      times, arising from the payment of the indemnity by France to
      Germany (1871-1873).

   72 An advocate of the mathematical method.

   73 Founded in 1863, published at Berlin, and edited by Dr. Eduard Wiss.

   74 Long Secretary to the Chamber of Commerce at Hamburg, and now
      honorary professor at Göttingen.

   75 Professor of Political Economy at Zürich in 1866, since 1875
      director of statistics at Dresden, and editor of “Der
      Arbeiterfreund.” He made a valuable study of industrial
      partnerships, “Die Gewinnbetheiligung” (second edition 1878). He
      also wrote “Freiheit der Arbeit” (1858), and “Beiträge zur
      geschichte des Zunftwesens” (1861).

   76 His most important work is “Das Armenwesen und die Armengesetzebung
      in Europäischen Staaten” (1870). Selected essays from this have been
      translated into English by E. B. Eastwick, “Poor Relief in Different
      Parts of Europe” (1873).

   77 Max Wirth is at Vienna, and has devoted himself to a “Geschichte der
      Handelskrisen” (1874), including the crisis of 1873. Baron von Hock
      has written a history of the finances of France, and of the United
      States—“Die Finanzen und die Finanzgeschichte der vereinigten
      Staaten von Amerika” (1867).

   78 This book has been translated into English by G. A. Matile, with
      notes by Stephen Colwell (1856).

   79 Mohl on administration, and Rau and A. Wagner on finance, also
      deserve mention. Stein, besides other works, is the author of a
      handbook, “Die Verwaltungslehre” (1870).

   80 “Fortnightly Review” (1876).

   81 In Ely’s “The Past and Present of Political Economy” (p. 9) it is
      clear the new school do not differ so much in reality as in seeming
      from the methods of the English writers, like Cairnes.

   82 The first division of Roscher’s (born 1817) treatise, also known
      under the title of “Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie,” has been
      translated here by J. J. Lalor, in two volumes, “Principles of
      Political Economy” (1878), with an essay by Wolowski on the
      historical method inserted. In 1840 he was made _Privat-Docent_ at
      Göttingen, and professor extraordinary in 1843. In 1844 he was
      called to a chair at Erlangen, but since 1848 he has remained at
      Leipsic. A list of Roscher’s works is as follows:

      “Grundriss zu Vorlesungen über die Staatswirthschaft nach
      geschichtlicher Methode” (1843); “Kornhandel und Theuerungspolitik”
      (third edition, 1852); “Untersuchungen über das Colonialwesen”;
      “Verhältniss der Nationalökonomie zum klassischen Alterthume”
      (1849); “Geschichte der englischen Volkswirthschaftslehre im 16. und
      17. Jahrhunderts”; “Ein nationalökonom. Princep der
      Forstwirthschaft”; “Ansichten der Volkswirthschaft aus dem
      geschichtlichen Standpunkte” (second edition, 1861); “Die deutsche
      Nationalökonomie an der Grenzscheide des 16. und 17. Jahrhunderts”
      (1862); “Gründungsgeschichte des Zollvereins” (1870); “Betrachtungen
      über die Währungsfrage der deutschen Müntzreform” (1872);
      “Geschichte der Nationalökonomie in Deutschland” (1874);
      “Nationalökonomie des Ackerbaues” (eighth edition, 1875). His
      histories of political economy in England and Germany are
      particularly valuable (see review by Cliffe Leslie, “Fortnightly
      Review,” July, 1875). But he does not rightly estimate the English
      writers when he takes McLeod as a type; and Carey is the only
      American to whom he refers.

   83 Professor at Marburg, then at the University of Friedburg, in
      Breisgau, and now at Heidelberg. He has also studied railways
      (1853), and telegraphs (1857), and money and credit, “Geld und
      Credit” (1873-1879).

   84 Died 1878. He devoted himself mainly to criticism of other systems,
      and seems to be the least able of the three.

   85 “Catheder-Socialisten,” or “Professional Socialists.”

   86 By far the ablest is Adolph Wagner, of Berlin, editor of Rau’s
      “Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie” (1872). He also published “Die
      russische Papierwährung” (1868); “Staatspapiergeld, Reichs-Kassen
      Scheine, und Banknoten” (1874); “Unsere Müntzreform” (1877);
      “Finanzwissenschaft” (1877); and “Die Communalsteuerfrage” (1878).

      Dr. Eduard Engel was formerly the head of the Prussian Bureau of
      Statistics. Professor Gustav Schönberg, of Tübingen, with the
      assistance of twenty-one other economists, produced a large
      “Handbuch der politischen Oekonomie” (1882). The school have
      expressed their peculiar doctrines in the “Zeitschrift für die
      gesammte Staatswissenschaft” (quarterly, founded 1844, Tübingen),
      and the “Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie” (established at Jena,
      1863). Also, see A. Wagner’s “Rede über die sociale Frage” (1872),
      H. v. Scheel’s “Die Theorie der socialen Frage” (1871), and G.
      Schmoller’s “Ueber einige Grundfrage des Rects und der
      Volkswirthschaft” (1875). A. E. F. Schäffle, once Minister of
      Commerce at Vienna, gained considerable reputation by “Das
      gesellschaftliche System der menschlichen Wirthschaft” (third
      edition, 1873).

   87 Émile de Laveleye (born 1822) studied law at Ghent, but since 1848
      has given himself up to political economy and public questions.
      Through the pages of the “Revue des Deux Mondes” he gained attention
      in 1863, and the next year was made Professor of Political Economy
      at the University of Liége. In 1869 he received an election as
      corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences. While a fertile
      writer on political subjects, he has produced “La question d’or”
      (1860); “Essai sur l’économie rurale de la Belgique” (1863); a study
      on “Suisse,” see “Revue des Deux Mondes,” April 15, 1863; “Études
      d’économie rurale, la Neerlande” (1864); “La marché monetaire depuis
      cinquante ans” (1865); “Land Systems of Belgium and Holland,” in the
      Cobden Club volume on “Land Tenures” (1870); “Bi-metallic Money,”
      translated by G. Walker (1877); “La socialisme contemporaine”
      (1881); “Éléments d’économie politique” (1882), which satisfies a
      certain modern demand for “ethical political economy.”

   88 Leslie found support in a well-known paper read before the
      Association for the Advancement of Science (see “London Statistical
      Journal,” December, 1878; also see “Penn Monthly,” 1879), by J. K.
      Ingram, who claimed that the old school isolated the study of
      economic from other social phenomena, and that Ricardo’s system was
      not only too abstract, but that its conclusions were of so absolute
      a character that they were little adapted for real use. Robert Lowe
      (Lord Sherbrooke) replied to Leslie and Ingram (“Nineteenth
      Century,” November, 1878). For most of this literature it will be
      necessary to consult the magazines. Cliffe Leslie, “Fortnightly
      Review” (November, 1870), placed Adam Smith among the inductive
      economists; D. Syme attacked the old methods, “Westminster Review,”
      vol. xcvi (1871); Cairnes represented the old school, and discussed
      the new theories, “Political Economy and Comte,” in the “Fortnightly
      Review,” vol. xiii, p. 579 (1870), “Political Economy and Laissez
      Faire,” vol. xvi, p. 80 (1871), and in 1872; see also his admirable
      “Logical Method”; F. Harrison discussed the limits of political
      economy, ibid. (1865), and answered Cairnes in an article on
      “Cairnes on Political Economy and M. Comte,” “Fortnightly Review,”
      vol. xiv, p. 39 (1870). W. Newmarch gave attention to Ingram’s
      paper, “Statistical Journal” (1871). Leslie, “Fortnightly Review”
      (1875), and G. Cohn, ibid. (1873), wrote on political economy in
      Germany. Leslie also contributed an article on “Political Economy
      and Sociology,” “Fortnightly Review,” vol. xxxi, p. 25 (1879), and
      the “Bicentenary of Political Economy,” in the “Bankers’ Magazine,”
      vol. xxxii, p. 29. Leslie examined the philosophical method, “Penn
      Monthly” (1877); Jevons saw the only hope for the future in the
      mathematical method, “Fortnightly Review” (1876); McLeod asks, “What
      is political economy?” in the “Contemporary Review” (1875); Maurice
      Block entered the discussion, “Penn Monthly” (1877), and “Bankers’
      Magazine,” March and November, 1878. Henry Sidgwick answers Leslie
      in a paper on “Economic Method,” in the “Fortnightly Review,” vol.
      xxxi (1879), p. 301. See also essay by Wolowski prefixed to
      Roscher’s “Political Economy” (English translation); Roscher’s own
      statement in Chapters II and III of the Introduction to his
      “Political Economy,” and Laveleye’s “New Tendencies of Political
      Economy” (1879). See also “Penn Monthly,” vol. vii, p. 190, and
      “Bankers’ Magazine,” vol. xxxiii, pp. 601, 698, 761; vol. xxxvi, pp.
      349, 422; S. Newcomb for an admirable essay “On the Method and
      Province of Political Economy,” “North American Review” (1875), vol.
      cxxi, p. 241, in which the “Orthodox” method is strongly supported;
      and an extreme position in favor of the historical method in a
      pamphlet, “The Past and Present of Political Economy,” by R. T. Ely
      (1884).

   89 Daniel Raymond, “The Elements of Political Economy” (1820). Thomas
      Cooper, “Lectures on the Elements of Political Economy” (1826); “A
      Manual of Political Economy” (1834). Willard Phillips, “A Manual of
      Political Economy” (1828); “Propositions concerning Protection and
      Free Trade” (1860). President Francis Wayland (1796-1865), “The
      Elements of Political Economy” (1837). Henry Vethake, “Principles of
      Political Economy” (1838). From 1840 to the civil war there appeared
      F. Bowen’s “Principles of Political Economy” (1856), since changed
      to “American Political Economy” (1873), which opposed the Malthusian
      doctrine and defended protection; John Bascom’s “Political Economy”
      (1859); and Stephen Colwell’s “Ways and Means of Payment” (1859).
      After the war, “Science of Wealth” (1866), by Amasa Walker, a
      lecturer in Amherst College, and father of F. A. Walker.

   90 Prof. C. F. Dunbar, “North American Review,” January, 1876, in an
      admirable review of economic science in America during the last
      century (1776-1876).

   91 See _supra_, p. 16.

   92 Carey (1793-1879) was the son of an Irish exile, and began a
      business career at the age of twelve. At twenty-eight he was the
      leading partner in the publishing firm of Carey & Lea, Philadelphia,
      from which he retired in 1835, to devote himself wholly to political
      economy. His leading works have been translated into French,
      Italian, Portuguese, German, Swedish, Russian, Magyar, and Japanese.
      He has written thirteen octavo volumes, three thousand pages in
      pamphlet form, and twice that amount for the newspaper press. See
      “Proceedings of the American Academy of Science” (1881-1882, p.
      417), and W. Elder’s “Memoir of Henry C. Carey” (January 5, 1880).
      The latter gives a list of his books.

   93 Bastiat’s “Harmonies économiques” appeared in 1850, and the question
      of his indebtedness to Carey was discussed, rather unfavorably to
      Bastiat, in a series of letters in the “Journal des économistes” for
      1851.

   94 See an able study, by Adolphe Held, “Carey’s Socialwissenschaft und
      das Merkantilsystem” (1866).

   95 His system appears also in the books of disciples: E. Peshine Smith,
      “A Manual of Political Economy” (1853), William Elder’s “Questions
      of the Day” (1871), and of Robert E. Thompson’s “Social Science and
      National Economy” (1875). A condensation of Carey’s “Social Science”
      has been made by Kate McKean, in one volume, octavo.

   96 The son of Amasa Walker, and formerly Professor of Political Economy
      and History in the Sheffield Scientific School of Yale College, he
      has become well known for his statistical work in connection with
      the United States census. His “Statistical Atlas of the United
      States” (1874) is unequaled. He has also published “Money” (1878);
      “Money, Trade, and Industry” (1879); “Political Economy” (1883); and
      “Land and Rent” (1884). The last book replies to various attacks on
      Ricardo’s doctrine of rent, and particularly to Henry George’s
      “Progress and Poverty.” General Walker in 1883 became President of
      the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston. He is also well
      known as an advocate of bimetallism.

   97 Professor of Political and Social Science in Yale College, and
      author of a “History of American Currency” (1874); “Lectures on the
      History of Protection in the United States” (1877); “What Social
      Classes owe to Each Other” (1883). He is a monometallist, and has
      devoted himself vigorously to the advocacy of free trade. His last
      book is a study in sociology, not in political economy.

   98 He has written “Political Economy” (eighteenth edition, 1883), and
      also “Introduction to Political Economy,” an elementary work on the
      same basis as the former.

   99 Henry George was born in Philadelphia, 1839, ran away to sea, and in
      1857 entered a printing-office in San Francisco. In 1871 he was one
      of the founders of the “San Francisco Post,” which he gave up in
      1875, and received a public office. He first began to agitate his
      views in a pamphlet entitled “Our Land and Land Policy” (1871), but
      not until the comparative leisure of his occupation (1875) gave him
      opportunity did he seriously begin the study which resulted in his
      “Progress and Poverty.” This volume was begun in the summer of 1877,
      and finished in the spring of 1879. The sale of the book, it is
      needless to say, has been phenomenal. He has also applied his
      doctrine of land to Ireland, in a pamphlet entitled “The Irish Land
      Question” (1882). His last book is a collection of essays entitled
      “Social Problems” (1884). His home is now in New York.

  100 Cf. p. 4, _supra_.

  101 Bowen, “American Political Economy,” p. 25.

  102 This is the beginning of Chapter II in the original treatise.

  103 This is his “sacrifice,” which corresponds to the exertion of the
      laborer.

  104 See Roscher’s note 1, section 42, for various definitions of
      capital.

  105 General Walker (“Political Economy,” Part II, Chap. iv) adopts the
      same position, although seemingly inconsistent with his doctrine on
      the rate of wages. The “rate of wages” is, however, a different
      thing from the source of a laborer’s subsistence. See Book II,
      Chapter II, § 2.

  106 The opinion mentioned above in the text is that of the believers in
      over-production, of whom the most distinguished are Mr. Malthus, Dr.
      Chalmers, and Sismondi.

  107 Page 371, English translation, N. Y. (1871).

  108 Edward Atkinson, “Labor and Capital, Allies not Enemies,” p. 60.

  109 Cf. Bowen, “American Political Economy,” p. 399.

  110 The functions of money are discussed later in the volume, and it is
      not proposed to unfold them here.

  111 See, for the argument that machinery necessarily injures labor,
      “Land and Labor,” William Godwin Moody (1883); and for the answer,
      “North American Review,” May, 1884, p. 510.

  112 Edward Atkinson, “Labor and Capital, Allies not Enemies,” p. 33.

  113 See book iv, chap. iv.

  114 See Mr. Babbage’s “Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.”

  115 Book i, chap. iv, § 6.

  116 Constant use of the same muscles, as by gold-beaters or writers,
      very often produces paralysis.

  117 Hearn’s “Plutology,” p. 279.

  118 Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” pp. 299, 300.

  119 “American Political Economy,” p. 134. See also an article,
      “Malthusianism, Darwinism, and Pessimism,” “North American Review,”
      November, 1879.

  120 See Cairnes, “Logical Method,” pp. 170-177.

  121 See also Walker’s “Wages Question,” chap. vi, and Roscher,
      “Political Economy,” book v, chaps. i, ii, iii.

  122 See Galton’s “Hereditary Genius,” p. 131-135.

  123 See also Edward Jarvis, “Atlantic Monthly,” 1872, and F. A. Walker,
      “Social Science Journal,” vol. v, 1873, p. 71. For other literature,
      see “Sketch of the History of Political Economy,” p. 16.

  124 This is the “preventive check” of Mr. Malthus, while the limitation
      through war, starvation, etc., is the “positive check.”

  125 This is fully confirmed by the inaugural address of Mr. Giffen as
      President of the London Statistical Society, November 20, 1883,
      _infra_, book iv, chap. v, § 1. (See the London “Statistical
      Journal,” 1883.)

  126 See Lavergne’s “Agriculture et Population,” pp. 305-316.

  127 For tables of relative births and deaths, see “Statesman’s
      Year-Book,” p. 253.

  128 This and the subsequent quotations are taken by Mr. Mill from Rae’s
      “New Principles of Political Economy.”

  129 “International Review,” article “Colonization,” 1881, p. 88. See H.
      V. Redfield, “Homicide North and South,” 1880.

  130 “Letters from America,” by John Robert Godley, vol. i. p. 42. See
      also Lyell’s “Travels in America,” vol. ii, p. 83.—Mill.

  131 Cf. “American Agriculture,” “Princeton Review,” May, 1882, by F. A.
      Walker.

  132 “Social Science,” vol. iii, p. 19.

  133 “Notes on North America,” 1851, vol. ii, pp. 116, 117.

  134 See also Cairnes, “Logical Method,” p. 35.

  135 I am indebted to Mr. Atkinson for advanced proofs of the annexed
      charts. See his paper in the “Journal of the American Agricultural
      Association,” vol. i, Nos. 3 and 4, p. 154, and a later discussion
      in the supplement of the Boston “Manufacturers’ Gazette,” August 9,
      1884, entitled “The Railway, the Farmer, and the Public.” His
      figures are drawn mainly from Poor’s “Railway Manual.”

  136 Cf. Book IV, Chap. I.

  137 “Economy of Manufactures,” pp. 163, 164.

  138 Cf. Book IV, Chap. I, § 4.

  139 “The Coal Question” (1866).

  140 Henry George, as well as the Socialists, thinks poverty arises from
      the injustice of society, and here takes issue with the present
      teaching. But the question can be better discussed under
      Distribution.

  141 Henry Gannet, “International Review,” 1882, p. 503.

  142 Volume on Population, p. 481.

  143 Estimated.

  144 See article “Colonization,” “International Review,” 1881, p. 88.

  145 See F. A. Walker’s “Statistical Atlas.”

  146 For a further discussion of the difference between the motive powers
      under private property and under Communism, see Mr. Mill’s
      posthumous “Chapters on Socialism,” “Fortnightly Review,” 1879 (vol.
      xxxi).

  147 For an exposition of the varying forms of modern state socialism,
      and that form of it which advocates the nationalization of land (in
      H. George’s “Progress and Poverty,” and Alfred Russel Wallace’s
      “Land Nationalization, its Necessity and its Aims”) see a chapter in
      Henry Fawcett’s last (sixth) edition of his “Manual” (1884). For a
      general and valuable treatise on Socialism, but one which does not
      describe schemes much later than Owen’s, see Louis Reybaud’s “Études
      sur les reformateurs, ou socialistes modernes” (seventh edition,
      1864). An excellent bibliography is given, vol. ii, pp. 453-470.

  148 Pierre Joseph Proudhon (born 1809) made a well-known attack on
      private property in his “Qu’est-ce que la Propriété,” “What is
      Property?” (1840). His answer was, “It is robbery.” See also Ely,
      “French and German Socialism” (1883), p. 140.

  149 Louis Blanc (born 1813, died 1882). His chief book, the
      “Organization of Labor,” appeared in 1840, in the columns of the
      “Revue du Progrès.”

  150 Karl Marx (born 1818, died 1883) published “The Criticism of
      Political Economy” (1859); and an extension of the same book under
      the new title of “Capital” (1867), of which only the first volume
      has appeared, on “The Process of the Production of Capital.” This
      was again enlarged in 1872 to 822 pages. A large part of the work is
      filled with extracts from parliamentary reports on the condition of
      English workmen. Before the Revolution of 1848 he edited a
      communistic journal, and was obliged to leave the country afterward,
      by which he was led to London. He was an able writer on history and
      politics. Marx was assisted by Friedrich Engels, who wrote “The
      Condition of the Working Classes in England” (1845). See Ely, ibid.,
      chap. x.

  151 Born 1825, the son of a rich Jewish merchant. In philosophy and
      jurisprudence he won the praise of Humboldt and Boeckh. But vanity
      and wild ambition checked the success due to great abilities and
      energy of character. He was finally shot in a duel in 1864. He
      appears as the antagonist of Schultze (of Delitzsch), advocating
      state-help against the self-help of the originator of the People’s
      Banks.

  152 For an account of this society see Theodore D. Woolsey’s “Communism
      and Socialism” (1880); “Nineteenth Century,” July, 1878; and Ely,
      ibid., chap. xi.

  153 See New York “Nation,” Nos. 684, 686.

  154 From his posthumous “Chapters on Socialism,” “Fortnightly Review,”
      1879, p. 513 (vol. xxxi), and written in 1869.

  155 The Count de Saint-Simon served in our Revolutionary War in the
      French army, while very young, and ended a life of misfortune and
      poverty in 1825, a month after the publication of his “Nouveau
      Christianisme” (Woolsey’s “Communism and Socialism,” p. 107). For a
      fuller account, see R. T. Ely’s “French and German Socialism,” p.
      53; A. J. Booth’s “Saint-Simon and Saint-Simonism” (London, 1871);
      and Reybaud, ibid.

  156 This experiment when put on trial in France first brought up the
      question of the legal justice of giving an absolute right to
      inherited property, and numbered among its disciples the economists,
      Michel Chevalier and Adolphe Blanqui, and the philosopher, Auguste
      Comte.

  157 Fourier was born at Besançon in 1772. He wrote the “Theory of the
      Four Movements” (1808); “A Treatise on Domestic and Agricultural
      Association” (1822); “The Theory of Universal Unity” (1841). Died
      1837. See Ely, ibid., p. 81; Victor Considérant’s “La Destinée
      Sociale” (fourth edition, 1851); and Reybaud, ibid.

  158 Robert Owen (father of Robert Dale Owen), born 1771, in 1799 was
      engaged in the famous New Lanark Mills, of which Jeremy Bentham was
      one of the partners. In 1825 he purchased Harmony, in Indiana, from
      Mr. Rapp. He believed in a full community of property; that the
      Government should employ the surplus of labor for which there was no
      demand; and that, until the members became fully trained, affairs
      should be managed by one head (as in Saint-Simonism).

  159 For Brook Farm, see Noyes’s “History of American Socialism,” chapter
      xi, and the life of “George Ripley,” by O. B. Frothingham (1882). In
      general, also, for American experiments see Charles Nordhoff’s “The
      Communistic Societies of the United States”; W. A. Hinds’s “American
      Communists” (1878); Woolsey’s “Communism and Socialism” (1880); and
      Noyes’s “American Socialism” (1870).

  160 The extracts in large type in this section are taken from Mr. Mill’s
      “Chapters on Socialism” (“Fortnightly Review,” 1879), being only the
      beginning of a larger work begun in 1869, and given to the public
      since his death. They are of interest because they give his
      conclusions twenty years after his “Political Economy” was written.

  161 “Logical Method,” pp. 34, 36.

  162 Cf. Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” pp. 180-188.

  163 In the “Fortnightly Review,” May 1, 1869.

  164 “Leading Principles,” pp. 149-189.

  165 Counting six days to a week and four weeks to a month.

  166 “Leading Principles,” p. 185.

  167 Mr. Thornton replied to Mr. Cairnes (“Nineteenth Century,” August,
      1879). A succinct statement of the condition of the wages-fund
      controversy has been made by Henry Sidgwick, “Fortnightly Review,”
      September 1, 1879. See also W. G. Sumner, “Princeton Review,”
      “Wages,” November, 1882.

  168 He advanced the same view in the “North American Review,” vol. cxx,
      January, 1875. In his “Political Economy” (1883) he advances a more
      extensive theory of distribution. See “Atlantic Monthly,” July,
      1883, p. 129.

  169 See Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” p. 209.

  170 This proposition needs to be kept in mind for the future discussion
      of the cost of production of food and its relation to cost of labor.
      Book II, Chap. V, § 5.

  171 Mr. Carey takes this ground.

  172 See the explanation of an economic law, Book II, Chap. II, § 1.

  173 “Constitutional History of England,” vol. ii, p. 563. See also
      Nicholls’s “History of the Poor Laws,” vol. ii, p. 303.

  174 For further discussion of the advantages of small holdings, see Book
      IV, Chap. V, § 2.

  175 “Leading Principles,” pp. 64-69.

  176 See Young, “Labor in Europe.”

  177 Walter Bagehot, “Lombard Street,” p. 13.

  178 “Work and Wages.”

  179 The reader is advised to consider, in connection with this, the
      former discussion on the relation between wages and the price of
      food (pp. 185, 186).

  180 “Logical Method,” p. 206.

  181 “American Political Economy,” p. 164.

  182 Rickards, “Population and Capital,” p. 135.

  183 Rickards, ibid., p. 75.

  184 “Political Economy,” p. 288.

  185 “Progress and Poverty,” pp. 220, 221.

  186 “American Political Economy,” p. 164.

  187 For other writers opposed to the doctrine of Rent as maintained by
      Ricardo and Mill, see Bonamy Price, “Practical Political Economy,”
      chap. x; McLeod, “Principles of Economic Philosophy,” chap. x; and
      J. E. T. Rogers, “Manual of Political Economy,” chap. xii.

  188 Cairnes, “Logical Method,” p. 199.

  189 “Theory and Practice of Banking,” vol. i, p. 13. Cf. Cairnes,
      “Logical Method,” p. 106.

  190 “Leading Principles,” p. 11.

  191 “Political Economy,” p. 5.

  192 “Social Science,” vol. i, p. 158.

  193 “Harmonies,” p. 171.

  194 “Political Economy,” p. 126.

  195 “Political Economy,” Introduction, Chap. I, § 5.

  196 “Précis d’Économie politique,” p. 175.

  197 “Précis de la Science économique,” vol. i, p. 202.

  198 “Political Economy Primer,” p. 98.

  199 “Leading Principles,” p. 15.

  200 “Theory of Political Economy,” pp. 82-91. See Cairnes, ibid., pp.
      17-19.

  201 “Political Economy,” p. 92.

  202 “Social Science,” vol. ii, p. 335.

  203 “Political Economy,” Introduction, Chap. I, § 5.

  204 “Précis,” p. 206.

  205 “Political Economy,” p. 165.

  206 “Logic of Political Economy.”

  207 Although here using demand in its proper sense, a little later Mr.
      Mill defines it as the “quantity demanded.” As he again uses it in
      the proper sense in discussing excess of money (Book III, Chap. V),
      supply (Book III, Chap. XI), and foreign trade (Book III, Chap.
      XIV), I have omitted from his present exposition his evidently
      inconsistent use of the word.

  208 “Leading Principles,” p. 25.

  209 “Leading Principles,” p. 108.

  210 See his chapter on “Natural and Market Price,” book i, chap. vii.

  211 “Report of the Director of the Mint,” 1883, p. 69.

_  212 Supra_, p. 222.

  213 “Leading Principles,” p. 41.

  214 Book I, Chap. I, § 2.

  215 See _supra_, p. 210.

  216 “Leading Principles,” part i, chap. iii, p. 87.

  217 “Work and Wages.”

  218 “Leading Principles,” p. 136.

  219 F. A. Walker (“Political Economy,” pp. 248-259) expands this idea,
      and makes it the pivotal part of his whole theory of distribution
      among laborers, capitalists, and landlords.

  220 “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” chap. iii.

  221 “Political Economy,” p. 127.

  222 “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” p. 1.

  223 “Political Economy,” p. 144.

  224 The substance of Mr. Mill’s former chapter, XV (Book III), is here
      inserted in its direct connection with the functions of money.

  225 F. A. Walker, “Political Economy,” p. 363. A German, Count Soden
      (1805), Joseph Lowe (1822), and G. Poulett Scrope (1833), proposed
      this scheme. See Jevons, “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,”
      chap. xxv.

  226 “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” p. 31.

  227 “A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold” (1863).

  228 F. A. Walker defines the demand for money as “the occasion for the
      use of money in effecting exchanges; in other words, it is the
      amount of money-work to be done” (“Political Economy,” p. 133); and
      the supply of money as “the money-force available to do the
      money-work which the demand for money indicates as required to be
      done, in the given community, at the given time. The supply of money
      is measured by ... the amount of money and the rapidity of
      circulation” (ibid., p. 136).

  229 Jevons, “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” pp. 336, 339.

  230 “Edelmetall-Production,” in Petermann’s “Mittheilungen,”
      Ergänzungsheft, No. 57.

  231 See Jevons’s “A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold.”

  232 In his book “De la Baisse probable de l’Or” (1859). See also
      Cairnes’s “Essays.” For authorities on the new gold, see Robinson’s
      “California” (Larkin’s and Mason’s Reports, pp. 17, 33); Executive
      Documents of United States, 1848, I, 1; Westgarth’s “Colony of
      Victoria,” pp. 122, 315; Wood, “Sixteen Months in the Gold
      Diggings,” p. 125; Lalor’s “Cyclopædia,” II, p. 851; Walker,
      “Money,” part i, chaps. vii, viii. For the probable effects, see
      “North American Review,” October, 1852; Tooke’s “History of Prices,”
      vi, p. 224; “Statistical Journal,” 1878, p. 230; Levasseur,
      “Question de l’Or.” As to how far the value of gold was lowered,
      Jevons, “Serious Fall,” etc.; “Statistical Journal,” 1865; ibid.,
      1869, p. 445; and Giffen’s “Essays in Finance,” p. 82.

  233 “Report of the House of Commons on Depreciation of Silver,” 1876, p.
      v.

  234 See Macaulay, “History of England,” chap. xxi.

  235 “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” p. 84.

  236 Jevons, ibid., p. 138.

  237 See S. Dana Horton, “Gold and Silver,” 1877, p. 84, _et seq._

  238 See Linderman, “Money and Legal Tender,” p. 161.

  239 Director of the Mint, Report, 1883, p. 49, and Linderman, ibid., p.
      173.

  240 See “Atlantic Monthly,” “The Silver Danger,” May, 1884.

  241 See “International Review,” September, 1876; and for some further
      explanation of banks, see “Atlantic Monthly,” 1882, pp. 196, 695,
      696.

  242 “Report of the Comptroller of the Currency,” 1883, p. 34.

  243 See “Nature,” xix, 33, 588.

  244 See Walker’s “Money,” p. 473.

  245 Vol. i, p. 302. See Sumner’s “History of American Currency” and
      Walker’s “Money” for much valuable material.

  246 See Cherbuliez, vol. i, p. 299.

  247 “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” p. 232.

  248 For John Law’s famous scheme (1718-1720) in France, called the
      “Mississippi Bubble,” the best authority is Levasseur’s “Système de
      Law” (1854). Also consult M. Thiers’s “The Mississippi Bubble”
      (translated by F. F. Fiske, 1859); Steuart’s “Political Economy”
      (1767); and McLeod’s “Dictionary of Political Economy,” article on
      “Banking in France.”

  249 For the best brief account of the issues of assignats, see President
      A. D. White’s “Paper Money Inflation in France.” See also F. A.
      Walker, “Money,” pp. 336-347; Bazot’s “Assignats”; and Alison’s
      “History of the French Revolution,” vol. ii, p. 606.

  250 See “Some Account of the Bills of Credit or Paper Money of Rhode
      Island, 1710-1786,” in “Rhode Island Historical Tracts,” No. 8
      (1880), by E. S. Potter and S. S. Rider.

  251 See Felt’s “History of Massachusetts Currency.” Consult also Minot,
      Hutchinson, and Gouge. Walker, “Money,” and Sumner, “History of
      American Currency,” have given considerable accounts of paper
      experiments in the United States, and should be well studied.

  252 See Walker, “Money,” p. 329.

  253 See J. J. Knox’s “United States Notes” (1884); the Finance Reports
      during and since the war to 1879; Spaulding’s “Financial History of
      the War” (1869); Bowen’s “American Political Economy,” chap. xv;
      “Chapters of Erie,” by H. Adams and F. A. Walker; and the voluminous
      pages of the “Congressional Globe.” For the decisions in the
      legal-tender cases, see “Banker’s Magazine,” 1869-1870, p. 712, and
      1871-1872, pp. 752, 780. A collection of statutes affecting United
      States finance, especially since 1860, has been made in a small
      pamphlet, by Professor C. F. Dunbar (published by Sever, Cambridge,
      Massachusetts).

  254 Report of 1861.

  255 Mr. Malthus, Dr. Chalmers, M. de Sismondi, and various minor
      writers. It is especially likely that, in times of commercial
      depression, the journals of the day will contain arguments to show a
      general over-production.

  256 Book IV, Chap. II.

  257 This is practically the argument of a little book, “Excessive Saving
      a Cause of Commercial Distress” (1884), by Uriel H. Crocker.

  258 Book III, Chap. II, § 4.

  259 “Leading Principles,” pp. 302-307.

  260 “Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy,” Essay I.

  261 I at one time believed Mr. Ricardo to have been the sole author of
      the doctrine now universally received by political economists, on
      the nature and measure of the benefit which a country derives from
      foreign trade. But Colonel Torrens, by the republication of one of
      his early writings, “The Economists refuted,” has established at
      least a joint claim with Mr. Ricardo to the origination of the
      doctrine, and an exclusive one to its earliest publication.—MILL.

  262 I have in this illustration retained almost the exact words quoted
      by Mr. Mill from his father’s book, James Mill’s “Elements of
      Political Economy,” but altered it by changing the trade from Poland
      to the United States, and by speaking of iron instead of cloth.

  263 “American Political Economy,” p. 481.

  264 For a fuller discussion of this question see Cairnes, “Leading
      Principles,” p. 319, ff.

  265 “Leading Principles,” p. 323.

  266 Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” p. 301.

  267 Book I, chap. VI, § 4.

  268 I have changed the illustration from England to the United States in
      this example.

  269 Book III, Chap. II, § 4.

  270 Book III, Chap. I, § 3.

  271 See “Statistical Abstract,” 1883, pp. 32, 33.

  272 This substitution has been made for Brazil.

  273 See close of last chapter.

  274 I have also changed the illustrations in this chapter so as to apply
      to the United States.

  275 The examples in this and the next section have been altered so as to
      apply to the United States.

  276 I have changed the names of the countries in the illustrations
      contained in this chapter, but have not further altered the language
      beyond the occasional change of a pronoun.

  277 The subjoined extract from the separate essay [“Some Unsettled
      Questions of Political Economy”] previously referred to will give
      some assistance in following the course of the phenomena. It is
      adapted to the imaginary case used for illustration throughout that
      essay, the case of a trade between England and Germany in cloth and
      linen.

      “We may, at first, make whatever supposition we will with respect to
      the value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that, before the
      opening of the trade, the price of cloth is the same in both
      countries, namely, six shillings per yard. As ten yards of cloth
      were supposed to exchange in England for fifteen yards of linen, in
      Germany for twenty, we must suppose that linen is sold in England at
      four shillings per yard, in Germany at three. Cost of carriage and
      importer’s profit are left, as before, out of consideration.

      “In this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, can not yet be
      exported from England into Germany; but linen can be imported from
      Germany into England. It will be so; and, in the first instance, the
      linen will be paid for in money.

      “The efflux of money from England and its influx into Germany will
      raise money prices in the latter country, and lower them in the
      former. Linen will rise in Germany above three shillings per yard,
      and cloth above six shillings. Linen in England, being imported from
      Germany, will (since cost of carriage is not reckoned) sink to the
      same price as in that country, while cloth will fall below six
      shillings. As soon as the price of cloth is lower in England than in
      Germany, it will begin to be exported, and the price of cloth in
      Germany will fall to what it is in England. As long as the cloth
      exported does not suffice to pay for the linen imported, money will
      continue to flow from England into Germany, and prices generally
      will continue to fall in England and rise in Germany.

      “By the fall, however, of cloth in England, cloth will fall in
      Germany also, and the demand for it will increase. By the rise of
      linen in Germany, linen must rise in England also, and the demand
      for it will diminish. As cloth fell in price and linen rose, there
      would be some particular price of both articles at which the cloth
      exported and the linen imported would exactly pay for each other. At
      this point prices would remain, because money would then cease to
      move out of England into Germany. What this point might be would
      entirely depend upon the circumstances and inclinations of the
      purchasers on both sides. If the fall of cloth did not much increase
      the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen did not diminish
      very rapidly the demand for it in England, much money must pass
      before the equilibrium is restored; cloth would fall very much, and
      linen would rise, until England, perhaps, had to pay nearly as much
      for it as when she produced it for herself. But, if, on the
      contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very rapid increase of the
      demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen in Germany reduced
      very rapidly the demand in England from what it was under the
      influence of the first cheapness produced by the opening of the
      trade, the cloth would very soon suffice to pay for the linen,
      little money would pass between the two countries, and England would
      derive a large portion of the benefit of the trade. We have thus
      arrived at precisely the same conclusion, in supposing the
      employment of money, which we found to hold under the supposition of
      barter.

      “In what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from the trade
      is clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of the trade, paid
      six shillings per yard for broadcloth; she now obtains it at a lower
      price. This, however, is not the whole of her advantage. As the
      money-prices of all her other commodities have risen, the
      money-incomes of all her producers have increased. This is no
      advantage to them in buying from each other, because the price of
      what they buy has risen in the same ratio with their means of paying
      for it: but it is an advantage to them in buying anything which has
      not risen, and, still more, anything which has fallen. They,
      therefore, benefit as consumers of cloth, not merely to the extent
      to which cloth has fallen, but also to the extent to which other
      prices have risen. Suppose that this is one tenth. The same
      proportion of their money-incomes as before will suffice to supply
      their other wants; and the remainder, being increased one tenth in
      amount, will enable them to purchase one tenth more cloth than
      before, even though cloth had not fallen: but it has fallen; so that
      they are doubly gainers. They purchase the same quantity with less
      money, and have more to expend upon their other wants.

      “In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have fallen.
      Linen, however, has fallen more than the rest, having been lowered
      in price by importation from a country where it was cheaper; whereas
      the others have fallen only from the consequent efflux of money.
      Notwithstanding, therefore, the general fall of money-prices, the
      English producers will be exactly as they were in all other
      respects, while they will gain as purchasers of linen.

      “The greater the efflux of money required to restore the
      equilibrium, the greater will be the gain of Germany, both by the
      fall of cloth and by the rise of her general prices. The less the
      efflux of money requisite, the greater will be the gain of England;
      because the price of linen will continue lower, and her general
      prices will not be reduced so much. It must not, however, be
      imagined that high money-prices are a good, and low money-prices an
      evil, in themselves. But, the higher the general money-prices in any
      country, the greater will be that country’s means of purchasing
      those commodities, which, being imported from abroad, are
      independent of the causes which keep prices high at home.”

      “In practice, the cloth and the linen would not, as here supposed,
      be at the same price in England and in Germany: each would be dearer
      in money-price in the country which imported than in that which
      produced it, by the amount of the cost of carriage, together with
      the ordinary profit on the importer’s capital for the average length
      of time which elapsed before the commodity could be disposed of. But
      it does not follow that each country pays the cost of carriage of
      the commodity it imports; for the addition of this item to the price
      may operate as a greater check to demand on one side than on the
      other; and the equation of international demand, and consequent
      equilibrium of payments, may not be maintained. Money would then
      flow out of one country into the other, until, in the manner already
      illustrated, the equilibrium was restored: and, when this was
      effected, one country would be paying more than its own cost of
      carriage, and the other less.”—MILL.

  278 See Book III, Chap. XVIII, § 5, of Mill’s original work.

  279 “Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,” third edition, p.
      143.

  280 For an exceedingly good study on the conditions of our foreign trade
      down to 1873, and a prophecy of the panic of 1873, see Cairnes,
      “Leading Principles,” pp. 364-374.

  281 “Leading Principles,” p. 357.

  282 The illustrations in this chapter have also been changed, but only
      so far as to make them apply to the United States.

  283 I am here supposing a state of things in which gold and silver
      mining are a permanent branch of industry, carried on under known
      conditions; and not the present state of uncertainty, in which
      gold-gathering is a game of chance, prosecuted (for the present) in
      the spirit of an adventure, not in that of a regular industrial
      pursuit.—MILL. It is, however, worth recalling that gold and silver
      mining have not been—for large effects on the value of the
      metals—anything like a permanent branch of industry, but that, in
      the main, great additions have been obtained suddenly and by chance
      discoveries.—J. L. L.

  284 See Walker, “Money,” Chap. XIX.

  285 Book II, Chap. V, § 1.

  286 I do not include in the general loan fund of the country the
      capitals, large as they sometimes are, which are habitually employed
      in speculatively buying and selling the public funds and other
      securities.—MILL.

  287 The rate of interest at such crises in New York has several times
      risen to 400 or 500 per cent per annum.

  288 In this illustration I have retained as nearly as possible the form
      of that given by Mr. Mill for the trade between England and Germany
      in cloth and linen.

  289 Book II, Chap. V, § 5.

  290 Book II, Chap. II, § 3.

  291 Cf. Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” p. 209.

  292 For a brief bibliography on our own Navigation Laws and the Shipping
      Question, see Appendix I.

  293 Book III, Chap. III, § 1.

_  294 Supra_, Book III, Chap. II, § 2, and Chap. XX, § 4.

  295 Henry George, however, asserts that, “irrespective of the increase
      of population, the effect of improvements in methods of production
      and exchange is to increase rent” (“Progress and Poverty,” p. 220).

  296 “Leading Principles,” Part I, chap. v.

  297 For the distinction between normal and market values, see _supra_,
      Book III, Chap. II, § 4, and p. 269.

  298 Before beginning this discussion the reader is advised to review the
      relation of profits to cost of labor, and the dependence of the
      latter on its three factors, Book II, Chap. V, § 5.

  299 Book I, Chap. IX

  300 Mr. Mill commended, as the most scientific treatment of the subject
      with which he had met, an “Essay on the Effects of Machinery,” by
      William Ellis, “Westminster Review,” January, 1826.

  301 Although their needs now attract more attention through the
      extension of newspapers and cheap books, the condition of the
      laboring-class is certainly better than it was fifty years ago. See
      Mr. Robert Giffen’s “Progress of the Working-Classes in the Last
      Half-Century” (1884), referred to in Book IV, Chap. V, § 1.

  302 A comparison of Chart No. XVII with Chart No. VI will furnish some
      means of learning whether the building of railways has gone on
      faster than is warranted by the increase of our crops (see _supra_,
      pp. 138).

  303 Book I, Chap. V, § 2.

  304 Book II, Chap. I, § 6.

  305 “Progress of the Working-Classes in the Last Half-Century” (1884),
      page 8.

  306 “Leading Principles,” pp. 278-280.

  307 “Progress of the Working-Classes in the Last Half-Century” (1884),
      being his inaugural address as President of the London Statistical
      Society, November 20, 1883.

  308 1825.

  309 1825.

  310 Wages per day.

  311 Wages per day.

  312 Year 1878.

  313 These mills have not been able to pay ten per cent regularly, as
      mentioned in Chart No. XIX, but it has merely been supposed that ten
      per cent were demanded by capital, in order to show that, for such a
      dividend, it required a diminishing proportion of the price to meet
      that estimate.

  314 Book II, Chap. V, § 5; see also “North American Review,” May, 1884,
      p. 517.

  315 For the influences of small properties in restraining an undue
      increase of population, see _supra_, p. 119. For a more general
      account of the benefits arising from such holdings, consult Mill’s
      original work, Book II, Chaps. VI and VII, and T. E. Cliffe Leslie’s
      “Land Systems.”

  316 Cf. E. L. Godkin, “North American Review,” 1868, p. 150.

  317 Fawcett, “Manual of Political Economy” (last edition), chapter on
      Co-operation.

  318 Giffen, “Progress of the Working-Classes in the Last Half-Century,”
      p. 19.

  319 “History of Co-operation in England” (2 vols., 1879), p. 105.

  320 Mr. Holyoake (“History of Co-operation in England,” p. 99) quotes as
      follows from another’s experience: “My own pass-book shows that I
      paid on November 3d, of last year (1860), £1 to become a member of a
      co-operative store. I have paid nothing since, and I am now credited
      with £3 16_s._ 6_d._, nearly three hundred per cent on my capital in
      a single year. Of course, that arises from my purchases having been
      large in proportion to my investment. In a co-operative store you
      get five per cent upon the money which you invest as a shareholder;
      and, if the store be well conducted, you will get seven and a half
      per cent addition.”

  321 For a full account of the proper steps to be taken in establishing a
      store, with many practical details, see Charles Barnard’s
      “Co-operation as a Business,” p. 119.

  322 Cf. Walker, “Wages Question,” p. 276.

  323 Godkin, “North American Review,” 1868.

  324 “History of Co-operation,” vol. ii, chap. ix.

  325 Holyoake, “History of Co-operation,” p. 131.

  326 Godkin, “North American Review,” 1868.

  327 Pp. 27, 31, 32.

  328 Barnard, “Co-operation as a Business,” pp. 150-152.

  329 Holyoake, “History of Co-operation,” p. 235.

  330 See Thornton, “On Labor,” p. 370. Also see “Parliamentary
      Documents,” 1868, 1869, xxxi; “Trades-Unions of England,” by the
      Count de Paris; Brassey’s “Work and Wages,” chap. xiii.

  331 See Walker, “Wages Question,” p. 283. Also see Mill, Book IV, Chap.
      VII, § 5, for an account of M. Leclaire’s experiments in France with
      house-painters.

  332 See also Von Böhmert, “Gewinnbetheiligung,” second edition, 1878,
      and Jevons’s “Methods of Social Reform” (1883). Professor Jevons
      (“The State in Relation to Labor,” pp. 146, 147) has given a brief
      bibliography, which I reproduce here:

      Charles Babbage, “Economy of Manufactures,” chap. xxvi; H. C.
      Briggs, “Social Science Association,” 1869; H. C. and A. Briggs,
      “Evidence before the Trades-Union Commission,” March 4, 1868,
      Questions 12,485 to 12,753 [Parliamentary Documents]; “The
      Industrial Partnerships Record”; Pare, “Co-operative Agriculture”
      (Longmans) 1870; Jean Billon, “Participation des Ouvriers aux
      Bénéfices des Patrons,” Genève, 1877; Fougerousse, “Patrons et
      Ouvriers de Paris” (Chaix), 1880; Sedley Taylor, “Society of Arts
      Journal,” February 18, 1881, vol. xxix, pp. 260-270; also in
      “Nineteenth Century,” May, 1881, pp. 802-811, “On Profit-Sharing”;
      J. C. Van Marken, “La Question Ouvrière: Essai de Solution Pratique”
      (Chaix) 1881.

  333 In his last edition of his “Manual,” Professor Fawcett thus
      describes a co-operative experiment in agriculture: “The one that
      has attracted the most attention was made nearly forty years since
      by Mr. Gurdon, on his estate at Assington, near Sudbury, in Suffolk.
      Mr. Gurdon was so much impressed with the miserable condition of the
      agricultural laborers who were employed on his estate, that he was
      prompted to do something on their behalf. When, therefore, one of
      his farms became vacant, he offered to let it at the ordinary rent,
      £150 a year, to the laborers who worked upon it. As they, of course,
      had not sufficient capital to cultivate it, he in the first instance
      loaned them the requisite stock and implements. The laborers were,
      in fact, formed into a company in which there were eleven shares,
      and no laborer was permitted to hold more than one share. The plan
      was so eminently successful that in a few years sufficient had been
      saved out of the profits to repay all that had been advanced, and
      the stock and implements became the property of the laborers. Each
      share greatly increased in value. Mr. Gurdon was so much encouraged,
      not only by the pecuniary advantages secured to the laborers, but
      also by the general improvement effected in their condition, that
      some years afterward he let another and a larger farm on similar
      terms. Although no statement of accounts has ever been published,
      the remarkable pecuniary advantages secured to the laborers is
      proved by the fact that, after enjoying at least as high wages as
      were paid in the district, they were able in a few years to become
      the owners of a valuable property, consisting of the stock and
      implements on the farms. One of the most significant and hopeful
      circumstances connected with the experiment is, that it was not
      carried out by a picked body of men; and if so much could be done by
      laborers who were probably among the worst educated in the country,
      it maybe fairly concluded, that when the intelligence of our rural
      population has been better developed, co-operation may be applied in
      a more complete form to agriculture, and with even more striking
      results than were obtained at Assington.... In the description which
      has been frequently given of the system of peasant proprietorship,
      it is shown how powerfully the industry of the laborer is stimulated
      by the feeling of property. When he cultivates his own plot of
      ground, he exerts himself to the utmost, because he knows that he
      will enjoy all that is yielded by his labor. Each year, with the
      extended use of machinery in agriculture, it is becoming more
      advantageous to carry on farming on a large scale. When, therefore,
      co-operative agriculture becomes practicable, land may be cultivated
      by associations of laborers, and thus many of the advantages
      associated with the system of peasant proprietorship may be secured,
      while at the same time the disadvantages of small farming may be
      avoided. The progress toward co-operative agriculture will no doubt
      be slow and gradual.”

  334 Godkin, “North American Review,” 1868. Also see Hermann
      Schultze-Delitsch, “Die Entwickelung des Genossenschaftswesens in
      Deutschland” (1870). This eminent philanthropist died April 29,
      1883. For other forms of co-operation, building associations, etc.,
      see Barnard, “Co-operation as a Business”; Pajot, “Du Progrès par
      les Sociétés de Secours Mutuels” (1878).

  335 See “Economics of Industry,” by Mr. and Mrs. Marshall, p. 223.

  336 “Wealth of Nations,” Book V, chap. ii.

  337 Book II, Chap. I, § 6.

  338 Book III, Chap. XIX, § 5.

  339 A higher rate is now imposed on landed than on professional incomes.

  340 Cf. Walker, “Land and Rent,” page 134.

  341 I have changed the sums mentioned in this illustration into our own
      money.

  342 Another common objection is that large and expensive accommodation
      is often required, not as a residence, but for business. But it is
      an admitted principle that buildings, or portions of buildings,
      occupied exclusively for business, such as shops, warehouses, or
      manufactories, ought to be exempted from house-tax.

      It has been also objected that house-rent in the rural districts is
      much lower than in towns, and lower in some towns and in some rural
      districts than in others; so that a tax proportioned to it would
      have a corresponding inequality of pressure. To this, however, it
      may be answered that, in places where house-rent is low, persons of
      the same amount of income usually live in larger and better houses,
      and thus expend in house-rent more nearly the same proportion of
      their incomes than might at first sight appear. Or, if not, the
      probability will be that many of them live in those places precisely
      because they are too poor to live elsewhere, and have, therefore,
      the strongest claim to be taxed lightly. In some cases it is
      precisely because the people are poor that house-rent remains
      low.—MILL.

  343 I have here also changed the amounts into our own money.

  344 This illustration has also been changed, but only so far as to fit
      the trade between England and the United States.

  345 Probably the strongest known instance of a large revenue raised from
      foreigners by a tax on exports is the opium-trade with China. The
      high price of the article under the Government monopoly (which is
      equivalent to a high export duty) has so little effect in
      discouraging its consumption that it is said to have been
      occasionally sold in China for as much as its weight in
      silver.—MILL.

  346 A land-tax is, to its extent, an evidence that the state claims a
      certain right in the soil, and that it stands to the contributor, as
      it were, in the place of a landlord. This tax, however, is generally
      so small that it does not materially diminish the rent of land. So
      far as it goes, it is a tax on rent.

  347 Some argue that the materials and instruments of all production
      should be exempt from taxation; but these, when they do not enter
      into the production of necessaries, seem as proper subjects of
      taxation as the finished article. It is chiefly with reference to
      foreign trade that such taxes have been considered injurious.
      Internationally speaking, they may be looked upon as export duties,
      and, unless in cases in which an export duty is advisable, they
      should be accompanied with an equivalent drawback on exportation.
      But there is no sufficient reason against taxing the materials and
      instruments used in the production of anything which is itself a fit
      object of taxation.—MILL.

  348 See Lalor’s “Cyclopædia,” article “Distilled Spirits,” by David A.
      Wells.

  349 “United States Statistical Abstract,” 1883, pp. 2, 3.

  350 The old condition of things was well described by Sydney Smith: “We
      must pay taxes upon every article which enters into the mouth or
      covers the back, or is placed under the foot. Taxes upon everything
      which is pleasant to see, hear, feel, smell, and taste. Taxes upon
      warmth, light, and locomotion. Taxes upon everything upon earth and
      the waters under the earth. On everything that comes from abroad or
      is grown at home. Taxes on raw material. Taxes on every value that
      is added to it by the industry of man. Taxes on the sauce which
      pampers man’s appetite and the drug which restores him to health. On
      the ermine which decorates the judge and the rope which hangs the
      criminal. On the brass nails of the coffin and on the ribbons of the
      bride. At bed or at board, couchant or levant, we must pay. The
      beardless youth manages his taxed horse with a taxed bridle on a
      taxed road, and the dying Englishman, pouring his medicine (which
      has paid 7 per cent) into a spoon (which has paid 30 per cent),
      throws himself back upon his chintz bed (which has paid 22 per
      cent), makes his will, and expires in the arms of the apothecary
      (who has paid £100 for the privilege of putting him to death). His
      whole property is then taxed from 2 to 10 per cent; besides the
      probate, large fees are demanded for burying him in the chancel: his
      virtues are handed down to posterity on taxed marble, and he is then
      gathered to his fathers to be taxed no more.”

  351 “Financial Reform Almanac,” 1883, pp. 107-109.

  352 “Handbuch der Verfassung und Verwaltung in Preussen und dem
      Deutschen Reich,” by Graf Hue de Grais (second edition, 1882), p.
      138.

  353 “Le Budget. Revenus et Dépenses de la France,” by M. Block (1881),
      pp. 57, 82.

  354 Taken, with modifications, from Milnes’s “Problems in Political
      Economy,” p. 377.

  355 Book I, Chap. IV, § 5.

  356 Although Mr. Mill had reference to the French wars in the beginning
      of this century, his words apply also to the circumstances of our
      own late war, 1861-1865.

  357 Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” pp. 381, 382.

  358 Book I, Chap. IV.

  359 Mr. Mill here takes up political considerations, which are not
      properly to be included in a purely economic treatment. (See the
      beginning of § 6.)

  360 See “Sketch of the History of Political Economy,” _supra_, p. 6,
      note 1.

  361 For bibliography of the United States shipping question, see
      Appendix I.

  362 D. A. Wells, “Cobden Club Essays,” second series, p. 533.

  363 See F. W. Taussig’s “Protection to Young Industries as applied in
      the United States” (1883).

  364 In a letter written February 26, 1866, to Mr. Horace White,
      published in the Chicago “Tribune,” and reprinted in the New York
      “Nation,” May 29, 1873.

  365 Business men constantly use the term “cost of production” when in
      reality they mean that which to the economist is expressed by “cost
      of labor.” If cost of labor becomes higher, it takes from
      profits—the place where they feel the difficulties of
      competition—but they say that the cost of production has risen: the
      cost, to them, only has risen, that is, the “cost of labor,” not
      “cost of production.”

  366 Cf. Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” pp. 324-341; and _supra_, Book
      III, Chap. II, § 4.

  367 The fact (sufficiently established by Mr. Brassey) is not considered
      also that England gives higher wages to operatives than the
      Continent, and yet England is able to undersell France and Germany
      in neutral markets. It is evident, however, that England can
      undersell only in occupations in which she has advantages.

  368 Cairnes, “Leading Principles,” pp. 382-388.

  369 “Compendium,” 1880, pp. 1343-1377.

  370 “Princeton Review,” 1883, p. 222.

  371 The United States have at the present time but five persons engaged
      in agriculture for each square mile of settled area.

  372 Book IV, Chap. I, § 2.

  373 “Fifteenth Annual Report of the Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics,
      1884,” by Carroll D. Wright.

  374 See Milnes’s “Problems in Political Economy.”




  SOCIALISM.


  BY
  JOHN STUART MILL.


  _Reprinted from the Fortnightly Review._


  CHICAGO.
  BELFORDS, CLARKE & CO.
  MDCCCLXXIX.




  MANUFACTURED _BY_
  DONOHUE
  HENNEBERRY.
  _CHICAGO, ILL._




PRELIMINARY NOTICE.


It was in the year 1869 that, impressed with the degree in which, even
during the last twenty years, when the world seemed so wholly occupied
with other matters, the socialist ideas of speculative thinkers had
spread among the workers in every civilized country, Mr. Mill formed
the design of writing a book on Socialism. Convinced that the
inevitable tendencies of modern society must be to bring the questions
involved in it always more and more to the front, he thought it of
great practical consequence that they should be thoroughly and
impartially considered, and the lines pointed out by which the best
speculatively-tested theories might, without prolongation of suffering
on the one hand, or unnecessary disturbance on the other, be applied
to the existing order of things. He therefore planned a work which
should go exhaustively through the whole subject, point by point; and
the chapters now printed are the first rough drafts thrown down
towards the foundation of that work. These chapters might not, when
the work came to be completely written out and then re-written,
according to the author's habit, have appeared in the present order;
they might have been incorporated into different parts of the work. It
has not been without hesitation that I have yielded to the urgent wish
of the editor of this Review to give these chapters to the world; but
I have complied with his request because, while they appear to me to
possess great intrinsic value as well as special application to the
problems now forcing themselves on public attention, they will not, I
believe, detract even from the mere literary reputation of their
author, but will rather form an example of the patient labor with
which good work is done.

                                                    HELEN TAYLOR.

  _January, 1879._




SOCIALISM.




INTRODUCTORY.


In the great country beyond the Atlantic, which is now well-nigh the
most powerful country in the world, and will soon be indisputably so,
manhood suffrage prevails. Such is also the political qualification of
France since 1848, and has become that of the German Confederation,
though not of all the several states composing it. In Great Britain
the suffrage is not yet so widely extended, but the last Reform Act
admitted within what is called the pale of the Constitution so large a
body of those who live on weekly wages, that as soon and as often as
these shall choose to act together as a class, and exert for any
common object the whole of the electoral power which our present
institutions give them, they will exercise, though not a complete
ascendency, a very great influence on legislation. Now these are the
very class which, in the vocabulary of the higher ranks, are said to
have no stake in the country. Of course they have in reality the
greatest stake, since their daily bread depends on its prosperity. But
they are not engaged (we may call it bribed) by any peculiar interest
of their own, to the support of property as it is, least of all to the
support of inequalities of property. So far as their power reaches, or
may hereafter reach, the laws of property have to depend for support
upon considerations of a public nature, upon the estimate made of
their conduciveness to the general welfare, and not upon motives of a
mere personal character operating on the minds of those who have
control over the Government.

It seems to me that the greatness of this change is as yet by no means
completely realized, either by those who opposed, or by those who
effected our last constitutional reform. To say the truth, the
perceptions of Englishmen are of late somewhat blunted as to the
tendencies of political changes. They have seen so many changes made,
from which, while only in prospect, vast expectations were
entertained, both of evil and of good, while the results of either
kind that actually followed seemed far short of what had been
predicted, that they have come to feel as if it were the nature of
political changes not to fulfil expectation, and have fallen into a
habit of half-unconscious belief that such changes, when they take
place without a violent revolution, do not much or permanently disturb
in practice the course of things habitual to the country. This,
however, is but a superficial view either of the past or of the
future. The various reforms of the last two generations have been at
least as fruitful in important consequences as was foretold. The
predictions were often erroneous as to the suddenness of the effects,
and sometimes even as to the kind of effect. We laugh at the vain
expectations of those who thought that Catholic emancipation would
tranquilize Ireland, or reconcile it to British rule. At the end of
the first ten years of the Reform Act of 1832, few continued to think
either that it would remove every important practical grievance, or
that it had opened the door to universal suffrage. But five-and-twenty
years more of its operation had given scope for a large development of
its indirect working, which is much more momentous than the direct.
Sudden effects in history are generally superficial. Causes which go
deep down into the roots of future events produce the most serious
parts of their effect only slowly, and have, therefore, time to become
a part of the familiar order of things before general attention is
called to the changes they are producing; since, when the changes do
become evident, they are often not seen, by cursory observers, to be
in any peculiar manner connected with the cause. The remoter
consequences of a new political fact are seldom understood when they
occur, except when they have been appreciated beforehand.

This timely appreciation is particularly easy in respect to tendencies
of the change made in our institutions by the Reform Act of 1867. The
great increase of electoral power which the Act places within the
reach of the working classes is permanent. The circumstances which
have caused them, thus far, to make a very limited use of that power,
are essentially temporary. It is known even to the most inobservant,
that the working classes have, and are likely to have, political
objects which concern them as working classes, and on which they
believe, rightly or wrongly, that the interests and opinions of the
other powerful classes are opposed to theirs. However much their
pursuit of these objects may be for the present retarded by want of
electoral organization, by dissensions among themselves, or by their
not having reduced as yet their wishes into a sufficiently definite
practical shape, it is as certain as anything in politics can be, that
they will before long find the means of making their collective
electoral power effectively instrumental to the proportion of their
collective objects. And when they do so, it will not be in the
disorderly and ineffective way which belongs to a people not
habituated to the use of legal and constitutional machinery, nor will
it be by the impulse of a mere instinct of levelling. The instruments
will be the press, public meetings and associations, and the return to
Parliament of the greatest possible number of persons pledged to the
political aims of the working classes. The political aims will
themselves be determined by definite political doctrines; for politics
are now scientifically studied from the point of view of the working
classes, and opinions conceived in the special interest of those
classes are organized into systems and creeds which lay claim to a
place on the platform of political philosophy, by the same right as
the systems elaborated by previous thinkers. It is of the utmost
importance that all reflecting persons should take into early
consideration what these popular political creeds are likely to be,
and that every single article of them should be brought under the
fullest light of investigation and discussion, so that, if possible,
when the time shall be ripe, whatever is right in them may be adopted,
and what is wrong rejected by general consent, and that instead of a
hostile conflict, physical or only moral, between the old and the new,
the best parts of both may be combined in a renovated social fabric.
At the ordinary pace of those great social changes which are not
effected by physical violence, we have before us an interval of about
a generation, on the due employment of which it depends whether the
accommodation of social institutions to the altered state of human
society, shall be the work of wise foresight, or of a conflict of
opposite prejudices. The future of mankind will be gravely imperilled,
if great questions are left to be fought over between ignorant change
and ignorant opposition to change.

And the discussion that is now required is one that must go down to
the very first principles of existing society. The fundamental
doctrines which were assumed as incontestable by former generations,
are now put again on their trial. Until the present age, the
institution of property in the shape in which it has been handed down
from the past, had not, except by a few speculative writers, been
brought seriously into question, because the conflicts of the past
have always been conflicts between classes, both of which had a stake
in the existing constitution of property. It will not be possible to
go on longer in this manner. When the discussion includes classes who
have next to no property of their own, and are only interested in the
institution so far as it is a public benefit, they will not allow
anything to be taken for granted--certainly not the principle of
private property, the legitimacy and utility of which are denied by
many of the reasoners who look out from the stand-point of the working
classes. Those classes will certainly demand that the subject, in all
its parts, shall be reconsidered from the foundation; that all
proposals for doing without the institution, and all modes of
modifying it which have the appearance of being favorable to the
interest of the working classes, shall receive the fullest
consideration and discussion before it is decided that the subject
must remain as it is. As far as this country is concerned, the
dispositions of the working classes have as yet manifested themselves
hostile only to certain outlying portions of the proprietary system.
Many of them desire to withdraw questions of wages from the freedom of
contract, which is one of the ordinary attributions of private
property. The more aspiring of them deny that land is a proper subject
for private appropriation, and have commenced an agitation for its
resumption by the State. With this is combined, in the speeches of
some of the agitators, a denunciation of what they term usury, but
without any definition of what they mean by the name; and the cry does
not seem to be of home origin, but to have been caught up from the
intercourse which has recently commenced through the Labor Congresses
and the International Society, with the continental Socialists who
object to all interest on money, and deny the legitimacy of deriving
an income in any form from property apart from labor. This doctrine
does not as yet show signs of being widely prevalent in Great Britain,
but the soil is well prepared to receive the seeds of this
description which are widely scattered from those foreign countries
where large, general theories, and schemes of vast promise, instead of
inspiring distrust, are essential to the popularity of a cause. It is
in France, Germany, and Switzerland that anti-property doctrines in
the widest sense have drawn large bodies of working men to rally round
them. In these countries nearly all those who aim at reforming society
in the interest of the working classes profess themselves Socialists,
a designation under which schemes of very diverse character are
comprehended and confounded, but which implies at least a remodelling
generally approaching to abolition of the institution of private
property. And it would probably be found that even in England the more
prominent and active leaders of the working classes are usually in
their private creed Socialists of one order or another, though being,
like most English politicians, better aware than their Continental
brethren that great and permanent changes in the fundamental ideas of
mankind are not to be accomplished by a _coup de main_, they direct
their practical efforts towards ends which seem within easier reach,
and are content to hold back all extreme theories until there has been
experience of the operation of the same principles on a partial scale.
While such continues to be the character of the English working
classes, as it is of Englishmen in general, they are not likely to
rush head-long into the reckless extremities of some of the foreign
Socialists, who, even in sober Switzerland, proclaim themselves
content to begin by simple subversion, leaving the subsequent
reconstruction to take care of itself; and by subversion, they mean
not only the annihilation of all government, but getting all property
of all kinds out of the hands of the possessors to be used for the
general benefit; but in what mode it will, they say, be time enough
afterwards to decide.

The avowal of this doctrine by a public newspaper, the organ of an
association (_La Solidarite_ published at Neuchatel), is one of the
most curious signs of the times. The leaders of the English
working-men--whose delegates at the congresses of Geneva and Bale
contributed much the greatest part of such practical common sense as
was shown there--are not likely to begin deliberately by anarchy,
without having formed any opinion as to what form of society should be
established in the room of the old. But it is evident that whatever
they do propose can only be properly judged, and the grounds of the
judgment made convincing to the general mind, on the basis of a
previous survey of the two rival theories, that of private property and
that of Socialism, one or other of which must necessarily furnish most
of the premises in the discussion. Before, therefore, we can usefully
discuss this class of questions in detail, it will be advisable to
examine from their foundations the general question raised by
Socialism. And this examination should be made without any hostile
prejudice. However irrefutable the arguments in favor of the laws of
property may appear to those to whom they have the double prestige of
immemorial custom and of personal interest, nothing is more natural
than that a working man who has begun to speculate on politics, should
regard them in a very different light. Having, after long struggles,
attained in some countries, and nearly attained in others, the point at
which for them, at least, there is no further progress to make in the
department of purely political rights, is it possible that the less
fortunate classes among the "adult males" should not ask themselves
whether progress ought to stop there? Notwithstanding all that has been
done, and all that seems likely to be done, in the extension of
franchises, a few are born to great riches, and the many to a penury,
made only more grating by contrast. No longer enslaved or made
dependent by force of law, the great majority are so by force of
poverty; they are still chained to a place, to an occupation, and to
conformity with the will of an employer, and debarred by the accident
of birth both from the enjoyments, and from the mental and moral
advantages, which others inherit without exertion and independently of
desert. That this is an evil equal to almost any of those against
which mankind have hitherto struggled, the poor are not wrong in
believing. Is it a necessary evil? They are told so by those who do not
feel it--by those who have gained the prizes in the lottery of life.
But it was also said that slavery, that despotism, that all the
privileges of oligarchy were necessary. All the successive steps that
have been made by the poorer classes, partly won from the better
feelings of the powerful, partly extorted from their fears, and partly
bought with money, or attained in exchange for support given to one
section of the powerful in its quarrels with another, had the strongest
prejudices opposed to them beforehand; but their acquisition was a sign
of power gained by the subordinate classes, a means to those classes of
acquiring more; it consequently drew to those classes a certain share
of the respect accorded to power, and produced a corresponding
modification in the creed of society respecting them; whatever
advantages they succeeded in acquiring came to be considered their due,
while, of those which they had not yet attained, they continued to be
deemed unworthy. The classes, therefore, which the system of society
makes subordinate, have little reason to put faith in any of the maxims
which the same system of society may have established as principles.
Considering that the opinions of mankind have been found so wonderfully
flexible, have always tended to consecrate existing facts, and to
declare what did not yet exist, either pernicious or impracticable,
what assurance have those classes that the distinction of rich and poor
is grounded on a more imperative necessity than those other ancient and
long-established facts, which, having been abolished, are now condemned
even by those who formerly profited by them? This cannot be taken on
the word of an interested party. The working classes are entitled to
claim that the whole field of social institutions should be
re-examined, and every question considered as if it now arose for the
first time; with the idea constantly in view that the persons who are
to be convinced are not those who owe their ease and importance to the
present system, but persons who have no other interest in the matter
than abstract justice and the general good of the community. It should
be the object to ascertain what institutions of property would be
established by an unprejudiced legislator, absolutely impartial between
the possessors of property and the non-possessors; and to defend and to
justify them by the reasons which would really influence such a
legislator, and not by such as have the appearance of being got up to
make out a case for what already exists. Such rights or privileges of
property as will not stand this test will, sooner or later, have to be
given up. An impartial hearing ought, moreover, to be given to all
objections against property itself. All evils and inconveniences
attaching to the institution in its best form ought to be frankly
admitted, and the best remedies or palliatives applied which human
intelligence is able to devise. And all plans proposed by social
reformers, under whatever name designated, for the purpose of attaining
the benefits aimed at by the institution of property without its
inconveniences, should be examined with the same candor, not prejudged
as absurd or impracticable.


SOCIALIST OBJECTIONS TO THE PRESENT ORDER OF SOCIETY.

As in all proposals for change there are two elements to be
considered--that which is to be changed, and that which it is to be
changed to--so in Socialism considered generally, and in each of its
varieties taken separately, there are two parts to be distinguished,
the one negative and critical, the other constructive. There is,
first, the judgment of Socialism on existing institutions and
practices and on their results; and secondly, the various plans which
it has propounded for doing better. In the former all the different
schools of Socialism are at one. They agree almost to identity in the
faults which they find with the economical order of existing society.
Up to a certain point also they entertain the same general conception
of the remedy to be provided for those faults; but in the details,
notwithstanding this general agreement, there is a wide disparity. It
will be both natural and convenient, in attempting an estimate of
their doctrines, to begin with the negative portion which is common to
them all, and to postpone all mention of their differences until we
arrive at that second part of their undertaking, in which alone they
seriously differ.

This first part of our task is by no means difficult; since it
consists only in an enumeration of existing evils. Of these there is
no scarcity, and most of them are by no means obscure or mysterious.
Many of them are the veriest commonplaces of moralists, though the
roots even of these lie deeper than moralists usually attempt to
penetrate. So various are they that the only difficulty is to make any
approach to an exhaustive catalogue. We shall content ourselves for
the present with mentioning a few of the principal. And let one thing
be remembered by the reader. When item after item of the enumeration
passes before him, and he finds one fact after another which he has
been accustomed to include among the necessities of nature urged as
an accusation against social institutions, he is not entitled to cry
unfairness, and to protest that the evils complained of are inherent
in Man and Society, and are such as no arrangements can remedy. To
assert this would be to beg the very question at issue. No one is more
ready than Socialists to admit--they affirm it indeed much more
decidedly than truth warrants--that the evils they complain of are
irremediable in the present constitution of society. They propose to
consider whether some other form of society may be devised which would
not be liable to those evils, or would be liable to them in a much
less degree. Those who object to the present order of society,
considered as a whole and who accept as an alternative the possibility
of a total change, have a right to set down all the evils which at
present exist in society as part of their case, whether these are
apparently attributable to social arrangements or not, provided they
do not flow from physical laws which human power is not adequate, or
human knowledge has not yet learned, to counteract. Moral evils and
such physical evils as would be remedied if all persons did as they
ought, are fairly chargeable against the state of society which admits
of them; and are valid as arguments until it is shown that any other
state of society would involve an equal or greater amount of such
evils. In the opinion of Socialists, the present arrangements of
society in respect to Property and the Production and Distribution of
Wealth, are as means to the general good, a total failure. They say
that there is an enormous mass of evil which these arrangements do not
succeed in preventing; that the good, either moral or physical, which
they realize is wretchedly small compared with the amount of exertion
employed, and that even this small amount of good is brought about by
means which are full of pernicious consequences, moral and physical.

First among existing social evils may be mentioned the evil of
Poverty. The institution of Property is upheld and commended
principally as being the means by which labor and frugality are
insured their reward, and mankind enabled to emerge from indigence.
It may be so; most Socialists allow that it has been so in earlier
periods of history. But if the institution can do nothing more or
better in this respect than it has hitherto done, its capabilities,
they affirm, are very insignificant. What proportion of the
population, in the most civilized countries of Europe, enjoy in their
own persons anything worth naming of the benefits of property? It may
be said, that but for property in the hands of their employers they
would be without daily bread; but, though this be conceded, at least
their daily bread is all that they have; and that often in
insufficient quantity; almost always of inferior quality; and with no
assurance of continuing to have it at all; an immense proportion of
the industrious classes being at some period or other of their lives
(and all being liable to become) dependent, at least temporarily, on
legal or voluntary charity. Any attempt to depict the miseries of
indigence, or to estimate the proportion of mankind who in the most
advanced countries are habitually given up during their whole
existence to its physical and moral sufferings, would be superfluous
here. This may be left to philanthropists, who have painted these
miseries in colors sufficiently strong. Suffice it to say that the
condition of numbers in civilized Europe, and even in England and
France, is more wretched than that of most tribes of savages who are
known to us.

It may be said that of this hard lot no one has any reason to
complain, because it befalls those only who are outstripped by others,
from inferiority of energy or of prudence. This, even were it true,
would be a very small alleviation of the evil. If some Nero or
Domitian was to require a hundred persons to run a race for their
lives, on condition that the fifty or twenty who came in hindmost
should be put to death, it would not be any diminution of the
injustice that the strongest or nimblest would, except through some
untoward accident, be certain to escape. The misery and the crime
would be that they were put to death at all. So in the economy of
society; if there be any who suffer physical privation or moral
degradation, whose bodily necessities are either not satisfied or
satisfied in a manner which only brutish creatures can be content
with, this, though not necessarily the crime of society, is _pro
tanto_ a failure of the social arrangements. And to assert as a
mitigation of the evil that those who thus suffer are the weaker
members of the community, morally or physically, is to add insult to
misfortune. Is weakness a justification of suffering? Is it not, on
the contrary, an irresistible claim upon every human being for
protection against suffering? If the minds and feelings of the
prosperous were in a right state, would they accept their prosperity
if for the sake of it even one person near them was, for any other
cause than voluntary fault, excluded from obtaining a desirable
existence?

One thing there is, which if it could be affirmed truly, would relieve
social institutions from any share in the responsibility of these
evils. Since the human race has no means of enjoyable existence, or of
existence at all, but what it derives from its own labor and
abstinence, there would be no ground for complaint against society if
every one who was willing to undergo a fair share of this labor and
abstinence could attain a fair share of the fruits. But is this the
fact? Is it not the reverse of the fact? The reward, instead of being
proportioned to the labor and abstinence of the individual, is almost
in an inverse ratio to it: those who receive the least, labor and
abstain the most. Even the idle, reckless, and ill-conducted poor,
those who are said with most justice to have themselves to blame for
their condition, often undergo much more and severer labor, not only
than those who are born to pecuniary independence, but than almost any
of the more highly remunerated of those who earn their subsistence;
and even the inadequate self-control exercised by the industrious poor
costs them more sacrifice and more effort than is almost ever required
from the more favored members of society. The very idea of
distributive justice, or of any proportionality between success and
merit, or between success and exertion, is in the present state of
society so manifestly chimerical as to be relegated to the regions of
romance. It is true that the lot of individuals is not wholly
independent of their virtue and intelligence; these do really tell in
their favor, but far less than many other things in which there is no
merit at all. The most powerful of all the determining circumstances
is birth. The great majority are what they were born to be. Some are
born rich without work, others are born to a position in which they
can become rich _by_ work, the great majority are born to hard work
and poverty throughout life, numbers to indigence. Next to birth the
chief cause of success in life is accident and opportunity. When a
person not born to riches succeeds in acquiring them, his own industry
and dexterity have generally contributed to the result; but industry
and dexterity would not have sufficed unless there had been also a
concurrence of occasions and chances which falls to the lot of only a
small number. If persons are helped in their worldly career by their
virtues, so are they, and perhaps quite as often, by their vices: by
servility and sycophancy, by hard-hearted and close-fisted
selfishness, by the permitted lies and tricks of trade, by gambling
speculations, not seldom by downright knavery. Energies and talents
are of much more avail for success in life than virtues; but if one
man succeeds by employing energy and talent in something generally
useful, another thrives by exercising the same qualities in
out-generalling and ruining a rival. It is as much as any moralist
ventures to assert, that, other circumstances being given, honesty is
the best policy, and that with parity of advantages an honest person
has a better chance than a rogue. Even this in many stations and
circumstances of life is questionable; anything more than this is out
of the question. It cannot be pretended that honesty, as a means of
success, tells for as much as a difference of one single step on the
social ladder. The connection between fortune and conduct is mainly
this, that there is a degree of bad conduct, or rather of some kinds
of bad conduct, which suffices to ruin any amount of good fortune; but
the converse is not true: in the situation of most people no degree
whatever of good conduct can be counted upon for raising them in the
world, without the aid of fortunate accidents.

These evils, then--great poverty, and that poverty very little
connected with desert--are the first grand failure of the existing
arrangements of society. The second is human misconduct; crime, vice,
and folly, with all the sufferings which follow in their train. For,
nearly all the forms of misconduct, whether committed towards ourselves
or towards others, may be traced to one of three causes: Poverty and
its temptations in the many; Idleness and _desoeuvrement_ in the few
whose circumstances do not compel them to work; bad education, or want
of education, in both. The first two must be allowed to be at least
failures in the social arrangements, the last is now almost universally
admitted to be the fault of those arrangements--it may almost be said
the crime. I am speaking loosely and in the rough, for a minuter
analysis of the sources of faults of character and errors of conduct
would establish far more conclusively the filiation which connects them
with a defective organization of society, though it would also show the
reciprocal dependence of that faulty state of society on a backward
state of the human mind.

At this point, in the enumeration of the evils of society, the mere
levellers of former times usually stopped; but their more far-sighted
successors, the present Socialists, go farther. In their eyes the very
foundation of human life as at present constituted, the very principle
on which the production and repartition of all material products is now
carried on, is essentially vicious and anti-social. It is the principle
of individualism, competition, each one for himself and against all the
rest. It is grounded on opposition of interests, not harmony of
interests, and under it every one is required to find his place by a
struggle, by pushing others back or being pushed back by them.
Socialists consider this system of private war (as it may be termed)
between every one and every one, especially fatal in an economical
point of view and in a moral. Morally considered, its evils are
obvious. It is the parent of envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness; it
makes every one the natural enemy of all others who cross his path, and
every one's path is constantly liable to be crossed. Under the present
system hardly any one can gain except by the loss or disappointment of
one or of many others. In a well-constituted community every one would
be a gainer by every other person's successful exertions; while now we
gain by each other's loss and lose by each other's gain, and our
greatest gains come from the worst source of all, from death, the death
of those who are nearest and should be dearest to us. In its purely
economical operation the principle of individual competition receives
as unqualified condemnation from the social reformers as in its moral.
In the competition of laborers they see the cause of low wages; in the
competition of producers the cause of ruin and bankruptcy; and both
evils, they affirm, tend constantly to increase as population and
wealth make progress; no person (they conceive) being benefited except
the great proprietors of land, the holders of fixed money incomes, and
a few great capitalists, whose wealth is gradually enabling them to
undersell all other producers, to absorb the whole of the operations of
industry into their own sphere, to drive from the market all employers
of labor except themselves, and to convert the laborers into a kind of
slaves or serfs, dependent on them for the means of support, and
compelled to accept these on such terms as they choose to offer.
Society, in short, is travelling onward, according to these
speculators, towards a new feudality, that of the great capitalists.

As I shall have ample opportunity in future chapters to state my own
opinion on these topics, and on many others connected with and
subordinate to them, I shall now, without further preamble, exhibit
the opinions of distinguished Socialists on the present arrangements
of society, in a selection of passages from their published writings.
For the present I desire to be considered as a mere reporter of the
opinions of others. Hereafter it will appear how much of what I cite
agrees or differs with my own sentiments.

The clearest, the most compact, and the most precise and specific
statement of the case of the Socialists generally against the existing
order of society in the economical department of human affairs, is to
be found in the little work of M. Louis Blanc, _Organisation du
Travail_. My first extracts, therefore, on this part of the subject,
shall be taken from that treatise.

    "Competition is for the people a system of extermination. Is the
    poor man a member of society, or an enemy to it? We ask for an
    answer.

    "All around him he finds the soil preoccupied. Can he cultivate
    the earth for himself? No; for the right of the first occupant
    has become a right of property. Can he gather the fruits which
    the hand of God ripens on the path of man? No; for, like the
    soil, the fruits have been _appropriated_. Can he hunt or fish?
    No; for that is a right which is dependent upon the government.
    Can he draw water from a spring enclosed in a field? No; for the
    proprietor of the field is, in virtue of his right to the
    field, proprietor of the fountain. Can he, dying of hunger and
    thirst, stretch out his hands for the charity of his
    fellow-creatures? No; for there are laws against begging. Can
    he, exhausted by fatigue and without a refuge, lie down to sleep
    upon the pavement of the streets? No; for there are laws against
    vagabondage. Can he, dying from the cruel native land where
    everything is denied him, seek the means of living far from the
    place where life was given him? No; for it is not permitted to
    change your country except on certain conditions which the poor
    man cannot fulfil.

    "What, then, can the unhappy man do? He will say, 'I have hands
    to work with, I have intelligence, I have youth, I have
    strength; take all this, and in return give me a morsel of
    bread.' This is what the working-men do say. But even here the
    poor man may be answered, 'I have no work to give you.' What is
    he to do then?"

       *       *       *       *       *

    "What is competition from the point of view of the workman? It
    is work put up to auction. A contractor wants a workman: three
    present themselves.--How much for your work?--Half-a-crown; I
    have a wife and children.--Well; and how much for yours?--Two
    shillings: I have no children, but I have a wife.--Very well;
    and now how much for you?--One and eightpence are enough for me;
    I am single. Then you shall have the work. It is done; the
    bargain is struck. And what are the other two workmen to do? It
    is to be hoped they will die quietly of hunger. But what if they
    take to thieving? Never fear; we have the police. To murder? We
    have got the hangman. As for the lucky one, his triumph is only
    temporary. Let a fourth workman make his appearance, strong
    enough to fast every other day, and his price will run down
    still lower; then there will be a new outcast, a new recruit for
    the prison perhaps!

    "Will it be said that these melancholy results are exaggerated;
    that at all events they are only possible when there is not work
    enough for the hands that seek employment? But I ask, in answer,
    Does the principle of competition contain, by chance, within
    itself any method by which this murderous disproportion is to be
    avoided? If one branch of industry is in want of hands, who can
    answer for it that, in the confusion created by universal
    competition, another is not overstocked? And if, out of
    thirty-four millions of men, twenty are really reduced to theft
    for a living, this would suffice to condemn the principle.

    "But who is so blind as not to see that under the system of
    unlimited competition, the continual fall of wages is no
    exceptional circumstance, but a necessary and general fact? Has
    the population a limit which it cannot exceed? Is it possible
    for us to say to industry--industry given up to the accidents of
    individual egotism and fertile in ruin--can we say, 'Thus far
    shalt thou go, and no farther?' The population increases
    constantly: tell the poor mother to become sterile, and
    blaspheme the God who made her fruitful, for if you do not, the
    lists will soon become too narrow for the combatants. A machine
    is invented: command it to be broken, and anathematize science,
    for if you do not, the thousand workmen whom the new machine
    deprives of work will knock at the door of the neighboring
    workshop, and lower the wages of their companions. Thus
    systematic lowering of wages, ending in the driving out of a
    certain number of workmen, is the inevitable effect of unlimited
    competition. It is an industrial system by means of which the
    working-classes are forced to exterminate one another."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "If there is an undoubted fact, it is that the increase of
    population is much more rapid among the poor than among the
    rich. According to the _Statistics of European Population_, the
    births at Paris are only one-thirty-second of the population in
    the rich quarters, while in the others they rise to
    one-twenty-sixth. This disproportion is a general fact, and M.
    de Sismondi, in his work on Political Economy, has explained it
    by the impossibility for the workmen of hopeful prudence. Those
    only who feel themselves assured of the morrow can regulate the
    number of their children according to their income; he who lives
    from day to day is under the yoke of a mysterious fatality, to
    which he sacrifices his children as he was sacrificed to it
    himself. It is true the workhouses exist, menacing society with
    an inundation of beggars--what way is there of escaping from the
    cause?... It is clear that any society where the means of
    subsistence increase less rapidly than the numbers of the
    population, is a society on the brink of an abyss....
    Competition produces destitution; this is a fact shown by
    statistics. Destitution is fearfully prolific; this is shown by
    statistics. The fruitfulness of the poor throws upon society
    unhappy creatures who have need of work and cannot find it; this
    is shown by statistics. At this point society is reduced to a
    choice between killing the poor or maintaining them
    gratuitously--between atrocity or folly."[1]

So much for the poor. We now pass to the middle classes.

    "According to the political economists of the school of Adam
    Smith and Leon Say, _cheapness_ is the word in which may be
    summed up the advantages of unlimited competition. But why
    persist in considering the effect of cheapness with a view only
    to the momentary advantage of the consumer? Cheapness is
    advantageous to the consumer at the cost of introducing the
    seeds of ruinous anarchy among the producers. Cheapness is, so
    to speak, the hammer with which the rich among the producers
    crush their poorer rivals. Cheapness is the trap into which the
    daring speculators entice the hard-workers. Cheapness is the
    sentence of death to the producer on a small scale who has no
    money to invest in the purchase of machinery that his rich
    rivals can easily procure. Cheapness is the great instrument in
    the hands of monopoly; it absorbs the small manufacturer, the
    small shopkeeper, the small proprietor; it is, in one word, the
    destruction of the middle classes for the advantage of a few
    industrial oligarchs.

    "Ought we, then, to consider cheapness as a curse? No one would
    attempt to maintain such an absurdity. But it is the specialty
    of wrong principles to turn good into evil and to corrupt all
    things. Under the system of competition cheapness is only a
    provisional and fallacious advantage. It is maintained only so
    long as there is a struggle; no sooner have the rich competitors
    driven out their poorer rivals than prices rise. Competition
    leads to monopoly, for the same reason cheapness leads to high
    prices. Thus, what has been made use of as a weapon in the
    contest between the producers, sooner or later becomes a cause
    of impoverishment among the consumers. And if to this cause we
    add the others we have already enumerated, first among which
    must be ranked the inordinate increase of the population, we
    shall be compelled to recognize the impoverishment of the mass
    of the consumers as a direct consequence of competition.

    "But, on the other hand, this very competition which tends to
    dry up the sources of demand, urges production to over-supply.
    The confusion produced by the universal struggle prevents each
    producer from knowing the state of the market. He must work in
    the dark, and trust to chance for a sale. Why should he check
    the supply, especially as he can throw any loss on the workman
    whose wages are so pre-eminently liable to rise and fall? Even
    when production is carried on at a loss the manufacturers still
    often carry it on, because they will not let their machinery,
    &c., stand idle, or risk the loss of raw material, or lose their
    customers; and because productive industry as carried on under
    the competitive system being nothing else than a game of chance,
    the gambler will not lose his chance of a lucky stroke.

    "Thus, and we cannot too often insist upon it, competition
    necessarily tends to increase supply and to diminish
    consumption; its tendency therefore is precisely the opposite
    of what is sought by economic science; hence it is not merely
    oppressive but foolish as well."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "And in all this, in order to avoid dwelling on truths which
    have become commonplaces, and sound declamatory from their very
    truth, we have said nothing of the frightful moral corruption
    which industry, organized, or more properly speaking,
    disorganized, as it is at the present day, has introduced among
    the middle classes. Everything has become venal, and competition
    invades even the domain of thought.

    "The factory crushing the workshop; the showy establishment
    absorbing the humble shop; the artisan who is his own master
    replaced by the day-laborer; cultivation by the plow superseding
    that by the spade, and bringing the poor man's field under
    disgraceful homage to the money-lender; bankruptcies multiplied;
    manufacturing industry transformed by the ill-regulated
    extension of credit into a system of gambling where no one, not
    even the rogue, can be sure of winning; in short a vast
    confusion calculated to arouse jealousy, mistrust, and hatred,
    and to stifle, little by little, all generous aspirations, all
    faith, self-sacrifice, and poetry--such is the hideous but only
    too faithful picture of the results obtained by the application
    of the principle of competition."[2]

The Fourierists, through their principal organ, M. Considérant,
enumerate the evils of the existing civilisation in the following
order:--

1. It employs an enormous quantity of labor and of human power
unproductively, or in the work of destruction.

    "In the first place there is the army, which in France, as in
    all other countries, absorbs the healthiest and strongest men, a
    large number of the most talented and intelligent, and a
    considerable part of the public revenue.... The existing state
    of society develops in its impure atmosphere innumerable
    outcasts, whose labor is not merely unproductive, but actually
    destructive: adventurers, prostitutes, people with no
    acknowledged means of living, beggars, convicts, swindlers,
    thieves, and others whose numbers tend rather to increase than
    to diminish....

    "To the list of unproductive labor fostered by our state of
    Society must be added that of the judicature and of the bar, of
    the courts of law and magistrates, the police, jailers,
    executioners, &c.,--functions indispensable to the state of
    society as it is.

    "Also people of what is called 'good society'; those who pass
    their lives in doing nothing; idlers of all ranks.

    "Also the numberless custom-house officials, tax-gatherers,
    bailiffs, excise-men; in short, all that army of men which
    overlooks, brings to account, takes, but produces nothing.

    "Also the labors of sophists, philosophers, metaphysicians,
    political men, working in mistaken directions, who do nothing to
    advance science, and produce nothing but disturbance and sterile
    discussions; the verbiage of advocates, pleaders, witnesses, &c.

    "And finally all the operations of commerce, from those of the
    bankers and brokers, down to those of the grocer behind his
    counter."[3]

Secondly, they assert that even the industry and powers which in the
present system are devoted to production, do not produce more than a
small portion of what they might produce if better employed and
directed:--

    "Who with any good-will and reflection will not see how much the
    want of coherence--the disorder, the want of combination, the
    parcelling out of labor and leaving it wholly to individual
    action without any organization, without any large or general
    views--are causes which limit the possibilities of production,
    and destroy, or at least waste, our means of action? Does not
    disorder give birth to poverty, as order and good management
    give birth to riches? Is not want of combination a source of
    weakness, as combination is a source of strength? And who can
    say that industry, whether agricultural, domestic,
    manufacturing, scientific, artistic, or commercial, is organized
    at the present day either in the state or in municipalities? Who
    can say that all the work which is carried on in any of these
    departments is executed in subordination to any general views,
    or with foresight, economy, and order? Or, again, who can say
    that it is possible in our present state of society to develop,
    by a good education, all the faculties bestowed by nature on
    each of its members; to employ each one in functions which he
    would like, which he would be the most capable of, and which,
    therefore, he could carry on with the greatest advantage to
    himself and to others? Has it even been so much as attempted to
    solve the problems presented by varieties of character so as to
    regulate and harmonize the varieties of employments in
    accordance with natural aptitudes? Alas! The Utopia of the most
    ardent philanthropists is to teach reading and writing to
    twenty-five millions of the French people! And in the present
    state of things we may defy them to succeed even in that!

    "And is it not a strange spectacle, too, and one which cries out
    in condemnation of us, to see this state of society where the
    soil is badly cultivated, and sometimes not cultivated at all;
    where man is ill lodged, ill clothed, and yet where whole masses
    are continually in need of work and pining in misery because
    they cannot find it? Of a truth we are forced to acknowledge
    that if the nations are poor and starving it is not because
    nature has denied the means of producing wealth, but because of
    the anarchy and disorder in our employment of those means; in
    other words, it is because society is wretchedly constituted and
    labor unorganized.

    "But this is not all, and you will have but a faint conception
    of the evil if you do not consider that to all these vices of
    society, which dry up the sources of wealth and prosperity, must
    be added the struggle, the discord, the war, in short under many
    names and many forms which society cherishes and cultivates
    between the individuals that compose it. These struggles and
    discords correspond to radical oppositions--deep-seated
    antinomies between the various interests. Exactly in so far as
    you are able to establish classes and categories within the
    nation; in so far, also, you will have opposition of interests
    and internal warfare either avowed or secret, even if you take
    into consideration the industrial system only."[4]

One of the leading ideas of this school is the wastefulness and at the
same time the immorality of the existing arrangements for distributing
the produce of the country among the various consumers, the enormous
superfluity in point of number of the agents of distribution, the
merchants, dealers, shopkeepers and their innumerable, employés, and
the depraving character of such a distribution of occupations.

    "It is evident that the interest of the trader is opposed to
    that of the consumer and of the producer. Has he not bought
    cheap and under-valued as much as possible in all his dealings
    with the producer, the very same article which, vaunting its
    excellence, he sells to you as dear as he can? Thus the interest
    of the commercial body, collectively and individually, is
    contrary to that of the producer and of the consumer--that is to
    say, to the interest of the whole body of society.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The trader is a go-between, who profits by the general anarchy
    and the non-organization of industry. The trader buys up
    products, he buys up everything; he owns and detains everything,
    in such sort that:--

    "1stly. He holds both Production and Consumption _under his
    yoke_, because both must come to him either finally for the
    products to be consumed, or at first for the raw materials to be
    worked up. Commerce with all its methods of buying, and of
    raising and lowering prices, its innumerable devices, and its
    holding everything in the hands of _middle-men_, levies toll
    right and left; it despotically gives the law to Production and
    Consumption, of which it ought to be only the subordinate.

    "2ndly. It robs society by its _enormous profits_--profits
    levied upon the consumer and the producer, and altogether out of
    proportion to the services rendered, for which a twentieth of
    the persons actually employed would be sufficient.

    "3rdly. It robs society by the subtraction of its productive
    forces; taking off from productive labor nineteen-twentieths of
    the agents of trade who are mere parasites. Thus, not only does
    commerce rob society by appropriating an exorbitant share of the
    common wealth, but also by considerably diminishing the
    productive energy of the human beehive. The great majority of
    traders would return to productive work if a rational system of
    commercial organization were substituted for the inextricable
    chaos of the present state of things.

    "4thly. It robs society by the _adulteration_ of products,
    pushed at the present day beyond all bounds. And in fact, if a
    hundred grocers establish themselves in a town where before
    there were only twenty, it is plain that people will not begin
    to consume five times as many groceries. Hereupon the hundred
    virtuous grocers have to dispute between them the profits which
    before were honestly made by the twenty; competition obliges
    them to make it up at the expense of the consumer, either by
    raising the prices as sometimes happens, or by adulterating the
    goods as always happens. In such a state of things there is an
    end to good faith. Inferior or adulterated goods are sold for
    articles of good quality whenever the credulous customer is not
    too experienced to be deceived. And when the customer has been
    thoroughly imposed upon, the trading conscience consoles itself
    by saying, 'I state my price; people can take or leave; no one
    is obliged to buy.' The losses imposed on the consumers by the
    bad quality or the adulteration of goods are incalculable.

    "5thly. It robs society by _accumulations_, artificial or not,
    in consequence of which vast quantities of goods, collected in
    one place, are damaged and destroyed for want of a sale. Fourier
    (Th. des Quat. Mouv., p. 334, 1st ed.) says: 'The fundamental
    principle of the commercial systems, that of _leaving full
    liberty to the merchants_, gives them absolute right of property
    over the goods in which they deal: they have the right to
    withdraw them altogether, to withhold or even to burn them, as
    happened more than once with the Oriental Company of Amsterdam,
    which publicly burnt stores of cinnamon in order to raise the
    price. What it did with cinnamon it would have done with corn;
    but for the fear of being stoned by the populace, it would have
    burnt some corn in order to sell the rest at four times its
    value. Indeed, it actually is of daily occurrence in ports, for
    provisions of grains to be thrown into the sea because the
    merchants have allowed them to rot while waiting for a rise. I
    myself, when I was a clerk, have had to superintend these
    infamous proceedings, and in one day caused to be thrown into
    the sea some forty thousand bushels of rice, which might have
    been sold at a fair profit had the withholder been less greedy
    of gain. It is society that bears the cost of this waste, which
    takes place daily under shelter of the philosophical maxim of
    _full liberty for the merchants_.'

    "6thly. Commerce robs society, moreover, by all the loss,
    damage, and waste that follows from the extreme scattering of
    products in millions of shops, and by the multiplication and
    complication of carriage.

    "7thly. It robs society by shameless and unlimited
    _usury_--usury absolutely appalling. The trader carries on
    operations with fictitious capital, much higher in amount than
    his real capital. A trader with a capital of twelve hundred
    pounds will carry on operations, by means of bills and credit,
    on a scale of four, eight, or twelve thousand pounds. Thus he
    draws from capital _which he does not possess_, usurious
    interest, out of all proportion with the capital he actually
    owns.

    "8thly. It robs society by innumerable _bankruptcies_, for the
    daily accidents of our commercial system, political events, and
    any kind of disturbance, must usher in a day when the trader,
    having incurred obligations beyond his means, is no longer able
    to meet them; his failure, whether fraudulent or not, must be a
    severe blow to his creditors. The bankruptcy of some entails
    that of others, so that bankruptcies follow one upon another,
    causing widespread ruin. And it is always the producer and the
    consumer who suffer; for commerce, considered as a whole, does
    not produce wealth, and invests very little in proportion to the
    wealth which passes through its hands. How many are the
    manufactures crushed by these blows! how many fertile sources of
    wealth dried up by these devices, with all their disastrous
    consequences!

    "The producer furnishes the goods, the consumer the money. Trade
    furnishes credit, founded on little or no actual capital, and
    the different members of the commercial body are in no way
    responsible for one another. This, in a few words, is the whole
    theory of the thing.

    "9thly. Commerce robs society by the _independence_ and
    _irresponsibility_ which permits it to buy at the epochs when
    the producers are forced to sell and compete with one another,
    in order to procure money for their rent and necessary expenses
    of production. When the markets are overstocked and goods cheap,
    trade purchases. Then it creates a rise, and by this simple
    manoeuvre despoils both producer and consumer.

    "10thly. It robs society by a considerable _drawing off_ of
    _capital_, which will return to productive industry when
    commerce plays its proper subordinate part, and is only an
    agency carrying on transactions between the producers (more or
    less distant) and the great centres of consumption--the
    communistic societies. Thus the capital engaged in the
    speculations of commerce (which, small as it is, compared to the
    immense wealth which passes through its hands, consists
    nevertheless of sums enormous in themselves), would return to
    stimulate production if commerce was deprived of the
    intermediate property in goods, and their distribution became a
    matter of administrative organization. Stock-jobbing is the most
    odious form of this vice of commerce.

    "11thly. It robs society by the _monopolising_ or buying up of
    raw materials. 'For' (says Fourier, Th. des Quat. Mouv., p. 359,
    1st ed.), 'the rise in price on articles that are bought up, is
    borne ultimately by the consumer, although in the first place by
    the manufacturers, who, being obliged to keep up their
    establishments, must make pecuniary sacrifices, and manufacture
    at small profits in the hope of better days; and it is often
    long before they can repay themselves the rise in prices which
    the monopoliser has compelled them to support in the first
    instance...."

    "In short, all these vices, besides many others which I omit,
    are multiplied by the extreme complication of mercantile
    affairs; for products do not pass once only through the greedy
    clutches of commerce; there are some which pass and repass
    twenty or thirty times before reaching the consumer. In the
    first place, the raw material passes through the grasp of
    commerce before reaching the manufacturer who first works it up;
    then it returns to commerce to be sent out again to be worked up
    in a second form; and so on until it receives its final shape.
    Then it passes into the hands of merchants, who sell to the
    wholesale dealers, and these to the great retail dealers of
    towns, and these again to the little dealers and to the country
    shops; and each time that it changes hands, it leaves something
    behind it.

    "... One of my friends who was lately exploring the Jura, where
    much working in metal is done, had occasion to enter the house
    of a peasant who was a manufacturer of shovels. He asked the
    price. 'Let us come to an understanding,' answered the poor
    laborer, not an economist at all, but a man of common sense; 'I
    sell them for 8_d._ to the trade, which retails them at 1_s._
    8_d._ in the towns. If you could find a means of opening a
    direct communication between the workman and the consumer, you
    might have them for 1_s._ 2_d._, and we should each gain 6_d._
    by the transaction.'"[5]

To a similar effect Owen, in the _Book of the New Moral World_, part
2, chap. iii.

    "The principle now in practice is to induce a large portion of
    society to devote their lives to distribute wealth upon a large,
    a medium, and a small scale, and to have it conveyed from place
    to place in larger or smaller quantities, to meet the means and
    wants of various divisions of society and individuals, as they
    are now situated in cities, towns, villages, and country places.
    This principle of distribution makes a class in society whose
    business is to _buy from_ some parties and to _sell to_ others.
    By this proceeding they are placed under circumstances which
    induce them to endeavor to buy at what appears at the time a low
    price in the market, and to sell again at the greatest permanent
    profit which they can obtain. Their real object being to get as
    much profit as gain between the seller to, and the buyer from
    them, as can be effected in their transactions.

    "There are innumerable errors in principle and evils in practice
    which necessarily proceed from this mode of distributing the
    wealth of society.

    "1st. A general class of distributers is formed, whose interest
    is separated from, and apparently opposed to, that of the
    individual from whom they buy and to whom they sell.

    "2nd. Three classes of distributers are made, the small, the
    medium, and the large buyers and sellers; or the retailers, the
    wholesale dealers, and the extensive merchants.

    "3rd. Three classes of buyers thus created constitute the small,
    the medium, and the large purchasers.

    "By this arrangement into various classes of buyers and sellers,
    the parties are easily trained to learn that they have separate
    and opposing interests, and different ranks and stations in
    society. An inequality of feeling and condition is thus created
    and maintained, with all the servility and pride which these
    unequal arrangements are sure to produce. The parties are
    regularly trained in a general system of deception, in order
    that they may be the more successful in buying cheap and selling
    dear.

    "The smaller sellers acquire habits of injurious idleness,
    waiting often for hours for customers. And this evil is
    experienced to a considerable extent even amongst the class of
    wholesale dealers.

    "There are, also, by this arrangement, many more establishments
    for selling than are necessary in the villages, towns, and
    cities; and a very large capital is thus wasted without benefit
    to society. And from their number opposed to each other all over
    the country to obtain customers, they endeavor to undersell each
    other, and are therefore continually endeavoring to injure the
    producer by the establishment of what are called cheap shops and
    warehouses; and to support their character the master or his
    servants must be continually on the watch to buy bargains, that
    is, to procure wealth for less than the cost of its production.

    "The distributers, small, medium, and large, have all to be
    supported by the producers, and the greater the number of the
    former compared with the latter, the greater will be the burden
    which the producer has to sustain; for as the number of
    distributers increases, the accumulation of wealth must
    decrease, and more must be required from the producer.

    "The distributers of wealth, under the present system, are a
    dead weight upon the producers, and are most active demoralisers
    of society. Their dependent condition, at the commencement of
    their task, teaches or induces them to be servile to their
    customers, and to continue to be so as long as they are
    accumulating wealth by their cheap buying and dear selling. But
    when they have secured sufficient to be what they imagine to be
    an independence--to live without business--they are too often
    filled with a most ignorant pride, and become insolent to their
    dependents.

    "The arrangement is altogether a most improvident one for
    society, whose interest it is to produce the greatest amount of
    wealth of the best qualities; while the existing system of
    distribution is not only to withdraw great numbers from
    producing to become distributers, but to add to the cost of the
    consumer all the expense of a most wasteful and extravagant
    distribution; the distribution costing to the consumer many
    times the price of the original cost of the wealth purchased.

    "Then, by the position in which the seller is placed by his
    created desire for gain on the one hand, and the competition he
    meets with from opponents selling similar productions on the
    other, he is strongly tempted to deteriorate the articles which
    he has for sale; and when these are provisions, either of home
    production or of foreign importation, the effects upon the
    health, and consequent comfort and happiness of the consumers,
    are often most injurious, and productive of much premature
    death, especially among the working classes, who, in this
    respect, are perhaps made to be the greatest sufferers, by
    purchasing the inferior or low-priced articles.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The expense of thus distributing wealth in Great Britain and
    Ireland, including transit from place to place, and all the
    agents directly and indirectly engaged in this department, is,
    perhaps, little short of one hundred millions annually, without
    taking into consideration the deterioration of the quality of
    many of the articles constituting this wealth, by carriage, and
    by being divided into small quantities, and kept in improper
    stores and places, in which the atmosphere is unfavorable to the
    keeping of such articles in a tolerably good, and much less in
    the best, condition for use."

In further illustration of the contrariety of interests between person
and person, class and class, which pervades the present constitution
of society, M. Considérant adds:--

    "If the wine-growers wish for free trade, this freedom ruins the
    producer of corn, the manufacturers of iron, of cloth, of
    cotton, and--we are compelled to add--the smuggler and the
    customs' officer. If it is the interest of the consumer that
    machines should be invented which lower prices by rendering
    production less costly, these same machines throw out of work
    thousands of workmen who do not know how to, and cannot at once,
    find other work. Here, then, again is one of the innumerable
    _vicious circles_ of civilisation ... for there are a thousand
    facts which prove cumulatively that in our existing social
    system the introduction of any good brings always along with it
    some evil.

    "In short, if we go lower down and come to vulgar details, we
    find that it is the interest of the tailor, the shoemaker, and
    the hatter that coats, shoes, and hats should be soon worn out;
    that the glazier profits by the hail-storms which break windows;
    that the mason and the architect profit by fires; the lawyer is
    enriched by law-suits; the doctor by disease; the wine-seller by
    drunkenness; the prostitute by debauchery. And what a disaster
    it would be for the judges, the police, and the jailers, as well
    as for the barristers and the solicitors, and all the lawyers'
    clerks, if crimes, offences, and law-suits were all at once to
    come to an end!"[6]

The following is one of the cardinal points of this school:--

    "Add to all this, that civilisation, which sows dissension and
    war on every side; which employs a great part of its powers in
    unproductive labor or even in destruction; which furthermore
    diminishes the public wealth by the unnecessary friction and
    discord it introduces into industry; add to all this, I say,
    that this same social system has for its special characteristic
    to produce a repugnance for work--a disgust for labor.

    "Everywhere you hear the laborer, the artisan, the clerk
    complain of his position and his occupation, while they long for
    the time when they can retire from work imposed upon them by
    necessity. To be repugnant, to have for its motive and pivot
    nothing but the fear of starvation, is the great, the fatal,
    characteristic of civilised labor. The civilised workman is
    condemned to penal servitude. So long as productive labor is so
    organized that instead of being associated with pleasure it is
    associated with pain, weariness and dislike, it will always
    happen that all will avoid it who are able. With few exceptions,
    those only will consent to work who are compelled to it by want.
    Hence the most numerous classes, the artificers of social
    wealth, the active and direct creators of all comfort and
    luxury, will always be condemned to touch closely on poverty and
    hunger; they will always be the slaves to ignorance and
    degradation; they will continue to be always that huge herd of
    mere beasts of burden whom we see ill-grown, decimated by
    disease, bowed down in the great workshop of society over the
    plow or over the counter, that they may prepare the delicate
    food, and the sumptuous enjoyments of the upper and idle
    classes.

    "So long as no method of attractive labor has been devised, it
    will continue to be true that 'there must be many poor in order
    that there may be a few rich;' a mean and hateful saying, which
    we hear every day quoted as an eternal truth from the mouths of
    people who call themselves Christians or philosophers. It is
    very easy to understand that oppression, trickery, and
    especially poverty, are the permanent and fatal appanage of
    every state of society characterized by the dislike of work,
    for, in this case, there is nothing but poverty that will force
    men to labor. And the proof of this is, that if every one of all
    the workers were to become suddenly rich, nineteen-twentieths of
    all the work now done would be abandoned."[7]

In the opinion of the Fourierists, the tendency of the present order
of society is to a concentration of wealth in the hands of a
comparatively few immensely rich individuals or companies, and the
reduction of all the rest of the community into a complete dependence
on them. This was termed by Fourier _la jeodalite industrielle_.

    "This feudalism," says M. Considérant, "would be constituted as
    soon as the largest part of the industrial and territorial
    property of the nation belongs to a minority which absorbs all
    its revenues, while the great majority, chained to the
    work-bench or laboring on the soil, must be content to gnaw the
    pittance which is cast to them."[8]

This disastrous result is to be brought about partly by the mere
progress of competition, as sketched in our previous extract by M.
Louis Blanc; assisted by the progress of national debts, which M.
Considérant regards as mortgages of the whole land and capital of the
country, of which "les capitalistes prêteurs" become, in a greater and
greater measure, co-proprietors, receiving without labor or risk an
increasing portion of the revenues.


THE SOCIALIST OBJECTIONS TO THE PRESENT ORDER OF SOCIETY EXAMINED.

It is impossible to deny that the considerations brought to notice in
the preceding chapter make out a frightful case either against the
existing order of society, or against the position of man himself in
this world. How much of the evils should be referred to the one, and
how much to the other, is the principal theoretic question which has
to be resolved. But the strongest case is susceptible of exaggeration;
and it will have been evident to many readers, even from the passages
I have quoted, that such exaggeration is not wanting in the
representations of the ablest and most candid Socialists. Though much
of their allegations is unanswerable, not a little is the result of
errors in political economy; by which, let me say once for all, I do
not mean the rejection of any practical rules of policy which have
been laid down by political economists, I mean ignorance of economic
facts, and of the causes by which the economic phenomena of society
as it is, are actually determined.

In the first place it is unhappily true that the wages of ordinary
labor, in all the countries of Europe, are wretchedly insufficient to
supply the physical and moral necessities of the population in any
tolerable measure. But, when it is further alleged that even this
insufficient remuneration has a tendency to diminish; that there is,
in the words of M. Louis Blanc, _une baisse continue des salaires_;
the assertion is in opposition to all accurate information, and to
many notorious facts. It has yet to be proved that there is any
country in the civilized world where the ordinary wages of labor,
estimated either in money or in articles of consumption, are
declining; while in many they are, on the whole, on the increase; and
an increase which is becoming, not slower, but more rapid. There are,
occasionally, branches of industry which are being gradually
superseded by something else, and, in those, until production
accommodates itself to demand, wages are depressed; which is an evil,
but a temporary one, and would admit of great alleviation even in the
present system of social economy. A diminution thus produced of the
reward of labor in some particular employment is the effect and the
evidence of increased remuneration, or of a new source of
remuneration, in some other; the total and the average remuneration
being undiminished, or even increased. To make out an appearance of
diminution in the rate of wages in any leading branch of industry, it
is always found necessary to compare some month or year of special and
temporary depression at the present time, with the average rate, or
even some exceptionally high rate, at an earlier time. The
vicissitudes are no doubt a great evil, but they were as frequent and
as severe in former periods of economical history as now. The greater
scale of the transactions, and the greater number of persons involved
in each fluctuation, may make the fluctuation appear greater, but
though a larger population affords more sufferers, the evil does not
weigh heavier on each of them individually. There is much evidence of
improvement, and none, that is at all trustworthy, of deterioration,
in the mode of living of the laboring population of the countries of
Europe; when there is any appearance to the contrary it is local or
partial, and can always be traced either to the pressure of some
temporary calamity, or to some bad law or unwise act of government
which admits of being corrected, while the permanent causes all
operate in the direction of improvement.

M. Louis Blanc, therefore, while showing himself much more enlightened
than the older school of levellers and democrats, inasmuch as he
recognizes the connection between low wages and the over-rapid
increase of population, appears to have fallen into the same error
which was at first committed by Malthus and his followers, that of
supposing that because population has a greater power of increase than
subsistence, its pressure upon subsistence must be always growing more
severe. The difference is that the early Malthusians thought this an
irrepressible tendency, while M. Louis Blanc thinks that it can be
repressed, but only under a system of Communism. It is a great point
gained for truth when it comes to be seen that the tendency to
over-population is a fact which Communism, as well as the existing
order of society, would have to deal with. And it is much to be
rejoiced at that this necessity is admitted by the most considerable
chiefs of all existing schools of Socialism. Owen and Fourier, no less
than M. Louis Blanc, admitted it, and claimed for their respective
systems a pre-eminent power of dealing with this difficulty. However
this may be, experience shows that in the existing state of society
the pressure of population on subsistence, which is the principal
cause of low wages, though a great, is not an increasing evil; on the
contrary, the progress of all that is called civilization has a
tendency to diminish it, partly by the more rapid increase of the
means of employing and maintaining labor, partly by the increased
facilities opened to labor for transporting itself to new countries
and unoccupied fields of employment, and partly by a general
improvement in the intelligence and prudence of the population. This
progress, no doubt, is slow; but it is much that such progress should
take place at all, while we are still only in the first stage of that
public movement for the education of the whole people, which when more
advanced must add greatly to the force of all the two causes of
improvement specified above. It is, of course, open to discussion what
form of society has the greatest power of dealing successfully with
the pressure of population on subsistence, and on this question there
is much to be said for Socialism; what was long thought to be its
weakest point will, perhaps, prove to be one of its strongest. But it
has no just claim to be considered as the sole means of preventing the
general and growing degradation of the mass of mankind through the
peculiar tendency of poverty to produce over-population. Society as at
present constituted is not descending into that abyss, but gradually,
though slowly, rising out of it, and this improvement is likely to be
progressive if bad laws do not interfere with it.

Next, it must be observed that Socialists generally, and even the most
enlightened of them, have a very imperfect and one-sided notion of the
operation of competition. They see half its effects, and overlook the
other half; they regard it as an agency for grinding down every one's
remuneration--for obliging every one to accept less wages for his
labor, or a less price for his commodities, which would be true only
if every one had to dispose of his labor or his commodities to some
great monopolist, and the competition were all on one side. They
forget that competition is a cause of high prices and values as well
as of low; that the buyers of labor and of commodities compete with
one another as well as the sellers; and that if it is competition
which keeps the prices of labor and commodities as low as they are, it
is competition which prevents them from falling still lower. In truth,
when competition is perfectly free on both sides, its tendency is not
specially either to raise or to lower the price of articles, but to
equalize it; to level inequalities of remuneration, and to reduce all
to a general average, a result which, in so far as realized (no doubt
very imperfectly), is, on Socialistic principles, desirable. But if,
disregarding for the time that part of the effects of competition
which consists in keeping up prices, we fix our attention on its
effect in keeping them down, and contemplate this effect in reference
solely to the interest of the laboring classes, it would seem that if
competition keeps down wages, and so gives a motive to the laboring
classes to withdraw the labor market from the full influence of
competition, if they can, it must on the other hand have credit for
keeping down the prices of the articles on which wages are expended,
to the great advantage of those who depend on wages. To meet this
consideration Socialists, as we said in our quotation from M. Louis
Blanc, are reduced to affirm that the low prices of commodities
produced by competition are delusive and lead in the end to higher
prices than before, because when the richest competitor has got rid of
all his rivals, he commands the market and can demand any price he
pleases. Now, the commonest experience shows that this state of
things, under really free competition, is wholly imaginary. The
richest competitor neither does nor can get rid of all his rivals, and
establish himself in exclusive possession of the market; and it is not
the fact that any important branch of industry or commerce formerly
divided among many has become, or shows any tendency to become, the
monopoly of a few.

The kind of policy described is sometimes possible where, as in the
case of railways, the only competition possible is between two or
three great companies, the operations being on too vast a scale to be
within the reach of individual capitalists; and this is one of the
reasons why businesses which require to be carried on by great
joint-stock enterprises cannot be trusted to competition, but, when
not reserved by the State to itself, ought to be carried on under
conditions prescribed, and, from time to time, varied by the State,
for the purpose of insuring to the public a cheaper supply of its
wants than would be afforded by private interest in the absence of
sufficient competition. But in the ordinary branches of industry no
one rich competitor has it in his power to drive out all the smaller
ones. Some businesses show a tendency to pass out of the hands of many
small producers or dealers into a smaller number of larger ones; but
the cases in which this happens are those in which the possession of a
larger capital permits the adoption of more powerful machinery, more
efficient by more expensive processes, or a better organized and more
economical mode of carrying on business, and thus enables the large
dealer legitimately and permanently to supply the commodity cheaper
than can be done on the small scale; to the great advantage of the
consumers, and therefore of the laboring classes, and diminishing,
_pro tanto_, that waste of the resources of the community so much
complained of by Socialists, the unnecessary multiplication of mere
distributors, and of the various other classes whom Fourier calls the
parasites of industry. When this change is effected, the larger
capitalists, either individual or joint stock, among which the
business is divided, are seldom, if ever, in any considerable branch
of commerce, so few as that competition shall not continue to act
between them; so that the saving in cost, which enabled them to
undersell the small dealers, continues afterwards, as at first, to be
passed on, in lower prices, to their customers. The operation,
therefore, of competition in keeping down the prices of commodities,
including those on which wages are expended, is not illusive but real,
and, we may add, is a growing, not a declining, fact.

But there are other respects, equally important, in which the charges
brought by Socialists against competition do not admit of so complete
an answer. Competition is the best security for cheapness, but by no
means a security for quality. In former times, when producers and
consumers were less numerous, it was a security for both. The market
was not large enough nor the means of publicity sufficient to enable a
dealer to make a fortune by continually attracting new customers: his
success depended on his retaining those that he had; and when a dealer
furnished good articles, or when he did not, the fact was soon known
to those whom it concerned, and he acquired a character for honest or
dishonest dealing of more importance to him than the gain that would
be made by cheating casual purchasers. But on the great scale of
modern transactions, with the great multiplication of competition and
the immense increase in the quantity of business competed for, dealers
are so little dependent on permanent customers that character is much
less essential to them, while there is also far less certainty of
their obtaining the character they deserve. The low prices which a
tradesman advertises are known, to a thousand for one who has
discovered for himself or learned from others, that the bad quality of
the goods is more than an equivalent for their cheapness; while at the
same time the much greater fortunes now made by some dealers excite
the cupidity of all, and the greed of rapid gain substitutes itself
for the modest desire to make a living by their business. In this
manner, as wealth increases and greater prizes seem to be within
reach, more and more of a gambling spirit is introduced into
commerce; and where this prevails not only are the simplest maxims of
prudence disregarded, but all, even the most perilous, forms of
pecuniary improbity receive a terrible stimulus. This is the meaning
of what is called the intensity of modern competition. It is further
to be mentioned that when this intensity has reached a certain height,
and when a portion of the producers of an article or the dealers in it
have resorted to any of the modes of fraud, such as adulteration,
giving short measure, &c., of the increase of which there is now so
much complaint, the temptation is immense on these to adopt the
fraudulent practises, who would not have originated them; for the
public are aware of the low prices fallaciously produced by the
frauds, but do not find out at first, if ever, that the article is not
worth the lower price, and they will not go on paying a higher price
for a better article, and the honest dealer is placed at a terrible
disadvantage. Thus the frauds, begun by a few, become customs of the
trade, and the morality of the trading classes is more and more
deteriorated.

On this point, therefore, Socialists have really made out the
existence not only of a great evil, but of one which grows and tends
to grow with the growth of population and wealth. It must be said,
however, that society has never yet used the means which are already
in its power of grappling with this evil. The laws against commercial
frauds are very defective, and their execution still more so. Laws of
this description have no chance of being really enforced unless it is
the special duty of some one to enforce them. They are specially in
need of a public prosecutor. It is still to be discovered how far it
is possible to repress by means of the criminal law a class of
misdeeds which are now seldom brought before the tribunals, and to
which, when brought, the judicial administration of this country is
most unduly lenient. The most important class, however, of these
frauds, to the mass of the people, those which affect the price or
quality of articles of daily consumption, can be in a great measure
overcome by the institution of co-operative stores. By this plan any
body of consumers who form themselves into an association for the
purpose, are enabled to pass over the retail dealers and obtain their
articles direct from the wholesale merchants, or, what is better (now
that wholesale co-operative agencies have been established), from the
producers, thus freeing themselves from the heavy tax now paid to the
distributing classes and at the same time eliminate the usual
perpetrators of adulterations and other frauds. Distribution thus
becomes a work performed by agents selected and paid by those who have
no interest in anything but the cheapness and goodness of the article;
and the distributors are capable of being thus reduced to the numbers
which the quantity of work to be done really requires. The
difficulties of the plan consist in the skill and trustworthiness
required in the managers, and the imperfect nature of the control
which can be exercised over them by the body at large. The great
success and rapid growth of the system prove, however, that these
difficulties are, in some tolerable degree, overcome. At all events,
if the beneficial tendency of the competition of retailers in
promoting cheapness is fore-gone, and has to be replaced by other
securities, the mischievous tendency of the same competition in
deteriorating quality is at any rate got rid of; and the prosperity of
the co-operative stores shows that this benefit is obtained not only
without detriment to cheapness, but with great advantage to it, since
the profits of the concerns enable them to return to the consumers a
large percentage on the price of every article supplied to them. So
far, therefore, as this class of evils is concerned, an effectual
remedy is already in operation, which, though suggested by and partly
grounded on socialistic principles, is consistent with the existing
constitution of property.

With regard to those greater and more conspicuous economical frauds,
or malpractices equivalent to frauds, of which so many deplorable
cases have become notorious--committed by merchants and bankers
between themselves or between them and those who have trusted them
with money, such a remedy as above described is not available, and the
only resources which the present constitution of society affords
against them are a sterner reprobation by opinion, and a more
efficient repression by the law. Neither of these remedies has had any
approach to an effectual trial. It is on the occurrence of
insolvencies that these dishonest practices usually come to light; the
perpetrators take their place, not in the class of malefactors, but in
that of insolvent debtors; and the laws of this and other countries
were formerly so savage against simple insolvency, that by one of
those reactions to which the opinions of mankind are liable,
insolvents came to be regarded mainly as objects of compassion, and it
seemed to be thought that the hand both of law and of public opinion
could hardly press too lightly upon them. By an error in a contrary
direction to the ordinary one of our law, which in the punishment of
offences in general wholly neglects the question of reparation to the
sufferer, our bankruptcy laws have for some time treated the recovery
for creditors of what is left of their property as almost the sole
object, scarcely any importance being attached to the punishment of
the bankrupt for any misconduct which does not directly interfere with
that primary purpose. For three or four years past there has been a
slight counter-reaction, and more than one bankruptcy act has been
passed, somewhat less indulgent to the bankrupt; but the primary
object regarded has still been the pecuniary interest of the
creditors, and criminality in the bankrupt himself, with the exception
of a small number of well-marked offences, gets off almost with
impunity. It may be confidently affirmed, therefore, that, at least in
this country, society has not exerted the power it possesses of making
mercantile dishonesty dangerous to the perpetrator. On the contrary,
it is a gambling trick in which all the advantage is on the side of
the trickster: if the trick succeeds it makes his fortune, or
preserves it; if it fails, he is at most reduced to poverty, which was
perhaps already impending when he determined to run the chance, and
he is classed by those who have not looked closely into the matter,
and even by many who have, not among the infamous but among the
unfortunate. Until a more moral and rational mode of dealing with
culpable insolvency has been tried and failed, commercial dishonesty
cannot be ranked among evils the prevalence of which is inseparable
from commercial competition.

Another point on which there is much misapprehension on the part of
Socialists, as well as of Trades Unionists and other partisans of
Labor against Capital, relates to the proportions in which the produce
of the country is really shared and the amount of what is actually
diverted from those who produce it, to enrich other persons. I forbear
for the present to speak of the land, which is a subject apart. But
with respect to capital employed in business, there is in the popular
notions a great deal of illusion. When, for instance, a capitalist
invests £20,000 in his business, and draws from it an income of
(suppose) £2,000 a year, the common impression is as if he was the
beneficial owner both of the £20,000 and of the £2,000, while the
laborers own nothing but their wages. The truth, however, is, that he
only obtains the £2,000 on condition of applying no part of the
£20,000 to his own use. He has the legal control over it, and might
squander it if he chose, but if he did he would not have the £2,000 a
year also. As long as he derives an income from his capital he has not
the option of withholding it from the use of others. As much of his
invested capital as consists of buildings, machinery, and other
instruments of production, are applied to production and are not
applicable to the support or enjoyment of any one. What is so
applicable (including what is laid out in keeping up or renewing the
buildings and instruments) is paid away to laborers, forming their
remuneration and their share in the division of the produce. For all
personal purposes they have the capital and he has but the profits,
which it only yields to him on condition that the capital itself is
employed in satisfying not his own wants, but those of laborers. The
proportion which the profits of capital usually bear to capital itself
(or rather to the circulating portion of it) is the ratio which the
capitalist's share of the produce bears to the aggregate share of the
laborers. Even of his own share a small part only belongs to him as
the owner of capital. The portion of the produce which falls to
capital merely as capital is measured by the interest of money, since
that is all that the owner of capital obtains when he contributes
nothing to production except the capital itself. Now the interest of
capital in the public funds, which are considered to be the best
security, is at the present prices (which have not varied much for
many years) about three and one-third per cent. Even in this
investment there is some little risk--risk of repudiation, risk of
being obliged to sell out at a low price in some commercial crisis.

Estimating these risks at 1/3 per cent., the remaining 3 per cent. may
be considered as the remuneration of capital, apart from insurance
against loss. On the security of a mortgage 4 per cent. is generally
obtained, but in this transaction there are considerably greater
risks--the uncertainty of titles to land under our bad system of law;
the chance of having to realize the security at a great cost in law
charges; and liability to delay in the receipt of the interest even
when the principal is safe. When mere money independently of exertion
yields a larger income, as it sometimes does, for example, by shares
in railway or other companies, the surplus is hardly ever an
equivalent for the risk of losing the whole, or part, of the capital
by mismanagement, as in the case of the Brighton Railway, the dividend
of which, after having been 6 per cent. per annum, sunk to from
nothing to 1-1/2 per cent., and shares which had been bought at 120
could not be sold for more than about 43. When money is lent at the
high rates of interest one occasionally hears of, rates only given by
spend-thrifts and needy persons, it is because the risk of loss is so
great that few who possess money can be induced to lend to them at
all. So little reason is there for the outcry against "usury" as one
of the grievous burthens of the working-classes. Of the profits,
therefore, which a manufacturer or other person in business obtains
from his capital no more than about 3 per cent. can be set down to the
capital itself. If he were able and willing to give up the whole of
this to his laborers, who already share among them the whole of his
capital as it is annually reproduced from year to year, the addition
to their weekly wages would be inconsiderable. Of what he obtains
beyond 3 per cent. a great part is insurance against the manifold
losses he is exposed to, and cannot safely be applied to his own use,
but requires to be kept in reserve to cover those losses when they
occur. The remainder is properly the remuneration of his skill and
industry--the wages of his labor of superintendence. No doubt if he is
very successful in business these wages of his are extremely liberal,
and quite out of proportion to what the same skill and industry would
command if offered for hire. But, on the other hand, he runs a worse
risk than that of being out of employment; that of doing the work
without earning anything by it, of having the labor and anxiety
without the wages. I do not say that the drawbacks balance the
privileges, or that he derives no advantage from the position which
makes him a capitalist and employer of labor, instead of a skilled
superintendent letting out his services to others; but the amount of
his advantage must not be estimated by the great prizes alone. If we
subtract from the gains of some the losses of others, and deduct from
the balance a fair compensation for the anxiety, skill, and labor of
both, grounded on the market price of skilled superintendence, what
remains will be, no doubt, considerable, but yet, when compared to the
entire capital of the country, annually reproduced and dispensed in
wages, it is very much smaller than it appears to the popular
imagination; and were the whole of it added to the share of the
laborers it would make a less addition to that share than would be
made by any important invention in machinery, or by the suppression of
unnecessary distributors and other "parasites of industry." To
complete the estimate, however, of the portion of the produce of
industry which goes to remunerate capital we must not stop at the
interest earned out of the produce by the capital actually employed in
producing it, but must include that which is paid to the former owners
of capital which has been unproductively spent and no longer exists,
and is paid, of course, out of the produce of other capital. Of this
nature is the interest of national debts, which is the cost a nation
is burthened with for past difficulties and dangers, or for past folly
or profligacy of its rulers, more or less shared by the nation itself.
To this must be added the interest on the debts of landowners and
other unproductive consumers; except so far as the money borrowed may
have been spent in remunerative improvement of the productive powers
of the land. As for landed property itself--the appropriation of the
rent of land by private individuals--I reserve, as I have said, this
question for discussion hereafter; for the tenure of land might be
varied in any manner considered desirable, all the land might be
declared the property of the State, without interfering with the right
of property in anything which is the product of human labor and
abstinence.

It seemed desirable to begin the discussion of the Socialist question
by these remarks in abatement of Socialist exaggerations, in order
that the true issues between Socialism and the existing state of
society might be correctly conceived. The present system is not, as
many Socialists believe, hurrying us into a state of general indigence
and slavery from which only Socialism can save us. The evils and
injustices suffered under the present system are great, but they are
not increasing; on the contrary, the general tendency is towards their
slow diminution. Moreover the inequalities in the distribution of the
produce between capital and labor, however they may shock the feeling
of natural justice, would not by their mere equalisation afford by any
means so large a fund for raising the lower levels of remuneration as
Socialists, and many besides Socialists, are apt to suppose. There is
not any one abuse or injustice now prevailing in society by merely
abolishing which the human race would pass out of suffering into
happiness. What is incumbent on us is a calm comparison between two
different systems of society, with a view of determining which of them
affords the greatest resources for overcoming the inevitable
difficulties of life. And if we find the answer to this question more
difficult, and more dependent upon intellectual and moral conditions,
than is usually thought, it is satisfactory to reflect that there is
time before us for the question to work itself out on an experimental
scale, by actual trial. I believe we shall find that no other test is
possible of the practicability or beneficial operation of Socialist
arrangements; but that the intellectual and moral grounds of Socialism
deserve the most attentive study, as affording in many cases the
guiding principles of the improvements necessary to give the present
economic system of society its best chance.


THE DIFFICULTIES OF SOCIALISM.

Among those who call themselves Socialists, two kinds of persons may
be distinguished. There are, in the first place, those whose plans for
a new order of society, in which private property and individual
competition are to be superseded and other motives to action
substituted, are on the scale of a village community or township, and
would be applied to an entire country by the multiplication of such
self-acting units; of this character are the systems of Owen, of
Fourier, and the more thoughtful and philosophic Socialists generally.
The other class, who are more a product of the Continent than of Great
Britain and may be called the revolutionary Socialists, propose to
themselves a much bolder stroke. Their scheme is the management of the
whole productive resources of the country by one central authority,
the general government. And with this view some of them avow as their
purpose that the working classes, or somebody in their behalf, should
take possession of all the property of the country, and administer it
for the general benefit.

Whatever be the difficulties of the first of these two forms of
Socialism, the second must evidently involve the same difficulties and
many more. The former, too, has the great advantage that it can be
brought into operation progressively, and can prove its capabilities
by trial. It can be tried first on a select population and extended to
others as their education and cultivation permit. It need not, and in
the natural order of things would not, become an engine of subversion
until it had shown itself capable of being also a means of
reconstruction. It is not so with the other: the aim of that is to
substitute the new rule for the old at a single stroke, and to
exchange the amount of good realised under the present system, and its
large possibilities of improvement, for a plunge without any
preparation into the most extreme form of the problem of carrying on
the whole round of the operations of social life without the motive
power which has always hitherto worked the social machinery. It must
be acknowledged that those who would play this game on the strength of
their own private opinion, unconfirmed as yet by any experimental
verification--who would forcibly deprive all who have now a
comfortable physical existence of their only present means of
preserving it, and would brave the frightful bloodshed and misery that
would ensue if the attempt was resisted--must have a serene confidence
in their own wisdom on the one hand and a recklessness of other
people's sufferings on the other, which Robespierre and St. Just,
hitherto the typical instances of those united attributes, scarcely
came up to. Nevertheless this scheme has great elements of popularity
which the more cautious and reasonable form of Socialism has not;
because what it professes to do it promises to do quickly, and holds
out hope to the enthusiastic of seeing the whole of their aspirations
realised in their own time and at a blow.

The peculiarities, however, of the revolutionary form of Socialism
will be most conveniently examined after the considerations common to
both the forms have been duly weighed.

The produce of the world could not attain anything approaching to its
present amount, nor support anything approaching to the present number
of its inhabitants, except upon two conditions: abundant and costly
machinery, buildings, and other instruments of production; and the
power of undertaking long operations and waiting a considerable time
for their fruits. In other words, there must be a large accumulation
of capital, both fixed in the implements and buildings, and
circulating, that is employed in maintaining the laborers and their
families during the time which elapses before the productive
operations are completed and the products come in. This necessity
depends on physical laws, and is inherent in the condition of human
life; but these requisites of production, the capital, fixed and
circulating, of the country (to which has to be added the land, and
all that is contained in it), may either be the collective property of
those who use it, or may belong to individuals; and the question is,
which of these arrangements is most conducive to human happiness. What
is characteristic of Socialism is the joint ownership by all the
members of the community of the instruments and means of production;
which carries with it the consequence that the division of the produce
among the body of owners must be a public act, performed according to
rules laid down by the community. Socialism by no means excludes
private ownership of articles of consumption; the exclusive right of
each to his or her share of the produce when received, either to
enjoy, to give, or to exchange it. The land, for example, might be
wholly the property of the community for agricultural and other
productive purposes, and might be cultivated on their joint account,
and yet the dwelling assigned to each individual or family as part of
their remuneration might be as exclusively theirs, while they
continued to fulfil their share of the common labors, as any one's
house now is; and not the dwelling only, but any ornamental ground
which the circumstances of the association allowed to be attached to
the house for purposes of enjoyment. The distinctive feature of
Socialism is not that all things are in common, but that production is
only carried on upon the common account, and that the instruments of
production are held as common property. The _practicability_ then of
Socialism, on the scale of Mr. Owen's or M. Fourier's villages, admits
of no dispute. The attempt to manage the whole production of a nation
by one central organization is a totally different matter; but a mixed
agricultural and manufacturing association of from two thousand to
four thousand inhabitants under any tolerable circumstances of soil
and climate would be easier to manage than many a joint stock company.
The question to be considered is, whether this joint management is
likely to be as efficient and successful as the managements of private
industry by private capital. And this question has to be considered in
a double aspect; the efficiency of the directing mind, or minds, and
that of the simple workpeople. And in order to state this question in
its simplest form, we will suppose the form of Socialism to be simple
Communism, _i.e._ equal division of the produce among all the sharers,
or, according to M. Louis Blanc's still higher standard of justice,
apportionment of it according to difference of need, but without
making any difference of reward according to the nature of the duty
nor according to the supposed merits or services of the individual.
There are other forms of Socialism, particularly Fourierism, which do,
on considerations of justice or expediency, allow differences of
remuneration for different kinds or degrees of service to the
community; but the consideration of these may be for the present
postponed.

The difference between the motive powers in the economy of society
under private property and under Communism would be greatest in the
case of the directing minds. Under the present system, the direction
being entirely in the hands of the person or persons who own (or are
personally responsible for) the capital, the whole benefit of the
difference between the best administration and the worst under which
the business can continue to be carried on accrues to the person or
persons who control the administration: they reap the whole profit of
good management except so far as their self-interest or liberality
induce them to share it with their subordinates; and they suffer the
whole detriment of mismanagement except so far as this may cripple
their subsequent power of employing labor. This strong personal motive
to do their very best and utmost for the efficiency and economy of the
operations, would not exist under Communism; as the managers would
only receive out of the produce the same equal dividend as the other
members of the association. What would remain would be the interest
common to all in so managing affairs as to make the dividend as large
as possible; the incentives of public spirit, of conscience, and of
the honor and credit of the managers. The force of these motives,
especially when combined, is great. But it varies greatly in different
persons, and is much greater for some purposes than for others. The
verdict of experience, in the imperfect degree of moral cultivation
which mankind have yet reached, is that the motive of conscience and
that of credit and reputation, even when they are of some strength,
are, in the majority of cases, much stronger as restraining than as
impelling forces--are more to be depended on for preventing wrong,
than for calling forth the fullest energies in the pursuit of ordinary
occupations. In the case of most men the only inducement which has
been found sufficiently constant and unflagging to overcome the
ever-present influence of indolence and love of ease, and induce men
to apply themselves unrelaxingly to work for the most part in itself
dull and unexciting, is the prospect of bettering their own economic
condition and that of their family; and the closer the connection of
every increase of exertion with a corresponding increase of its
fruits, the more powerful is this motive. To suppose the contrary
would be to imply that with men as they now are, duty and honor are
more powerful principles of action than personal interest, not solely
as to special acts and forbearances respecting which those sentiments
have been exceptionally cultivated, but in the regulation of their
whole lives; which no one, I suppose, will affirm. It may be said that
this inferior efficacy of public and social feelings is not
inevitable--is the result of imperfect education. This I am quite
ready to admit, and also that there are even now many individual
exceptions to the general infirmity. But before these exceptions can
grow into a majority, or even into a very large minority, much time
will be required. The education of human beings is one of the most
difficult of all arts, and this is one of the points in which it has
hitherto been least successful; moreover improvements in general
education are necessarily very gradual because the future generation
is educated by the present, and the imperfections of the teachers set
an invincible limit to the degree in which they can train their pupils
to be better than themselves. We must therefore expect, unless we are
operating upon a select portion of the population, that personal
interest will for a long time be a more effective stimulus to the most
vigorous and careful conduct of the industrial business of society
than motives of a higher character. It will be said that at present
the greed of personal gain by its very excess counteracts its own end
by the stimulus it gives to reckless and often dishonest risks. This
it does, and under Communism that source of evil would generally be
absent. It is probable, indeed, that enterprise either of a bad or of
a good kind would be a deficient element, and that business in general
would fall very much under the dominion of routine; the rather, as the
performance of duty in such communities has to be enforced by external
sanctions, the more nearly each person's duty can be reduced to fixed
rules, the easier it is to hold him to its performance. A circumstance
which increases the probability of this result is the limited power
which the managers would have of independent action. They would of
course hold their authority from the choice of the community, by whom
their function might at any time be withdrawn from them; and this
would make it necessary for them, even if not so required by the
constitution of the community, to obtain the general consent of the
body before making any change in the established mode of carrying on
the concern. The difficulty of persuading a numerous body to make a
change in their accustomed mode of working, of which change the
trouble is often great, and the risk more obvious to their minds than
the advantage, would have a great tendency to keep things in their
accustomed track. Against this it has to be set, that choice by the
persons who are directly interested in the success of the work, and
who have practical knowledge and opportunities of judgment, might be
expected on the average to produce managers of greater skill than the
chances of birth, which now so often determine who shall be the owner
of the capital. This may be true; and though it may be replied that
the capitalist by inheritance can also, like the community, appoint a
manager more capable than himself, this would only place him on the
same level of advantage as the community, not on a higher level. But
it must be said on the other side that under the Communist system the
persons most qualified for the management would be likely very often
to hang back from undertaking it. At present the manager, even if he
be a hired servant, has a very much larger remuneration than the other
persons concerned in the business; and there are open to his ambition
higher social positions to which his function of manager is a
stepping-stone. On the Communist system none of these advantages would
be possessed by him; he could obtain only the same dividend out of the
produce of the community's labor as any other member of it; he would
no longer have the chance of raising himself from a receiver of wages
into the class of capitalists; and while he could be in no way better
off than any other laborer, his responsibilities and anxieties would
be so much greater that a large proportion of mankind would be likely
to prefer the less onerous position. This difficulty was foreseen by
Plato as an objection to the system proposed in his Republic of
community of goods among a governing class; and the motive on which he
relied for inducing the fit persons to take on themselves, in the
absence of all the ordinary inducements, the cares and labors of
government, was the fear of being governed by worse men. This, in
truth, is the motive which would have to be in the main depended upon;
the persons most competent to the management would be prompted to
undertake the office to prevent it from falling into less competent
hands. And the motive would probably be effectual at times when there
was an impression that by incompetent management the affairs of the
community were going to ruin, or even only decidedly deteriorating.
But this motive could not, as a rule, expect to be called into action
by the less stringent inducement of merely promoting improvement;
unless in the case of inventors or schemers eager to try some device
from which they hoped for great and immediate fruits; and persons of
this kind are very often unfitted by over-sanguine temper and
imperfect judgment for the general conduct of affairs, while even when
fitted for it they are precisely the kind of persons against whom the
average man is apt to entertain a prejudice, and they would often be
unable to overcome the preliminary difficulty of persuading the
community both to adopt their project and to accept them as managers.
Communistic management would thus be, in all probability, less
favorable than private management to that striking out of new paths
and making immediate sacrifices for distant and uncertain advantages,
which, though seldom unattended with risk, is generally indispensable
to great improvements in the economic condition of mankind, and even
to keeping up the existing state in the face of a continual increase
of the number of mouths to be fed.

We have thus far taken account only of the operation of motives upon
the managing minds of the association. Let us now consider how the
case stands in regard to the ordinary workers.

These, under Communism, would have no interest, except their share of
the general interest, in doing their work honestly and energetically.
But in this respect matters would be no worse than they now are in
regard to the great majority of the producing classes. These, being
paid by fixed wages, are so far from having any direct interest of
their own in the efficiency of their work, that they have not even
that share in the general interest which every worker would have in
the Communistic organization. Accordingly, the inefficiency of hired
labor, the imperfect manner in which it calls forth the real
capabilities of the laborers, is matter of common remark. It is true
that a character for being a good workman is far from being without
its value, as it tends to give him a preference in employment, and
sometimes obtains for him higher wages. There are also possibilities
of rising to the position of foreman, or other subordinate
administrative posts, which are not only more highly paid than
ordinary labor, but sometimes open the way to ulterior advantages. But
on the other side is to be set that under Communism the general
sentiment of the community, composed of the comrades under whose eyes
each person works, would be sure to be in favor of good and hard
working, and unfavorable to laziness, carelessness, and waste. In the
present system not only is this not the case, but the public opinion
of the workman class often acts in the very opposite direction: the
rules of some trade societies actually forbid their members to exceed
a certain standard of efficiency, lest they should diminish the number
of laborers required for the work; and for the same reason they often
violently resist contrivances for economising labor. The change from
this to a state in which every person would have an interest in
rendering every other person as industrious, skilful, and careful as
possible (which would be the case under Communism), would be a change
very much for the better.

It is, however, to be considered that the principal defects of the
present system in respect to the efficiency of labor may be corrected,
and the chief advantages of Communism in that respect may be obtained,
by arrangements compatible with private property and individual
competition. Considerable improvement is already obtained by
piece-work, in the kinds of labor which admit of it. By this the
workman's personal interest is closely connected with the quantity of
work he turns out--not so much with its quality, the security for
which still has to depend on the employer's vigilance; neither does
piece-work carry with it the public opinion of the workman class,
which is often, on the contrary, strongly opposed to it, as a means of
(as they think) diminishing the market for laborers. And there is
really good ground for their dislike of piece-work, if, as is alleged,
it is a frequent practice of employers, after using piece-work to
ascertain the utmost which a good workman can do, to fix the price of
piece-work so low that by doing that utmost he is not able to earn
more than they would be obliged to give him as day wages for ordinary
work.

But there is a far more complete remedy than piece-work for the
disadvantages of hired labor, viz., what is now called industrial
partnership--the admission of the whole body of laborers to a
participation in the profits, by distributing among all who share in
the work, in the form of a percentage on their earnings, the whole or
a fixed portion of the gains after a certain remuneration has been
allowed to the capitalist. This plan has been found of admirable
efficacy, both in this country and abroad. It has enlisted the
sentiments of the workmen employed on the side of the most careful
regard by all of them to the general interest of the concern; and by
its joint effect in promoting zealous exertion and checking waste, it
has very materially increased the remuneration of every description of
labor in the concerns in which it has been adopted. It is evident that
this system admits of indefinite extension and of an indefinite
increase in the share of profits assigned to the laborers, short of
that which would leave to the managers less than the needful degree of
personal interest in the success of the concern. It is even likely
that when such arrangements become common, many of these concerns
would at some period or another, on the death or retirement of the
chief's pass, by arrangement, into the state of purely co-operative
associations.

It thus appears that as far as concerns the motives to exertion in the
general body, Communism has no advantage which may not be reached
under private property, while as respects the managing heads it is at
a considerable disadvantage. It has also some disadvantages which seem
to be inherent in it, through the necessity under which it lies of
deciding in a more or less arbitrary manner questions which, on the
present system, decide themselves, often badly enough but
spontaneously.

It is a simple rule, and under certain aspects a just one, to give
equal payment to all who share in the work. But this is a very
imperfect justice unless the work also is apportioned equally. Now the
many different kinds of work required in every society are very
unequal in hardness and unpleasantness. To measure these against one
another, so as to make quality equivalent to quantity, is so difficult
that Communists generally propose that all should work by turns at
every kind of labor. But this involves an almost complete sacrifice of
the economic advantages of the division of employments, advantages
which are indeed frequently over-estimated (or rather the counter
considerations are under-estimated) by political economists, but which
are nevertheless, in the point of view of the productiveness of labor,
very considerable, for the double reason that the co-operation of
employment enables the work to distribute itself with some regard to
the special capacities and qualifications of the worker, and also that
every worker acquires greater skill and rapidity in one kind of work
by confining himself to it. The arrangement, therefore, which is
deemed indispensable to a just distribution would probably be a very
considerable disadvantage in respect of production. But further, it is
still a very imperfect standard of justice to demand the same amount
of work from every one. People have unequal capacities of work, both
mental and bodily, and what is a light task for one is an
insupportable burthen to another. It is necessary, therefore, that
there should be a dispensing power, an authority competent to grant
exemptions from the ordinary amount of work, and to proportion tasks
in some measure to capabilities. As long as there are any lazy or
selfish persons who like better to be worked for by others than to
work, there will be frequent attempts to obtain exemptions by favor or
fraud, and the frustration of these attempts will be an affair of
considerable difficulty, and will by no means be always successful.
These inconveniences would be little felt, for some time at least, in
communities composed of select persons, earnestly desirous of the
success of the experiment; but plans for the regeneration of society
must consider average human beings, and not only them but the large
residuum of persons greatly below the average in the personal and
social virtues. The squabbles and ill-blood which could not fail to be
engendered by the distribution of work whenever such persons have to
be dealt with, would be a great abatement from the harmony and
unanimity which Communists hope would be found among the members of
their association. That concord would, even in the most fortunate
circumstances, be much more liable to disturbance than Communists
suppose. The institution provides that there shall be no quarrelling
about material interests; individualism is excluded from that
department of affairs. But there are other departments from which no
institutions can exclude it: there will still be rivalry for
reputation and for personal power. When selfish ambition is excluded
from the field in which, with most men, it chiefly exercises itself,
that of riches and pecuniary interest, it would betake itself with
greater intensity to the domain still open to it, and we may expect
that the struggles for pre-eminence and for influence in the
management would be of great bitterness when the personal passions,
diverted from their ordinary channel, are driven to seek their
principal gratification in that other direction. For these various
reasons it is probable that a Communist association would frequently
fail to exhibit the attractive picture of mutual love and unity of
will and feeling which we are often told by Communists to expect, but
would often be torn by dissension and not unfrequently broken up by
it.

Other and numerous sources of discord are inherent in the necessity
which the Communist principle involves, of deciding by the general
voice questions of the utmost importance to every one, which on the
present system can be and are left to individuals to decide, each for
his own case. As an example, take the subject of education. All
Socialists are strongly impressed with the all-importance of the
training given to the young, not only for the reasons which apply
universally, but because their demands being much greater than those
of any other system upon the intelligence and morality of the
individual citizen, they have even more at stake than any other
societies on the excellence of their educational arrangements. Now
under Communism these arrangements would have to be made for every
citizen by the collective body, since individual parents, supposing
them to prefer some other mode of educating their children, would
have no private means of paying for it, and would be limited to what
they could do by their own personal teaching and influence. But every
adult member of the body would have an equal voice in determining the
collective system designed for the benefit of all. Here, then, is a
most fruitful source of discord in every association. All who had any
opinion or preference as to the education they would desire for their
own children, would have to rely for their chance of obtaining it upon
the influence they could exercise in the joint decision of the
community.

It is needless to specify a number of other important questions
affecting the mode of employing the productive resources of the
association, the conditions of social life, the relations of the body
with other associations, &c., on which difference of opinion, often
irreconcilable, would be likely to arise. But even the dissensions
which might be expected would be a far less evil to the prospects of
humanity than a delusive unanimity produced by the prostration of all
individual opinions and wishes before the decree of the majority. The
obstacles to human progression are always great, and require a
concurrence of favorable circumstances to overcome them; but an
indispensable condition of their being overcome is, that human nature
should have freedom to expand spontaneously in various directions,
both in thought and practice; that people should both think for
themselves and try experiments for themselves, and should not resign
into the hands of rulers, whether acting in the name of a few or of
the majority, the business of thinking for them, and of prescribing
how they shall act. But in Communist associations private life would
be brought in a most unexampled degree within the dominion of public
authority, and there would be less scope for the development of
individual character and individual preferences than has hitherto
existed among the full citizens of any state belonging to the
progressive branches of the human family. Already in all societies the
compression of individuality by the majority is a great and growing
evil; it would probably be much greater under Communism, except so far
as it might be in the power of individuals to set bounds to it by
selecting to belong to a community of persons like-minded with
themselves.

From these various considerations I do not seek to draw any inference
against the possibility that Communistic production is capable of
being at some future time the form of society best adapted to the
wants and circumstances of mankind. I think that this is, and will
long be an open question, upon which fresh light will continually be
obtained, both by trial of the Communistic principle under favorable
circumstances, and by the improvements which will be gradually
effected in the working of the existing system, that of private
ownership. The one certainty is, that Communism, to be successful,
requires a high standard of both moral and intellectual education in
all the members of the community--moral, to qualify them for doing
their part honestly and energetically in the labor of life under no
inducement but their share in the general interest of the
association, and their feelings of duty and sympathy towards it;
intellectual, to make them capable of estimating distant interests and
entering into complex considerations, sufficiently at least to be able
to discriminate, in these matters, good counsel from bad. Now I reject
altogether the notion that it is impossible for education and
cultivation such as is implied in these things to be made the
inheritance of every person in the nation; but I am convinced that it
is very difficult, and that the passage to it from our present
condition can only be slow. I admit the plea that in the points of
moral education on which the success of communism depends, the present
state of society is demoralizing, and that only a Communistic
association can effectually train mankind for Communism. It is for
Communism, then, to prove, by practical experiment, its power of
giving this training. Experiments alone can show whether there is as
yet in any portion of the population a sufficiently high level of
moral cultivation to make Communism succeed, and to give to the next
generation among themselves the education necessary to keep that high
level permanently If Communist associations show that they can be
durable and prosperous, they will multiply, and will probably be
adopted by successive portions of the population of the more advanced
countries as they become morally fitted for that mode of life. But to
force unprepared populations into Communist societies, even if a
political revolution gave the power to make such an attempt, would end
in disappointment.

If practical trial is necessary to test the capabilities of Communism,
it is no less required for those other forms of Socialism which
recognize the difficulties of Communism and contrive means to surmount
them. The principal of these is Fourierism, a system which, if only as
a specimen of intellectual ingenuity, is highly worthy of the
attention of any student, either of society or of the human mind.
There is scarcely an objection or a difficulty which Fourier did not
forsee, and against which he did not make provision beforehand by
self-acting contrivances, grounded, however, upon a less high
principle of distributive justice than that of Communism, since he
admits inequalities of distribution and individual ownership of
capital, but not the arbitrary disposal of it. The great problem which
he grapples with is how to make labor attractive, since, if this
could be done, the principal difficulty of Socialism would be
overcome. He maintains that no kind of useful labor is necessarily or
universally repugnant, unless either excessive in amount or devoid of
the stimulus of companionship and emulation, or regarded by mankind
with contempt. The workers in a Fourierist village are to class
themselves spontaneously in groups, each group undertaking a different
kind of work, and the same person may be a member not only of one
group but of any number; a certain minimum having first been set apart
for the subsistence of every member of the community, whether capable
or not of labor, the society divides the remainder of the produce
among the different groups, in such shares as it finds attract to each
the amount of labor required, and no more; if there is too great a run
upon particular groups it is a sign that those groups are
over-remunerated relatively to others; if any are neglected their
remuneration must be made higher. The share of produce assigned to
each group is divided in fixed proportions among three elements--labor,
capital, and talent; the part assigned to talent being awarded by the
suffrages of the group itself, and it is hoped that among the variety
of human capacities all, or nearly all, will be qualified to excel in
some group or other. The remuneration for capital is to be such as is
found sufficient to induce savings from individual consumption, in
order to increase the common stock to such point as is desired. The
number and ingenuity of the contrivances for meeting minor
difficulties, and getting rid of minor inconveniencies, is very
remarkable. By means of these various provisions it is the expectation
of Fourierists that the personal inducements to exertion for the public
interest, instead of being taken away, would be made much greater than
at present, since every increase of the service rendered would be much
more certain of leading to increase of reward than it is now, when
accidents of position have so much influence. The efficiency of labor,
they therefore expect, would be unexampled, while the saving of labor
would be prodigious, by diverting to useful occupations that which is
now wasted on things useless or hurtful, and by dispensing with the
vast number of superfluous distributors, the buying and selling for the
whole community being managed by a single agency. The free choice of
individuals as to their manner of life would be no further interfered
with than would be necessary for gaining the full advantages of
co-operation in the industrial operations. Altogether, the picture of a
Fourierist community is both attractive in itself and requires less
from common humanity than any other known system of Socialism; and it
is much to be desired that the scheme should have that fair trial which
alone can test the workableness of any new scheme of social life.[9]

The result of our review of the various difficulties of Socialism has
led us to the conclusion that the various schemes for managing the
productive resources of the country by public instead of private
agency have a case for a trial, and some of them may eventually
establish their claims to preference over the existing order of
things, but that they are at present workable only by the _élite_ of
mankind, and have yet to prove their power of training mankind at
large to the state of improvement which they presuppose. Far more, of
course, may this be said of the more ambitious plan which aims at
taking possession of the whole land and capital of the country, and
beginning at once to administer it on the public account. Apart from
all consideration of injustice to the present possessors, the very
idea of conducting the whole industry of a country by direction from a
single centre is so obviously chimerical, that nobody ventures to
propose any mode in which it should be done; and it can hardly be
doubted that if the revolutionary Socialists attained their immediate
object, and actually had the whole property of the country at their
disposal, they would find no other practicable mode of exercising
their power over it than that of dividing it into portions, each to be
made over to the administration of a small Socialist community. The
problem of management, which we have seen to be so difficult even to a
select population well prepared beforehand, would be thrown down to be
solved as best it could by aggregations united only by locality, or
taken indiscriminately from the population, including all the
malefactors, all the idlest and most vicious, the most incapable of
steady industry, forethought, or self-control, and a majority who,
though not equally degraded, are yet, in the opinion of Socialists
themselves as far as regards the qualities essential for the success
of Socialism, profoundly demoralised by the existing state of society.
It is saying but little to say that the introduction of Socialism
under such conditions could have no effect but disastrous failure, and
its apostles could have only the consolation that the order of society
as it now exists would have perished first, and all who benefit by it
would be involved in the common ruin--a consolation which to some of
them would probably be real, for if appearances can be trusted the
animating principle of too many of the revolutionary Socialists is
hate; a very excusable hatred of existing evils, which would vent
itself by putting an end to the present system at all costs even to
those who suffer by it, in the hope that out of chaos would arise a
better Kosmos, and in the impatience of desperation respecting any
more gradual improvement. They are unaware that chaos is the very most
unfavorable position for setting out in the construction of a Kosmos,
and that many ages of conflict, violence, and tyrannical oppression
of the weak by the strong must intervene; they know not that they
would plunge mankind into the state of nature so forcibly described by
Hobbes (_Leviathan_, Part I. ch. xiii.), where every man is enemy to
every man:--

    "In such condition there is no place for industry, because the
    fruit thereof is uncertain, and consequently no culture of the
    earth, no navigation, no use of the commodities that may be
    imported by sea, no commodious building, no instruments of
    moving and removing such things as require much force, no
    knowledge of the face of the earth, no account of time, no arts,
    no letters, no society; and, which is worst of all, continual
    fear and danger of violent death; and the life of man solitary,
    poor, nasty, brutish, and short."

If the poorest and most wretched members of a so-called civilised
society are in as bad a condition as every one would be in that worst
form of barbarism produced by the dissolution of civilised life, it
does not follow that the way to raise them would be to reduce all
others to the same miserable state. On the contrary, it is by the aid
of the first who have risen that so many others have escaped from the
general lot, and it is only by better organization of the same process
that it may be hoped in time to succeed in raising the remainder.


THE IDEA OF PRIVATE PROPERTY NOT FIXED BUT VARIABLE.

The preceding considerations appear sufficient to show that an entire
renovation of the social fabric, such as is contemplated by Socialism,
establishing the economic constitution of society upon an entirely new
basis, other than that of private property and competition, however
valuable as an ideal, and even as a prophecy of ultimate
possibilities, is not available as a present resource, since it
requires from those who are to carry on the new order of things
qualities both moral and intellectual, which require to be tested in
all, and to be created in most; and this cannot be done by an Act of
Parliament, but must be, on the most favorable supposition, a work of
considerable time. For a long period to come the principle of
individual property will be in possession of the field; and even if in
any country a popular movement were to place Socialists at the head of
a revolutionary government, in however many ways they might violate
private property, the institution itself would survive, and would
either be accepted by them or brought back by their expulsion, for the
plain reason that people will not lose their hold of what is at
present their sole reliance for subsistence and security until a
substitute for it has been got into working order. Even those, if any,
who had shared among themselves what was the property of others would
desire to keep what they had acquired, and to give back to property in
the new hands the sacredness which they had not recognised in the old.

But though, for these reasons, individual property has presumably a
long term before it, if only of provisional existence, we are not,
therefore, to conclude that it must exist during that whole term
unmodified, or that all the rights now regarded as appertaining to
property belong to it inherently, and must endure while it endures. On
the contrary, it is both the duty and the interest of those who derive
the most direct benefit from the laws of property to give impartial
consideration to all proposals for rendering those laws in any way
less onerous to the majority. This, which would in any case be an
obligation of justice, is an injunction of prudence also, in order to
place themselves in the right against the attempts which are sure to
be frequent to bring the Socialist forms of society prematurely into
operation.

One of the mistakes oftenest committed, and which are the sources of
the greatest practical errors in human affairs, is that of supposing
that the same name always stands for the same aggregation of ideas. No
word has been the subject of more of this kind of misunderstanding
than the word property. It denotes in every state of society the
largest powers of exclusive use or exclusive control over things (and
sometimes, unfortunately, over persons) which the law accords, or
which custom, in that state of society, recognizes; but these powers
of exclusive use and control are very various, and differ greatly in
different countries and in different states of society.

For instance, in early states of society, the right of property did
not include the right of bequest. The power of disposing of property
by will was in most countries of Europe a rather late institution; and
long after it was introduced it continued to be limited in favor of
what were called natural heirs. Where bequest is not permitted,
individual property is only a life interest. And in fact, as has been
so well and fully set forth by Sir Henry Maine in his most instructive
work on Ancient Law, the primitive idea of property was that it
belonged to the family, not the individual. The head of the family had
the management and was the person who really exercised the proprietary
rights. As in other respects, so in this, he governed the family with
nearly despotic power. But he was not free so to exercise his power as
to defeat the co-proprietors of the other portions; he could not so
dispose of the property as to deprive them of the joint enjoyment or
of the succession. By the laws and customs of some nations the
property could not be alienated without the consent of the male
children; in other cases the child could by law demand a division of
the property and the assignment to him of his share, as in the story
of the Prodigal Son. If the association kept together after the death
of the head, some other member of it, not always his son, but often
the eldest of the family, the strongest, or the one selected by the
rest, succeeded to the management and to the managing rights, all the
others retaining theirs as before. If, on the other hand the body
broke up into separate families, each of these took away with it a
part of the property. I say the property, not the inheritance, because
the process was a mere continuance of existing rights, not a creation
of new; the manager's share alone lapsed to the association.

Then, again, in regard to proprietary rights over immovables (the
principal kind of property in a rude age) these rights were of very
varying extent and duration. By the Jewish law property in immovables
was only a temporary concession; on the Sabbatical year it returned to
the common stock to be redistributed; though we may surmise that in
the historical times of the Jewish state this rule may have been
successfully evaded. In many countries of Asia, before European ideas
intervened, nothing existed to which the expression property in land,
as we understand the phrase, is strictly applicable. The ownership was
broken up among several distinct parties, whose rights were determined
rather by custom than by law. The government was part owner, having
the right to a heavy rent. Ancient ideas and even ancient laws limited
the government share to some particular fraction of the gross produce,
but practically there was no fixed limit. The government might make
over its share to an individual, who then became possessed of the
right of collection and all the other rights of the state, but not
those of any private person connected with the soil. These private
rights were of various kinds. The actual cultivators or such of them
as had been long settled on the land, had a right to retain
possession; it was held unlawful to evict them while they paid the
rent--a rent not in general fixed by agreement, but by the custom of
the neighborhood. Between the actual cultivators and the state, or the
substitute to whom the state had transferred its rights, there were
intermediate persons with rights of various extent. There were
officers of government who collected the state's share of the produce,
sometimes for large districts, who, though bound to pay over to
government all they collected, after deducting a percentage, were
often hereditary officers. There were also, in many cases village
communities, consisting of the reputed descendants of the first
settlers of a village, who shared among themselves either the land or
its produce according to rules established by custom, either
cultivating it themselves or employing others to cultivate it for
them, and whose rights in the land approached nearer to those of a
landed proprietor, as understood in England, than those of any other
party concerned. But the proprietary right of the village was not
individual, but collective; inalienable (the rights of individual
sharers could only be sold or mortgaged with the consent of the
community) and governed by fixed rules. In mediæval Europe almost all
land was held from the sovereign on tenure of service, either military
or agricultural; and in Great Britain even now, when the services as
well as all the reserved rights of the sovereign have long since
fallen into disuse or been commuted for taxation, the theory of the
law does not acknowledge an absolute right of property in land in any
individual; the fullest landed proprietor known to the law, the
freeholder, is but a "tenant" of the Crown. In Russia, even when the
cultivators of the soil were serfs of the landed proprietor, his
proprietary right in the land was limited by rights of theirs
belonging to them as a collective body managing its own affairs, and
with which he could not interfere. And in most of the countries of
continental Europe when serfage was abolished or went out of use,
those who had cultivated the land as serfs remained in possession of
rights as well as subject to obligations. The great land reforms of
Stein and his successors in Prussia consisted in abolishing both the
rights and the obligations, and dividing the land bodily between the
proprietor and the peasant, instead of leaving each of them with a
limited right over the whole. In other cases, as in Tuscany, the
_metayer_ farmer is virtually co-proprietor with the landlord, since
custom, though not law, guarantees to him a permanent possession and
half the gross produce, so long as he fulfils the customary conditions
of his tenure.

Again: if rights of property over the same things are of different
extent in different countries, so also are they exercised over
different things. In all countries at a former time, and in some
countries still, the right of property extended and extends to the
ownership of human beings. There has often been property in public
trusts, as in judicial offices, and a vast multitude of others in
France before the Revolution; there are still a few patent offices in
Great Britain, though I believe they will cease by operation of law on
the death of the present holders; and we are only now abolishing
property in army rank. Public bodies, constituted and endowed for
public purposes, still claim the same inviolable right of property in
their estates which individuals have in theirs, and though a sound
political morality does not acknowledge this claim, the law supports
it. We thus see that the right of property is differently interpreted,
and held to be of different extent, in different times and places;
that the conception entertained of it is a varying conception, has
been frequently revised, and may admit of still further revision. It
is also to be noticed that the revisions which it has hitherto
undergone in the progress of society have generally been improvements.
When, therefore, it is maintained, rightly or wrongly, that some
change or modification in the powers exercised over things by the
persons legally recognised as their proprietors would be beneficial to
the public and conducive to the general improvement, it is no good
answer to this merely to say that the proposed change conflicts with
the idea of property. The idea of property is not some one thing,
identical throughout history and incapable of alteration, but is
variable like all other creations of the human mind; at any given time
it is a brief expression denoting the rights over things conferred by
the law or custom of some given society at that time; but neither on
this point nor on any other has the law and custom of a given time and
place a claim to be stereotyped for ever. A proposed reform in laws
or customs is not necessarily objectionable because its adoption would
imply, not the adaptation of all human affairs to the existing idea of
property, but the adaptation of existing ideas of property to the
growth and improvement of human affairs. This is said without
prejudice to the equitable claim of proprietors to be compensated by
the state for such legal rights of a proprietary nature as they may be
dispossessed of for the public advantage. That equitable claim, the
grounds and the just limits of it, are a subject by itself, and as
such will be discussed hereafter. Under this condition, however,
society is fully entitled to abrogate or alter any particular right of
property which on sufficient consideration it judges to stand in the
way of the public good. And assuredly the terrible case which, as we
saw in a former chapter, Socialists are able to make out against the
present economic order of society, demands a full consideration of all
means by which the institution may have a chance of being made to work
in a manner more beneficial to that large portion of society which at
present enjoys the least share of its direct benefits.


THE END.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] See Louis Blanc, "Organisation du Travail," 4me edition, pp. 6, 11,
53, 57.

[2] See Louis Blanc, "Organisation du Travail," pp. 58-61, 65-66, 4me
edition. Paris, 1845.

[3] See Considérant, "Destinée Sociale," tome i. pp. 35, 36, 37, 3me
ed. Paris, 1848.

[4] See "Destinée Sociale," par V. Considérant, tome i. pp. 38-40.

[5] See Considérant, "Destinée Sociale," tome i. pp. 43-51, 3me.
edition, Paris, 1848.

[6] Considérant, "Destinée Sociale," tome i., pp. 59, 60.

[7] Considérant, "Destinée Sociale," tome i., pp. 60, 61.

[8] Considérant, "Destinée Sociale," tome i., p. 134.

[9] The principles of Fourierism are clearly set forth and powerfully
defended in the various writings of M. Victor Considérant, especially
that entitled _La Destinée Sociale_; but the curious inquirer will do
well to study them in the writings of Fourier himself; where he will
find unmistakable proofs of genius, mixed, however with the wildest and
most unscientific fancies respecting the physical world, and much
interesting but rash speculation on the past and future history of
humanity. It is proper to add that on some important social questions,
for instance on marriage, Fourier had peculiar opinions, which,
however, as he himself declares, are quite independent of, and
separable from, the principles of his industrial system.

       *       *       *       *       *



                      THE CONTEST IN AMERICA

                       BY JOHN STUART MILL

                 REPRINTED FROM FRASER'S MAGAZINE



                      The Contest in America




The cloud which for the space of a month hung gloomily over the
civilized world, black with far worse evils than those of simple war,
has passed from over our heads without bursting. The fear has not been
realized, that the only two first-rate Powers who are also free
nations would take to tearing each other in pieces, both the one and
the other in a bad and odious cause. For while, on the American side,
the war would have been one of reckless persistency in wrong, on ours
it would have been a war in alliance with, and, to practical purposes,
in defence and propagation of, slavery. We had, indeed, been wronged.
We had suffered an indignity, and something more than an indignity,
which, not to have resented, would have been to invite a constant
succession of insults and injuries from the same and from every other
quarter. We could have acted no otherwise than we have done: yet it is
impossible to think, without something like a shudder, from what we
have escaped. We, the emancipators of the slave--who have wearied
every Court and Government in Europe and America with our protests and
remonstrances, until we goaded them into at least ostensibly
coöperating with us to prevent the enslaving of the negro--we, who for
the last half century have spent annual sums, equal to the revenue of
a small kingdom, in blockading the African coast, for a cause in which
we not only had no interest, but which was contrary to our pecuniary
interest, and which many believed would ruin, as many among us still,
though erroneously, believe that it has ruined, our colonies,--_we_
should have lent a hand to setting up, in one of the most commanding
positions of the world, a powerful republic, devoted not only to
slavery, but to pro-slavery propagandism--should have helped to give a
place in the community of nations to a conspiracy of slave-owners, who
have broken their connection with the American Federation on the sole
ground, ostentatiously proclaimed, that they thought an attempt would
be made to restrain, not slavery itself, but their purpose of
spreading slavery wherever migration or force could carry it.

A nation which has made the professions that England has, does not
with impunity, under however great provocation, betake itself to
frustrating the objects for which it has been calling on the rest of
the world to make sacrifices of what they think their interest. At
present all the nations of Europe have sympathized with us; have
acknowledged that we were injured, and declared with rare unanimity,
that we had no choice but to resist, if necessary, by arms. But the
consequences of such a war would soon have buried its causes in
oblivion. When the new Confederate States, made an independent Power
by English help, had begun their crusade to carry negro slavery from
the Potomac to Cape Horn; who would then have remembered that England
raised up this scourge to humanity not for the evil's sake, but
because somebody had offered an insult to her flag? Or even if
unforgotten, who would then have felt that such a grievance was a
sufficient palliation of the crime? Every reader of a newspaper, to
the farthest ends of the earth, would have believed and remembered one
thing only--that at the critical juncture which was to decide whether
slavery should blaze up afresh with increased vigor or be trodden out
at the moment of conflict between the good and the evil spirit--at the
dawn of a hope that the demon might now at last be chained and flung
into the pit, England stepped in, and, for the sake of cotton, made
Satan victorious.

The world has been saved from this calamity, and England from this
disgrace. The accusation would indeed have been a calumny. But to be
able to defy calumny, a nation, like an individual, must stand very
clear of just reproach in its previous conduct. Unfortunately, we
ourselves have given too much plausibility to the charge. Not by
anything said or done by us as a Government or as a nation, but by the
tone of our press, and in some degree, it must be owned, the general
opinion of English society. It is too true, that the feelings which
have been manifested since the beginning of the American contest--the
judgments which have been put forth, and the wishes which have been
expressed concerning the incidents and probable eventualities of the
struggle--the bitter and irritating criticism which has been kept up,
not even against both parties equally, but almost solely against the
party in the right, and the ungenerous refusal of all those just
allowances which no country needs more than our own, whenever its
circumstances are as near to those of America as a cut finger is to an
almost mortal wound,--these facts, with minds not favorably disposed
to us, would have gone far to make the most odious interpretation of
the war in which we have been so nearly engaged with the United
States, appear by many degrees the most probable. There is no denying
that our attitude towards the contending parties (I mean our moral
attitude, for politically there was no other course open to us than
neutrality) has not been that which becomes a people who are as
sincere enemies of slavery as the English really are, and have made as
great sacrifices to put an end to it where they could. And it has been
an additional misfortune that some of our most powerful journals have
been for many years past very unfavorable exponents of English feeling
on all subjects connected with slavery: some, probably, from the
influences, more or less direct, of West Indian opinions and
interests: others from inbred Toryism, which, even when compelled by
reason to hold opinions favorable to liberty, is always adverse to it
in feeling; which likes the spectacle of irresponsible power exercised
by one person over others; which has no moral repugnance to the
thought of human beings born to the penal servitude for life, to which
for the term of a few years we sentence our most hardened criminals,
but keeps its indignation to be expended on "rabid and fanatical
abolitionists" across the Atlantic, and on those writers in England
who attach a sufficiently serious meaning to their Christian
professions, to consider a fight against slavery as a fight for God.

Now, when the mind of England, and it may almost be said, of the
civilized part of mankind, has been relieved from the incubus which
had weighed on it ever since the _Trent_ outrage, and when we are no
longer feeling towards the Northern Americans as men feel towards
those with whom they may be on the point of struggling for life or
death; now, if ever, is the time to review our position, and consider
whether we have been feeling what ought to have been felt, and wishing
what ought to have been wished, regarding the contest in which the
Northern States are engaged with the South.

In considering this matter, we ought to dismiss from our minds, as far
as possible, those feelings against the North, which have been
engendered not merely by the _Trent_ aggression, but by the previous
anti-British effusions of newspaper writers and stump orators. It is
hardly worth while to ask how far these explosions of ill-humor are
anything more than might have been anticipated from ill-disciplined
minds, disappointed of the sympathy which they justly thought they had
a right to expect from the great anti-slavery people, in their really
noble enterprise. It is almost superfluous to remark that a democratic
Government always shows worst where other Governments generally show
best, on its outside; that unreasonable people are much more noisy
than the reasonable; that the froth and scum are the part of a
violently fermenting liquid that meets the eyes, but are not its body
and substance. Without insisting on these things, I contend, that all
previous cause of offence should be considered as cancelled, by the
reparation which the American Government has so amply made; not so
much the reparation itself, which might have been so made as to leave
still greater cause of permanent resentment behind it; but the manner
and spirit in which they have made it. These have been such as most of
us, I venture to say, did not by any means expect. If reparation were
made at all, of which few of us felt more than a hope, we thought that
it would have been made obviously as a concession to prudence, not to
principle. We thought that there would have been truckling to the
newspaper editors and supposed fire-eaters who were crying out for
retaining the prisoners at all hazards. We expected that the
atonement, if atonement there were, would have been made with
reservations, perhaps under protest. We expected that the
correspondence would have been spun out, and a trial made to induce
England to be satisfied with less; or that there would have been a
proposal of arbitration; or that England would have been asked to make
concessions in return for justice; or that if submission was made, it
would have been made, ostensibly, to the opinions and wishes of
Continental Europe. We expected anything, in short, which would have
been weak and timid and paltry. The only thing which no one seemed to
expect, is what has actually happened. Mr. Lincoln's Government have
done none of these things. Like honest men, they have said in direct
terms, that our demand was right; that they yielded to it because it
was just; that if they themselves had received the same treatment,
they would have demanded the same reparation; and that if what seemed
to be the American side of a question was not the just side, they
would be on the side of justice; happy as they were to find after
their resolution had been taken, that it was also the side which
America had formerly defended. Is there any one, capable of a moral
judgment or feeling, who will say that his opinion of America and
American statesmen, is not raised by such an act, done on such
grounds? The act itself may have been imposed by the necessity of the
circumstances; but the reasons given, the principles of action
professed, were their own choice. Putting the worst hypothesis
possible, which it would be the height of injustice to entertain
seriously, that the concession was really made solely to convenience,
and that the profession of regard for justice was hypocrisy, even so,
the ground taken, even if insincerely, is the most hopeful sign of the
moral state of the American mind which has appeared for many years.
That a sense of justice should be the motive which the rulers of a
country rely on, to reconcile the public to an unpopular, and what
might seem a humiliating act; that the journalists, the orators, many
lawyers, the Lower House of Congress, and Mr. Lincoln's own naval
secretary, should be told in the face of the world, by their own
Government, that they have been giving public thanks, presents of
swords, freedom of cities, all manner of heroic honors to the author
of an act which, though not so intended, was lawless and wrong, and
for which the proper remedy is confession and atonement; that this
should be the accepted policy (supposing it to be nothing higher) of a
Democratic Republic, shows even unlimited democracy to be a better
thing than many Englishmen have lately been in the habit of
considering it, and goes some way towards proving that the aberrations
even of a ruling multitude are only fatal when the better instructed
have not the virtue or the courage to front them boldly. Nor ought it
to be forgotten, to the honor of Mr. Lincoln's Government, that in
doing what was in itself right, they have done also what was best
fitted to allay the animosity which was daily becoming more bitter
between the two nations so long as the question remained open. They
have put the brand of confessed injustice upon that rankling and
vindictive resentment with which the profligate and passionate part of
the American press has been threatening us in the event of concession,
and which is to be manifested by some dire revenge, to be taken, as
they pretend, after the nation is extricated from its present
difficulties. Mr. Lincoln has done what depended on him to make this
spirit expire with the occasion which raised it up; and we shall have
ourselves chiefly to blame if we keep it alive by the further
prolongation of that stream of vituperative eloquence, the source of
which, even now, when the cause of quarrel has been amicably made up,
does not seem to have run dry. {1}


{1. I do not forget one regrettable passage in Mr. Seward's letter,
in which he said that "if the safety of the Union required the
detention of the captured persons, it would be the right and duty of
this Government to detain them." I sincerely grieve to find this
sentence in the dispatch, for the exceptions to the general rules of
morality are not a subject to be lightly or unnecessarily tampered
with. The doctrine in itself is no other than that professed and
acted on by all governments--that self-preservation, in a State, as
in an individual, is a warrant for many things which at all other
times ought to be rigidly abstained from. At all events, no nation
which has ever passed "laws of exception," which ever supended the
Habeas Corpus Act or passed an Alien Bill in dread of a Chartist
insurrection, has a right to throw the first stone at Mr. Lincoln's
Government.}

Let us, then, without reference to these jars, or to the declamations
of newspaper writers on either side of the Atlantic, examine the
American question as it stood from the beginning; its origin, the
purpose of both the combatants, and its various possible or probable
issues.

There is a theory in England, believed perhaps by some, half believed
by many more, which is only consistent with original ignorance, or
complete subsequent forgetfulness, of all the antecedents of the
contest. There are people who tell us that, on the side of the North,
the question is not one of slavery at all. The North, it seems, have
no more objection to slavery than the South have. Their leaders never
say one word implying disapprobation of it. They are ready, on the
contrary, to give it new guarantees; to renounce all that they have
been contending for; to win back, if opportunity offers, the South to
the Union by surrendering the whole point.

If this be the true state of the case, what are the Southern chiefs
fighting about? Their apologists in England say that it is about
tariffs, and similar trumpery. _They_ say nothing of the kind. They
tell the world, and they told their own citizens when they wanted
their votes, that the object of the fight was slavery. Many years ago,
when General Jackson was President, South Carolina did nearly rebel
(she never was near separating) about a tariff; but no other State
abetted her, and a strong adverse demonstration from Virginia brought
the matter to a close. Yet the tariff of that day was rigidly
protective. Compared with that, the one in force at the time of the
secession was a free-trade tariff: This latter was the result of
several successive modifications in the direction of freedom; and its
principle was not protection for protection, but as much of it only as
might incidentally result from duties imposed for revenue. Even the
Morrill tariff (which never could have been passed but for the
Southern secession) is stated by the high authority of Mr. H. C. Carey
to be considerably more liberal than the reformed French tariff under
Mr. Cobden's treaty; insomuch that he, a Protectionist, would be glad
to exchange his own protective tariff for Louis Napoleon's free-trade
one. But why discuss, on probable evidence, notorious facts? The world
knows what the question between the North and South has been for many
years, and still is. Slavery alone was thought of, alone talked of.
Slavery was battled for and against, on the floor of Congress and in
the plains of Kansas; on the slavery question exclusively was the
party constituted which now rules the United States: on slavery
Fremont was rejected, on slavery Lincoln was elected; the South
separated on slavery, and proclaimed slavery as the one cause of
separation.

It is true enough that the North are not carrying on war to abolish
slavery in the States where it legally exists. Could it have been
expected, or even perhaps desired, that they should? A great party
does not change suddenly, and at once, all its principles and
professions. The Republican party have taken their stand on law, and
the existing constitution of the Union. They have disclaimed all right
to attempt anything which that constitution forbids. It does forbid
interference by the Federal Congress with slavery in the Slave States;
but it does not forbid their abolishing it in the District of
Columbia; and this they are now doing, having voted, I perceive, in
their present pecuniary straits, a million of dollars to indemnify the
slave-owners of the District. Neither did the Constitution, in their
own opinion, require them to permit the introduction of slavery into
the territories which were not yet States. To prevent this, the
Republican party was formed, and to prevent it, they are now fighting,
as the slave-owners are fighting to enforce it.

The present government of the United States is not an Abolitionist
government. Abolitionists, in America, mean those who do not keep
within the constitution; who demand the destruction (as far as slavery
