merit, it is not a base which could be brought into general use. Its
brilliancy and piquancy are here set off with exquisite skill by its
opposition to mouldings, in the upper part of the building, of an almost
effeminate delicacy, and its complexity is rendered delightful by its
contrast with the ruder bases of the other buildings of the city; but it
would look meagre if it were employed to sustain bolder masses above,
and would become wearisome if the eye were once thoroughly familiarized
with it by repetition.


6. CHARACTER OF THE DOGE MICHELE MOROSINI.

The following extracts from the letter of Count Charles Morosini, above
mentioned, appear to set the question at rest.

"It is our unhappy destiny that, during the glory of the Venetian
republic, no one took the care to leave us a faithful and conscientious
history: but I hardly know whether this misfortune should be laid to the
charge of the historians themselves, or of those commentators who have
destroyed their trustworthiness by new accounts of things, invented by
themselves. As for the poor Morosini, we may perhaps save his honor by
assembling a conclave of our historians, in order to receive their
united sentence; for, in this case, he would have the absolute majority
on his side, nearly all the authors bearing testimony to his love for
his country and to the magnanimity of his heart. I must tell you that
the history of Daru is not looked upon with esteem by well-informed men;
and it is said that he seems to have no other object in view than to
obscure the glory of all actions. I know not on what authority the
English writer depends; but he has, perhaps, merely copied the statement
of Daru.... I have consulted an ancient and authentic MS. belonging to
the Venieri family, a MS. well known, and certainly better worthy of
confidence than Daru's history, and it says nothing of M. Morosini but
that he was elected Doge to the delight and joy of all men. Neither do
the Savina or Dolfin Chronicles say a word of the shameful speculation;
and our best informed men say that the reproach cast by some historians
against the Doge perhaps arose from a mistaken interpretation of the
words pronounced by him, and reported by Marin Sanuto, that 'the
speculation would sooner or later have been advantageous to the
country.' But this single consideration is enough to induce us to form a
favorable conclusion respecting the honor of this man, namely, that he
was not elected Doge until after he had been entrusted with many
honorable embassies to the Genoese and Carrarese, as well as to the King
of Hungary and Amadeus of Savoy; and if in these embassies he had not
shown himself a true lover of his country, the republic not only would
not again have entrusted him with offices so honorable, but would never
have rewarded him with the dignity of Doge, therein to succeed such a
man as Andrea Contarini; and the war of Chioggia, during which it is
said that he tripled his fortune by speculations, took place during the
reign of Contarini, 1379, 1380, while Morosini was absent on foreign
embassies."


7. MODERN EDUCATION.

The following fragmentary notes on this subject have been set down at
different times. I have been accidentally prevented from arranging them
properly for publication, but there are one or two truths in them which
it is better to express insufficiently than not at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

By a large body of the people of England and of Europe a man is called
educated if he can write Latin verses and construe a Greek chorus. By
some few more enlightened persons it is confessed that the construction
of hexameters is not in itself an important end of human existence; but
they say, that the general discipline which a course of classical
reading gives to the intellectual powers, is the final object of our
scholastical institutions.

But it seems to me, there is no small error even in this last and more
philosophical theory. I believe, that what it is most honorable to know,
it is also most profitable to learn; and that the science which it is
the highest power to possess, it is also the best exercise to acquire.

And if this be so, the question as to what should be the materiel of
education, becomes singularly simplified. It might be matter of dispute
what processes have the greatest effect in developing the intellect; but
it can hardly be disputed what facts it is most advisable that a man
entering into life should accurately know.

I believe, in brief, that he ought to know three things:

  First.   Where he is.
  Secondly.   Where he is going.
  Thirdly.   What he had best do, under those circumstances.

First. Where he is.--That is to say, what sort of a world he has got
into; how large it is; what kind of creatures live in it, and how; what
it is made of, and what may be made of it.

Secondly. Where he is going.--That is to say, what chances or reports
there are of any other world besides this; what seems to be the nature
of that other world; and whether, for information respecting it, he had
better consult the Bible, Koran, or Council of Trent.

Thirdly. What he had best do under those circumstances.--That is to say,
what kind of faculties he possesses; what are the present state and
wants of mankind; what is his place in society; and what are the
readiest means in his power of attaining happiness and diffusing it. The
man who knows these things, and who has had his will so subdued in the
learning them, that he is ready to do what he knows he ought, I should
call educated; and the man who knows them not,--uneducated, though he
could talk all the tongues of Babel.

Our present European system of so-called education ignores, or despises,
not one, nor the other, but all the three, of these great branches of
human knowledge.

First: It despises Natural History.--Until within the last year or two,
the instruction in the physical sciences given at Oxford consisted of a
course of twelve or fourteen lectures on the Elements of Mechanics or
Pneumatics, and permission to ride out to Shotover with the Professor of
Geology. I do not know the specialties of the system pursued in the
academies of the Continent; but their practical result is, that unless a
man's natural instincts urge him to the pursuit of the physical sciences
too strongly to be resisted, he enters into life utterly ignorant of
them. I cannot, within my present limits, even so much as count the
various directions in which this ignorance does evil. But the main
mischief of it is, that it leaves the greater number of men without the
natural food which God intended for their intellects. For one man who is
fitted for the study of words, fifty are fitted for the study of things,
and were intended to have a perpetual, simple, and religious delight in
watching the processes, or admiring the creatures, of the natural
universe. Deprived of this source of pleasure, nothing is left to them
but ambition or dissipation; and the vices of the upper classes of
Europe are, I believe, chiefly to be attributed to this single cause.

Secondly: It despises Religion.--I do not say it despises "Theology,"
that is to say, _Talk_ about God. But it despises "Religion;" that is to
say, the "binding" or training to God's service. There is much talk and
much teaching in all our academies, of which the effect is not to bind,
but to loosen, the elements of religious faith. Of the ten or twelve
young men who, at Oxford, were my especial friends, who sat with me
under the same lectures on Divinity, or were punished with me for
missing lecture by being sent to evening prayers,[63] four are now
zealous Romanists,--a large average out of twelve; and while thus our
own universities profess to teach Protestantism, and do not, the
universities on the Continent profess to teach Romanism, and do
not,--sending forth only rebels and infidels. During long residence on
the Continent, I do not remember meeting with above two or three young
men, who either believed in revelation, or had the grace to hesitate in
the assertion of their infidelity.

Whence, it seems to me, we may gather one of two things; either that
there is nothing in any European form of religion so reasonable or
ascertained, as that it can be taught securely to our youth, or fastened
in their minds by any rivets of proof which they shall not be able to
loosen the moment they begin to think; or else, that no means are taken
to train them in such demonstrable creeds.

It seems to me the duty of a rational nation to ascertain (and to be at
some pains in the matter) which of these suppositions is true; and, if
indeed no proof can be given of any supernatural fact, or Divine
doctrine, stronger than a youth just out of his teens can overthrow in
the first stirrings of serious thought, to confess this boldly; to get
rid of the expense of an Establishment, and the hypocrisy of a Liturgy;
to exhibit its cathedrals as curious memorials of a by-gone
superstition, and, abandoning all thoughts of the next world, to set
itself to make the best it can of this.

But if, on the other hand, there _does_ exist any evidence by which the
probability of certain religious facts may be shown, as clearly, even,
as the probabilities of things not absolutely ascertained in
astronomical or geological science, let this evidence be set before all
our youth so distinctly, and the facts for which it appears inculcated
upon them so steadily, that although it may be possible for the evil
conduct of after life to efface, or for its earnest and protracted
meditation to modify, the impressions of early years, it may not be
possible for our young men, the instant they emerge from their
academies, to scatter themselves like a flock of wild fowl risen out of
a marsh, and drift away on every irregular wind of heresy and apostasy.

Lastly: Our system of European education despises Politics.--That is to
say, the science of the relations and duties of men to each other. One
would imagine, indeed, by a glance at the state of the world, that there
was no such science. And, indeed, it is one still in its infancy.

It implies, in its full sense, the knowledge of the operations of the
virtues and vices of men upon themselves and society; the understanding
of the ranks and offices of their intellectual and bodily powers in
their various adaptations to art, science, and industry; the
understanding of the proper offices of art, science, and labor
themselves, as well as of the foundations of jurisprudence, and broad
principles of commerce; all this being coupled with practical knowledge
of the present state and wants of mankind.

What, it will be said, and is all this to be taught to schoolboys? No;
but the first elements of it, all that are necessary to be known by an
individual in order to his acting wisely in any station of life, might
be taught, not only to every schoolboy, but to every peasant. The
impossibility of equality among men; the good which arises from their
inequality; the compensating circumstances in different states and
fortunes; the honorableness of every man who is worthily filling his
appointed place in society, however humble; the proper relations of poor
and rich, governor and governed; the nature of wealth, and mode of its
circulation; the difference between productive and unproductive labor;
the relation of the products of the mind and hand; the true value of
works of the higher arts, and the possible amount of their production;
the meaning of "Civilization," its advantages and dangers; the meaning
of the term "Refinement;" the possibilities of possessing refinement in
a low station, and of losing it in a high one; and, above all, the
significance of almost every act of a man's daily life, in its ultimate
operation upon himself and others;--all this might be, and ought to be,
taught to every boy in the kingdom, so completely, that it should be
just as impossible to introduce an absurd or licentious doctrine among
our adult population, as a new version of the multiplication table. Nor
am I altogether without hope that some day it may enter into the heads
of the tutors of our schools to try whether it is not as easy to make an
Eton boy's mind as sensitive to falseness in policy, as his ear is at
present to falseness in prosody.

I know that this is much to hope. That English ministers of religion
should ever come to desire rather to make a youth acquainted with the
powers of nature and of God, than with the powers of Greek particles;
that they should ever think it more useful to show him how the great
universe rolls upon its course in heaven, than how the syllables are
fitted in a tragic metre; that they should hold it more advisable for
him to be fixed in the principles of religion than in those of syntax;
or, finally, that they should ever come to apprehend that a youth likely
to go straight out of college into parliament, might not unadvisably
know as much of the Peninsular as of the Peloponnesian War, and be as
well acquainted with the state of Modern Italy as of old Etruria;--all
this however unreasonably, I _do_ hope, and mean to work for. For though
I have not yet abandoned all expectation of a better world than this, I
believe this in which we live is not so good as it might be. I know
there are many people who suppose French revolutions, Italian
insurrections, Caffre wars, and such other scenic effects of modern
policy, to be among the normal conditions of humanity. I know there are
many who think the atmosphere of rapine, rebellion, and misery which
wraps the lower orders of Europe more closely every day, is as natural a
phenomenon as a hot summer. But God forbid! There are ills which flesh
is heir to, and troubles to which man is born; but the troubles which he
is born to are as sparks which fly _upward_, not as flames burning to
the nethermost Hell. The Poor we must have with us always, and sorrow is
inseparable from any hour of life; but we may make their poverty such as
shall inherit the earth, and the sorrow, such as shall be hallowed by
the hand of the Comforter, with everlasting comfort. We _can_, if we
will but shake off this lethargy and dreaming that is upon us, and take
the pains to think and act like men, we can, I say, make kingdoms to be
like well-governed households, in which, indeed, while no care or
kindness can prevent occasional heart-burnings, nor any foresight or
piety anticipate all the vicissitudes of fortune, or avert every stroke
of calamity, yet the unity of their affection and fellowship remains
unbroken, and their distress is neither embittered by division,
prolonged by imprudence, nor darkened by dishonor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great leading error of modern times is the mistaking erudition for
education. I call it the leading error, for I believe that, with little
difficulty, nearly every other might be shown to have root in it; and,
most assuredly, the worst that are fallen into on the subject of art.

Education then, briefly, is the leading human souls to what is best, and
making what is best out of them; and these two objects are always
attainable together, and by the same means; the training which makes men
happiest in themselves, also makes them most serviceable to others. True
education, then, has respect, first to the ends which are proposable to
the man, or attainable by him; and, secondly, to the material of which
the man is made. So far as it is able, it chooses the end according to
the material: but it cannot always choose the end, for the position of
many persons in life is fixed by necessity; still less can it choose
the material; and, therefore, all it can do, is to fit the one to the
other as wisely as may be.

But the first point to be understood, is that the material is as various
as the ends; that not only one man is unlike another, but _every_ man is
essentially different from _every_ other, so that no training, no
forming, nor informing, will ever make two persons alike in thought or
in power. Among all men, whether of the upper or lower orders, the
differences are eternal and irreconcilable, between one individual and
another, born under absolutely the same circumstances. One man is made
of agate, another of oak; one of slate, another of clay. The education
of the first is polishing; of the second, seasoning; of the third,
rending; of the fourth, moulding. It is of no use to season the agate;
it is vain to try to polish the slate; but both are fitted, by the
qualities they possess, for services in which they may be honored.

Now the cry for the education of the lower classes, which is heard every
day more widely and loudly, is a wise and a sacred cry, provided it be
extended into one for the education of _all_ classes, with definite
respect to the work each man has to do, and the substance of which he is
made. But it is a foolish and vain cry, if it be understood, as in the
plurality of cases it is meant to be, for the expression of mere craving
after knowledge, irrespective of the simple purposes of the life that
now is, and blessings of that which is to come.

One great fallacy into which men are apt to fall when they are reasoning
on this subject is: that light, as such, is always good; and darkness,
as such, always evil. Far from it. Light untempered would be
annihilation. It is good to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death; but, to those that faint in the wilderness, so also is the
shadow of the great rock in a weary land. If the sunshine is good, so
also the cloud of the latter rain. Light is only beautiful, only
available for life, when it is tempered with shadow; pure light is
fearful, and unendurable by humanity. And it is not less ridiculous to
say that the light, as such, is good in itself, than to say that the
darkness is good in itself. Both are rendered safe, healthy, and useful
by the other; the night by the day, the day by the night; and we could
just as easily live without the dawn as without the sunset, so long as
we are human. Of the celestial city we are told there shall be "no night
there," and then we shall know even as also we are known: but the night
and the mystery have both their service here; and our business is not to
strive to turn the night into day, but to be sure that we are as they
that watch for the morning.

Therefore, in the education either of lower or upper classes, it matters
not the least how much or how little they know, provided they know just
what will fit them to do their work, and to be happy in it. What the sum
or the nature of their knowledge ought to be at a given time or in a
given case, is a totally different question: the main thing to be
understood is, that a man is not educated, in any sense whatsoever,
because he can read Latin, or write English, or can behave well in a
drawingroom; but that he is only educated if he is happy, busy,
beneficent, and effective in the world; that millions of peasants are
therefore at this moment better educated than most of those who call
themselves gentlemen; and that the means taken to "educate" the lower
classes in any other sense may very often be productive of a precisely
opposite result.

Observe: I do not say, nor do I believe, that the lower classes ought
not to be better educated, in millions of ways, than they are. I believe
_every man in a Christian kingdom ought to be equally well educated_.
But I would have it education to purpose; stern, practical,
irresistible, in moral habits, in bodily strength and beauty, in all
faculties of mind capable of being developed under the circumstances of
the individual, and especially in the technical knowledge of his own
business; but yet, infinitely various in its effort, directed to make
one youth humble, and another confident; to tranquillize this mind, to
put some spark of ambition into that; now to urge, and now to restrain:
and in the doing of all this, considering knowledge as one only out of
myriads of means in its hands, or myriads of gifts at its disposal; and
giving it or withholding it as a good husbandman waters his garden,
giving the full shower only to the thirsty plants, and at times when
they are thirsty, whereas at present we pour it upon the heads of our
youth as the snow falls on the Alps, on one and another alike, till they
can bear no more, and then take honor to ourselves because here and
there a river descends from their crests into the valleys, not
observing that we have made the loaded hills themselves barren for ever.

Finally: I hold it for indisputable, that the first duty of a state is
to see that every child born therein shall be well housed, clothed, fed,
and educated, till it attain years of discretion. But in order to the
effecting this, the government must have an authority over the people of
which we now do not so much as dream; and I cannot in this place pursue
the subject farther.


8. EARLY VENETIAN MARRIAGES.

Galliciolli, lib. ii. § 1757, insinuates a doubt of the general custom,
saying "it would be more reasonable to suppose that only twelve maidens
were married in public on St. Mark's day;" and Sandi also speaks of
twelve only. All evidence, however, is clearly in favor of the popular
tradition; the most curious fact connected with the subject being the
mention, by Herodotus, of the mode of marriage practised among the
Illyrian "Veneti" of his time, who presented their maidens for marriage
on one day in each year; and, with the price paid for those who were
beautiful, gave dowries to those who had no personal attractions.

It is very curious to find the traces of this custom existing, though in
a softened form, in Christian times. Still, I admit that there is little
confidence to be placed in the mere concurrence of the Venetian
Chroniclers, who, for the most part, copied from each other: but the
best and most complete account I have read, is that quoted by
Galliciolli from the "Matricola de' Casseleri," written in 1449; and, in
that account, the words are quite unmistakable. "It was anciently the
custom of Venice, that _all the brides_ (novizze) of Venice, when they
married, should be married by the bishop, in the Church of S. Pietro di
Castello, on St. Mark's day, which is the 31st of January." Rogers quotes
Navagiero to the same effect; and Sansovino is more explicit still. "It
was the custom to contract marriages openly; and when the deliberations
were completed, the damsels assembled themselves in St. Pietro di
Castello, for the feast of St. Mark, in February."


9. CHARACTER OF THE VENETIAN ARISTOCRACY.

The following noble answer of a Venetian ambassador, Giustiniani, on the
occasion of an insult offered him at the court of Henry the Eighth, is
as illustrative of the dignity which there yet remained in the character
and thoughts of the Venetian noble, as descriptive, in few words, of the
early faith and deeds of his nation. He writes thus to the Doge, from
London, on the 15th of April, 1516:

"By my last, in date of the 30th ult., I informed you that the
countenances of some of these lords evinced neither friendship nor
goodwill, and that much language had been used to me of a nature
bordering not merely on arrogance, but even on outrage; and not having
specified this in the foregoing letters, I think fit now to mention it
in detail. Finding myself at the court, and talking familiarly about
other matters, two lay lords, great personages in this kingdom, inquired
of me 'whence it came that your Excellency was of such slippery faith,
now favoring one party and then the other?' Although these words ought
to have irritated me, I answered them with all discretion, 'that you did
keep, and ever had kept your faith; the maintenance of which has placed
you in great trouble, and subjected you to wars of longer duration than
you would otherwise have experienced; descending to particulars in
justification of your Sublimity.' Whereupon one of them replied, '_Isti
Veneti sunt piscatores._'[64] Marvellous was the command I then had over
myself in not giving vent to expressions which might have proved
injurious to your Signory; and with extreme moderation I rejoined, 'that
had he been at Venice, and seen our Senate, and the Venetian nobility,
he perhaps would not speak thus; and moreover, were he well read in our
history, both concerning the origin of our city and the grandeur of your
Excellency's feats, neither the one nor the other would seem to him
those of fishermen; yet,' said I, 'did fishermen found the Christian
faith, and we have been those fishermen who defended it against the
forces of the Infidel, our fishing-boats being galleys and ships, our
hooks the treasure of St. Mark, and our bait the life-blood of our
citizens, who died for the Christian faith.'"

I take this most interesting passage from a volume of despatches
addressed from London to the Signory of Venice, by the ambassador
Giustiniani, during the years 1516-1519; despatches not only full of
matters of historical interest, but of the most delightful every-day
description of all that went on at the English court. They were
translated by Mr. Brown from the original letters, and will, I believe,
soon be published, and I hope also, read and enjoyed: for I cannot close
these volumes without expressing a conviction, which has long been
forcing itself upon my mind, that _restored_ history is of little more
value than restored painting or architecture; that the only history
worth reading is that written at the time of which it treats, the
history of what was done and seen, heard out of the mouths of the men
who did and saw. One fresh draught of such history is worth more than a
thousand volumes of abstracts, and reasonings, and suppositions, and
theories; and I believe that, as we get wiser, we shall take little
trouble about the history of nations who have left no distinct records
of themselves, but spend our time only in the examination of the
faithful documents which, in any period of the world, have been left,
either in the form of art or literature, portraying the scenes, or
recording the events, which in those days were actually passing before
the eyes of men.


10. FINAL APPENDIX.

The statements respecting the dates of Venetian buildings made
throughout the preceding pages, are founded, as above stated, on careful
and personal examination of all the mouldings, or other features
available as evidence, of every palace of importance in the city. Three
parts, at least, of the time occupied in the completion of the work have
been necessarily devoted to the collection of these evidences, of which
it would be quite useless to lay the mass before the reader; but of
which the leading points must be succinctly stated, in order to show the
nature of my authority for any of the conclusions expressed in the text.

I have therefore collected in the plates which illustrate this article
of the Appendix, for the examination of any reader who may be interested
by them, as many examples of the evidence-bearing details as are
sufficient for the proof required, especially including all the
exceptional forms; so that the reader may rest assured that if I had
been able to lay before him all the evidence in my possession, it would
have been still more conclusive than the portion now submitted to him.

[Illustration: Plate V.
               BYZANTINE BASES.]

We must examine in succession the Bases, Doorways and Jambs, Capitals,
Archivolts, Cornices, and Tracery Bars, of Venetian architecture.


  _I. Bases._

The principal points we have to notice are the similarity and simplicity
of the Byzantine bases in general, and the distinction between those of
Torcello and Murano, and of St. Mark's, as tending to prove the early
dates attributed in the text to the island churches. I have sufficiently
illustrated the forms of the Gothic bases in Plates X., XI., and XIII.
of the first volume, so that I here note chiefly the Byzantine or
Romanesque ones, adding two Gothic forms for the sake of comparison.

The most characteristic examples, then, are collected in Plate V.
opposite; namely:

            1, 2, 3, 4. In the upper gallery of apse of Murano.
            5. Lower shafts of apse. Murano.
            6. Casa Falier.
            7. Small shafts of panels. Casa Farsetti.
            8. Great shafts and plinth. Casa Farsetti.
            9. Great lower shafts. Fondaco de' Turchi.
           10. Ducal Palace, upper arcade.
 PLATE V.  11. General late Gothic form.
 Vol. III. 12. Tomb of Dogaressa Vital Michele, in St. Mark's atrium.
           13. Upper arcade of Madonnetta House.
           14. Rio-Foscari House.
           15. Upper arcade. Terraced House.
           16, 17, 18. Nave. Torcello.
           19, 20. Transepts. St. Mark's.
           21. Nave. St. Mark's.
           22. External pillars of northern portico. St. Mark's.
           23, 24. Clustered pillars of northern portico. St. Mark's.
           25, 26. Clustered pillars of southern portico. St. Mark's.

Now, observe, first, the enormous difference in style between the bases
1 to 5, and the rest in the upper row, that is to say, between the bases
of Murano and the twelfth and thirteenth century bases of Venice; and,
secondly, the difference between the bases 16 to 20 and the rest in the
lower row, that is to say, between the bases of Torcello (with those of
St. Mark's which belong to the nave, and which may therefore be supposed
to be part of the earlier church), and the later ones of the St. Mark's
Façade.

Secondly: Note the fellowship between 5 and 6, one of the evidences of
the early date of the Casa Falier.

Thirdly: Observe the slurring of the upper roll into the cavetto, in 13,
14, and 15, and the consequent relationship established between three
most important buildings, the Rio-Foscari House, Terraced House, and
Madonnetta House.

Fourthly: Byzantine bases, if they have an incision between the upper
roll and cavetto, are very apt to approach the form of fig. 23, in which
the upper roll is cut out of the flat block, and the ledge beneath it is
sloping. Compare Nos. 7, 8, 9, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. On the other
hand, the later Gothic base, 11, has always its upper roll well
developed, and, generally, the fillet between it and the cavetto
vertical. The sloping fillet is indeed found down to late periods; and
the vertical fillet, as in No. 12, in Byzantine ones; but still, when a
base has such a sloping fillet and peculiarly graceful sweeping cavetto,
as those of No. 10, looking as if they would run into one line with each
other, it is strong presumptive evidence of its belonging to an early,
rather than a late period.

The base 12 is the boldest example I could find of the exceptional form
in early times; but observe, in this, that the upper roll is larger than
the lower. This is _never_ the case in late Gothic, where the proportion
is always as in fig. 11. Observe that in Nos. 8 and 9 the upper rolls
are at least as large as the lower, an important evidence of the dates
of the Casa Farsetti and Fondaco de' Turchi.

Lastly: Note the peculiarly steep profile of No. 22, with reference to
what is said of this base in Vol. II. Appendix 9.


  _II. Doorways and Jambs._

The entrances to St. Mark's consist, as above mentioned, of great
circular or ogee porches; underneath which the real open entrances, in
which the valves of the bronze doors play, are square headed.

[Illustration: Fig. I.]

The mouldings of the jambs of these doors are highly curious, and the
most characteristic are therefore represented in one view. The outsides
of the jambs are lowest.

  _a_. Northern lateral door.
  _b_. First northern door of the façade.
  _c_. Second door of the façade.
  _d_. Fourth door of the façade.
  _e_. Central door of the façade.

I wish the reader especially to note the arbitrary character of the
curves and incisions; all evidently being drawn by hand, none being
segments of circles, none like another, none influenced by any visible
law. I do not give these mouldings as beautiful; they are, for the most
part, very poor in effect, but they are singularly characteristic of the
free work of the time.

The kind of door to which these mouldings belong, is shown, with the
other groups of doors, in Plate XIV. Vol. II. fig. 6 _a_. Then 6 _b_, 6
_c_, 6 _d_ represent the groups of doors in which the Byzantine
influence remained energetic, admitting slowly the forms of the pointed
Gothic; 7 _a_, with the gable above, is the intermediate group between
the Byzantine and Gothic schools; 7 _b_, 7 _c_, 7 _d_, 7 _e_ are the
advanced guards of the Gothic and Lombardic invasions, representative of
a large number of thirteenth century arcades and doors. Observe that 6
_d_ is shown to be of a late school by its finial, and 6 _e_ of the
latest school by its finial, complete ogee arch (instead of round or
pointed), and abandonment of the lintel.

These examples, with the exception of 6 _a_, which is a general form,
are all actually existing doors; namely:

  6 _b._ In the Fondamenta Venier, near St. Maria della Salute.
  6 _c._ In the Calle delle Botteri, between the Rialto and San Cassan.
  6 _d._ Main door of San Gregorio.
  6 _e._ Door of a palace in Rio San Paternian.
  7 _a._ Door of a small courtyard near house of Marco Polo.
  7 _b._ Arcade in narrow canal, at the side of Casa Barbaro.
  7 _c._ At the turn of the canal, close to the Ponte dell' Angelo.
  7 _d._ In Rio San Paternian (a ruinous house).
  7 _e._ At the turn of the canal on which the Sotto Portico della Stua
           opens, near San Zaccaria.

If the reader will take a magnifying glass to the figure 6 _d_, he will
see that its square ornaments, of which, in the real door, each contains
a rose, diminish to the apex of the arch; a very interesting and
characteristic circumstance, showing the subtle feeling of the Gothic
builders. They must needs diminish the ornamentation, in order to
sympathize with the delicacy of the point of the arch. The magnifying
glass will also show the Bondumieri shield in No. 7 _d_, and the Leze
shield in No. 7 _e_, both introduced on the keystones in the grand early
manner. The mouldings of these various doors will be noticed under the
head Archivolt.

[Illustration: Plate VI.
               BYZANTINE JAMBS.]

Now, throughout the city we find a number of doors resembling the square
doors of St. Mark, and occurring with rare exceptions either in
buildings of the Byzantine period, or imbedded in restored houses;
never, in a single instance, forming a connected portion of any late
building; and they therefore furnish a most important piece of evidence,
wherever they are part of the original structure of a _Gothic_ building,
that such building is one of the advanced guards of the Gothic school,
and belongs to its earliest period.

On Plate VI., opposite, are assembled all the important examples I could
find in Venice of these mouldings. The reader will see at a glance their
peculiar character, and unmistakable likeness to each other. The
following are the references:

            1. Door in Calle Mocenigo.
            2. Angle of tomb of Dogaressa Vital Michele.
            3. Door in Sotto Portico, St. Apollonia (near Ponte di
                  Canonica).
            4. Door in Calle della Verona (another like it is close by).
            5. Angle of tomb of Doge Marino Morosini.
            6, 7. Door in Calle Mocenigo.
            8. Door in Campo S. Margherita.
 Plate VI.  9. Door at Traghetto San Samuele, on south side of Grand
 Vol. III.       Canal.
           10. Door at Ponte St. Toma.
           11. Great door of Church of Servi.
           12. In Calle della Chiesa, Campo San Filippo e Giacomo.
           13. Door of house in Calle di Rimedio (Vol. II.).
           14. Door in Fondaco de' Turchi.
           15. Door in Fondamenta Malcanton, near Campo S. Margherita.
           16. Door in south side of Canna Reggio.
           17, 18. Doors in Sotto Portico dei Squellini.

The principal points to be noted in these mouldings are their curious
differences of level, as marked by the dotted lines, more especially in
14, 15, 16, and the systematic projection of the outer or lower
mouldings in 16, 17, 18. Then, as points of evidence, observe that 1 is
the jamb and 6 the archivolt (7 the angle on a larger scale) of the
brick door given in my folio work from Ramo di rimpetto Mocenigo, one of
the evidences of the early date of that door; 8 is the jamb of the door
in Campo Santa Margherita (also given in my folio work), fixing the
early date of that also; 10 is from a Gothic door opening off the Ponte
St. Toma; and 11 is also from a Gothic building. All the rest are from
Byzantine work, or from ruins. The angle of the tomb of Marino Morosini
(5) is given for comparison only.

The doors with the mouldings 17, 18, are from the two ends of a small
dark passage, called the Sotto Portico dei Squellini, opening near Ponte
Cappello, on the Rio-Marin: 14 is the outside one, arranged as usual,
and at _a_, in the rough stone, are places for the staples of the door
valve; 15, at the other end of the passage, opening into the little
Corte dei Squellini, is set with the part _a_ outwards, it also having
places for hinges; but it is curious that the rich moulding should be
set in towards the dark passage, though natural that the doors should
both open one way.

[Illustration: Plate VII.
               GOTHIC JAMBS.]

The next Plate, VII., will show the principal characters of the Gothic
jambs, and the total difference between them and the Byzantine ones. Two
more Byzantine forms, 1 and 2, are given here for the sake of
comparison; then 3, 4, and 5 are the common profiles of simple jambs of
doors in the Gothic period; 6 is one of the jambs of the Frari windows,
continuous into the archivolt, and meeting the traceries, where the line
is set upon it at the extremity of its main slope; 7 and 8 are jambs of
the Ducal Palace windows, in which the great semicircle is the half
shaft which sustains the traceries, and the rest of the profile is
continuous in the archivolt; 17, 18, and 19 are the principal piers of
the Ducal Palace; and 20, from St. Fermo of Verona, is put with them in
order to show the step of transition from the Byzantine form 2 to the
Gothic chamfer, which is hardly represented at Venice. The other
profiles on the plate are all late Gothic, given to show the gradual
increase of complexity without any gain of power. The open lines in 12,
14, 16, etc., are the parts of the profile cut into flowers or cable
mouldings; and so much incised as to show the constant outline of the
cavetto or curve beneath them. The following are the references:

             1. Door in house of Marco Polo.
             2. Old door in a restored church of St. Cassan.
             3, 4, 5. Common jambs of Gothic doors.
             6. Frari windows.
             7, 8. Ducal Palace windows.
             9. Casa Priuli, great entrance.
            10. San Stefano, great door.
 PLATE VII. 11. San Gregorio, door opening to the water.
 Vol. III.  12. Lateral door, Frari.
            13. Door of Campo San Zaccaria.
            14. Madonna dell'Orto.
            15. San Gregorio, door in the façade.
            16. Great lateral door, Frari.
            17. Pilaster at Vine angle, Ducal Palace.
            18. Pier, inner cortile, Ducal Palace.
            19. Pier, under the medallion of Venice, on the Piazetta
                  façade of the Ducal Palace.


  _III. Capitals._

I shall here notice the various facts I have omitted in the text of the
work.

First, with respect to the Byzantine Capitals represented in Plate VII.
Vol. II., I omitted to notice that figs. 6 and 7 represent two sides of
the same capital at Murano (though one is necessarily drawn on a smaller
scale than the other). Fig. 7 is the side turned to the light, and fig.
6 to the shade, the inner part, which is quite concealed, not being
touched at all.

We have here a conclusive proof that these capitals were cut for their
place in the apse; therefore I have always considered them as tests of
Venetian workmanship, and, on the strength of that proof, have
occasionally spoken of capitals as of true Venetian work, which M.
Lazari supposes to be of the Lower Empire. No. 11, from St. Mark's, was
not above noticed. The way in which the cross is gradually left in
deeper relief as the sides slope inwards and away from it, is highly
picturesque and curious.

No. 9 has been reduced from a larger drawing, and some of the life and
character of the curves lost in consequence. It is chiefly given to show
the irregular and fearless freedom of the Byzantine designers, no two
parts of the foliage being correspondent; in the original it is of white
marble, the ground being colored blue.

Plate X. Vol. II. represents the four principal orders of Venetian
capitals in their greatest simplicity, and the profiles of the most
interesting examples of each. The figures 1 and 4 are the two great
concave and convex groups, and 2 and 3 the transitional. Above each type
of form I have put also an example of the group of flowers which
represent it in nature: fig. 1 has a lily; fig. 2 a variety of the
Tulipa sylvestris; figs. 3 and 4 forms of the magnolia. I prepared this
plate in the early spring, when I could not get any other examples,[65]
or I would rather have had two different species for figs. 3 and 4; but
the half-open magnolia will answer the purpose, showing the beauty of
the triple curvature in the sides.

I do not say that the forms of the capitals are actually taken from
flowers, though assuredly so in some instances, and partially so in the
decoration of nearly all. But they were designed by men of pure and
natural feeling for beauty, who therefore instinctively adopted the
forms represented, which are afterwards proved to be beautiful by their
frequent occurrence in common flowers.

The convex forms, 3 and 4, are put lowest in the plate only because they
are heaviest; they are the earliest in date, and have already been
enough examined.

I have added a plate to this volume (Plate XII.), which should have
appeared in illustration of the fifth chapter of Vol. II., but was not
finished in time. It represents the central capital and two of the
lateral ones of the Fondaco de' Turchi, the central one drawn very
large, in order to show the excessive simplicity of its chiselling,
together with the care and sharpness of it, each leaf being expressed by
a series of sharp furrows and ridges. Some slight errors in the large
tracings from which the engraving was made have, however, occasioned a
loss of spring in the curves, and the little fig. 4 of Plate X. Vol. II.
gives a truer idea of the distant effect of the capital.

The profiles given in Plate X. Vol. II. are the following:

       1. _a._ Main capitals, upper arcade, Madonnetta House.
          _b._ Main capitals, upper arcade, Casa Falier.
          _c._ Lateral capitals, upper arcade, Fondaco de' Turchi.
          _d._ Small pillars of St. Mark's Pulpit.
          _e._ Casa Farsetti.
          _f._ Inner capitals of arcade of Ducal Palace.
          _g._ Plinth of the house[66] at Apostoli.
          _h._ Main capitals of house at Apostoli.
          _i._ Main capitals, upper arcade, Fondaco de' Turchi.
       2. _a._ Lower arcade, Fondaco de' Turchi.
          _b, c._ Lower pillars, house at Apostoli.
          _d._ San Simeon Grande.
 PLATE X. _e._ Restored house on Grand Canal. Three of the old arches left.
 vol. II. _f._ Upper arcade, Ducal Palace.
          _g._ Windows of third order, central shaft, Ducal Palace.
          _h._ Windows of third order, lateral shaft, Ducal Palace.
          _i._ Ducal Palace, main shafts.
          _k._ Piazzetta shafts.
       3. _a._ St. Mark's Nave.
          _b, c._ Lily capitals, St. Mark's.
       4. _a._ Fondaco de' Turchi, central shaft, upper arcade.
          _b._ Murano, upper arcade.
          _c._ Murano, lower arcade.
          _d._ Tomb of St. Isidore.
          _e._ General late Gothic profile.

The last two sections are convex in effect, though not in reality; the
bulging lines being carved into bold flower-work.

The capitals belonging to the groups 1 and 2, in the Byzantine times,
have already been illustrated in Plate VIII. Vol. II.; we have yet to
trace their succession in the Gothic times. This is done in Plate II. of
this volume, which we will now examine carefully. The following are the
capitals represented in that plate:

           1. Small shafts of St. Mark's Pulpit.
           2. From the transitional house in the Calle di Rimedio (conf.
                Vol. II.).
           3. General simplest form of the middle Gothic capital.
           4. Nave of San Giacomo de Lorio.
           5. Casa Falier.
           6. Early Gothic house in Campo Sta. M^a. Mater Domini.
 PLATE II. 7. House at the Apostoli.
 Vol. III. 8. Piazzetta shafts.
           9. Ducal Palace, upper arcade.
          10. Palace of Marco Querini.
          11. Fondaco de' Turchi.
          12. Gothic palaces in Campo San Polo.
          13. Windows of fourth order, Plate XVI. Vol. II.
          14. Nave of Church of San Stefano.
          15. Late Gothic Palace at the Miracoli.

The two lateral columns form a consecutive series: the central column is
a group of exceptional character, running parallel with both. We will
take the lateral ones first. 1. Capital of pulpit of St. Mark's
(representative of the simplest concave forms of the Byzantine period).
Look back to Plate VIII. Vol. II., and observe that while all the forms
in that plate are contemporaneous, we are now going to follow a series
_consecutive_ in time, which begins from fig. 1, either in that plate or
in this; that is to say, with the simplest possible condition to be
found at the time; and which proceeds to develope itself into gradually
increasing richness, while the _already rich_ capitals of the old school
die at its side. In the forms 14 and 15 (Plate VIII.) the Byzantine
school expired; but from the Byzantine simple capital (1, Plate II.
above) which was coexistent with them, sprang another hardy race of
capitals, whose succession we have now to trace.

The form 1, Plate II. is evidently the simplest conceivable condition of
the truncated capital, long ago represented generally in Vol. I., being
only rounded a little on its side to fit it to the shaft. The next step
was to place a leaf beneath each of the truncations (fig. 4, Plate II.,
San Giacomo de Lorio), the end of the leaf curling over at the top in a
somewhat formal spiral, partly connected with the traditional volute of
the Corinthian capital. The sides are then enriched by the addition of
some ornament, as a shield (fig. 7) or rose (fig. 10), and we have the
formed capital of the early Gothic. Fig. 10, being from the palace of
Marco Querini, is certainly not later than the middle of the thirteenth
century (see Vol. II.), and fig. 7, is, I believe, of the same date; it
is one of the bearing capitals of the lower story of the palace at the
Apostoli, and is remarkably fine in the treatment of its angle leaves,
which are not deeply under-cut, but show their magnificent sweeping
under surface all the way down, not as a leaf surface, but treated like
the gorget of a helmet, with a curved line across it like that where the
gorget meets the mail. I never saw anything finer in simple design. Fig.
10 is given chiefly as a certification of date, and to show the
treatment of the capitals of this school on a small scale. Observe the
more expansive head in proportion to the diameter of the shaft, the
leaves being drawn from the angles, as if gathered in the hand, till
their edges meet; and compare the rule given in Vol. I. Chap. IX. § XIV.
The capitals of the remarkable house, of which a portion is represented
in Fig. XXXI. Vol. II., are most curious and pure examples of this
condition; with experimental trefoils, roses, and leaves introduced
between their volutes. When compared with those of the Querini Palace,
they form one of the most important evidences of the date of the
building.

Fig. 13. One of the bearing capitals, already drawn on a small scale in
the windows represented in Plate XVI. Vol. II.

Now, observe. The capital of the form of fig. 10 appeared sufficient to
the Venetians for all ordinary purposes; and they used it in common
windows to the latest Gothic periods, but yet with certain differences
which at once show the lateness of the work. In the first place, the
rose, which at first was flat and quatrefoiled, becomes, after some
experiments, a round ball dividing into three leaves, closely resembling
our English ball flower, and probably derived from it; and, in other
cases, forming a bold projecting bud in various degrees of contraction
or expansion. In the second place, the extremities of the angle leaves
are wrought into rich flowing lobes, and bent back so as to lap against
their own breasts; showing lateness of date in exact proportion to the
looseness of curvature. Fig. 3 represents the general aspect of these
later capitals, which may be conveniently called the rose capitals of
Venice; two are seen on service, in Plate VIII. Vol. I., showing
comparatively early date by the experimental form of the six-foiled
rose. But for elaborate edifices this form was not sufficiently rich;
and there was felt to be something awkward in the junction of the leaves
at the bottom. Therefore, four other shorter leaves were added at the
sides, as in fig. 13, Plate II., and as generally represented in Plate
X. Vol. II. fig. 1. This was a good and noble step, taken very early in
the thirteenth century; and all the best Venetian capitals were
thenceforth of this form. Those which followed, and rested in the common
rose type, were languid and unfortunate: I do not know a single good
example of them after the first half of the thirteenth century.

But the form reached in fig. 13 was quickly felt to be of great value
and power. One would have thought it might have been taken straight from
the Corinthian type; but it is clearly the work of men who were making
experiments for themselves. For instance, in the central capital of Fig.
XXXI. Vol. II., there is a trial condition of it, with the intermediate
leaf set behind those at the angles (the reader had better take a
magnifying glass to this woodcut; it will show the character of the
capitals better). Two other experimental forms occur in the Casa Cicogna
(Vol. II.), and supply one of the evidences which fix the date of that
palace. But the form soon was determined as in fig. 13, and then means
were sought of recommending it by farther decoration.

The leaves which are used in fig. 13, it will be observed, have lost
the Corinthian volute, and are now pure and plain leaves, such as were
used in the Lombardic Gothic of the early thirteenth century all over
Italy. Now in a round-arched gateway at Verona, certainly not later than
1300; the pointed leaves of this pure form are used in one portion of
the mouldings, and in another are enriched by having their surfaces
carved each into a beautiful ribbed and pointed leaf. The capital, fig.
6, Plate II., is nothing more than fig. 13 so enriched; and the two
conditions are quite contemporary, fig. 13 being from a beautiful series
of fourth order windows in Campo Sta. M^a. Mater Domini, already drawn
in my folio work.

Fig. 13 is representative of the richest conditions of Gothic capital
which existed at the close of the thirteenth century. The builder of the
Ducal Palace amplified them into the form of fig. 9, but varying the
leafage in disposition and division of lobes in every capital; and the
workmen trained under him executed many noble capitals for the Gothic
palaces of the early fourteenth century, of which fig. 12, from a palace
in the Campo St. Polo, is one of the most beautiful examples. In figs. 9
and 12 the reader sees the Venetian Gothic capital in its noblest
developement. The next step was to such forms as fig. 15, which is
generally characteristic of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth
century Gothic, and of which I hope the reader will at once perceive the
exaggeration and corruption.

This capital is from a palace near the Miracoli, and it is remarkable
for the delicate, though corrupt, ornament on its abacus, which is
precisely the same as that on the pillars of the screen of St. Mark's.
That screen is a monument of very great value, for it shows the entire
corruption of the Gothic power, and the style of the later palaces
accurately and completely defined in all its parts, and is dated 1380;
thus at once furnishing us with a limiting date, which throws all the
noble work of the early Ducal Palace, and all that is like it in Venice,
thoroughly back into the middle of the fourteenth century at the latest.

Fig. 2 is the simplest condition of the capital universally employed in
the windows of the second order, noticed above, Vol. II., as belonging
to a style of great importance in the transitional architecture of
Venice. Observe, that in all the capitals given in the lateral columns
in Plate II., the points of the leaves _turn over_. But in this central
group they lie _flat_ against the angle of the capital, and form a
peculiarly light and lovely succession of forms, occurring only in their
purity in the windows of the second order, and in some important
monuments connected with them.

In fig. 2 the leaf at the angle is cut, exactly in the manner of an
Egyptian bas-relief, _into_ the stone, with a raised edge round it, and
a raised rib up the centre; and this mode of execution, seen also in
figs. 4 and 7, is one of the collateral evidences of early date. But in
figs. 5 and 8, where more elaborate effect was required, the leaf is
thrown out boldly with an even edge from the surface of the capital, and
enriched on its own surface: and as the treatment of fig. 2 corresponds
with that of fig. 4, so that of fig. 5 corresponds with that of fig. 6;
2 and 5 having the upright leaf, 4 and 6 the bending leaves; but all
contemporary.

Fig. 5 is the central capital of the windows of Casa Falier, drawn in
Plate XV. Vol. II.; and one of the leaves set on its angles is drawn
larger at fig. 7, Plate XX. Vol. II. It has no rib, but a sharp raised
ridge down its centre; and its lobes, of which the reader will observe
the curious form,--round in the middle one, truncated in the sides,--are
wrought with a precision and care which I have hardly ever seen
equalled: but of this more presently.

The next figure (8, Plate II.) is the most important capital of the
whole transitional period, that employed on the two columns of the
Piazzetta. These pillars are said to have been _raised_ in the close of
the twelfth century, but I cannot find even the most meagre account of
their bases, capitals, or, which seems to me most wonderful, of that
noble winged lion, one of the grandest things produced by mediæval art,
which all men admire, and none can draw. I have never yet seen a
faithful representation of his firm, fierce, and fiery strength. I
believe that both he and the capital which bears him are late thirteenth
century work. I have not been up to the lion, and cannot answer for it;
but if it be not thirteenth century work, it is as good; and respecting
the capitals, there can be small question. They are of exactly the date
of the oldest tombs, bearing crosses, outside of St. John and Paul; and
are associated with all the other work of the transitional period, from
1250 to 1300 (the bases of these pillars, representing the trades of
Venice, ought, by the by, to have been mentioned as among the best early
efforts of Venetian grotesque); and, besides, their abaci are formed by
four reduplications of the dentilled mouldings of St. Mark's, which
never occur after the year 1300.

Nothing can be more beautiful or original than the adaptation of these
broad bearing abaci; but as they have nothing to do with the capital
itself, and could not easily be brought into the space, they are omitted
in Plate II., where fig. 8 shows the bell of the capital only. Its
profile is curiously subtle,--apparently concave everywhere, but in
reality concave (all the way down) only on the angles, and slightly
convex at the sides (the profile through the side being 2 _k_, Plate X.
Vol. II.); in this subtlety of curvature, as well as in the simple
cross, showing the influence of early times.

The leaf on the angle, of which more presently, is fig. 5, Plate XX.
Vol. II.

Connected with this school of transitional capitals we find a form in
the later Gothic, such as fig. 14, from the Church of San Stefano; but
which appears in part derived from an old and rich Byzantine type, of
which fig. 11, from the Fondaco de' Turchi, is a characteristic example.

I must now take the reader one step farther, and ask him to examine,
finally, the treatment of the leaves, down to the cutting of their most
minute lobes, in the series of capitals of which we have hitherto only
sketched the general forms.

In all capitals with nodding leaves, such as 6 and 9 in Plate II., the
real form of the leaf is not to be seen, except in perspective; but, in
order to render the comparison more easy, I have in Plate XX. Vol. II.
opened all the leaves out, as if they were to be dried in a herbarium,
only leaving the furrows and sinuosities of surface, but laying the
outside contour nearly flat upon the page, except for a particular
reason in figs. 2, 10, 11, and 15.

I shall first, as usual, give the references, and then note the points
of interest.

           1, 2, 3. Fondaco de' Turchi, upper arcade.
           4. Greek pillars brought from St. Jean d'Acre.
           5. Piazzetta shafts.
           6. Madonnetta House.
 PLATE XX. 7. Casa Falier.
  Vol. II. 8. Palace near St. Eustachio.
           9. Tombs, outside of St. John and Paul.
          10. Tomb of Giovanni Soranzo.
          11. Tomb of Andrea Dandolo.
          12, 13, 14. Ducal Palace.

N.B. The upper row, 1 to 4, is Byzantine, the next transitional, the
last two Gothic.

Fig. 1. The leaf of the capital No. 6, Plate VIII. Vol. II. Each lobe of
the leaf has a sharp furrow up to its point, from its root.

Fig. 2. The leaf of the capital on the right hand, at the top of Plate
XII. in this volume. The lobes worked in the same manner, with deep
black drill holes between their points.

Fig. 3. One of the leaves of fig. 14, Plate VIII. Vol. II. fully
unfolded. The lobes worked in the same manner, but left shallow, so as
not to destroy the breadth of light; the central line being drawn by
drill holes, and the interstices between lobes cut black and deep.

Fig. 4. Leaf with flower; pure Byzantine work, showing whence the
treatment of all the other leaves has been derived.

Fig. 6. For the sake of symmetry, this is put in the centre: it is the
earliest of the three in this row; taken from the Madonnetta House,
where the capitals have leaves both at their sides and angles. The tall
angle leaf, with its two lateral ones, is given in the plate; and there
is a remarkable distinction in the mode of workmanship of these leaves,
which, though found in a palace of the Byzantine period, is indicative
of a tendency to transition; namely, that the sharp furrow is now drawn
_only to the central lobe_ of each division of the leaf, and the rest of
the surface of the leaf is left nearly flat, a slight concavity only
marking the division of the extremities. At the base of these leaves
they are perfectly flat, only cut by the sharp and narrow furrow, as an
elevated table-land is by ravines.

Fig. 5. A more advanced condition; the fold at the recess, between each
division of the leaf, carefully expressed, and the concave or depressed
portions of the extremities marked more deeply, as well as the central
furrow, and a rib added in the centre.

Fig. 7. A contemporary, but more finished form; the sharp furrows
becoming softer, and the whole leaf more flexible.

Fig. 8. An exquisite form of the same period, but showing still more
advanced naturalism, from a very early group of third order windows,
near the Church of St. Eustachio on the Grand Canal.

Fig. 9. Of the same time, from a small capital of an angle shaft of the
sarcophagi at the _side_ of St. John and Paul, in the little square
which is adorned by the Colleone statue. This leaf is very quaint and
pretty in giving its midmost lateral divisions only two lobes each,
instead of the usual three or four.

Fig. 10. Leaf employed in the cornice of the tomb of the Doge Giovanni
Soranzo, who died in 1312. It nods over, and has three ribs on its upper
surface; thus giving us the completed ideal form of the leaf, but its
execution is still very archaic and severe.

Now the next example, fig. 11, is from the tomb of the Doge Andrea
Dandolo, and therefore executed between 1354 and 1360; and this leaf
shows the Gothic naturalism and refinement of curvature fully developed.
In this forty years' interval, then, the principal advance of Gothic
sculpture is to be placed.

I had prepared a complete series of examples, showing this advance, and
the various ways in which the separations of the ribs, a most
characteristic feature, are more and more delicately and scientifically
treated, from the beginning to the middle of the fourteenth century, but
I feared that no general reader would care to follow me into these
minutiæ, and have cancelled this portion of the work, at least for the
present, the main point being, that the reader should feel the full
extent of the change, which he can hardly fail to do in looking from
fig. 10 to figs. 11 and 12. I believe that fig. 12 is the earlier of the
two; and it is assuredly the finer, having all the elasticity and
simplicity of the earliest forms, with perfect flexibility added. In
fig. 11 there is a perilous element beginning to develope itself into
one feature, namely, the extremities of the leaves, which, instead of
merely nodding over, now curl completely round into a kind of ball. This
occurs early, and in the finest Gothic work, especially in cornices and
other running mouldings: but it is a fatal symptom, a beginning of the
intemperance of the later Gothic, and it was followed out with singular
avidity; the ball of coiled leafage increasing in size and complexity,
and at last becoming the principal feature of the work; the light
striking on its vigorous projection, as in fig. 14. Nearly all the
Renaissance Gothic of Venice depends upon these balls for effect, a late
capital being generally composed merely of an upper and lower range of
leaves terminating in this manner.

It is very singular and notable how, in this loss of _temperance_, there
is loss of _life_. For truly healthy and living leaves do not bind
themselves into knots at the extremities. They bend, and wave, and nod,
but never curl. It is in disease, or in death, by blight, or frost, or
poison only, that leaves in general assume this ingathered form. It is
the flame of autumn that has shrivelled them, or the web of the
caterpillar that has bound them: and thus the last forms of the Venetian
leafage set forth the fate of Venetian pride; and, in their utmost
luxuriance and abandonment, perish as if eaten of worms.

And now, by glancing back to Plate X. Vol. II, the reader will see in a
moment the kind of evidence which is found of the date of capitals in
their profiles merely. Observe: we have seen that the treatment of the
leaves in the Madonnetta House seemed "indicative of a tendency to
transition." Note their profile, 1_a_, and its close correspondence with
1 _h_, which is actually of a transitional capital from the upper arcade
of second order windows in the Apostoli Palace; yet both shown to be
very close to the Byzantine period, if not belonging to it, by their
fellowship with the profile _i_, from the Fondaco de' Turchi. Then note
the close correspondence of all the other profiles in that line, which
belong to the concave capitals or plinths of the Byzantine palaces, and
note their composition, the abacus being, in idea, merely an echo or
reduplication of the capital itself; as seen in perfect simplicity in
the profile _f_, which is a roll under a _tall_ concave curve forming
the bell of the capital, with a roll and _short_ concave curve for its
abacus. This peculiar abacus is an unfailing test of early date; and our
finding this simple profile used for the Ducal Palace (_f_), is strongly
confirmatory of all our former conclusions.

Then the next row, 2, are the Byzantine and early Gothic semi-convex
curves, in their pure forms, having no roll below; but often with a roll
added, as at _f_, and in certain early Gothic conditions curiously fused
into it, with a cavetto between, as _b_, _c_, _d_. But the more archaic
form is as at _f_ and _k_; and as these two profiles are from the Ducal
Palace and Piazzetta shafts, they join again with the rest of the
evidence of their early date. The profiles _i_ and _k_ are both most
beautiful; _i_ is that of the great capitals of the Ducal Palace, and
the small profiles between it and _k_ are the varieties used on the
fillet at its base. The profile _i_ should have had leaves springing
from it, as 1 _h_ has, only more boldly, but there was no room for them.

The reader cannot fail to discern at a glance the fellowship of the
whole series of profiles, 2 _a_ to _k_, nor can he but with equal ease
observe a marked difference in 4 _d_ and 4 _e_ from any others in the
plate; the bulging outlines of leafage being indicative of the luxuriant
and flowing masses, no longer expressible with a simple line, but to be
considered only as confined within it, of the later Gothic. Now _d_ is a
dated profile from the tomb of St. Isidore, 1355, which by its dog-tooth
abacus and heavy leafage distinguishes itself from all the other
profiles, and therefore throws them back into the first half of the
century. But, observe, it still retains the noble swelling root. This
character soon after vanishes; and, in 1380, the profile _e_, at once
heavy, feeble, and ungraceful, with a meagre and valueless abacus hardly
discernible, is characteristic of all the capitals of Venice.

Note, finally, this contraction of the abacus. Compare 4 _c_, which is
the earliest form in the plate, from Murano, with 4 _e_, which is the
latest. The other profiles show the gradual process of change; only
observe, in 3_a_ the abacus is not drawn; it is so bold that it would
not come into the plate without reducing the bell curve to too small a
scale.

So much for the evidence derivable from the capitals; we have next to
examine that of the archivolts or arch mouldings.

[Illustration: Plate VIII.
               BYZANTINE ARCHIVOLTS.]


  _IV. Archivolts._

In Plate VIII., opposite, are arranged in one view all the conditions of
Byzantine archivolt employed in Venice, on a large scale. It will be
seen in an instant that there can be no mistaking the manner of their
masonry. The soffit of the arch is the horizontal line at the bottom of
all these profiles, and each of them (except 13, 14) is composed of two
slabs of marble, one for the soffit, another for the face of the arch;
the one on the soffit is worked on the edge into a roll (fig. 10) or
dentil (fig. 9), and the one on the face is bordered on the other side
by another piece let edgeways into the wall, and also worked into a roll
or dentil: in the richer archivolts a cornice is added to this roll, as
in figs. 1 and 4, or takes its place, as in figs. 1, 3, 5, and 6; and in
such richer examples the facestone, and often the soffit, are
sculptured, the sculpture being cut into their surfaces, as indicated in
fig. 11. The concavities cut in the facestones of 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 are all
indicative of sculpture in effect like that of Fig. XXVI. Vol. II., of
which archivolt fig. 5, here, is the actual profile. The following are
the references to the whole:

             1. Rio-Foscari House.
             2. Terraced House, entrance door.
             3. Small Porticos of St. Mark's, external arches.
             4. Arch on the canal at Ponte St. Toma.
             5. Arch of Corte del Remer.
             6. Great outermost archivolt of central door, St. Mark's.
 PLATE VIII. 7. Inner archivolt of southern porch, St. Mark's Façade.
  Vol. III.  8. Inner archivolt of central entrance, St. Mark's.
             9. Fondaco de' Turchi, main arcade.
            10. Byzantine restored house on Grand Canal, lower arcade.
            11. Terraced House, upper arcade.
            12. Inner archivolt of northern porch of façade, St. Mark's.
            13 and 14. Transitional forms.

[Illustration: Plate IX.
               GOTHIC ARCHIVOLTS.]

There is little to be noted respecting these forms, except that, in fig.
1, the two lower rolls, with the angular projections between, represent
the fall of the mouldings of two proximate arches on the abacus of the
bearing shaft; their two cornices meeting each other, and being
gradually narrowed into the little angular intermediate piece, their
sculptures being slurred into the contracted space, a curious proof of
the earliness of the work. The real archivolt moulding is the same as
fig. 4 _c c_, including only the midmost of the three rolls in fig. 1.

It will be noticed that 2, 5, 6, and 8 are sculptured on the soffits as
well as the faces; 9 is the common profile of arches decorated only with
colored marble, the facestone being colored, the soffit white. The
effect of such a moulding is seen in the small windows at the right hand
of Fig. XXVI. Vol. II.

The reader will now see that there is but little difficulty in
identifying Byzantine work, the archivolt mouldings being so similar
among themselves, and so unlike any others. We have next to examine the
Gothic forms.

Figs. 13 and 14 in Plate VIII. represent the first brick mouldings of
the transitional period, occurring in such instances as Fig. XXIII. or
Fig. XXXIII. Vol. II. (the soffit stone of the Byzantine mouldings being
taken away), and this profile, translated into solid stone, forms the
almost universal moulding of the windows of the second order. These two
brick mouldings are repeated, for the sake of comparison, at the top of
Plate IX. opposite; and the upper range of mouldings which they
commence, in that plate, are the brick mouldings of Venice in the early
Gothic period. All the forms below are in stone; and the moulding 2,
translated into stone, forms the universal archivolt of the early
pointed arches of Venice, and windows of second and third orders. The
moulding 1 is much rarer, and used for the most part in doors only.

The reader will see at once the resemblance of character in the various
flat brick mouldings, 3 to 11. They belong to such arches as 1 and 2 in
Plate XVII. Vol. II.; or 6 _b_, 6 _c_, in Plate XIV. Vol. II., 7 and 8
being actually the mouldings of those two doors; the whole group being
perfectly defined, and separate from all the other Gothic work in
Venice, and clearly the result of an effort to imitate, in brickwork,
the effect of the flat sculptured archivolts of the Byzantine times.
(See Vol. II. Chap. VII. § XXXVII.)

Then comes the group 14 to 18 in stone, derived from the mouldings 1 and
2; first by truncation, 14; then by beading the truncated angle, 15, 16.
The occurrence of the profile 16 in the three beautiful windows
represented in the uppermost figure of Plate XVIII. Vol. I. renders that
group of peculiar interest, and is strong evidence of its antiquity.
Then a cavetto is added, 17; first shallow and then deeper, 18, which is
the common archivolt moulding of the central Gothic door and window:
but, in the windows of the early fourth order, this moulding is
complicated by various additions of dog-tooth mouldings under the
dentil, as in 20; or the _gabled_ dentil (see fig. 20, Plate IX. Vol.
I), as fig. 21; or both, as figs 23, 24. All these varieties expire in
the advanced period, and the established moulding for windows is 29. The
intermediate group, 25 to 28, I found only in the high windows of the
third order in the Ducal Palace, or in the Chapter-house of the Frari,
or in the arcades of the Ducal Palace; the great outside lower arcade of
the Ducal Palace has the profile 31, the left-hand side being the
innermost.

Now observe, all these archivolts, without exception, assume that the
spectator looks from the outside only: none are complete on both sides;
they are essentially _window_ mouldings, and have no resemblance to
those of our perfect Gothic arches prepared for traceries. If they were
all completely drawn in the plate, they should be as fig. 25, having a
great depth of wall behind the mouldings, but it was useless to
represent this in every case. The Ducal Palace begins to show mouldings
on both sides, 28, 31; and 35 is a _complete_ arch moulding from the
apse of the Frari. That moulding, though so perfectly developed, is
earlier than the Ducal Palace, and with other features of the building,
indicates the completeness of the Gothic system, which made the
architect of the Ducal Palace found his work principally upon that
church.

The other examples in this plate show the various modes of combination
employed in richer archivolts. The triple change of slope in 38 is very
curious. The references are as follows:

            1. Transitional to the second order.
            2. Common second order.
            3. Brick, at Corte del Forno, Round arch.
            4. Door at San Giovanni Grisostomo.
            5. Door at Sotto Portico della Stua.
            6. Door in Campo St. Luca, of rich brickwork.
            7. Round door at Fondamenta Venier.
            8. Pointed door. Fig. 6_c_, Plate XIV. Vol. II.
            9. Great pointed arch, Salizzada San Lio.
           10. Round door near Fondaco de' Turchi.
           11. Door with Lion, at Ponte della Corona.
           12. San Gregorio, Façade.
           13. St. John and Paul, Nave.
           14. Rare early fourth order, at San Cassan.
           15. General early Gothic archivolt.
           16. Same, from door in Rio San G. Grisostomo.
           17. Casa Vittura.
           18. Casa Sagredo, Unique thirds. Vol. II.
           19. Murano Palace, Unique fourths.[67]
 PLATE IX. 20. Pointed door of Four-Evangelist House.[68]
 Vol. III. 21. Keystone door in Campo St. M. Formosa.
           22. Rare fourths, at St. Pantaleon.
           23. Rare fourths, Casa Papadopoli.
           24. Rare fourths, Chess house.[69]
           25. Thirds of Frari Cloister.
           26. Great pointed arch of Frari Cloister.
           27. Unique thirds, Ducal Palace.
           28. Inner Cortile, pointed arches, Ducal Palace.
           29. Common fourth and fifth order Archivolt.
           30. Unique thirds, Ducal Palace.
           31. Ducal Palace, lower arcade.
           32. Casa Priuli, arches in the inner court.
           33. Circle above the central window, Ducal Palace.
           34. Murano apse.
           35. Acute-pointed arch, Frari.
           36. Door of Accademia delle belle Arti.
           37. Door in Calle Tiossi, near Four-Evangelist House.
           38. Door in Campo San Polo.
           39. Door of palace at Ponte Marcello.
           40. Door of a palace close to the Church of the Miracoli.


  _V. Cornices._

Plate X. represents, in one view, the cornices or string-courses of
Venice, and the abaci of its capitals, early and late; these two
features being inseparably connected, as explained in Vol. I.

The evidence given by these mouldings is exceedingly clear. The two
upper lines in the Plate, 1-11, 12-24, are all plinths from Byzantine
buildings. The reader will at once observe their unmistakable
resemblances. The row 41 to 50 are contemporary abaci of capitals; 52,
53, 54, 56, are examples of late Gothic abaci; and observe, especially,
these are all rounded at the _top_ of the cavetto, but the Byzantine
abaci are rounded, if at all, at the _bottom_ of the cavetto (see 7, 8,
9, 10, 20, 28, 46). Consider what a valuable test of date this is, in
any disputable building.

Again, compare 28, 29, one from St. Mark's, the other from the Ducal
Palace, and observe the close resemblance, giving farther evidence of
early date in the palace.

25 and 50 are drawn to the same scale. The former is the wall-cornice,
the latter the abacus of the great shafts, in the Casa Loredan; the one
passing into the other, as seen in Fig. XXVIII. Vol. I. It is curious to
watch the change in proportion, while the moulding, all but the lower
roll, remains the same.

[Illustration: Plate X.
               CORNICES AND ABACI.]

The following are the references:

            1. Common plinth of St. Mark's.
            2. Plinth above lily capitals, St. Mark's.
            3, 4. Plinths in early surface Gothic.
            5. Plinth of door in Campo St. Luca.
            6. Plinth of treasury door, St. Mark's.
            7. Archivolts of nave, St. Mark's.
            8. Archivolts of treasury door, St. Mark's.
            9. Moulding of circular window in St. John and Paul.
           10. Chief decorated narrow plinth, St. Mark's.
           11. Plinth of door, Campo St. Margherita.
           12. Plinth of tomb of Doge Vital Falier.
           13. Lower plinth, Fondaco de' Turchi, and Terraced House.
           14. Running plinth of Corte del Remer.
           15. Highest plinth at top of Fondaco de' Turchi.
           16. Common Byzantine plinth.
           17. Running plinth of Casa Falier.
           18. Plinth of arch at Ponte St. Toma.
           19, 20, 21. Plinths of tomb of Doge Vital Falier.
           22. Plinth of window in Calle del Pistor.
           23. Plinth of tomb of Dogaressa Vital Michele.
           24. Archivolt in the Frari.
           25. Running plinth, Casa Loredan.
           26. Running plinth, under pointed arch, in Salizzada San Lio.
           27. Running plinth, Casa Erizzo.
 PLATE X.  28. Circles in portico of St. Mark's.
 Vol. III. 29. Ducal Palace cornice, lower arcade.
           30. Ducal Palace cornice, upper arcade.
           31. Central Gothic plinth.
           32. Late Gothic plinth.
           33. Late Gothic plinth, Casa degli Ambasciatori.
           34. Late Gothic plinth, Palace near the Jesuiti.
           35, 36. Central balcony cornice.
           37. Plinth of St. Mark's balustrade.
           38. Cornice of the Frari, in brick, cabled.
           39. Central balcony plinth.
           40. Uppermost cornice, Ducal Palace.
           41. Abacus of lily capitals, St. Mark's.
           42. Abacus, Fondaco de' Turchi.
           43. Abacus, large capital of Terraced House.
           44. Abacus, Fondaco de' Turchi.
           45. Abacus, Ducal Palace, upper arcade.
           46. Abacus, Corte del Remer.
           47. Abacus, small pillars, St. Mark's pulpit.
           48. Abacus, Murano and Torcello.
           49. Abacus, Casa Farsetti.
           50. Abacus, Casa Loredan, lower story.
           51. Abacus, capitals of Frari.
           52. Abacus, Casa Cavalli (plain).
           53. Abacus, Casa Priuli (flowered).
           54. Abacus, Casa Foscari (plain).
           55. Abacus, Casa Priuli (flowered).
           56. Abacus, Plate II. fig. 15.
           57. Abacus, St. John and Paul.
           58. Abacus, St. Stefano.

It is only farther to be noted, that these mouldings are used in various
proportions, for all kinds of purposes: sometimes for true cornices;
sometimes for window-sills; sometimes, 3 and 4 (in the Gothic time)
especially, for dripstones of gables: 11 and such others form little
plinths or abaci at the spring of arches, such as those shown at _a_,
Fig. XXIII. Vol. II. Finally, a large number of superb Byzantine
cornices occur, of the form shown at the top of the arch in Plate V.
Vol. II., having a profile like 16 or 19 here; with nodding leaves of
acanthus thrown out from it, being, in fact, merely one range of the
leaves of a Byzantine capital unwrapped, and formed into a continuous
line. I had prepared a large mass of materials for the illustration of
these cornices, and the Gothic ones connected with them; but found the
subject would take up another volume, and was forced, for the present,
to abandon it. The lower series of profiles, 7 to 12 in Plate XV. Vol.
I, shows how the leaf-ornament is laid on the simple early cornices.


  _VI. Traceries._

We have only one subject more to examine, the character of the early and
late Tracery Bars.

The reader may perhaps have been surprised at the small attention given
to traceries in the course of the preceding volumes: but the reason is,
that there are no _complicated_ traceries at Venice belonging to the
good Gothic time, with the single exception of those of the Casa
Cicogna; and the magnificent arcades of the Ducal Palace Gothic are so
simple as to require little explanation.

There are, however, two curious circumstances in the later traceries;
the first, that they are universally considered by the builder (as the
old Byzantines considered sculptured surfaces of stone) as material out
of which a certain portion is _to be cut_, to fill his window. A fine
Northern Gothic tracery is a complete and systematic arrangement of
arches and foliation, _adjusted_ to the form of the window; but a
Venetian tracery is a piece of a larger composition, cut to the shape of
the window. In the Porta della Carta, in the Church of the Madonna
dell'Orto, in the Casa Bernardo on the Grand Canal, in the old Church of
the Misericordia, and wherever else there are rich traceries in Venice,
it will always be found that a certain arrangement of quatrefoils and
other figures has been planned as if it were to extend indefinitely into
miles of arcade; and out of this colossal piece of marble lace, a piece
in the shape of a window is cut, mercilessly and fearlessly: whatever
fragments and odd shapes of interstice, remnants of this or that figure
of the divided foliation, may occur at the edge of the window, it
matters not; all are cut across, and shut in by the great outer
archivolt.

It is very curious to find the Venetians treating what in other
countries became of so great individual importance, merely as a kind of
diaper ground, like that of their chequered colors on the walls. There
is great grandeur in the idea, though the system of their traceries was
spoilt by it: but they always treated their buildings as masses of color
rather than of line; and the great traceries of the Ducal Palace itself
are not spared any more than those of the minor palaces. They are cut
off at the flanks in the middle of the quatrefoils, and the terminal
mouldings take up part of the breadth of the poor half of a quatrefoil
at the extremity.

One other circumstance is notable also. In good Northern Gothic the
tracery bars are of a constant profile, the same on both sides; and if
the plan of the tracery leaves any interstices so small that there is
not room for the full profile of the tracery bar all round them, those
interstices are entirely closed, the tracery bars being supposed to have
met each other. But in Venice, if an interstice becomes anywhere
inconveniently small, the tracery bar is sacrificed; cut away, or in
some way altered in profile, in order to afford more room for the light,
especially in the early traceries, so that one side of a tracery bar is
often quite different from the other. For instance, in the bars 1 and 2,
Plate XI., from the Frari and St. John and Paul, the uppermost side is
towards a great opening, and there was room for the bevel or slope to
the cusp; but in the other side the opening was too small, and the bar
falls vertically to the cusp. In 5 the uppermost side is to the narrow
aperture, and the lower to the small one; and in fig. 9, from the Casa
Cicogna, the uppermost side is to the apertures of the tracery, the
lowermost to the arches beneath, the great roll following the design of
the tracery; while 13 and 14 are left without the roll at the base of
their cavettos on the uppermost sides, which are turned to narrow
apertures. The earliness of the Casa Cicogna tracery is seen in a moment
by its being moulded on the face only. It is in fact nothing more than a
series of quatrefoiled apertures in the solid wall of the house, with
mouldings on their faces, and magnificent arches of pure pointed fifth
order sustaining them below.

[Illustration: Plate XI.
               TRACERY BARS.]

The following are the references to the figures in the plate:

            1. Frari.
            2. Apse, St. John and Paul.
            3. Frari.
            4. Ducal Palace, inner court, upper window.
            5. Madonna dell'Orto.
            6. St. John and Paul.
            7. Casa Bernardo.
            8. Casa Contarini Fasan.
            9. Casa Cicogna.
           10. 11. Frari.
           12. Murano Palace (see note, p. 265).
 PLATE XI. 13. Misericordia.
 Vol. III. 14. Palace of the younger Foscari.[70]
           15. Casa d'Oro; great single windows.
           16. Hotel Danieli.
           17. Ducal Palace.
           18. Casa Erizzo, on Grand Canal.
           19. Main story, Casa Cavalli.
           20. Younger Foscari.
           21. Ducal Palace, traceried windows.
           22. Porta della Carta.
           23. Casa d'Oro.
           24. Casa d'Oro, upper story.
           25. Casa Facanon.
           26. Casa Cavalli, near Post-Office.

It will be seen at a glance that, except in the very early fillet
traceries of the Frari and St. John and Paul, Venetian work consists of
roll traceries of one general pattern. It will be seen also, that 10 and
11 from the Frari, furnish the first examples of the form afterwards
completely developed in 17, the tracery bar of the Ducal Palace; but
that this bar differs from them in greater strength and squareness, and
in adding a recess between its smaller roll and the cusp. Observe, that
this is done for strength chiefly; as, in the contemporary tracery (21)
of the upper windows, no such additional thickness is used.

Figure 17 is slightly inaccurate. The little curved recesses behind the
smaller roll are not equal on each side; that next the cusp is smallest,
being about 5/8 of an inch, while that next the cavetto is about 7/8; to
such an extent of subtlety did the old builders carry their love of
change.

The return of the cavetto in 21, 23, and 26, is comparatively rare, and
is generally a sign of later date.

[Illustration: Fig. II.]

[Illustration: Fig. III.]

The reader must observe that the great sturdiness of the form of the
bars, 5, 9, 17, 24, 25, is a consequence of the peculiar office of
Venetian traceries in supporting the mass of the building above, already
noticed in Vol. II.; and indeed the forms of the Venetian Gothic are,
in many other ways, influenced by the difficulty of obtaining stability
on sandy foundations. One thing is especially noticeable in all their
arrangements of traceries; namely, the endeavor to obtain equal and
horizontal pressure along the whole breadth of the building, not the
divided and local pressures of Northern Gothic. This object is
considerably aided by the structure of the balconies, which are of great
service in knitting the shafts together, forming complete tie-beams of
marble, as well as a kind of rivets, at their bases. For instance, at
_b_, Fig. II., is represented the masonry of the base of the upper
arcade of the Ducal Palace, showing the root of one of its main shafts,
with the binding balconies. The solid stones which form the foundation
are much broader than the balcony shafts, so that the socketed
arrangement is not seen: it is shown as it would appear in a
longitudinal section. The balconies are not let into the circular
shafts, but fitted to their circular curves, so as to grasp them, and
riveted with metal; and the bars of stone which form the tops of the
balconies are of great strength and depth, the small trefoiled arches
being cut out of them as in Fig. III., so as hardly to diminish their
binding power. In the lighter independent balconies they are often cut
deeper; but in all cases the bar of stone is nearly independent of the
small shafts placed beneath it, and would stand firm though these were
removed, as at _a_, Fig. II., supported either by the main shafts of
the traceries, or by its own small pilasters with semi-shafts at their
sides, of the plan _d_, Fig. II., in a continuous balcony, and _e_ at
the angle of one.

There is one more very curious circumstance illustrative of the Venetian
desire to obtain horizontal pressure. In all the Gothic staircases with
which I am acquainted, out of Venice, in which vertical shafts are used
to support an inclined line, those shafts are connected by arches rising
each above the other, with a little bracket above the capitals, on the
side where it is necessary to raise the arch; or else, though less
gracefully, with a longer curve to the lowest side of the arch.

But the Venetians seem to have had a morbid horror of arches which were
not _on a level_. They could not endure the appearance of the roof of
one arch bearing against the side of another; and rather than introduce
the idea of obliquity into bearing curves, they abandoned the arch
principle altogether; so that even in their richest Gothic staircases,
where trefoiled arches, exquisitely decorated, are used on the landings,
they ran the shafts on the sloping stair simply into the bar of stone
above them, and used the excessively ugly and valueless arrangement of
Fig. II., rather than sacrifice the sacred horizontality of their arch
system.

[Illustration: Fig. IV.]

It will be noted, in Plate XI., that the form and character of the
tracery bars themselves are independent of the position or projection of
the cusps on their flat sides. In this respect, also, Venetian traceries
are peculiar, the example 22 of the Porta della Carta being the only one
in the plate which is subordinated according to the Northern system. In
every other case the form of the aperture is determined, either by a
flat and solid cusp as in 6, or by a pierced cusp as in 4. The effect of
the pierced cusp is seen in the uppermost figure, Plate XVIII. Vol. II.;
and its derivation from the solid cusp will be understood, at once, from
the woodcut Fig. IV., which represents a series of the flanking stones
of any arch of the fifth order, such as _f_ in Plate III. Vol. I.

[Illustration: Fig. V.]

The first on the left shows the condition of cusp in a perfectly simple
and early Gothic arch, 2 and 3 are those of common arches of the fifth
order, 4 is the condition in more studied examples of the Gothic
advanced guard, and 5 connects them all with the system of traceries.
Introducing the common archivolt mouldings on the projecting edge of 2
and 3, we obtain the bold and deep fifth order window, used down to the
close of the fourteenth century or even later, and always grand in its
depth of cusp, and consequently of shadow; but the narrow cusp 4 occurs
also in very early work, and is piquant when set beneath a bold flat
archivolt, as in Fig. V., from the Corte del Forno at Santa Marina. The
pierced cusp gives a peculiar lightness and brilliancy to the window,
but is not so sublime. In the richer buildings the surface of the flat
and solid cusp is decorated with a shallow trefoil (see Plate VIII. Vol.
I.), or, when the cusp is small, with a triangular incision only, as
seen in figs. 7 and 8, Plate XI. The recesses on the sides of the other
cusps indicate their single or double lines of foliation. The cusp of
the Ducal Palace has a fillet only round its edge, and a ball of red
marble on its truncated point, and is perfect in its grand simplicity;
but in general the cusps of Venice are far inferior to those of Verona
and of the other cities of Italy, chiefly because there was always some
confusion in the mind of the designer between true cusps and the mere
bending inwards of the arch of the fourth order. The two series, 4 _a_
to 4 _e_, and 5 _a_ to 5 _e_, in Plate XIV. Vol. II., are arranged so as
to show this connexion, as well as the varieties of curvature in the
trefoiled arches of the fourth and fifth orders, which, though
apparently slight on so small a scale, are of enormous importance in
distant effect; a house in which the joints of the cusps project as much
as in 5 _c_, being quite piquant and grotesque when compared with one in
which the cusps are subdued to the form 5 _b_. 4 _d_ and 4 _e_ are
Veronese forms, wonderfully effective and spirited; the latter occurs at
Verona only, but the former at Venice also. 5 _d_ occurs in Venice, but
is very rare; and 5 _e_ I found only once, on the narrow canal close to
the entrance door of the Hotel Danieli. It was partly walled up, but I
obtained leave to take down the brickwork and lay open one side of the
arch, which may still be seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

The above particulars are enough to enable the reader to judge of the
distinctness of evidence which the details of Venetian architecture bear
to its dates. Farther explanation of the plates would be vainly tedious:
but the architect who uses these volumes in Venice will find them of
value, in enabling him instantly to class the mouldings which may
interest him; and for this reason I have given a larger number of
examples than would otherwise have been sufficient for my purpose.


FOOTNOTES:

  [58] "Olim _magistri_ prothi palatii nostri novi."--_Cadorin_, p. 127.

  [59] A print, dated 1585, barbarously inaccurate, as all prints were
    at that time, but still in some respects to be depended upon,
    represents all the windows on the façade full of traceries; and the
    circles above, between them, occupied by quatrefoils.

  [60] "Lata tanto, quantum est ambulum existens super columnis versus
    canale respicientibus."

  [61] Bettio, p. 28.

  [62] In the bombardment of Venice in 1848, hardly a single palace
    escaped without three or four balls through its roof: three came
    into the Scuola di San Rocco, tearing their way through the pictures
    of Tintoret, of which the ragged fragments were still hanging from
    the ceiling in 1851; and the shells had reached to within a hundred
    yards of St. Mark's Church itself, at the time of the capitulation.

  [63] A _Mohammedan_ youth is punished, I believe, for such
    misdemeanors, by being _kept away_ from prayers.

  [64] "Those Venetians are fishermen."

  [65] I am afraid that the kind friend, Lady Trevelyan, who helped me
    to finish this plate, will not like to be thanked here; but I cannot
    let her send into Devonshire for magnolias, and draw them for me,
    _without_ thanking her.

  [66] That is, the house in the parish of the Apostoli, on the Grand
    Canal, noticed in Vol. II.; and see also the Venetian Index, under
    head "Apostoli."

  [67] Close to the bridge over the main channel through Murano is a
    massive foursquare Gothic palace, containing some curious traceries,
    and many _unique_ transitional forms of window, among which these
    windows of the fourth order occur, with a roll within their dentil
    band.

  [68] Thus, for the sake of convenience, we may generally call the
    palace with the emblems of the Evangelists on its spandrils, Vol.
    II.

  [69] The house with chequers like a chess-board on its spandrils,
    given in my folio work.

  [70] The palace next the Casa Foscari, on the Grand Canal, sometimes
    said to have belonged to the son of the Doge.




INDICES.

   I. PERSONAL INDEX.  |  III. TOPICAL INDEX.
  II. LOCAL INDEX.     |   IV. VENETIAN INDEX.

The first of the following Indices contains the names of persons; the
second those of places (not in Venice) alluded to in the body of the
work. The third Index consists of references to the subjects touched
upon. In the fourth, called the Venetian Index, I have named every
building of importance in the city of Venice itself, or near it;
supplying, for the convenience of the traveller, short notices of those
to which I had no occasion to allude in the text of the work; and making
the whole as complete a guide as I could, with such added directions as
I should have given to any private friend visiting the city. As,
however, in many cases, the opinions I have expressed differ widely from
those usually received; and, in other instances, subjects which may be
of much interest to the traveller have not come within the scope of my
inquiry; the reader had better take Lazari's small Guide in his hand
also, as he will find in it both the information I have been unable to
furnish, and the expression of most of the received opinions upon any
subject of art.

Various inconsistencies will be noticed in the manner of indicating the
buildings, some being named in Italian, some in English, and some half
in one, and half in the other. But these inconsistencies are permitted
in order to save trouble, and make the Index more practically useful.
For instance, I believe the traveller will generally look for "Mark,"
rather than for "Marco," when he wishes to find the reference to St.
Mark's Church; but I think he will look for Rocco, rather than for Roch,
when he is seeking for the account of the Scuola di San Rocco. So also I
have altered the character in which the titles of the plates are
printed, from the black letter in the first volume, to the plain Roman
in the second and third; finding experimentally that the former
character was not easily legible, and conceiving that the book would be
none the worse for this practical illustration of its own principles, in
a daring sacrifice of symmetry to convenience.

These alphabetical Indices will, however, be of little use, unless
another, and a very different kind of Index, be arranged in the mind of
the reader; an Index explanatory of the principal purposes and contents
of the various parts of this essay. It is difficult to analyze the
nature of the reluctance with which either a writer or painter takes it
upon him to explain the meaning of his own work, even in cases where,
without such explanation, it must in a measure remain always disputable:
but I am persuaded that this reluctance is, in most instances, carried
too far; and that, wherever there really is a serious purpose in a book
or a picture, the author does wrong who, either in modesty or vanity
(both feelings have their share in producing the dislike of personal
interpretation), trusts entirely to the patience and intelligence of the
readers or spectators to penetrate into their significance. At all
events, I will, as far as possible, spare such trouble with respect to
these volumes, by stating here, finally and clearly, both what they
intend and what they contain; and this the rather because I have lately
noticed, with some surprise, certain reviewers announcing as a
discovery, what I thought had lain palpably on the surface of the book,
namely, that "if Mr. Ruskin be right, all the architects, and all the
architectural teaching of the last three hundred years, must have been
wrong." That is indeed precisely the fact; and the very thing I meant to
say, which indeed I thought I had said over and over again. I believe
the architects of the last three centuries to have been wrong; wrong
without exception; wrong totally, and from the foundation. This is
exactly the point I have been endeavoring to prove, from the beginning
of this work to the end of it. But as it seems not yet to have been
stated clearly enough, I will here try to put my entire theorem into an
unmistakable form.

The various nations who attained eminence in the arts before the time of
Christ, each of them, produced forms of architecture which in their
various degrees of merit were almost exactly indicative of the degrees
of intellectual and moral energy of the nations which originated them;
and each reached its greatest perfection at the time when the true
energy and prosperity of the people who had invented it were at their
culminating point. Many of these various styles of architecture were
good, considered in relation to the times and races which gave birth to
them; but none were absolutely good or perfect, or fitted for the
practice of all future time.

The advent of Christianity for the first time rendered possible the full
development of the soul of man, and therefore the full development of
the arts of man.

Christianity gave birth to a new architecture, not only immeasurably
superior to all that had preceded it, but demonstrably the best
architecture that _can_ exist; perfect in construction and decoration,
and fit for the practice of all time.

This architecture, commonly called "Gothic," though in conception
perfect, like the theory of a Christian character, never reached an
actual perfection, having been retarded and corrupted by various adverse
influences; but it reached its highest perfection, hitherto manifested,
about the close of the thirteenth century, being then indicative of a
peculiar energy in the Christian mind of Europe.

In the course of the fifteenth century, owing to various causes which I
have endeavored to trace in the preceding pages, the Christianity of
Europe was undermined; and a Pagan architecture was introduced, in
imitation of that of the Greeks and Romans.

The architecture of the Greeks and Romans themselves was not good, but
it was natural; and, as I said before, good in some respects, and for a
particular time.

But the imitative architecture introduced first in the fifteenth
century, and practised ever since, was neither good nor natural. It was
good in no respect, and for no time. All the architects who have built
in that style have built what was worthless; and therefore the greater
part of the architecture which has been built for the last three hundred
years, and which we are now building, is worthless. We must give up this
style totally, despise it and forget it, and build henceforward only in
that perfect and Christian style hitherto called Gothic, which is
everlastingly the best.

This is the theorem of these volumes.

In support of this theorem, the first volume contains, in its first
chapter, a sketch of the actual history of Christian architecture, up to
the period of the Reformation; and, in the subsequent chapters, an
analysis of the entire system of the laws of architectural construction
and decoration, deducing from those laws positive conclusions as to the
best forms and manners of building for all time.

The second volume contains, in its first five chapters, an account of
one of the most important and least known forms of Christian
architecture, as exhibited in Venice, together with an analysis of its
nature in the fourth chapter; and, which is a peculiarly important part
of this section, an account of the power of color over the human mind.

The sixth chapter of the second volume contains an analysis of the
nature of Gothic architecture, properly so called, and shows that in its
external form it complies precisely with the abstract laws of structure
and beauty, investigated in the first volume. The seventh and eighth
chapters of the second volume illustrate the nature of Gothic
architecture by various Venetian examples. The third volume
investigates, in its first chapter, the causes and manner of the
corruption of Gothic architecture; in its second chapter, defines the
nature of the Pagan architecture which superseded it; in the third
chapter, shows the connexion of that Pagan architecture with the various
characters of mind which brought about the destruction of the Venetian
nation; and, in the fourth chapter, points out the dangerous tendencies
in the modern mind which the practice of such an architecture indicates.

Such is the intention of the preceding pages, which I hope will no more
be doubted or mistaken. As far as regards the manner of its fulfilment,
though I hope, in the course of other inquiries, to add much to the
elucidation of the points in dispute, I cannot feel it necessary to
apologize for the imperfect handling of a subject which the labor of a
long life, had I been able to bestow it, must still have left
imperfectly treated.




I.

PERSONAL INDEX.


    A

  Alberti, Duccio degli, his tomb, iii. 74, 80.
  Alexander III., his defence by Venetians, i. 7.
  Ambrose, St., his verbal subtleties, ii. 320.
  Angelico, Frà, artistical power of, i. 400; his influence on
    Protestants, ii. 105; his coloring, ii. 145.
  Aristotle, his evil influence on the modern mind, ii. 319.
  Averulinus, his book on architecture, iii. 63.


    B

  Barbaro, monuments of the family, iii. 125.
  Barbarossa, Emperor, i. 7, 9.
  Baseggio, Pietro, iii. 199.
  Bellini, John, i. 11; his kindness to Albert Durer, i. 383; general
    power of, see Venetian Index, under head "Giovanni Grisostomo;"
    Gentile, his brother, iii. 21.
  Berti, Bellincion, ii. 263.
  Browning, Elizabeth B., her poetry, ii. 206.
  Bunsen, Chevalier, his work on Romanesque Churches, ii. 381.
  Bunyan, John, his portraiture of constancy, ii. 333; of patience, ii.
    334; of vanity, ii. 346; of sin, iii. 147.


    C

  Calendario, Filippo, iii. 199.
  Canaletto, i. 24; and see Venetian Index under head "Carità."
  Canova, i. 217; and see Venetian Index under head "Frari."
  Cappello, Vincenzo, his tomb, iii. 122.
  Caracci, school of the, i. 24.
  Cary, his translation of Dante, ii. 264.
  Cavalli, Jacopo, his tomb, iii. 82.
  Cicero, influence of his philosophy, ii. 317, 318.
  Claude Lorraine, i. 24.
  Comnenus, Manuel, ii. 263.
  Cornaro, Marco, his tomb, iii. 79.
  Correggio, ii. 192.
  Crabbe, naturalism in his poetry, ii. 195.


    D

  Dandolo, Andrea, tomb of, ii. 70; Francesco, tomb of, iii. 74;
    character of, iii. 76; Simon, tomb of, iii. 79.
  Dante, his central position, ii. 340, iii. 158; his system of virtue,
    ii. 323; his portraiture of sin, iii. 147.
  Daru, his character as a historian, iii. 213.
  Dolci, Carlo, ii. 105.
  Dolfino, Giovanni, tomb of, iii. 78.
  Durer, Albert, his rank as a landscape painter, i. 383; his power in
    grotesque, iii. 145.


    E

  Edwin, King, his conversion, iii. 62.


    F

  Faliero, Bertuccio, his tomb, iii. 94; Marino, his house, ii. 254;
    Vitale, miracle in his time, ii. 61.
  Fergusson, James, his system of beauty, i. 388.
  Foscari, Francesco, his reign, i. 4, iii. 165; his tomb, iii. 84; his
    countenance, iii. 86.


    G

  Garbett, answer to Mr., i. 403.
  Ghiberti, his sculpture, i. 217.
  Giotto, his system of the virtues, ii. 323, 329, 341; his rank as a
    painter, ii. 188, iii. 172.
  Giulio Romano, i. 23.
  Giustiniani, Marco, his tomb, i. 315; Sebastian, ambassador to
    England, iii. 224.
  Godfrey of Bouillon, his piety, iii. 62.
  Gozzoli, Benozzo, ii. 195.
  Gradenigo, Pietro, ii. 290.
  Grande, Can, della Scala, his tomb, i. 268 (the cornice _g_ in Plate
    XVI. is taken from it), iii. 71.
  Guariento, his Paradise, ii. 296.
  Guercino, ii. 105.


    H

  Hamilton, Colonel, his paper on the Serapeum, ii. 220.
  Hobbima, iii. 184.
  Hunt, William, his painting of peasant boys, ii. 192; of still life,
    ii. 394.
  Hunt, William Holman, relation of his works to modern and ancient
    art, iii. 185.


    K

  Knight, Gally, his work on Architecture, i. 378.


    L

  Leonardo da Vinci, ii. 171.
  Louis XI., iii. 194.


    M

  Martin, John, ii. 104.
  Mastino, Can, della Scala, his tomb, ii. 224, iii. 72.
  Maynard, Miss, her poems, ii. 397.
  Michael Angelo, ii. 134, 188, iii. 56, 90, 99, 158.
  Millais, John E., relation of his works to older art, iii. 185;
    aerial perspective in his "Huguenot," iii. 47.
  Milton, how inferior to Dante, iii. 147.
  Mocenigo, Tomaso, his character, i. 4; his speech on rebuilding the
    Ducal Palace, ii. 299; his tomb, i. 26, iii. 84.
  Morosini, Carlo, Count, note on Daru's History by, iii. 213.
  Morosini, Marino, his tomb, iii. 93.
  Morosini, Michael, his character, iii. 213;
     his tomb, iii. 80.
  Murillo, his sensualism, ii. 192.


    N

  Napoleon, his genius in civil administration, i. 399.
  Niccolo Pisano, i. 215.


    O

  Orcagna, his system of the virtues, ii. 329.
  Orseolo, Pietro (Doge), iii. 120.
  Otho the Great, his vow at Murano, ii. 32.


    P

  Palladio, i. 24, 146; and see Venetian Index, under head "Giorgio
    Maggiore."
  Participazio, Angelo, founds the Ducal Palace, ii. 287.
  Pesaro, Giovanni, tomb of, iii. 92; Jacopo, tomb of, iii. 91.
  Philippe de Commynes, i. 12.
  Plato, influence of his philosophy, ii. 317, 338; his playfulness,
    iii. 127.
  Poussin, Nicolo and Gaspar, i. 23.
  Procaccini, Camillo, ii. 188.
  Prout, Samuel, his style, i. 250, iii. 19, 134.
  Pugin, Welby, his rank as an architect, i. 385.


    Q

  Querini, Marco, his palace, ii. 255.


    R

  Raffaelle, ii. 188, iii. 56, 108, 136.
  Reynolds, Sir J., his painting at New College, ii. 323; his general
    manner, iii. 184.
  Rogers, Samuel, his works, ii. 195, iii. 113.
  Rubens, intellectual rank of, i. 400;
     coarseness of, ii. 145.


    S

  Salvator Rosa, i. 24, ii. 105, 145, 188.
  Scaligeri, tombs of, at Verona; see "Grande," "Mastino," "Signorio;"
    palace of, ii. 257.
  Scott, Sir W., his feelings of romance, iii. 191.
  Shakspeare, his "Seven Ages," whence derived, ii. 361.
  Sharpe, Edmund, his works, i. 342, 408.
  Signorio, Can, della Scala, his tomb, character, i. 268, iii. 73.
  Simplicius, St., ii. 356.
  Spenser, value of his philosophy, ii. 327, 341; his personifications
    of the months, ii. 272; his system of the virtues, ii. 326; scheme of
    the first book of the Faërie Queen, iii. 205.
  Steno, Michael, ii. 306; his tomb, ii. 296.
  Stothard (the painter), his works, ii. 187, 195.
  Symmachus, St., ii. 357.


    T

  Teniers, David, ii. 188.
  Tiepolo, Jacopo and Lorenzo, their tombs, iii. 69; Bajamonte, ii.
    255.
  Tintoret, i. 12; his genius and function, ii. 149; his Paradise, ii.
    304, 372; his rank among the men of Italy, iii. 158.
  Titian, i. 12; his function and fall, ii. 149, 187.
  Turner, his rank as a landscape painter, i. 382, ii. 187.


    U

  Uguccione, Benedetto, destroys Giotto's façade at Florence, i. 197.


    V

  Vendramin, Andrea (Doge), his tomb, i. 27, iii. 88.
  Verocchio, Andrea, iii. 11, 13.
  Veronese, Paul, artistical rank of, i. 400; his designs of
    balustrades, ii. 247; and see in Venetian Index, "Ducal Palace,"
    "Pisani," "Sebastian," "Redentore," "Accademia."


    W

  West, Benjamin, ii. 104.
  Wordsworth, his observation of nature, i. 247 (note).


    Z

  Zeno, Carlo, i. 4, iii. 80.
  Ziani, Sebastian (Doge), builds Ducal Palace, ii. 289.




II.

LOCAL INDEX.


    A

  Abbeville, door of church at, ii. 225; parapet at, ii. 245.
  Alexandria, Church at, i. 381.
  Alhambra, ornamentation of, i. 429.
  Alps, how formed for distant effect, i. 247; how seen from Venice,
    ii. 2, 28.
  Amiens, pillars of Cathedral at, i. 102.
  Arqua, hills of, how seen from Venice, ii. 2.
  Assisi, Giotto's paintings at, ii. 323.


    B

  Beauvais, piers of Cathedral at, i. 93; grandeur of its buttress
    structure, i. 170.
  Bergamo, Duomo at, i. 275.
  Bologna, Palazzo Pepoli at, i. 275.
  Bourges, Cathedral at, i. 43, 102, 228, 271, 299; ii. 92, 186; house
    of Jacques Coeur at, i. 346.


    C

  Chamouni, glacier forms at, i. 222.
  Como, Broletto of, i. 141, 339.


    D

  Dijon, pillars in Church of Notre Dame at, i. 102; tombs of Dukes of
    Burgundy, iii. 68.


    E

  Edinburgh, college at, i. 207.


    F

  Falaise (St. Gervaise at), piers of, i. 103.
  Florence, Cathedral of, i. 197, iii. 13.


    G

  Gloucester, Cathedral of, i. 192.


    L

  Lombardy, geology of, ii. 5.
  London, Church in Margaret Street, Portland Place, iii. 196; Temple
    Church, i. 412; capitals in Belgrave and Grosvenor Squares, i. 330;
    Bank of England, base of, i. 283; wall of, typical of accounts, i.
    295; statue in King William Street, i. 210; shops in Oxford Street,
    i. 202; Arthur Club-house, i. 295; Athenæum Club-house, i. 157, 283;
    Duke of York's Pillar, i. 283; Treasury, i. 205; Whitehall, i. 205;
    Westminster, fall of houses at, ii. 268; Monument, i. 82, 283; Nelson
    Pillar, i. 216; Wellington Statue, i. 257.
  Lucca, Cathedral of, ii. 275; San Michele at, i. 375.
  Lyons, porch of cathedral at, i. 379.


    M

  Matterhorn (Mont Cervin), structure of, i. 58; lines of, applied to
    architecture, i. 308, 310, 332.
  Mestre, scene in street of, i. 355.
  Milan, St. Ambrogio, piers of, i. 102; capital of, i. 324; St.
    Eustachio, tomb of St. Peter Martyr, i. 218.
  Moulins, brickwork at, i. 296.
  Murano, general aspect of, ii. 29; Duomo of, ii. 32; balustrades of,
    ii. 247; inscriptions at, ii. 384.


    N

  Nineveh, style of its decorations, i. 234, 239; iii. 159.


    O

  Orange (South France), arch at, i. 250.
  Orleans, Cathedral of, i. 95.


    P

  Padua, Arena chapel at, ii. 324; St. Antonio at, i. 135; St. Sofia
    at, i. 327; Eremitani, Church of, at, i. 135.
  Paris, Hotel des Invalides, i. 214; Arc de l'Etoile, i. 291; Colonne
    Vendome, i. 212.
  Pavia, St. Michele at, piers of, i. 102, 337; ornaments of, i. 376.
  Pisa, Baptistery of, ii. 275.
  Pistoja, San Pietro at, i. 295.


    R

  Ravenna, situation of, ii. 6.
  Rouen, Cathedral, piers of, i. 103, 153; pinnacles of, ii. 213; St.
    Maclou at, sculptures of, ii. 197.


    S

  Salisbury Cathedral, piers of, i. 102; windows at, ii. 224.
  Sens, Cathedral of, i. 135.
  Switzerland, cottage architecture of, i. 156, 203, iii. 133.


    V

  Verona, San Fermo at, i. 136, ii. 259; Sta. Anastasia at, i. 142;
    Duomo of, i. 373; St. Zeno at, i. 373; balconies at, ii. 247;
    archivolt at, i. 335; tombs at, see in Personal Index, "Grande,"
    "Mastino," "Signorio."
  Vevay, architecture of, i. 136.
  Vienne (South France), Cathedral of, i. 274.


    W

  Warwick, Guy's tower at, i. 168.
  Wenlock (Shropshire), Abbey of, i. 270.
  Winchester, Cathedral of, i. 192.


    Y

  York, Minster of, i. 205, 313.




III.

TOPICAL INDEX.


    A

  Abacus, defined, i. 107; law of its proportion, i. 111-115; its
    connection with cornices, i. 116; its various profiles, i. 319-323;
    iii. 243-248.
  Acanthus, leaf of, its use in architecture, i. 233; how treated at
    Torcello, ii. 15.
  Alabaster, use of, in incrustation, ii. 86.
  Anachronism, necessity of, in the best art, ii. 198.
  Anatomy, a disadvantageous study for artists, iii. 47.
  Angels, use of their images in Venetian heraldry, ii. 278; statues
    of, on the Ducal Palace, ii. 311.
  Anger, how symbolically represented, ii. 344.
  Angles, decoration of, i. 260; ii. 305; of Gothic Palaces, ii. 238;
    of Ducal Palace, ii. 307.
  Animal character in northern and southern climates, ii. 156; in
    grotesque art, iii. 149.
  Apertures, analysis of their structure, i. 50; general forms of, i.
    174.
  Apse, forms of, in southern and northern churches compared, i. 170.
  Arabesques of Raffaelle, their baseness, iii. 136.
  Arabian architecture, i. 18, 234, 235, 429; ii. 135.
  Arches, general structure of, i. 122; moral characters of, i. 126;
    lancet, round, and depressed, i. 129; four-centred, i. 130; ogee, i.
    131; non-concentric, i. 133, 341; masonry of, i. 133, ii. 218; load
    of, i. 144; are not derived from vegetation, ii. 201.
  Architects, modern, their unfortunate position, i. 404, 407.
  Architecture, general view of its divisions, i. 47-51; how to judge
    of it, ii. 173; adaptation of, to requirements of human mind, iii.
    192; richness of early domestic, ii. 100, iii. 2; manner of its
    debasement in general, iii. 3.
  Archivolts, decoration of, i. 334; general families of, i. 335; of
    Murano, ii. 49; of St. Mark's, ii. 95; in London, ii. 97; Byzantine,
    ii. 138; profiles of, iii. 244.
  Arts, relative dignity of, i. 395; how represented in Venetian
    sculpture, ii. 355; what relation exists between them and their
    materials, ii. 394; art divided into the art of facts, of design, and
    of both, ii. 183; into purist, naturalist, and sensualist, ii. 187;
    art opposed to inspiration, iii. 151; defined, iii. 170;
    distinguished from science, iii. 35; how to enjoy that of the
    ancients, iii. 188.
  Aspiration, not the primal motive of Gothic work, i. 151.
  Astrology, judicial, representation of its doctrines in Venetian
    sculpture, ii. 352.
  Austrian government in Italy, iii. 209.
  Avarice, how represented figuratively, ii. 344.


    B

  Backgrounds, diapered, iii. 20.
  Balconies, of Venice, ii. 243; general treatment of, iii. 254; of
    iron, ii. 247.
  Ballflower, its use in ornamentation, i. 279.
  Balustrades. See "Balconies."
  Bases, general account of, iii. 225; of walls, i. 55; of piers, i.
    73; of shafts, i. 84; decoration of, i. 281; faults of Gothic
    profiles of, i. 285; spurs of, i. 286; beauty of, in St. Mark's, i.
    290; Lombardie, i. 292; ought not to be richly decorated, i. 292;
    general effect of, ii. 387.
  Battlements, i. 162; abuse of, in ornamentation, i. 219.
  Beauty and ornament, relation of the terms, i. 404.
  Bellstones of capitals defined, i. 108.
  Birds, use of in ornamentation, i. 234, ii. 140.
  Bishops, their ancient authority, ii. 25.
  Body, its relation to the soul, i. 41, 395.
  Brackets, division of, i. 161; ridiculous forms of, i. 161.
  Breadth in Byzantine design, ii. 133.
  Brickwork, ornamental, i. 296; in general, ii. 241, 260, 261.
  Brides of Venice, legend of the, iii. 113, 116.
  Buttresses, general structure of, i. 166; flying, i. 192; supposed
    sanctity of, i. 173.
  Bull, symbolical use of, in representing rivers, i. 418, 421, 424.
  Byzantine style, analysis of, ii. 75; ecclesiastical fitness of, ii.
    97; centralization in, ii. 236; palaces built in, ii. 118; sculptures
    in, ii. 137, 140.


    C

  Candlemas, ancient symbols of, ii. 272.
  Capitals, general structure of, i. 105; bells of, i. 107; just
    proportions of, i. 114; various families of, i. 13, 65, 324, ii. 129,
    iii. 231; are necessary to shafts in good architecture, i. 119;
    Byzantine, ii. 131, iii. 231; Lily, of St. Mark's, ii. 137; of
    Solomon's temple, ii. 137.
  Care, how symbolized, ii. 348. See "Sorrow."
  Caryatides, i. 302.
  Castles, English, entrances of, i. 177.
  Cathedrals, English, effect of, ii. 63.
  Ceilings, old Venetian, ii. 280.
  Centralization in design, ii. 237.
  Chalet of Switzerland, its character, i. 203.
  Chamfer defined, i. 263; varieties of, i. 262, 429.
  Changefulness, an element of Gothic, ii. 172.
  Charity, how symbolized, ii. 327, 339.
  Chartreuse, Grande, morbid life in, iii. 190.
  Chastity, how symbolized, ii. 328.
  Cheerfulness, how symbolized, ii. 326, 348; virtue of, ii. 326.
  Cherries, cultivation of, at Venice, ii. 361.
  Christianity, how mingled with worldliness, iii. 109; how imperfectly
    understood, iii. 168; influence of, in liberating workmen, ii. 159,
    i. 243; influence of, on forms, i. 99.
  Churches, wooden, of the North, i. 381; considered as ships, ii. 25;
    decoration of, how far allowable, ii. 102.
  Civilization, progress of, iii. 168; twofold danger of, iii. 169.
  Classical literature, its effect on the modern mind, iii. 12.
  Climate, its influence on architecture, i. 151, ii. 155, 203.
  Color, its importance in early work, ii. 38, 40, 78, 91; its
    spirituality, ii. 145, 396; its relation to music, iii. 186;
    quartering of, iii. 20; how excusing realization, iii. 186.
  Commerce, how regarded by Venetians, i. 6.
  Composition, definition of the term, ii. 182.
  Constancy, how symbolized, ii. 333.
  Construction, architectural, how admirable, i. 36.
  Convenience, how consulted by Gothic architecture, ii. 179.
  Cornices, general divisions of, i. 63, iii. 248; of walls, i. 60; of
    roofs, i. 149; ornamentation of, i. 305; curvatures of, i. 310;
    military, i. 160; Greek, i. 157.
  Courses in walls, i. 60.
  Crockets, their use in ornamentation, i. 346; their abuse at Venice,
    iii. 109.
  Crosses, Byzantine, ii. 139.
  Crusaders, character of the, ii. 263.
  Crystals, architectural appliance of, i. 225.
  Cupid, representation of, in early and later art, ii. 342.
  Curvature, on what its beauty depends, i. 222, iii. 5.
  Cusps, definition of, i. 135; groups of, i. 138; relation of, to
    vegetation, ii. 219; general treatment of, iii. 255; earliest
    occurrence of, ii. 220.


    D

  Daguerreotype, probable results of, iii. 169.
  Darkness, a character of early churches, ii. 18; not an abstract
    evil, iii. 220.
  Death, fear of, in Renaissance times, iii. 65, 90, 92; how anciently
    regarded, iii. 139, 156.
  Decoration, true nature of, i. 405; how to judge of, i. 44, 45. See
    "Ornament."
  Demons, nature of, how illustrated by Milton and Dante, iii. 147.
  Dentil, Venetian, defined, i. 273, 275.
  Design, definition of the term, ii. 183; its relations to naturalism,
    ii. 184.
  Despair, how symbolized, ii. 334.
  Diaper patterns in brick, i. 296; in color, iii. 21, 22.
  Discord, how symbolized, ii. 333.
  Discs, decoration by means of, i. 240, 416; ii. 147, 264.
  Division of labor, evils of, ii. 165.
  Doge of Venice, his power, i. 3, 360.
  Dogtooth moulding defined, i. 269.
  Dolphins, moral disposition of, i. 230; use of, in symbolic
    representation of sea, i. 422, 423.
  Domestic architecture, richness of, in middle ages, ii. 99.
  Doors, general structure of, i. 174, 176; smallness of in English
    cathedrals, i. 176; ancient Venetian, ii. 277, iii. 227.
  Doric architecture, i. 157, 301, 307; Christian Doric, i. 308, 315.
  Dragon, conquered by St. Donatus, ii. 33; use of, in ornamentation,
    ii. 219.
  Dreams, how resembled by the highest arts, iii. 153; prophetic, in
    relation to the Grotesque, iii. 156.
  Dress, its use in ornamentation, i. 212; early Venetian, ii. 383;
    dignity of, iii. 191; changes in modern dress, iii. 192.
  Duties of buildings, i. 47.


    E

  Earthquake of 1511, ii. 242.
  Eastern races, their power over color, ii. 147.
  Eaves, construction of, i. 156.
  Ecclesiastical architecture in Venice, i. 20; no architecture
    exclusively ecclesiastical, ii. 99.
  Edge decoration, i. 268.
  Education, University, i. 391; iii. 110; evils of, with respect to
    architectural workmen, ii. 107; how to be successfully undertaken,
    ii. 165, 214; modern education in general, how mistaken, iii. 110,
    234; system of, in Plato, ii. 318; of Persian kings, ii. 318; not to
    be mistaken for erudition, iii. 219; ought to be universal, iii. 220.
  Egg and arrow mouldings, i. 314.
  Egyptian architecture, i. 99, 239; ii. 203.
  Elgin marbles, ii. 171.
  Encrusted architecture, i. 271, 272; general analysis of, ii. 76.
  Energy of Northern Gothic, i. 371; ii. 16, 204.
  English (early) capitals, faults of, i. 100, 411; English mind, its
    mistaken demands of perfection, ii. 160.
  Envy, how set forth, ii. 346.
  Evangelists, types of, how explicable, iii. 155.


    F

  Faërie Queen, Spenser's, value of, theologically, ii. 328.
  Faith, influence of on art, ii. 104, 105; Titian's picture of, i. 11;
    how symbolized, ii. 337.
  Falsehood, how symbolized, ii. 349.
  Fatalism, how expressed in Eastern architecture, ii. 205.
  Fear, effect of, on human life, iii. 137; on Grotesque art, iii. 142.
  Feudalism, healthy effects of, i. 184.
  Fig-tree, sculpture of, on Ducal Palace, ii. 307.
  Fillet, use of, in ornamentation, i. 267.
  Finials, their use in ornamentation, i. 346; a sign of decline in
    Venetian architecture, iii. 109.
  Finish in workmanship, when to be required, ii. 165; dangers of, iii.
    170, ii. 162.
  Fir, spruce, influence of, on architecture, i. 152.
  Fire, forms of, in ornamentation, i. 228.
  Fish, use of, in ornamentation, i. 229.
  Flamboyant Gothic, i. 278, ii. 225.
  Flattery, common in Renaissance times, iii. 64.
  Flowers, representation of, how desirable, i. 340; how represented in
    mosaic, iii. 179.
  Fluting of columns, a mistake, i. 301.
  Foils, definition of, ii. 221.
  Foliage, how carved in declining periods, iii. 8, 17. See "Vegetation."
  Foliation defined, ii. 219; essential to Gothic architecture, ii. 222.
  Folly, how symbolized, ii. 325, 348.
  Form of Gothic, defined, ii. 209.
  Fortitude, how symbolized, ii. 337.
  Fountains, symbolic representations of, i. 427.
  French architecture, compared with Italian, ii. 226.
  Frivolity, how exhibited in Grotesque art, iii. 143.
  Fruit, its use in ornamentation, i. 232.


    G

  Gable, general structure of, i. 124; essential to Gothic, ii. 210, 217.
  Gardens, Italian, iii. 136.
  Generalization, abuses of, iii. 176.
  Geology of Lombardy, ii. 5.
  Glass, its capacities in architecture, i. 409; manufacture of, ii.
    166; true principles of working in, ii. 168, 395.
  Gluttony, how symbolized, ii. 343.
  Goldsmiths' work, a high form of art, ii. 166.
  Gondola, management of, ii. 375.
  Gothic architecture, analysis of, ii. 151; not derived from vegetable
    structure, i. 121; convenience of, ii. 178; divisions of, ii. 215;
    surface and linear, ii. 226; Italian and French, ii. 226; flamboyant,
    i. 278, ii. 225; perpendicular, i. 192, ii. 223, 227; early English,
    i. 109; how to judge of it, ii. 228; how fitted for domestic
    purposes, ii. 269, iii. 195; how first corrupted, iii. 3; how to be
    at present built, iii. 196; early Venetian, ii. 248; ecclesiastical
    Venetian, i. 21; central Venetian, ii. 231; how adorned by color in
    Venice, iii. 23.
  Government of Venice, i. 2, ii. 366.
  Grammar, results of too great study of it, iii. 55, 106.
  Greek architecture, general character of, i. 240, ii. 215, iii. 159.
  Grief. See "Sorrow."
  Griffins, Lombardic, i. 292, 387.
  Grotesque, analysis of, iii. 132; in changes of form, i. 317; in
    Venetian painting, iii. 162; symbolical, iii. 155; its character in
    Renaissance work, iii. 113, 121, 136, 143.
  Gutters of roofs, i. 151.


    H

  Heathenism, typified in ornament, i. 317. See "Paganism."
  Heaven and Hell, proofs of their existence in natural phenomena, iii.
    138.
  History, how to be written and read, iii. 224.
  Hobbima, iii. 184.
  Honesty, how symbolized, ii. 349.
  Hope, how symbolized, ii. 341.
  Horseshoe arches, i. 129, ii. 249, 250.
  Humanity, spiritual nature of, i. 41; divisions of, with respect to
    art, i. 394.
  Humility, how symbolized, ii. 339.


    I

  Idleness, how symbolized, ii. 345.
  Idolatry, proper sense of the term, ii. 388; is no encourager of art,
    ii. 110. See "Popery."
  Imagination, its relation to art, iii. 182.
  Imitation of precious stones, &c., how reprehensible, iii. 26, 30.
  Imposts, continuous, i. 120.
  Infidelity, how symbolized, ii. 335; an element of the Renaissance
    spirit, iii. 100.
  Injustice, how symbolized, ii. 349.
  Inlaid ornamentation, i. 369; perfection of, in early Renaissance,
    iii. 26.
  Inscriptions at Murano, ii. 47, 54; use of, in early times, ii. 111.
  Insects, use of, in ornamentation, i. 230.
  Inspiration, how opposed to art, iii. 151, 171.
  Instinct, its dignity, iii. 171.
  Intellect, how variable in dignity, iii. 173.
  Involution, delightfulness of, in ornament, ii. 136.
  Iron, its use in architecture, i. 184, 410.
  Italians, modern character of, iii. 209.
  Italy, how ravaged by recent war, iii. 209.


    J

  Jambs, Gothic, iii. 137.
  Jesting, evils of, iii. 129.
  Jesuits, their restricted power in Venice, i. 366.
  Jewels, their cutting, a bad employment, ii. 166.
  Judgments, instinctive, i. 399.
  Job, book of, its purpose, iii. 53.


    K

  Keystones, how mismanaged in Renaissance work. See Venetian Index,
    under head "Libreria."
  Knowledge, its evil consequences, iii. 40; how to be received, iii.
    50, &c. See "Education."


    L

  Labor, manual, ornamental value of, i. 407; evils of its division,
    ii. 165; is not a degradation, ii. 168.
  Labyrinth, in Venetian streets, its clue, ii. 254.
  Lagoons, Venetian, nature of, ii. 7, 8.
  Landscape, lower schools of, i. 24; Venetian, ii. 149; modern love
    of, ii. 175, iii. 123.
  Laws of right in architecture, i. 32; laws in general, how
    permissibly violated, i. 255, ii. 210; their position with respect to
    art, iii. 96; and to religion, iii. 205.
  Leaves, use of, in ornamentation, i. 232 (see "Vegetation");
    proportion of, ii. 128.
  Liberality, how symbolized, ii. 333.
  Life in Byzantine architecture, ii. 133.
  Lilies, beautiful proportions of, ii. 128; used for parapet
    ornaments, ii. 242; lily capitals, ii. 137.
  Limitation of ornament, i. 254.
  Lines, abstract use of, in ornament, i. 221.
  Lintel, its structure, i. 124, 126.
  Lion, on piazzetta shafts, iii. 238.
  Load, of arches, i. 133.
  Logic, a contemptible science, iii. 105.
  Lombardic architecture, i. 17.
  Lotus leaf, its use in architecture, i. 233.
  Love, its power over human life, iii. 137.
  Lusts, their power over human nature, how symbolized by Spenser, ii.
    328.
  Luxury, how symbolized, ii. 342; how traceable in ornament, iii. 4;
    of Renaissance schools, iii. 61.


    M

  Madonna, Byzantine representations of, ii. 53.
  Magnitude, vulgar admiration of, iii. 64.
  Malmsey, use of, in Feast of the Maries, iii. 117.
  Marble, its uses, iii. 27.
  Maries, Feast of the, iii. 117.
  Mariolatry, ancient and modern, ii. 55.
  Marriages of Venetians, iii. 116.
  Masonry, Mont-Cenisian, i. 132; of walls, i. 61; of arches, i. 133.
  Materials, invention of new, how injurious to art, iii. 42.
  Misery, how symbolized, ii. 347.
  Modesty, how symbolized, ii. 335.
  Monotony, its place in art, ii. 176.
  Months, personifications of, in ancient art, ii. 272.
  Moroseness, its guilt, iii. 130.
  Mosaics at Torcello, ii. 18, 19; at St. Mark's, ii. 70, 112; early
    character of, ii. 110, iii. 175, 178.
  Music, its relation to color, iii. 186.
  Mythology of Venetian painters, ii. 150; ancient, how injurious to
    the Christian mind, iii. 107.


    N

  Natural history, how necessary a study, iii. 54.
  Naturalism, general analysis of it with respect to art, ii. 181, 190;
    its advance in Gothic art, iii. 6; not to be found in the encrusted
    style, ii. 89; its presence in the noble Grotesque, iii. 144.
  Nature (in the sense of material universe) not improvable by art, i.
    350; its relation to architecture, i. 351.
  Niches, use of, in Northern Gothic, i. 278; in Venetian, ii. 240; in
    French and Veronese, ii. 227.
  Norman hatchet-work, i. 297; zigzag, i. 339.
  Novelty, its necessity to the human mind, ii. 176.


    O

  Oak-tree, how represented in symbolical art, iii. 185.
  Obedience, how symbolized, ii. 334.
  Oligarchical government, its effect on the Venetians, i. 5.
  Olive-tree, neglect of, by artists, iii. 175; general expression of,
    iii. 176, 177; representations of, in mosaic, iii. 178.
  Order, uses and disadvantages of, ii. 172.
  Orders, Doric and Corinthian, i. 13; ridiculous divisions of, i. 157,
    370; ii. 173, 249; iii. 99.
  Ornament, material of, i. 211; the best, expresses man's delight in
    God's work, i. 220; not in his own, i. 211; general treatment of, i.
    236; is necessarily imperfect, i. 237, 240; divided into servile,
    subordinate, and insubordinate, i. 242, ii. 158; distant effect of,
    i. 248; arborescent, i. 252; restrained within limits, i. 255; cannot
    be overcharged if good, i. 406.
  Oxford, system of education at, i. 391.


    P

  Paganism, revival of its power in modern times, iii. 105, 107, 122.
  Painters, their power of perception, iii. 37; influence of society
    on, iii. 41; what they should know, iii. 41; what is their business,
    iii. 187.
  Palace, the Crystal, merits of, i. 409.
  Palaces, Byzantine, ii. 118, 391; Gothic, ii. 231.
  Papacy. See "Popery."
  Parapets, i. 162, ii. 240.
  Parthenon, curves of, ii. 127.
  Patience, how symbolized, ii. 334.
  Pavements, ii. 52.
  Peacocks, sculpture of, i. 240.
  Pedestals of shafts, i. 82; and see Venetian Index under head
    "Giorgio Maggiore."
  Perception opposed to knowledge, iii. 37.
  Perfection, inordinate desire of, destructive of art, i. 237; ii.
    133, 158, 169.
  Perpendicular style, i. 190, 253; ii. 223, 227.
  Personification, evils of, ii. 322.
  Perspective, aerial, ridiculous exaggerations of, iii. 45; ancient
    pride in, iii. 57; absence of, in many great works, see in Venetian
    Index the notice of Tintoret's picture of the Pool of Bethesda, under
    head "Rocco."
  Phariseeism and Liberalism, how opposed, iii. 97.
  Philology, a base science, iii. 54.
  Piazzetta at Venice, plan of, ii. 283; shafts of, ii. 233.
  Pictures, judgment of, how formed, ii. 371; neglect of, in Venice,
    ii. 372; how far an aid to religion, ii. 104, 110.
  Picturesque, definition of term, iii. 134.
  Piers, general structure of, i. 71, 98, 118.
  Pilgrim's Progress. See "Bunyan."
  Pine of Italy, its effect on architecture, i. 152; of Alps, effect in
    distance, i. 245. See "Fir."
  Pinnacles are of little practical service, i. 170; their effect on
    common roofs, i. 347.
  Play, its relation to Grotesque art, iii. 126.
  Pleasure, its kinds and true uses, iii. 189.
  Popery, how degraded in contest with Protestantism, i. 34, iii. 103;
    its influence on art, i. 23, 34, 35, 384, 432, ii. 51; typified in
    ornament, i. 316; power of Pope in Venice, i. 362; arts used in
    support of Popery, ii. 74.
  Porches, i. 195.
  Portraiture, power of, in Venice, iii. 164.
  Posture-making in Renaissance art, iii. 90.
  Prayers, ancient and modern, difference between, ii. 315, 390.
  Pre-Raphaelitism, iii. 90; present position of, iii. 168, 174, 188.
  Pride, how symbolized, ii. 343, iii. 207; of knowledge, iii. 35; of
    state, iii. 59; of system, iii. 95.
  Priests, restricted power of, in Venice, i. 366.
  Proportions, subtlety of, in early work, ii. 38, 121, 127.
  Protestantism, its influence on art, i. 23; typified in ornament, i.
    316; influence of, on prosperity of nations, i. 368; expenditure in
    favor of, i. 434; is incapable of judging of art, ii. 105; how
    expressed in art, ii. 205; its errors in opposing Romanism, iii, 102,
    103, 104; its shame of religious confession, ii. 278.
  Prudence, how symbolized, ii. 340.
  Pulpits, proper structure of, ii. 22, 380.
  Purism in art, its nature and definition, ii. 189.
  Purity, how symbolized, iii. 20.


    Q

  Quadrupeds, use of in ornamentation, i. 234.
  Quantity of ornament, its regulation, i. 23.


    R

  Rationalism, its influence on art, i. 23.
  Realization, how far allowable in noble art, iii. 182, 186.
  Recesses, decoration of, i. 278.
  Recumbent statues, iii. 72.
  Redundance, an element of Gothic, ii. 206.
  Religion, its influence on Venetian policy, i. 6; how far aided by
    pictorial art, ii. 104, 109; contempt of, in Renaissance times, iii.
    122.
  Renaissance architecture, nature of, iii. 33; early, iii. 1;
    Byzantine, iii. 15; Roman, iii. 32; Grotesque, iii. 112;
    inconsistencies of, iii. 42, etc.
  Reptiles, how used in ornamentation, i. 230.
  Resistance, line of, in arches, i. 126.
  Restraint, ornamental, value of, i. 255.
  Reverence, how ennobling to humanity, ii. 163.
  Rhetoric, a base study, iii. 106.
  Rigidity, an element of Gothic, ii. 203.
  Rivers, symbolical representation of, i. 419, 420.
  Rocks, use of, in ornamentation, i. 224; organization of, i. 246;
    curvatures of, i. 58, 224.
  Roll-mouldings, decoration of, i. 276.
  Romance, modern errors of, ii. 4; how connected with dress, iii. 192.
  Romanesque style, i. 15, 19, 145; ii. 215. See "Byzantine," and
    "Renaissance."
  Romanism. See "Popery."
  Roofs, analysis of, i. 46, 148; ii. 212, 216; domed, i. 149; Swiss,
    i. 149, 345; steepness of, conducive to Gothic character, i. 151, ii.
    209; decoration of, i. 343.
  Rustication, is ugly and foolish, i. 65; natural objects of which it
    produces a resemblance, i. 296.


    S

  Salvia, its leaf applied to architecture, i. 287, 306.
  Sarcophagi, Renaissance treatment of, iii. 90; ancient, iii. 69, 93.
  Satellitic shafts, i. 95.
  Satire in Grotesque art, iii. 126, 145.
  Savageness, the first element of Gothic, ii. 155; in Grotesque art,
    iii. 159.
  Science opposed to art, iii. 36.
  Sculpture, proper treatment of, i. 216, &c.
  Sea, symbolical representations of, i. 352, 421; natural waves of, i.
    351.
  Sensualism in art, its nature and definition, ii. 189; how redeemed
    by color, ii. 145.
  Serapeum at Memphis, cusps of, ii. 220.
  Sermons, proper manner of regarding them, ii. 22; mode of their
    delivery in Scotch church, ii. 381.
  Serrar del Consiglio, ii. 291.
  Shafts, analysis of, i. 84; vaulting shafts, i. 145; ornamentation
    of, i. 300; twisted, by what laws regulated, i. 303; strength of, i.
    402; laws by which they are regulated in encrusted style, ii. 82.
  Shields, use of, on tombs, ii. 224, iii. 87.
  Shipping, use of, in ornamentation, i. 215.
  Shops in Venice, ii. 65.
  Sight, how opposed to thought, iii. 39.
  Simplicity of life in thirteenth century, ii. 263.
  Sin, how symbolized in Grotesque art, iii. 141.
  Slavery of Greeks and Egyptians, ii. 158; of English workmen, ii.
    162, 163.
  Society, unhealthy state of, in modern times, ii. 163.
  Sorrow, how sinful, ii. 325; how symbolized, ii. 347.
  Soul, its development in art, iii. 173, 188; its connection with the
    body, i. 41, 395.
  Spandrils, structure of, i. 146; decoration of, i. 297.
  Spirals, architectural value of, i. 222, ii. 16.
  Spurs of bases, i. 79.
  Staircases, i. 208; of Gothic palaces, ii. 280.
  Stucco, when admissible, iii. 21.
  Subordination of ornament, i. 240.
  Superimposition of buildings, i. 200; ii. 386.
  Surface-Gothic, explanation of term, ii. 225, 227.
  Symbolism, i. 417; how opposed to personification, ii. 322.
  System, pride of, how hurtful, iii. 95, 99.


    T

  Temperance, how symbolized, ii. 338; temperance in color and
    curvature, iii. 420.
  Theology, opposed to religion, iii. 216; of Spencer, iii. 205.
  Thirteenth century, its high position with respect to art, ii. 263.
  Thought, opposed to sight, iii. 39.
  Tombs at Verona, i. 142, 412; at Venice, ii. 69; early Christian,
    iii. 67; Gothic, iii. 71; Renaissance treatment of, iii. 84.
  Towers, proper character of, i. 204; of St. Mark's, i 207.
  Traceries, structure of, i. 184, 185; flamboyant, i. 189; stump, i.
    189; English perpendicular, i 190, ii. 222; general character of, ii.
    220; strength of, in Venetian Gothic, ii. 234, iii. 253; general
    forms of tracery bars, iii. 250.
  Treason, how detested by Dante, ii. 327.
  Trees, use of, in ornamentation, i. 231.
  Trefoil, use of, in ornamentation, ii. 42.
  Triangles, used for ornaments at Murano, ii. 43.
  Tribune at Torcello, ii. 24.
  Triglyphs, ugliness of, i, 43.
  Trunkmakers, their share in recovery of Brides of Venice, iii. 117, 118.
  Truth, relation of, to religion, in Spenser's "Faërie Queen," iii,
    205; typified by stones, iii. 31.
  Tympanum, decoration of, i. 299.


    U

  Unity of Venetian nobility, i. 10.


    V

  Vain glory, speedy punishment of, iii. 122.
  Vanity, how symbolized, ii. 346.
  Variety in ornamental design, importance of, ii. 43, 133, 142, 172.
  Vegetation, use of, in ornamentation, i. 232; peculiar meaning of, in
    Gothic, ii. 199; how connected with cusps, ii. 219.
  Veil (wall veil), construction of, i. 58; decoration of, i. 294.
  Vine, Lombardic sculpture of, i. 375; at Torcello, ii. 15; use of, in
    ornamentation, ii. 141; in symbolism, ii. 143; sculpture of, on Ducal
    Palace, ii. 308.
  Virtues, how symbolized in sepulchral monuments, iii. 82, 86; systems
    of, in Pagan and Christian philosophy, ii. 312; cardinal, ii. 317,
    318, 320; of architecture, i. 36, 44.
  Voussoirs defined, i. 125; contest between them and architraves, i.
    336.


    W

  Walls, general analysis of their structure, i. 48; bases of, i. 52,
    53; cornices of, i. 63; rustication of, i. 61, 338; decoration of, i.
    294; courses in, i. 61, 295.
  Water, its use in ornamentation, i. 226; ancient representations of,
    i. 417.
  Weaving, importance of associations connected with, ii. 136.
  Wells, old Venetian, ii. 279.
  Windows, general forms of, i. 179; Arabian, i. 180, ii. 135;
    square-headed, ii. 211, 269; development of, in Venice, ii. 235;
    orders of, in Venice, ii. 248; advisable form of, in modern
    buildings, ii. 269.
  Winds, how symbolized at Venice, ii. 367.
  Wooden architecture, i. 381.
  Womanhood, virtues of, as given by Spenser, ii. 326.


    Z

  Zigzag, Norman, i. 339.




IV.

VENETIAN INDEX.


I have endeavored to make the following index as useful as possible to
the traveller, by indicating only the objects which are really worth his
study. A traveller's interest, stimulated as it is into strange vigor by
the freshness of every impression, and deepened by the sacredness of the
charm of association which long familiarity with any scene too fatally
wears away,[71] is too precious a thing to be heedlessly wasted; and as
it is physically impossible to see and to understand more than a certain
quantity of art in a given time, the attention bestowed on second-rate
works, in such a city as Venice, is not merely lost, but actually
harmful,--deadening the interest and confusing the memory with respect
to those which it is a duty to enjoy, and a disgrace to forget. The
reader need not fear being misled by any omissions; for I have
conscientiously pointed out every characteristic example, even of the
styles which I dislike, and have referred to Lazari in all instances in
which my own information failed: but if he is in any wise willing to
trust me, I should recommend him to devote his principal attention, if
he is fond of paintings, to the works of Tintoret, Paul Veronese, and
John Bellini; not of course neglecting Titian, yet remembering that
Titian can be well and thoroughly studied in almost any great European
gallery, while Tintoret and Bellini can be judged of _only_ in Venice,
and Paul Veronese, though gloriously represented by the two great
pictures in the Louvre, and many others throughout Europe, is yet not to
be fully estimated until he is seen at play among the fantastic chequers
of the Venetian ceilings.

I have supplied somewhat copious notices of the pictures of Tintoret,
because they are much injured, difficult to read, and entirely neglected
by other writers on art. I cannot express the astonishment and
indignation I felt on finding, in Kugler's handbook, a paltry cenacolo,
painted probably in a couple of hours for a couple of zecchins, for the
monks of St. Trovaso, quoted as characteristic of this master; just as
foolish readers quote separate stanzas of Peter Bell or the Idiot Boy,
as characteristic of Wordsworth. Finally, the reader is requested to
observe, that the dates assigned to the various buildings named in the
following index, are almost without exception conjectural; that is to
say, founded exclusively on the internal evidence of which a portion has
been given in the Final Appendix. It is likely, therefore, that here and
there, in particular instances, further inquiry may prove me to have
been deceived; but such occasional errors are not of the smallest
importance with respect to the general conclusions of the preceding
pages, which will be found to rest on too broad a basis to be disturbed.


    A

 ACCADEMIA DELLE BELLE ARTI. Notice above the door the two bas-reliefs
   of St. Leonard and St. Christopher, chiefly remarkable for their rude
   cutting at so late a date as 1377; but the niches under which they
   stand are unusual in their bent gables, and in little crosses within
   circles which fill their cusps. The traveller is generally too much
   struck by Titian's great picture of the "Assumption," to be able to
   pay proper attention to the other works in this gallery. Let him,
   however, ask himself candidly, how much of his admiration is
   dependent merely upon the picture being larger than any other in the
   room, and having bright masses of red and blue in it: let him be
   assured that the picture is in reality not one whit the better for
   being either large, or gaudy in color; and he will then be better
   disposed to give the pains necessary to discover the merit of the more
   profound and solemn works of Bellini and Tintoret. One of the most
   wonderful works in the whole gallery is Tintoret's "Death of Abel," on
   the left of the "Assumption;" the "Adam and Eve," on the right of it,
   is hardly inferior; and both are more characteristic examples of the
   master, and in many respects better pictures, than the much vaunted
   "Miracle of St. Mark." All the works of Bellini in this room are of
   great beauty and interest. In the great room, that which contains
   Titian's "Presentation of the Virgin," the traveller should examine
   carefully all the pictures by Vittor Carpaccio and Gentile Bellini,
   which represent scenes in ancient Venice; they are full of interesting
   architecture and costume. Marco Basaiti's "Agony in the Garden" is a
   lovely example of the religious school. The Tintorets in this room are
   all second rate, but most of the Veronese are good, and the large ones
   are magnificent.

 ALIGA. See GIORGIO.

 ALVISE, CHURCH OF ST. I have never been in this church, but Lazari
   dates its interior, with decision, as of the year 1388, and it may be
   worth a glance, if the traveller has time.

 ANDREA, CHURCH OF ST. Well worth visiting for the sake of the
   peculiarly sweet and melancholy effect of its little grass-grown
   campo, opening to the lagoon and the Alps. The sculpture over the
   door, "St. Peter walking on the Water," is a quaint piece of
   Renaissance work. Note the distant rocky landscape, and the oar of the
   existing gondola floating by St. Andrew's boat. The church is of the
   later Gothic period, much defaced, but still picturesque. The lateral
   windows are bluntly trefoiled, and good of their time.

 ANGELI, CHURCH DELGLI, at Murano. The sculpture of the "Annunciation"
   over the entrance-gate is graceful. In exploring Murano, it is worth
   while to row up the great canal thus far for the sake of the opening
   to the lagoon.

 ANTONINO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 APOLLINARE, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 APOSTOLI, CHURCH OF THE. The exterior is nothing. There is said to be
   a picture by Veronese in the interior, "The Fall of the Manna." I have
   not seen it; but, if it be of importance, the traveller should compare
   it carefully with Tintoret's, in the Scuola di San Rocco, and San
   Giorgio Maggiore.

 APOSTOLI, PALACE AT, II. 253, on the Grand Canal, near the Rialto,
   opposite the fruit-market. A most important transitional palace. Its
   sculpture in the first story is peculiarly rich and curious; I think
   Venetian, in imitation of Byzantine. The sea story and first floor are
   of the first half of the thirteenth century, the rest modern. Observe
   that only one wing of the sea story is left, the other half having
   been modernized. The traveller should land to look at the capital
   drawn in Plate II. of Vol. III. fig. 7.

 ARSENAL. Its gateway is a curiously picturesque example of Renaissance
   workmanship, admirably sharp and expressive in its ornamental
   sculpture; it is in many parts like some of the best Byzantine work.
   The Greek lions in front of it appear to me to deserve more praise
   than they have received; though they are awkwardly balanced between
   conventional and imitative representation, having neither the severity
   proper to the one, nor the veracity necessary for the other.


    B

 BADOER, PALAZZO, in the Campo San Giovanni in Bragola. A magnificent
   example of the fourteenth century Gothic, circa 1310-1320, anterior to
   the Ducal Palace, and showing beautiful ranges of the fifth order
   window, with fragments of the original balconies, and the usual
   lateral window larger than any of the rest. In the centre of its
   arcade on the first floor is the inlaid ornament drawn in Plate VIII.
   Vol. I. The fresco painting on the walls is of later date; and I
   believe the heads which form the finials have been inserted afterwards
   also, the original windows having been pure fifth order.

   The building is now a ruin, inhabited by the lowest orders; the first
   floor, when I was last in Venice, by a laundress.

 BAFFO, PALAZZO, in the Campo St. Maurizio. The commonest late
   Renaissance. A few olive leaves and vestiges of two figures still
   remain upon it, of the frescoes by Paul Veronese, with which it was
   once adorned.

 BALBI, PALAZZO, in Volta di Canal. Of no importance.

 BARBARIGO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, next the Casa Pisani. Late
   Renaissance; noticeable only as a house in which some of the best
   pictures of Titian were allowed to be ruined by damp, and out of which
   they were then sold to the Emperor of Russia.

 BARBARO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, next the Palazzo Cavalli. These
   two buildings form the principal objects in the foreground of the view
   which almost every artist seizes on his first traverse of the Grand
   Canal, the Church of the Salute forming a most graceful distance.
   Neither is, however, of much value, except in general effect; but the
   Barbaro is the best, and the pointed arcade in its side wall, seen
   from the narrow canal between it and the Cavalli, is good Gothic, of
   the earliest fourteenth century type.

 BARNABA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 BARTOLOMEO, CHURCH OF ST. I did not go to look at the works of
   Sebastian del Piombo which it contains, fully crediting M. Lazari's
   statement, that they have been "Barbaramente sfigurati da mani
   imperite, che pretendevano ristaurarli." Otherwise the church is of no
   importance.

 BASSO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 BATTAGIA, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 BECCHERIE. See QUERINI.

 BEMBO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, next the Casa Manin. A noble
   Gothic pile, circa 1350-1380, which, before it was painted by the
   modern Venetians with the two most valuable colors of Tintoret, Bianco
   e Nero, by being whitewashed above, and turned into a coal warehouse
   below, must have been among the most noble in effect on the whole
   Grand Canal. It still forms a beautiful group with the Rialto, some
   large shipping being generally anchored at its quay. Its sea story and
   entresol are of earlier date, I believe, than the rest; the doors of
   the former are Byzantine (see above, Final Appendix, under head
   "Jambs"); and above the entresol is a beautiful Byzantine cornice,
   built into the wall, and harmonizing well with the Gothic work.

 BEMBO, PALAZZO, in the Calle Magno, at the Campo de' due Pozzi, close
   to the Arsenal. Noticed by Lazari and Selvatico as having a very
   interesting staircase. It is early Gothic, circa 1330, but not a whit
   more interesting than many others of similar date and design. See
   "Contarini Porta de Ferro," "Morosini," "Sanudo," and "Minelli."

 BENEDETTO, CAMPO OF ST. Do not fail to see the superb, though
   partially ruinous, Gothic palace fronting this little square. It is
   very late Gothic, just passing into Renaissance; unique in Venice, in
   masculine character, united with the delicacy of the incipient style.
   Observe especially the brackets of the balconies, the flower-work on
   the cornices, and the arabesques on the angles of the balconies
   themselves.

 BENEDETTO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 BERNARDO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. A very noble pile of early
   fifteenth century Gothic, founded on the Ducal Palace. The traceries
   in its lateral windows are both rich and unusual.

 BERNARDO, PALAZZO, at St. Polo. A glorious palace, on a narrow canal,
   in a part of Venice now inhabited by the lower orders only. It is
   rather late Central Gothic, circa 1380-1400, but of the finest kind,
   and superb in its effect of color when seen from the side. A capital
   in the interior court is much praised by Selvatico and Lazari, because
   its "foglie d'acanto" (anything by the by, _but_ acanthus), "quasi
   agitate de vento si attorcigliano d'intorno alla campana, _concetto
   non indegno della bell'epoca greca_!" Does this mean "epoca
   Bisantina?" The capital is simply a translation into Gothic sculpture
   of the Byzantine ones of St. Mark's and the Fondaco de' Turchi (see
   Plate VIII. Vol. I. fig. 14), and is far inferior to either. But,
   taken as a whole, I think that, after the Ducal Palace, this is the
   noblest in effect of all in Venice.

 BRENTA, Banks of the, I. 354. Villas on the, I. 354.

 BUSINELLO, CASA, II. 391.

 BYZANTINE PALACES generally, II. 118.


    C

 CAMERLENGHI, PALACE OF THE, beside the Rialto. A graceful work of the
   early Renaissance (1525) passing into Roman Renaissance. Its details
   are inferior to most of the work of the school. The "Camerlenghi,"
   properly "Camerlenghi di Comune," were the three officers or ministers
   who had care of the administration of public expenses.

 CANCELLARIA, II. 293.

 CANCIANO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 CAPPELLO, PALAZZO, at St. Aponal. Of no interest. Some say that Bianca
   Cappello fled from it; but the tradition seems to fluctuate between
   the various houses belonging to her family.

 CARITÀ, CHURCH OF THE. Once an interesting Gothic church of the
   fourteenth century, lately defaced, and applied to some of the usual
   important purposes of the modern Italians. The effect of its ancient
   façade may partly be guessed at from the pictures of Canaletto, but
   only guessed at; Canaletto being less to be trusted for renderings of
   details, than the rudest and most ignorant painter of the thirteenth
   century.

 CARMINI, CHURCH OF THE. A most interesting church of late thirteenth
   century work, but much altered and defaced. Its nave, in which the
   early shafts and capitals of the pure truncate form are unaltered, is
   very fine in effect; its lateral porch is quaint and beautiful,
   decorated with Byzantine circular sculptures (of which the central one
   is given in Vol. II. Plate XI. fig. 5), and supported on two shafts
   whose capitals are the most archaic examples of the pure Rose form
   that I know in Venice.

   There is a glorious Tintoret over the first altar on the right in
   entering; the "Circumcision of Christ." I do not know an aged head
   either more beautiful or more picturesque than that of the high
   priest. The cloister is full of notable tombs, nearly all dated; one,
   of the fifteenth century, to the left on entering, is interesting from
   the color still left on the leaves and flowers of its sculptured
   roses.

 CASSANO, CHURCH OF ST. This church must on no account be missed, as it
   contains three Tintorets, of which one, the "Crucifixion," is among
   the finest in Europe. There is nothing worth notice in the building
   itself, except the jamb of an ancient door (left in the Renaissance
   buildings, facing the canal), which has been given among the examples
   of Byzantine jambs; and the traveller may, therefore, devote his
   entire attention to the three pictures in the chancel.

   1. _The Crucifixion._ (On the left of the high altar.) It is
   refreshing to find a picture taken care of, and in a bright though not
   a good light, so that such parts of it as are seen at all are seen
   well. It is also in a better state than most pictures in galleries,
   and most remarkable for its new and strange treatment of the subject.
   It seems to have been painted more for the artist's own delight, than
   with any labored attempt at composition; the horizon is so low that
   the spectator must fancy himself lying at full length on the grass, or
   rather among the brambles and luxuriant weeds, of which the foreground
   is entirely composed. Among these, the seamless robe of Christ has
   fallen at the foot of the cross; the rambling briars and wild grasses
   thrown here and there over its folds of rich, but pale, crimson.
   Behind them, and seen through them, the heads of a troop of Roman
   soldiers are raised against the sky; and, above them, their spears and
   halberds form a thin forest against the horizontal clouds. The three
   crosses are put on the extreme right of the picture, and its centre is
   occupied by the executioners, one of whom, standing on a ladder,
   receives from the other at once the sponge and the tablet with the
   letters INRI. The Madonna and St. John are on the extreme left,
   superbly painted, like all the rest, but quite subordinate. In fact,
   the whole mind of the painter seems to have been set upon making the
   principals accessary, and the accessaries principal. We look first at
   the grass, and then at the scarlet robe; and then at the clump of
   distant spears, and then at the sky, and last of all at the cross. As
   a piece of color, the picture is notable for its extreme modesty.
   There is not a single very full or bright tint in any part, and yet
   the color is delighted in throughout; not the slightest touch of it
   but is delicious. It is worth notice also, and especially, because
   this picture being in a fresh state we are sure of one fact, that,
   like nearly all other great colorists, Tintoret was afraid of light
   greens in his vegetation. He often uses dark blue greens in his
   shadowed trees, but here where the grass is in full light, it is all
   painted with various hues of sober brown, more especially where it
   crosses the crimson robe. The handling of the whole is in his noblest
   manner; and I consider the picture generally quite beyond all price.
   It was cleaned, I believe, some years ago, but not injured, or at
   least as little injured as it is possible for a picture to be which
   has undergone any cleaning process whatsoever.

   2. _The Resurrection._ (Over the high altar.) The lower part of this
   picture is entirely concealed by a miniature temple, about five feet
   high, on the top of the altar; certainly an insult little expected by
   Tintoret, as, by getting on steps, and looking over the said temple,
   one may see that the lower figures of the picture are the most
   labored. It is strange that the painter never seemed able to conceive
   this subject with any power, and in the present work he is
   marvellously hampered by various types and conventionalities. It is
   not a painting of the Resurrection, but of Roman Catholic saints,
   _thinking_ about the Resurrection. On one side of the tomb is a bishop
   in full robes, on the other a female saint, I know not who; beneath
   it, an angel playing on an organ, and a cherub blowing it; and other
   cherubs flying about the sky, with flowers; the whole conception being
   a mass of Renaissance absurdities. It is, moreover, heavily painted,
   over-done, and over-finished; and the forms of the cherubs utterly
   heavy and vulgar. I cannot help fancying the picture has been restored
   in some way or another, but there is still great power in parts of it.
   If it be a really untouched Tintoret, it is a highly curious example
   of failure from over-labor on a subject into which his mind was not
   thrown: the color is hot and harsh, and felt to be so more painfully,
   from its opposition to the grand coolness and chastity of the
   "Crucifixion." The face of the angel playing the organ is highly
   elaborated; so, also, the flying cherubs.

   3. _The Descent into Hades._ (On the right-hand side of the high
   altar.) Much injured and little to be regretted. I never was more
   puzzled by any picture, the painting being throughout careless, and in
   some places utterly bad, and yet not like modern work; the principal
   figure, however, of Eve, has either been redone, or is scholar's work
   altogether, as, I suspect, most of the rest of the picture. It looks
   as if Tintoret had sketched it when he was ill, left it to a bad
   scholar to work on with, and then finished it in a hurry; but he has
   assuredly had something to do with it; it is not likely that anybody
   else would have refused all aid from the usual spectral company with
   which common painters fill the scene. Bronzino, for instance, covers
   his canvas with every form of monster that his sluggish imagination
   could coin. Tintoret admits only a somewhat haggard Adam, a graceful
   Eve, two or three Venetians in court dress, seen amongst the smoke,
   and a Satan represented as a handsome youth, recognizable only by the
   claws on his feet. The picture is dark and spoiled, but I am pretty
   sure there are no demons or spectres in it. This is quite in
   accordance with the master's caprice, but it considerably diminishes
   the interest of a work in other ways unsatisfactory. There may once
   have been something impressive in the shooting in of the rays at the
   top of the cavern, as well as in the strange grass that grows in the
   bottom, whose infernal character is indicated by its all being knotted
   together; but so little of these parts can be seen, that it is not
   worth spending time on a work certainly unworthy of the master, and in
   great part probably never seen by him.

 CATTARINA, CHURCH OF ST., said to contain a _chef-d'oeuvre_ of Paul
   Veronese, the "Marriage of St. Catherine." I have not seen it.

 CAVALLI, PALAZZO, opposite the Academy of Arts. An imposing pile, on
   the Grand Canal, of Renaissance Gothic, but of little merit in the
   details; and the effect of its traceries has been of late destroyed by
   the fittings of modern external blinds. Its balconies are good, of the
   later Gothic type. See "BARBARO."

 CAVALLI, PALAZZO, next the Casa Grimani (or Post-Office), but on the
   other side of the narrow canal. Good Gothic, founded on the Ducal
   Palace, circa 1380. The capitals of the first story are remarkably
   rich in the deep fillets at the necks. The crests, heads of
   sea-horses, inserted between the windows, appear to be later, but are
   very fine of their kind.

 CICOGNA, PALAZZO, at San Sebastiano, II. 265.

 CLEMENTE, CHURCH OF ST. On an island to the south of Venice, from
   which the view of the city is peculiarly beautiful. See "SCALZI."

 CONTARINI PORTA DI FERRO, PALAZZO, near the Church of St. John and
   Paul, so called from the beautiful ironwork on a door, which was some
   time ago taken down by the proprietor and sold. Mr. Rawdon Brown
   rescued some of the ornaments from the hands of the blacksmith, who
   had bought them for old iron. The head of the door is a very
   interesting stone arch of the early thirteenth century, already drawn
   in my folio work. In the interior court is a beautiful remnant of
   staircase, with a piece of balcony at the top, circa 1350, and one of
   the most richly and carefully wrought in Venice. The palace, judging
   by these remnants (all that are now left of it, except a single
   traceried window of the same date at the turn of the stair), must once
   have been among the most magnificent in Venice.

 CONTARINI (DELLE FIGURE), PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, III. 17.

 CONTARINI DAI SCRIGNI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. A Gothic building,
   founded on the Ducal Palace. Two Renaissance statues in niches at the
   sides give it its name.

 CONTARINI FASAN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, II. 244. The richest
   work of the fifteenth century domestic Gothic in Venice, but notable
   more for richness than excellence of design. In one respect, however,
   it deserves to be regarded with attention, as showing how much beauty
   and dignity may be bestowed on a very small and unimportant
   dwelling-house by Gothic sculpture. Foolish criticisms upon it have
   appeared in English accounts of foreign buildings, objecting to it on
   the ground of its being "ill-proportioned;" the simple fact being,
   that there was no room in this part of the canal for a wider house,
   and that its builder made its rooms as comfortable as he could, and
   its windows and balconies of a convenient size for those who were to
   see through them, and stand on them, and left the "proportions"
   outside to take care of themselves; which, indeed, they have very
   sufficiently done; for though the house thus honestly confesses its
   diminutiveness, it is nevertheless one of the principal ornaments of
   the very noblest reach of the Grand Canal, and would be nearly as
   great a loss, if it were destroyed, as the Church of La Salute itself.

 CONTARINI, PALAZZO, at St. Luca. Of no importance.

 CORNER DELLA CA' GRANDE, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. One of the worst
   and coldest buildings of the central Renaissance, It is on a grand
   scale, and is a conspicuous object, rising over the roofs of the
   neighboring houses in the various aspects of the entrance of the Grand
   Canal, and in the general view of Venice from San Clemente.

 CORNER DELLA REGINA, PALAZZO. A late Renaissance building of no merit
   or interest.

 CORNER MOCENIGO, PALAZZO, at St. Polo. Of no interest.

 CORNER SPINELLI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. A graceful and
   interesting example of the early Renaissance, remarkable for its
   pretty circular balconies.

 CORNER, RACCOLTA. I must refer the reader to M. Lazari's Guide for an
   account of this collection, which, however, ought only to be visited
   if the traveller is not pressed for time.


    D

 DANDOLO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Between the Casa Loredan and
   Casa Bembo is a range of modern buildings, some of which occupy, I
   believe, the site of the palace once inhabited by the Doge Henry
   Dandolo. Fragments of early architecture of the Byzantine school may
   still be traced in many places among their foundations, and two doors
   in the foundation of the Casa Bembo itself belong to the same group.
   There is only one existing palace, however, of any value, on this
   spot, a very small but rich Gothic one of about 1300, with two groups
   of fourth order windows in its second and third stories, and some
   Byzantine circular mouldings built into it above. This is still
   reported to have belonged to the family of Dandolo, and ought to be
   carefully preserved, as it is one of the most interesting and ancient
   Gothic palaces which yet remain.

 DANIELI, ALBERGO. See Nani.

 DA PONTE, PALAZZO. Of no interest.

 DARIO, PALAZZO, I. 370; III. 211.

 DOGANA DI MARE, at the separation of the Grand Canal from the Giudecca.
   A barbarous building of the time of the Grotesque Renaissance (1676),
   rendered interesting only by its position. The statue of Fortune,
   forming the weathercock, standing on the world, is alike
   characteristic of the conceits of the time, and of the hopes and
   principles of the last days of Venice.

 DONATO, CHURCH OF ST., at Murano, II. 31.

 DONA', PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. I believe the palace described under
   this name as of the twelfth century, by M. Lazari, is that which I
   have called the Braided House, II. 132, 392.

 D'ORO CASA. A noble pile of very quaint Gothic, once superb in general
   effect, but now destroyed by restorations. I saw the beautiful slabs
   of red marble, which formed the bases of its balconies, and were
   carved into noble spiral mouldings of strange sections, half a foot
   deep, dashed to pieces when I was last in Venice; its glorious
   interior staircase, by far the most interesting Gothic monument of the
   kind in Venice, had been carried away, piece by piece, and sold for
   waste marble, two years before. Of what remains, the most beautiful
   portions are, or were, when I last saw them, the capitals of the
   windows in the upper story, most glorious sculpture of the fourteenth
   century. The fantastic window traceries are, I think, later; but the
   rest of the architecture of this palace is anomalous, and I cannot
   venture to give any decided opinion respecting it. Parts of its
   mouldings are quite Byzantine in character, but look somewhat like
   imitations.

 DUCAL PALACE, I. 29; history of, II. 282, etc.; III. 199; plan and
   section of, II. 282, 283; description of, II. 304, etc.; series of its
   capitals, II. 332, etc.; spandrils of, I. 299, 415; shafts of, I. 413;
   traceries of, derived from those of the Frari, II. 234; angles of, II.
   239; main balcony of, II. 245; base of, III. 212; Rio Façade of, III.
   25; paintings in, II. 372. The multitude of works by various masters,
   which cover the walls of this palace is so great, that the traveller
   is in general merely wearied and confused by them. He had better
   refuse all attention except to the following works:

   1. _Paradise_, by Tintoret; at the extremity of the Great Council
   chamber. I found it impossible to count the number of figures in this
   picture, of which the grouping is so intricate, that at the upper part
   it is not easy to distinguish one figure from another; but I counted
   150 important figures in one half of it alone; so that, as there are
   nearly as many in subordinate position, the total number cannot be
   under 500. I believe this is, on the whole, Tintoret's
   _chef-d'oeuvre_; though it is so vast that no one takes the trouble
   to read it, and therefore less wonderful pictures are preferred to it.
   I have not myself been able to study except a few fragments of it, all
   executed in his finest manner; but it may assist a hurried observer to
   point out to him that the whole composition is divided into concentric
   zones, represented one above another like the stories of a cupola,
   round the figures of Christ and the Madonna, at the central and
   highest point: both these figures are exceedingly dignified and
   beautiful. Between each zone or belt of the nearer figures, the white
   distances of heaven are seen filled with floating spirits. The picture
   is, on the whole, wonderfully preserved, and the most precious thing
   that Venice possesses. She will not possess it long; for the Venetian
   academicians, finding it exceedingly unlike their own works, declare
   it to want harmony, and are going to retouch it to their own ideas of
   perfection.

   2. _Siege of Zara_; the first picture on the right on entering the
   Sala del Scrutinio. It is a mere battle piece, in which the figures,
   like the arrows, are put in by the score. There are high merits in the
   thing, and so much invention that it is possible Tintoret may have
   made the sketch for it; but, if executed by him at all, he has done it
   merely in the temper in which a sign-painter meets the wishes of an
   ambitious landlord. He seems to have been ordered to represent all the
   events of the battle at once; and to have felt that, provided he gave
   men, arrows, and ships enough, his employers would be perfectly
   satisfied. The picture is a vast one, some thirty feet by fifteen.

   Various other pictures will be pointed out by the custode, in these
   two rooms, as worthy of attention, but they are only historically, not
   artistically, interesting. The works of Paul Veronese on the ceiling
   have been repainted; and the rest of the pictures on the walls are by
   second-rate men. The traveller must, once for all, be warned against
   mistaking the works of Domenico Robusti (Domenico Tintoretto), a very
   miserable painter, for those of his illustrious father, Jacopo.

   3. _The Doge Grimani kneeling before Faith_, by Titian; in the Sala
   delle quattro Porte. To be observed with care, as one of the most
   striking examples of Titian's want of feeling and coarseness of
   conception. (See above, Vol. I. p. 12.) As a work of mere art, it is,
   however, of great value. The traveller who has been accustomed to
   deride Turner's indistinctness of touch, ought to examine carefully
   the mode of painting the Venice in the distance at the bottom of this
   picture.

   4. _Frescoes on the Roof of the Sala delle quattro Porte_, by
   Tintoret. Once magnificent beyond description, now mere wrecks (the
   plaster crumbling away in large flakes), but yet deserving of the most
   earnest study.

   5. _Christ taken down from the Cross_, by Tintoret; at the upper end
   of the Sala dei Pregadi. One of the most interesting mythic pictures
   of Venice, two doges being represented beside the body of Christ, and
   a most noble painting; executed, however, for distant effect, and seen
   best from the end of the room.

   6. _Venice, Queen of the Sea_, by Tintoret. Central compartment of the
   ceiling, in the Sala dei Pregadi. Notable for the sweep of its vast
   green surges, and for the daring character of its entire conception,
   though it is wild and careless, and in many respects unworthy of the
   master. Note the way in which he has used the fantastic forms of the
   sea weeds, with respect to what was above stated (III. 158), as to his
   love of the grotesque.

   7. _The Doge Loredano in Prayer to the Virgin_, by Tintoret; in the
   same room. Sickly and pale in color, yet a grand work; to be studied,
   however, more for the sake of seeing what a great man does "to order,"
   when he is wearied of what is required from him, than for its own
   merit.

   8. _St. George and the Princess._ There are, besides the "Paradise,"
   only six pictures in the Ducal Palace, as far as I know, which
   Tintoret painted carefully, and those are all exceedingly fine: the
   most finished of these are in the Anti-Collegio; but those that are
   most majestic and characteristic of the master are two oblong ones,
   made to fill the panels of the walls in the Anti-Chiesetta; these two,
   each, I suppose, about eight feet by six, are in his most quiet and
   noble manner. There is excessively little color in them, their
   prevalent tone being a greyish brown opposed with grey, black, and a
   very warm russet. They are thinly painted, perfect in tone, and quite
   untouched. The first of them is "St. George and the Dragon," the
   subject being treated in a new and curious way. The principal figure
   is the princess, who sits astride on the dragon's neck, holding him by
   a bridle of silken riband; St. George stands above and behind her,
   holding his hands over her head as if to bless her, or to keep the
   dragon quiet by heavenly power; and a monk stands by on the right,
   looking gravely on. There is no expression or life in the dragon,
   though the white flashes in its eye are very ghastly: but the whole
   thing is entirely typical; and the princess is not so much represented
   riding on the dragon, as supposed to be placed by St. George in an
   attitude of perfect victory over her chief enemy. She has a full rich
   dress of dull red, but her figure is somewhat ungraceful. St. George
   is in grey armor and grey drapery, and has a beautiful face; his
   figure entirely dark against the distant sky. There is a study for
   this picture in the Manfrini Palace.

   9. _St. Andrew and St. Jerome._ This, the companion picture, has even
   less color than its opposite. It is nearly all brown and grey; the
   fig-leaves and olive-leaves brown, the faces brown, the dresses brown,
   and St. Andrew holding a great brown cross. There is nothing that can
   be called color, except the grey of the sky, which approaches in some
   places a little to blue, and a single piece of dirty brick-red in St.
   Jerome's dress; and yet Tintoret's greatness hardly ever shows more
   than in the management of such sober tints. I would rather have these
   two small brown pictures, and two others in the Academy perfectly
   brown also in their general tone--the "Cain and Abel" and the "Adam
   and Eve,"--than all the other small pictures in Venice put together,
   which he painted in bright colors, for altar pieces; but I never saw
   two pictures which so nearly approached grisailles as these, and yet
   were delicious pieces of color. I do not know if I am right in calling
   one of the saints St. Andrew. He stands holding a great upright wooden
   cross against the sky. St. Jerome reclines at his feet, against a
   rock, over which some glorious fig leaves and olive branches are
   shooting; every line of them studied with the most exquisite care, and
   yet cast with perfect freedom.

   10. _Bacchus and Ariadne._ The most beautiful of the four careful
   pictures by Tintoret, which occupy the angles of the Anti-Collegio.
   Once one of the noblest pictures in the world, but now miserably
   faded, the sun being allowed to fall on it all day long. The design of
   the forms of the leafage round the head of the Bacchus, and the
   floating grace of the female figure above, will, however, always give
   interest to this picture, unless it be repainted.

   The other three Tintorets in this room are careful and fine, but far
   inferior to the "Bacchus;" and the "Vulcan and the Cyclops" is a
   singularly meagre and vulgar study of common models.

   11. _Europa_, by Paul Veronese: in the same room. One of the very few
   pictures which both possess and deserve a high reputation.

   12. _Venice enthroned_, by Paul Veronese; on the roof of the same
   room. One of the grandest pieces of frank color in the Ducal Palace.

   13. _Venice, and the Doge Sebastian Venier_; at the upper end of the
   Sala del Collegio. An unrivalled Paul Veronese, far finer even than
   the "Europa."

   14. _Marriage of St. Catherine_, by Tintoret; in the same room. An
   inferior picture, but the figure of St. Catherine is quite exquisite.
   Note how her veil falls over her form, showing the sky through it, as
   an alpine cascade falls over a marble rock.

   There are three other Tintorets on the walls of this room, but all
   inferior, though full of power. Note especially the painting of the
   lion's wings, and of the colored carpet, in the one nearest the
   throne, the Doge Alvise Mocenigo adoring the Redeemer.

   The roof is entirely by Paul Veronese, and the traveller who really
   loves painting, ought to get leave to come to this room whenever he
   chooses; and should pass the sunny summer mornings there again and
   again, wandering now and then into the Anti-Collegio and Sala dei
   Pregadi, and coming back to rest under the wings of the couched lion
   at the feet of the "Mocenigo." He will no otherwise enter so deeply
   into the heart of Venice.


    E

 EMO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no interest.

 ERIZZO, PALAZZO, near the Arsenal, II. 262.

 ERIZZO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, nearly opposite the Fondaco
   de'Turchi. A Gothic palace, with a single range of windows founded on
   the Ducal traceries, and bold capitals. It has been above referred to
   in the notice of tracery bars.

 EUFEMIA, CHURCH OF ST. A small and defaced, but very curious, early
   Gothic church on the Giudecca. Not worth visiting, unless the
   traveller is seriously interested in architecture.

 EUROPA, ALBERGO, ALL'. Once a Giustiniani Palace. Good Gothic, circa
   1400, but much altered.

 EVANGELISTI, CASA DEGLI, II. 265.

 [Illustration: Plate XII.
                CAPITALS OF FONDACO DE' TURCHI.]


    F

 FACANON, PALAZZO (ALLA FAVA). A fair example of the fifteenth century
   Gothic, founded on Ducal Palace.

 FALIER, PALAZZO, at the Apostoli. Above, II. 253.

 FANTINO, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a John Bellini, otherwise of no
   importance.

 FARSETTI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, II. 124, 393.

 FAVA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 FELICE, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Tintoret, which, if untouched,
   I should conjecture, from Lazari's statement of its subject, St.
   Demetrius armed, with one of the Ghisi family in prayer, must be very
   fine. Otherwise the church is of no importance.

 FERRO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Fifteenth century Gothic, very
   hard and bad.

 FLANGINI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 FONDACO DE' TURCHI, I. 328; II. 120, 121, 236. The opposite plate,
   representing three of its capitals, has been several times referred
   to.

 FONDACO DE' TEDESCHI. A huge and ugly building near the Rialto,
   rendered, however, peculiarly interesting by remnants of the frescoes
   by Giorgione with which it was once covered. See Vol. II. 80, and III.
   23.

 FORMOSA, CHURCH OF SANTA MARIA, III. 113, 122,

 FOSCA, CHURCH OF ST. Notable for its exceedingly picturesque
   campanile, of late Gothic, but uninjured by restorations, and
   peculiarly Venetian in being crowned by the cupola instead of the
   pyramid, which would have been employed at the same period in any
   other Italian city.

 FOSCARI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. The noblest example in Venice of
   the fifteenth century Gothic, founded on the Ducal Palace, but lately
   restored and spoiled, all but the stone-work of the main windows. The
   restoration was necessary, however: for, when I was in Venice in 1845,
   this palace was a foul ruin; its great hall a mass of mud, used as a
   back receptacle of a stone-mason's yard; and its rooms whitewashed,
   and scribbled over with indecent caricatures. It has since been
   partially strengthened and put in order; but as the Venetian
   municipality have now given it to the Austrians to be used as
   barracks, it will probably soon be reduced to its former condition.
   The lower palaces at the side of this building are said by some to
   have belonged to the younger Foscari. See "GIUSTINIANI."

 FRANCESCO DELLA VIGNA, CHURCH OF ST. Base Renaissance, but must be
   visited in order to see the John Bellini in the Cappella Santa. The
   late sculpture, in the Cappella Giustiniani, appears from Lazari's
   statement to be deserving of careful study. This church is said also
   to contain two pictures by Paul Veronese.

 FRARI, CHURCH OF THE. Founded in 1250, and continued at various
   subsequent periods. The apse and adjoining chapels are the earliest
   portions, and their traceries have been above noticed (II. 234) as the
   origin of those of the Ducal Palace. The best view of the apse, which
   is a very noble example of Italian Gothic, is from the door of the
   Scuola di San Rocco. The doors of the church are all later than any
   other portion of it, very elaborate Renaissance Gothic. The interior
   is good Gothic, but not interesting, except in its monuments. Of
   these, the following are noticed in the text of this volume:

   That of Duccio degli Alberti, at pages 74, 80; of the unknown Knight,
   opposite that of Duccio, III. 74; of Francesco Foscari, III. 84; of
   Giovanni Pesaro, 91; of Jacopo Pesaro, 92.

   Besides these tombs, the traveller ought to notice carefully that of
   Pietro Bernardo, a first-rate example of Renaissance work; nothing can
   be more detestable or mindless in general design, or more beautiful in
   execution. Examine especially the griffins, fixed in admiration of
   bouquets, at the bottom. The fruit and flowers which arrest the
   attention of the griffins may well arrest the traveller's also;
   nothing can be finer of their kind. The tomb of Canova, _by_ Canova,
   cannot be missed; consummate in science, intolerable in affectation,
   ridiculous in conception, null and void to the uttermost in invention
   and feeling. The equestrian statue of Paolo Savelli is spirited; the
   monument of the Beato Pacifico, a curious example of Renaissance
   Gothic with wild crockets (all in terra cotta). There are several good
   Vivarini's in the church, but its chief pictorial treasure is the John
   Bellini in the sacristy, the most finished and delicate example of the
   master in Venice.


    G

 GEREMIA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GESUATI, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 GIACOMO DE LORIO, CHURCH OF ST., a most interesting church, of the early
   thirteenth century, but grievously restored. Its capitals have been
   already noticed as characteristic of the earliest Gothic; and it is
   said to contain four works of Paul Veronese, but I have not examined
   them. The pulpit is admired by the Italians, but is utterly worthless.
   The verdantique pillar, in the south transept, is a very noble example
   of the "Jewel Shaft." See the note at p. 83, Vol. II.

 GIACOMO DI RIALTO, CHURCH OF ST. A picturesque little church, on the
   Piazza di Rialto. It has been grievously restored, but the pillars and
   capitals of its nave are certainly of the eleventh century; those of
   its portico are of good central Gothic; and it will surely not be left
   unvisited, on this ground, if on no other, that it stands on the site,
   and still retains the name, of the first church ever built on that
   Rialto which formed the nucleus of future Venice, and became
   afterwards the mart of her merchants.

 GIOBBE, CHURCH OF ST., near the Cana Reggio. Its principal entrance is
   a very fine example of early Renaissance sculpture. Note in it,
   especially, its beautiful use of the flower of the convolvulus. There
   are said to be still more beautiful examples of the same period, in
   the interior. The cloister, though much defaced, is of the Gothic
   period, and worth a glance.

 GIORGIO DE' GRECI, CHURCH OF ST. The Greek Church. It contains no
   valuable objects of art, but its service is worth attending by those
   who have never seen the Greek ritual.

 GIORGIO DE' SCHIAVONI, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a very precious
   series of paintings by Victor Carpaccio. Otherwise of no interest.

 GIORGIO IN ALIGA (St. George in the seaweed), Church of St. Unimportant
   in itself, but the most beautiful view of Venice at sunset is from a
   point at about two thirds of the distance from the city to the island.

 GIORGIO MAGGIORE, CHURCH OF ST. A building which owes its interesting
   effect chiefly to its isolated position, being seen over a great space
   of lagoon. The traveller should especially notice in its façade the
   manner in which the central Renaissance architects (of whose style
   this church is a renowned example) endeavored to fit the laws they had
   established to the requirements of their age. Churches were required
   with aisles and clerestories, that is to say, with a high central nave
   and lower wings; and the question was, how to face this form with
   pillars of one proportion. The noble Romanesque architects built story
   above story, as at Pisa and Lucca; but the base Palladian architects
   dared not do this. They must needs retain some image of the Greek
   temple; but the Greek temple was all of one height, a low gable roof
   being borne on ranges of equal pillars. So the Palladian builders
   raised first a Greek temple with pilasters for shafts; and, _through
   the middle of its roof, or horizontal beam_, that is to say, of the
   cornice which externally represented this beam, they lifted another
   temple on pedestals, adding these barbarous appendages to the shafts,
   which otherwise would not have been high enough; fragments of the
   divided cornice or tie-beam being left between the shafts, and the
   great door of the church thrust in between the pedestals. It is
   impossible to conceive a design more gross, more barbarous, more
   childish in conception, more servile in plagiarism, more insipid in
   result, more contemptible under every point of rational regard.

   Observe, also, that when Palladio had got his pediment at the top of
   the church, he did not know what to do with it; he had no idea of
   decorating it except by a round hole in the middle. (The traveller
   should compare, both in construction and decoration, the Church of the
   Redentore with this of San Giorgio.) Now, a dark penetration is often
   a most precious assistance to a building dependent upon color for its
   effect; for a cavity is the only means in the architect's power of
   obtaining certain and vigorous shadow; and for this purpose, a
   circular penetration, surrounded by a deep russet marble moulding, is
   beautifully used in the centre of the white field on the side of the
   portico of St. Mark's. But Palladio had given up color, and pierced
   his pediment with a circular cavity, merely because he had not wit
   enough to fill it with sculpture. The interior of the church is like a
   large assembly room, and would have been undeserving of a moment's
   attention, but that it contains some most precious pictures, namely:

   1. _Gathering the Manna._ (On the left hand of the high altar.) One of
   Tintoret's most remarkable landscapes. A brook flowing through a
   mountainous country, studded with thickets and palm trees; the
   congregation have been long in the Wilderness, and are employed in
   various manufactures much more than in gathering the manna. One group
   is forging, another grinding manna in a mill, another making shoes,
   one woman making a piece of dress, some washing; the main purpose of
   Tintoret being evidently to indicate the _continuity_ of the supply of
   heavenly food. Another painter would have made the congregation
   hurrying to gather it, and wondering at it; Tintoret at once makes us
   remember that they have been fed with it "by the space of forty
   years." It is a large picture, full of interest and power, but
   scattered in effect, and not striking except from its elaborate
   landscape.

   2. _The Last Supper._ (Opposite the former.) These two pictures have
   been painted for their places, the subjects being illustrative of the
   sacrifice of the mass. This latter is remarkable for its entire
   homeliness in the general treatment of the subject; the entertainment
   being represented like any large supper in a second-rate Italian inn,
   the figures being all comparatively uninteresting; but we are reminded
   that the subject is a sacred one, not only by the strong light shining
   from the head of Christ, but because the smoke of the lamp which hangs
   over the table turns, as it rises, into a multitude of angels, all
   painted in grey, the color of the smoke; and so writhed and twisted
   together that the eye hardly at first distinguishes them from the
   vapor out of which they are formed, ghosts of countenances and filmy
   wings filling up the intervals between the completed heads. The idea
   is highly characteristic of the master. The picture has been
   grievously injured, but still shows miracles of skill in the
   expression of candle-light mixed with twilight; variously reflected
   rays, and half tones of the dimly lighted chamber, mingled with the
   beams of the lantern and those from the head of Christ, flashing along
   the metal and glass upon the table, and under it along the floor, and
   dying away into the recesses of the room.

   3. _Martyrdom of various Saints._ (Altar piece of the third altar in
   the South aisle.) A moderately sized picture, and now a very
   disagreeable one, owing to the violent red into which the color that
   formed the glory of the angel at the top is changed. It has been
   hastily painted, and only shows the artist's power in the energy of
   the figure of an executioner drawing a bow, and in the magnificent
   ease with which the other figures are thrown together in all manner of
   wild groups and defiances of probability. Stones and arrows are flying
   about in the air at random.

   4. _Coronation of the Virgin._ (Fourth altar in the same aisle.)
   Painted more for the sake of the portraits at the bottom, than of the
   Virgin at the top. A good picture, but somewhat tame for Tintoret, and
   much injured. The principal figure, in black, is still, however, very
   fine.

   5. _Resurrection of Christ._ (At the end of the north aisle, in the
   chapel beside the choir.) Another picture painted chiefly for the sake
   of the included portraits, and remarkably cold in general conception;
   its color has, however, been gay and delicate, lilac, yellow, and blue
   being largely used in it. The flag which our Saviour bears in his
   hand, has been once as bright as the sail of a Venetian fishing-boat,
   but the colors are now all chilled, and the picture is rather crude
   than brilliant; a mere wreck of what it was, and all covered with
   droppings of wax at the bottom.

   6. _Martyrdom of St. Stephen._ (Altar piece in the north transept.)
   The Saint is in a rich prelate's dress, looking as if he had just been
   saying mass, kneeling in the foreground, and perfectly serene. The
   stones are flying about him like hail, and the ground is covered with
   them as thickly as if it were a river bed. But in the midst of them,
   at the saint's right hand, there is a book lying, crushed but open,
   two or three stones which have torn one of its leaves lying upon it.
   The freedom and ease with which the leaf is crumpled is just as
   characteristic of the master as any of the grander features; no one
   but Tintoret could have so crushed a leaf; but the idea is still more
   characteristic of him, for the book is evidently meant for the Mosaic
   History which Stephen had just been expounding, and its being crushed
   by the stones shows how the blind rage of the Jews was violating their
   own law in the murder of Stephen. In the upper part of the picture are
   three figures,--Christ, the Father, and St. Michael. Christ of course
   at the right hand of the Father, as Stephen saw him standing; but
   there is little dignity in this part of the conception. In the middle
   of the picture, which is also the middle distance, are three or four
   men throwing stones, with Tintoret's usual vigor of gesture, and
   behind them an immense and confused crowd; so that, at first, we
   wonder where St. Paul is; but presently we observe that, in the front
   of this crowd, and _almost exactly in the centre of the picture_,
   there is a figure seated on the ground, very noble and quiet, and with
   some loose garments thrown across its knees. It is dressed in vigorous
   black and red. The figure of the Father in the sky above is dressed in
   black and red also, and these two figures are the centres of color to
   the whole design. It is almost impossible to praise too highly the
   refinement of conception which withdrew the unconverted St. Paul into
   the distance, so as entirely to separate him from the immediate
   interest of the scene, and yet marked the dignity to which he was
   afterward to be raised, by investing him with the colors which
   occurred nowhere else in the picture except in the dress which veils
   the form of the Godhead. It is also to be noted as an interesting
   example of the value which the painter put upon color only; another
   composer would have thought it necessary to exalt the future apostle
   by some peculiar dignity of action or expression. The posture of the
   figure is indeed grand, but inconspicuous; Tintoret does not depend
   upon it, and thinks that the figure is quite ennobled enough by being
   made a key-note of color.

   It is also worth observing how boldly imaginative is the treatment
   which covers the ground with piles of stones, and yet leaves the
   martyr apparently unwounded. Another painter would have covered him
   with blood, and elaborated the expression of pain upon his
   countenance. Tintoret leaves us under no doubt as to what manner of
   death he is dying; he makes the air hurtle with the stones, but he
   does not choose to make his picture disgusting, or even painful. The
   face of the martyr is serene, and exulting; and we leave the picture,
   remembering only how "he fell asleep."

 GIOVANELLI, PALAZZO, at the Ponte di Noale. A fine example of
   fifteenth century Gothic, founded on the Ducal Palace.

 GIOVANNI E PAOLO, CHURCH OF ST.[72] Foundation of, III. 69. An
   impressive church, though none of its Gothic is comparable with that
   of the North, or with that of Verona. The Western door is interesting
   as one of the last conditions of Gothic design passing into
   Renaissance, very rich and beautiful of its kind, especially the
   wreath of fruit and flowers which forms its principal molding. The
   statue of Bartolomeo Colleone, in the little square beside the church,
   is certainly one of the noblest works in Italy. I have never seen
   anything approaching it in animation, in vigor of portraiture, or
   nobleness of line. The reader will need Lazari's Guide in making the
   circuit of the church, which is full of interesting monuments: but I
   wish especially to direct his attention to two pictures, besides the
   celebrated Peter Martyr: namely,

   1. _The Crucifixion_, by Tintoret; on the wall of the left-hand aisle,
   just before turning into the transept. A picture fifteen feet long by
   eleven or twelve high. I do not believe that either the "Miracle of
   St. Mark," or the great "Crucifixion" in the Scuola di San Rocco, cost
   Tintoret more pains than this comparatively small work, which is now
   utterly neglected, covered with filth and cobwebs, and fearfully
   injured. As a piece of color, and light and shade, it is altogether
   marvellous. Of all the fifty figures which the picture contains, there
   is not one which in any way injures or contends with another; nay,
   there is not a single fold of garment or touch of the pencil which
   could be spared; every virtue of Tintoret, as a painter, is there in
   its highest degree,--color at once the most intense and the most
   delicate, the utmost decision in the arrangement of masses of light,
   and yet half tones and modulations of endless variety; and all
   executed with a magnificence of handling which no words are energetic
   enough to describe. I have hardly ever seen a picture in which there
   was so much decision, and so little impetuosity, and in which so
   little was conceded to haste, to accident, or to weakness. It is too
   infinite a work to be describable; but among its minor passages of
   extreme beauty, should especially be noticed the manner in which the
   accumulated forms of the human body, which fill the picture from end
   to end, are prevented from being felt heavy, by the grace and
   elasticity of two or three sprays of leafage which spring from a
   broken root in the foreground, and rise conspicuous in shadow against
   an interstice filled by the pale blue, grey, and golden light in which
   the distant crowd is invested, the office of this foliage being, in an
   artistical point of view, correspondent to that of the trees set by
   the sculptors of the Ducal Palace on its angles. But they have a far
   more important meaning in the picture than any artistical one. If the
   spectator will look carefully at the root which I have called broken,
   he will find that in reality, it is not broken, but cut; the other
   branches of the young tree having _lately been cut away_. When we
   remember that one of the principal incidents in great San Rocco
   Crucifixion is the ass feeding on withered palm leaves, we shall be at
   no loss to understand the great painter's purpose in lifting the
   branch of this mutilated olive against the dim light of the distant
   sky; while, close beside it, St. Joseph of Arimathea drags along the
   dust a white garment--observe, the principal light of the
   picture,--stained with the blood of that King before whom, five days
   before, his crucifiers had strewn their own garments in the way.

   2. _Our Lady with the Camerlenghi._ (In the centre chapel of the three
   on the right of the choir.) A remarkable instance of the theoretical
   manner of representing Scriptural facts, which, at this time, as noted
   in the second chapter of this volume, was undermining the belief of
   the facts themselves. Three Venetian chamberlains desired to have
   their portraits painted, and at the same time to express their
   devotion to the Madonna; to that end they are painted kneeling before
   her, and in order to account for their all three being together, and
   to give a thread or clue to the story of the picture, they are
   represented as the Three Magi; but lest the spectator should think it
   strange that the Magi should be in the dress of Venetian chamberlains,
   the scene is marked as a mere ideality, by surrounding the person of
   the Virgin with saints who lived five hundred years after her. She has
   for attendants St. Theodore, St. Sebastian, and St. Carlo (query St.
   Joseph). One hardly knows whether most to regret the spirit which was
   losing sight of the verities of religious history in imaginative
   abstractions, or to praise the modesty and piety which desired rather
   to be represented as kneeling before the Virgin than in the discharge
   or among the insignia of important offices of state.

   As an "Adoration of the Magi," the picture is, of course, sufficiently
   absurd: the St. Sebastian leans back in the corner to be out of the
   way; the three Magi kneel, without the slightest appearance of
   emotion, to a Madonna seated in a Venetian loggia of the fifteenth
   century, and three Venetian servants behind bear their offerings in a
   very homely sack, tied up at the mouth. As a piece of portraiture and
   artistical composition, the work is altogether perfect, perhaps the
   best piece of Tintoret's portrait-painting in existence. It is very
   carefully and steadily wrought, and arranged with consummate skill on
   a difficult plan. The canvas is a long oblong, I think about eighteen
   or twenty feet long, by about seven high; one might almost fancy the
   painter had been puzzled to bring the piece into use, the figures
   being all thrown into positions which a little diminish their height.
   The nearest chamberlain is kneeling, the two behind him bowing
   themselves slightly, the attendants behind bowing lower, the Madonna
   sitting, the St. Theodore sitting still lower on the steps at her
   feet, and the St. Sebastian leaning back, so that all the lines of the
   picture incline more or less from right to left as they ascend. This
   slope, which gives unity to the detached groups, is carefully
   exhibited by what a mathematician would call coordinates,--the upright
   pillars of the loggia and the horizontal clouds of the beautiful sky.
   The color is very quiet, but rich and deep, the local tones being
   brought out with intense force, and the cast shadows subdued, the
   manner being much more that of Titian than of Tintoret. The sky
   appears full of light, though it is as dark as the flesh of the faces;
   and the forms of its floating clouds, as well as of the hills over
   which they rise, are drawn with a deep remembrance of reality. There
   are hundreds of pictures of Tintoret's more amazing than this, but I
   hardly know one that I more love.

   The reader ought especially to study the sculpture round the altar of
   the Capella del Rosario, as an example of the abuse of the sculptor's
   art; every accessory being labored out with as much ingenuity and
   intense effort to turn sculpture into painting, the grass, trees, and
   landscape being as far realized as possible, and in alto-relievo.
   These bas-reliefs are by various artists, and therefore exhibit the
   folly of the age, not the error of an individual.

   The following alphabetical list of the tombs in this church which are
   alluded to as described in the text, with references to the pages
   where they are mentioned, will save some trouble:

     Cavalli, Jacopo, III. 82.    |  Mocenigo, Pietro, III. 89.
     Cornaro, Marco, III. 11.     |  Mocenigo, Tomaso, I. 8, 26, III. 84.
     Dolfin, Giovanni, III. 78.   |  Morosini, Michele, III. 80.
     Giustiniani, Marco, I. 315.  |  Steno, Michele, III. 83.
     Mocenigo, Giovanni, III. 89. |  Vendramin, Andrea, I. 27, III. 88.

 GIOVANNI GRISOSTOMO, CHURCH OF ST. One of the most important in
   Venice. It is early Renaissance, containing some good sculpture, but
   chiefly notable as containing a noble Sebastian del Piombo, and a John
   Bellini, which a few years hence, unless it be "restored," will be
   esteemed one of the most precious pictures in Italy, and among the
   most perfect in the world. John Bellini is the only artist who appears
   to me to have united, in equal and magnificent measures, justness of
   drawing, nobleness of coloring, and perfect manliness of treatment,
   with the purest religious feeling. He did, as far as it is possible to
   do it, instinctively and unaffectedly, what the Caracci only pretended
   to do. Titian colors better, but has not his piety. Leonardo draws
   better, but has not his color. Angelico is more heavenly, but has not
   his manliness, far less his powers of art.

 GIOVANNI ELEMOSINARIO, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Titian and a
   Bonifazio. Of no other interest.

 GIOVANNI IN BRAGOLA, CHURCH OF ST. A Gothic church of the fourteenth
   century, small, but interesting, and said to contain some precious
   works by Cima da Conegliano, and one by John Bellini.

 GIOVANNI NOVO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GIOVANNI, S., SCUOLA DI. A fine example of the Byzantine Renaissance,
   mixed with remnants of good late Gothic. The little exterior cortile
   is sweet in feeling, and Lazari praises highly the work of the
   interior staircase.

 GIUDECCA. The crescent-shaped island (or series of islands), which
   forms the most northern extremity of the city of Venice, though
   separated by a broad channel from the main city. Commonly said to
   derive its name from the number of Jews who lived upon it; but Lazari
   derives it from the word "Judicato," in Venetian dialect "Zudegà," it
   having been in old time "adjudged" as a kind of prison territory to
   the more dangerous and turbulent citizens. It is now inhabited only by
   the poor, and covered by desolate groups of miserable dwellings,
   divided by stagnant canals.

   Its two principal churches, the Redentore and St. Eufemia, are named
   in their alphabetical order.

 GIULIANO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GIUSEPPE DI CASTELLO, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Paul Veronese:
   otherwise of no importance.

 GIUSTINA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GIUSTINIANI PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, now Albergo all' Europa. Good
   late fourteenth century Gothic, but much altered.

 GIUSTINIANI, PALAZZO, next the Casa Foscari, on the Grand Canal.
   Lazari, I know not on what authority, says that this palace was built
   by the Giustiniani family before 1428. It is one of those founded
   directly on the Ducal Palace, together with the Casa Foscari at its
   side: and there could have been no doubt of their date on this ground;
   but it would be interesting, after what we have seen of the progress
   of the Ducal Palace, to ascertain the exact year of the erection of
   any of these imitations.

   This palace contains some unusually rich detached windows, full of
   tracery, of which the profiles are given in the Appendix, under the
   title of the Palace of the Younger Foscari, it being popularly
   reported to have belonged to the son of the Doge.

 GIUSTINIAN LOLIN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 GRASSI PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, now Albergo all' Imperator d'
   Austria. Of no importance.

 GREGORIO, CHURCH OF ST., on the Grand Canal. An important church of
   the fourteenth century, now desecrated, but still interesting. Its
   apse is on the little canal crossing from the Grand Canal to the
   Giudecca, beside the Church of the Salute, and is very characteristic
   of the rude ecclesiastical Gothic contemporary with the Ducal Palace.
   The entrance to its cloisters, from the Grand Canal, is somewhat
   later; a noble square door, with two windows on each side of it, the
   grandest examples in Venice of the late window of the fourth order.

   The cloister, to which this door gives entrance, is exactly
   contemporary with the finest work of the Ducal Palace, circa 1350. It
   is the loveliest cortile I know in Venice; its capitals consummate in
   design and execution; and the low wall on which they stand showing
   remnants of sculpture unique, as far as I know, in such application.

 GRIMANI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, III. 32.

   There are several other palaces in Venice belonging to this family,
   but none of any architectural interest.


    J

 JESUITI, CHURCH OF THE. The basest Renaissance; but worth a visit in
   order to examine the imitations of curtains in white marble inlaid
   with green.

   It contains a Tintoret, "The Assumption," which I have not examined;
   and a Titian, "The Martyrdom of St. Lawrence," originally, it seems to
   me, of little value, and now, having been restored, of none.


    L

 LABIA PALAZZO, on the Canna Reggio. Of no importance.

 LAZZARO DE' MENDICANTI, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 LIBRERIA VECCHIA. A graceful building of the central Renaissance,
   designed by Sansovino, 1536, and much admired by all architects of the
   school. It was continued by Scamozzi, down the whole side of St.
   Mark's Place, adding another story above it, which modern critics
   blame as destroying the "eurithmia;" never considering that had the
   two low stories of the Library been continued along the entire length
   of the Piazza, they would have looked so low that the entire dignity
   of the square would have been lost. As it is, the Library is left in
   its originally good proportions, and the larger mass of the Procuratie
   Nuove forms a more majestic, though less graceful, side for the great
   square.

   But the real faults of the building are not in its number of stories,
   but in the design of the parts. It is one of the grossest examples of
   the base Renaissance habit of turning _keystones_ into _brackets_,
   throwing them out in bold projection (not less than a foot and a half)
   beyond the mouldings of the arch; a practice utterly barbarous,
   inasmuch as it evidently tends to dislocate the entire arch, if any
   real weight were laid on the extremity of the keystone; and it is also
   a very characteristic example of the vulgar and painful mode of
   filling spandrils by naked figures in alto-relievo, leaning against
   the arch on each side, and appearing as if they were continually in
   danger of slipping off. Many of these figures have, however, some
   merit in themselves; and the whole building is graceful and effective
   of its kind. The continuation of the Procuratie Nuove, at the western
   extremity of St. Mark's Place (together with various apartments in the
   great line of the Procuratie Nuove) forms the "Royal Palace," the
   residence of the Emperor when at Venice. This building is entirely
   modern, built in 1810, in imitation of the Procuratie Nuove, and on
   the site of Sansovino's Church of San Geminiano.

   In this range of buildings, including the Royal Palace, the Procuratie
   Nuove, the old Library, and the "Zecca" which is connected with them
   (the latter being an ugly building of very modern date, not worth
   notice architecturally), there are many most valuable pictures, among
   which I would especially direct attention, first to those in the
   Zecca, namely, a beautiful and strange Madonna, by Benedetto Diana;
   two noble Bonifazios; and two groups, by Tintoret, of the Provveditori
   della Zecca, by no means to be missed, whatever may be sacrificed to
   see them, on account of the quietness and veracity of their unaffected
   portraiture, and the absolute freedom from all vanity either in the
   painter or in his subjects.

   Next, in the "Antisala" of the old Library, observe the "Sapienza" of
   Titian, in the centre of the ceiling; a most interesting work in the
   light brilliancy of its color, and the resemblance to Paul Veronese.
   Then, in the great hall of the old Library, examine the two large
   Tintorets, "St. Mark saving a Saracen from Drowning," and the
   "Stealing of his Body from Constantinople," both rude, but great (note
   in the latter the dashing of the rain on the pavement, and running of
   the water about the feet of the figures): then in the narrow spaces
   between the windows, there are some magnificent single figures by
   Tintoret, among the finest things of the kind in Italy, or in Europe.
   Finally, in the gallery of pictures in the Palazzo Reale, among other
   good works of various kinds, are two of the most interesting
   Bonifazios in Venice, the "Children of Israel in their journeyings,"
   in one of which, if I recollect right, the quails are coming in flight
   across a sunset sky, forming one of the earliest instances I know of a
   thoroughly natural and Turneresque effect being felt and rendered by
   the old masters. The picture struck me chiefly from this circumstance;
   but, the note-book in which I had described it and its companion
   having been lost on my way home, I cannot now give a more special
   account of them, except that they are long, full of crowded figures,
   and peculiarly light in color and handling as compared with
   Bonifazio's work in general.

 LIO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance, but said to contain a spoiled
   Titian.

 LIO, SALIZZADA DI ST., windows in, II. 252, 257.

 LOREDAN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, near the Rialto, II. 123, 393.
   Another palace of this name, on the Campo St. Stefano, is of no
   importance.

 LORENZO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 LUCA, CHURCH OF ST. Its campanile is of very interesting and quaint
   early Gothic, and it is said to contain a Paul Veronese, "St Luke and
   the Virgin." In the little Campiello St. Luca, close by, is a very
   precious Gothic door, rich in brickwork, of the thirteenth century;
   and in the foundations of the houses on the same side of the square,
   but at the other end of it, are traceable some shafts and arches
   closely resembling the work of the Cathedral of Murano, and evidently
   having once belonged to some most interesting building.

 LUCIA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.


    M

 MADDALENA, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA. Of no importance.

 MALIPIERO, PALAZZO, on the Campo St. M. Formosa, facing the canal at its
   extremity. A very beautiful example of the Byzantine Renaissance. Note
   the management of color in its inlaid balconies.

 MANFRINI, PALAZZO. The architecture is of no interest; and as it is in
   contemplation to allow the collection of pictures to be sold, I shall
   take no note of them. But even if they should remain, there are few of
   the churches in Venice where the traveller had not better spend his
   time than in this gallery; as, with the exception of Titian's
   "Entombment," one or two Giorgiones, and the little John Bellini (St.
   Jerome), the pictures are all of a kind which may be seen elsewhere.

 MANGILI VALMARANA, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 MANIN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 MANZONI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, near the Church of the Carità. A
   perfect and very rich example of Byzantine Renaissance: its warm
   yellow marbles are magnificent.

 MARCILIAN, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Titian, "Tobit and the
   Angel:" otherwise of no importance.

 MARIA, CHURCHES OF STA. See FORMOSA, MATER DOMINI, MIRACOLI, ORTO,
   SALUTE, and ZOBENIGO.

 MARCO, SCUOLA DI SAN, III. 16.

 MARK, CHURCH OF ST., history of, II. 57; approach to, II. 71; general
   teaching of, II. 112, 116; measures of façade of, II. 126; balustrades
   of, II. 244, 247; cornices of, I. 311; horseshoe arches of, II. 249;
   entrances of, II. 271, III. 245; shafts of, II. 384; base in
   baptistery of, I. 290; mosaics in atrium of, II. 112; mosaics in
   cupola of, II. 114, III. 192; lily capitals of, II. 137; Plates
   illustrative of (Vol. II.), VI. VII. figs. 9, 10, 11, VIII. figs. 8,
   9, 12, 13, 15, IX. XI. fig. 1, and Plate III. Vol. III.

 MARK, SQUARE OF ST. (Piazza di San Marco), anciently a garden, II. 58;
   general effect of, II. 66, 116; plan of, II. 282.

 MARTINO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 MATER DOMINI, CHURCH OF ST. MARIA. It contains two important pictures:
   one over the second altar on the right, "St. Christina," by Vincenzo
   Catena, a very lovely example of the Venetian religious school; and,
   over the north transept door, the "Finding of the Cross," by Tintoret,
   a carefully painted and attractive picture, but by no means a good
   specimen of the master, as far as regards power of conception. He does
   not seem to have entered into his subject. There is no wonder, no
   rapture, no entire devotion in any of the figures. They are only
   interested and pleased in a mild way; and the kneeling woman who hands
   the nails to a man stooping forward to receive them on the right hand,
   does so with the air of a person saying, "You had better take care of
   them; they may be wanted another time." This general coldness in
   expression is much increased by the presence of several figures on the
   right and left, introduced for the sake of portraiture merely; and
   the reality, as well as the feeling, of the scene is destroyed by our
   seeing one of the youngest and weakest of the women with a huge cross
   lying across her knees, the whole weight of it resting upon her. As
   might have been expected, where the conception is so languid, the
   execution is little delighted in; it is throughout steady and
   powerful, but in no place affectionate, and in no place impetuous. If
   Tintoret had always painted in this way, he would have sunk into a
   mere mechanist. It is, however, a genuine and tolerably well preserved
   specimen, and its female figures are exceedingly graceful; that of St.
   Helena very queenly, though by no means agreeable in feature. Among
   the male portraits on the left there is one different from the usual
   types which occur either in Venetian paintings or Venetian populace;
   it is carefully painted, and more like a Scotch Presbyterian minister,
   than a Greek. The background is chiefly composed of architecture,
   white, remarkably uninteresting in color, and still more so in form.
   This is to be noticed as one of the unfortunate results of the
   Renaissance teaching at this period. Had Tintoret backed his Empress
   Helena with Byzantine architecture, the picture might have been one of
   the most gorgeous he ever painted.

 MATER DOMINI, CAMPO DI STA. MARIA, II. 261. A most interesting little
   piazza, surrounded by early Gothic houses, once of singular beauty;
   the arcade at its extremity, of fourth order windows, drawn in my
   folio work, is one of the earliest and loveliest of its kind in
   Venice; and in the houses at the side is a group of second order
   windows with their intermediate crosses, all complete, and well worth
   careful examination.

 MICHELE IN ISOLA, CHURCH OF ST. On the island between Venice and
   Murano. The little Cappella Emiliana at the side of it has been much
   admired, but it would be difficult to find a building more feelingless
   or ridiculous. It is more like a German summer-house, or angle turret,
   than a chapel, and may be briefly described as a bee-hive set on a low
   hexagonal tower, with dashes of stone-work about its windows like the
   flourishes of an idle penman.

   The cloister of this church is pretty; and the attached cemetery is
   worth entering, for the sake of feeling the strangeness of the quiet
   sleeping ground in the midst of the sea.

 MICHIEL DALLE COLONNE, PALAZZO. Of no importance.

 MINELLI, PALAZZO. In the Corte del Maltese, at St. Paternian. It has a
   spiral external staircase, very picturesque, but of the fifteenth
   century and without merit.

 MIRACOLI, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA DEI. The most interesting and finished
   example in Venice of the Byzantine Renaissance, and one of the most
   important in Italy of the cinque-cento style. All its sculptures
   should be examined with great care, as the best possible examples of a
   bad style. Observe, for instance, that in spite of the beautiful work
   on the square pillars which support the gallery at the west end, they
   have no more architectural effect than two wooden posts. The same kind
   of failure in boldness of purpose exists throughout; and the building
   is, in fact, rather a small museum of unmeaning, though refined
   sculpture, than a piece of architecture.

   Its grotesques are admirable examples of the base Raphaelesque design
   examined above, III. 136. Note especially the children's heads tied up
   by the hair, in the lateral sculptures at the top of the altar steps.
   A rude workman, who could hardly have carved the head at all, might
   have allowed this or any other mode of expressing discontent with his
   own doings; but the man who could carve a child's head so perfectly
   must have been wanting in all human feeling, to cut it off, and tie it
   by the hair to a vine leaf. Observe, in the Ducal Palace, though far
   ruder in skill, the heads always _emerge_ from the leaves, they are
   never _tied_ to them.

 MISERICORDIA, CHURCH OF. The church itself is nothing, and contains
   nothing worth the traveller's time; but the Albergo de' Confratelli
   della Misericordia at its side is a very interesting and beautiful
   relic of the Gothic Renaissance. Lazari says, "del secolo xiv.;" but I
   believe it to be later. Its traceries are very curious and rich, and
   the sculpture of its capitals very fine for the late time. Close to
   it, on the right-hand side of the canal which is crossed by the wooden
   bridge, is one of the richest Gothic doors in Venice, remarkable for
   the appearance of antiquity in the general design and stiffness of its
   figures, though it bears its date 1505. Its extravagant crockets are
   almost the only features which, but for this written date, would at
   first have confessed its lateness; but, on examination, the figures
   will be found as bad and spiritless as they are apparently archaic,
   and completely exhibiting the Renaissance palsy of imagination.

   The general effect is, however, excellent, the whole arrangement
   having been borrowed from earlier work.

   The action of the statue of the Madonna, who extends her robe to
   shelter a group of diminutive figures, representative of the Society
   for whose house the sculpture was executed, may be also seen in most
   of the later Venetian figures of the Virgin which occupy similar
   situations. The image of Christ is placed in a medallion on her
   breast, thus fully, though conventionally, expressing the idea of
   self-support which is so often partially indicated by the great
   religious painters in their representations of the infant Jesus.

 MOISÈ, CHURCH OF ST., III. 124. Notable as one of the basest examples
   of the basest school of the Renaissance. It contains one important
   picture, namely "Christ washing the Disciples' Feet," by Tintoret; on
   the left side of the chapel, north of the choir. This picture has been
   originally dark, is now much faded--in parts, I believe, altogether
   destroyed--and is hung in the worst light of a chapel, where, on a
   sunny day at noon, one could not easily read without a candle. I
   cannot, therefore, give much information respecting it; but it is
   certainly one of the least successful of the painter's works, and both
   careless and unsatisfactory in its composition as well as its color.
   One circumstance is noticeable, as in a considerable degree detracting
   from the interest of most of Tintoret's representations of our Saviour
   with his disciples. He never loses sight of the fact that all were
   poor, and the latter ignorant; and while he never paints a senator, or
   a saint once thoroughly canonized, except as a gentleman, he is very
   careful to paint the Apostles, in their living intercourse with the
   Saviour, in such a manner that the spectator may see in an instant, as
   the Pharisee did of old, that they were unlearned and ignorant men;
   and, whenever we find them in a room, it is always such a one as would
   be inhabited by the lower classes. There seems some violation of this
   practice in the dais, or flight of steps, at the top of which the
   Saviour is placed in the present picture; but we are quickly reminded
   that the guests' chamber or upper room ready prepared was not likely
   to have been in a palace, by the humble furniture upon the floor,
   consisting of a tub with a copper saucepan in it, a coffee-pot, and a
   pair of bellows, curiously associated with a symbolic cup with a
   wafer, which, however, is in an injured part of the canvas, and may
   have been added by the priests. I am totally unable to state what the
   background of the picture is or has been; and the only point farther
   to be noted about it is the solemnity, which, in spite of the familiar
   and homely circumstances above noticed, the painter has given to the
   scene, by placing the Saviour, in the act of washing the feet of
   Peter, at the top of a circle of steps, on which the other Apostles
   kneel in adoration and astonishment.

 MORO, PALAZZO. See OTHELLO.

 MOROSINI, PALAZZO, near the Ponte dell' Ospedaletto, at San Giovannie
   Paolo. Outside it is not interesting, though the gateway shows remains
   of brickwork of the thirteenth century. Its interior court is
   singularly beautiful; the staircase of early fourteenth century Gothic
   has originally been superb, and the window in the angle above is the
   most perfect that I know in Venice of the kind; the lightly sculptured
   coronet is exquisitely introduced at the top of its spiral shaft.

   This palace still belongs to the Morosini family, to whose present
   representative, the Count Carlo Morosini, the reader is indebted for
   the note on the character of his ancestors, above, III. 213.

 MOROSINI, PALAZZO, at St. Stefano. Of no importance.


    N

 NANI-MOCENIGO, PALAZZO. (Now Hotel Danieli.) A glorious example of the
   central Gothic, nearly contemporary with the finest part of the Ducal
   Palace. Though less impressive in effect than the Casa Foscari or Casa
   Bernardo, it is of purer architecture than either: and quite unique in
   the delicacy of the form of the cusps in the central group of windows,
   which are shaped like broad scimitars, the upper foil of the windows
   being very small. If the traveller will compare these windows with
   the neighboring traceries of the Ducal Palace, he will easily perceive
   the peculiarity.

 NICOLO DEL LIDO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 NOME DI GESU, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.


    O

 ORFANI, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 ORTO, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA, DELL'. An interesting example of Renaissance
   Gothic, the traceries of the windows being very rich and quaint.

   It contains four most important Tintorets: "The Last Judgment," "The
   Worship of the Golden Calf," "The Presentation of the Virgin," and
   "Martyrdom of St. Agnes." The first two are among his largest and
   mightiest works, but grievously injured by damp and neglect; and
   unless the traveller is accustomed to decipher the thoughts in a
   picture patiently, he need not hope to derive any pleasure from them.
   But no pictures will better reward a resolute study. The following
   account of the "Last Judgment," given in the second volume of "Modern
   Painters," will be useful in enabling the traveller to enter into the
   meaning of the picture, but its real power is only to be felt by
   patient examination of it.

   "By Tintoret only has this unimaginable event (the Last Judgment) been
   grappled with in its Verity; not typically nor symbolically, but as
   they may see it who shall not sleep, but be changed. Only one
   traditional circumstance he has received, with Dante and Michael
   Angelo, the Boat of the Condemned; but the impetuosity of his mind
   bursts out even in the adoption of this image; he has not stopped at
   the scowling ferryman of the one, nor at the sweeping blow and demon
   dragging of the other, but, seized Hylas like by the limbs, and
   tearing up the earth in his agony, the victim is dashed into his
   destruction; nor is it the sluggish Lethe, nor the fiery lake, that
   bears the cursed vessel, but the oceans of the earth and the waters of
   the firmament gathered into one white, ghastly cataract; the river of
   the wrath of God, roaring down into the gulf where the world has
   melted with its fervent heat, choked with the ruins of nations, and
   the limbs of its corpses tossed out of its whirling, like
   water-wheels. Bat-like, out of the holes and caverns and shadows of
   the earth, the bones gather, and the clay heaps heave, rattling and
   adhering into half-kneaded anatomies, that crawl, and startle, and
   struggle up among the putrid weeds, with the clay clinging to their
   clotted hair, and their heavy eyes sealed by the earth darkness yet,
   like his of old who went his way unseeing to the Siloam Pool; shaking
   off one by one the dreams of the prison-house, hardly hearing the
   clangor of the trumpets of the armies of God, blinded yet more, as
   they awake, by the white light of the new Heaven, until the great
   vortex of the four winds bears up their bodies to the judgment seat;
   the Firmament is all full of them, a very dust of human souls, that
   drifts, and floats, and falls into the interminable, inevitable light;
   the bright clouds are darkened with them as with thick snow, currents
   of atom life in the arteries of heaven, now soaring up slowly, and
   higher and higher still, till the eye and the thought can follow no
   farther, borne up, wingless, by their inward faith and by the angel
   powers invisible, now hurled in countless drifts of horror before the
   breath of their condemnation."

   Note in the opposite picture the way the clouds are wrapped about in
   the distant Sinai.

   The figure of the little Madonna in the "Presentation" should be
   compared with Titian's in his picture of the same subject in the
   Academy. I prefer Tintoret's infinitely: and note how much finer is
   the feeling with which Tintoret has relieved the glory round her head
   against the pure sky, than that which influenced Titian in encumbering
   his distance with architecture.

   The "Martyrdom of St. Agnes" _was_ a lovely picture. It has been
   "restored" since I saw it.

 OSPEDALETTO, CHURCH OF THE. The most monstrous example of the
   Grotesque Renaissance which there is in Venice; the sculptures on its
   façade representing masses of diseased figures and swollen fruit.

   It is almost worth devoting an hour to the successive examination of
   five buildings, as illustrative of the last degradation of the
   Renaissance. San Moisè is the most clumsy, Santa Maria Zobenigo the
   most impious, St. Eustachio the most ridiculous, the Ospedaletto the
   most monstrous, and the head at Santa Maria Formosa the most foul.

 OTHELLO, HOUSE OF, at the Carmini. The researches of Mr. Brown into
   the origin of the play of "Othello" have, I think, determined that
   Shakspeare wrote on definite historical grounds; and that Othello may
   be in many points identified with Christopher Moro, the lieutenant of
   the republic at Cyprus, in 1508. See "Ragguagli su Maria Sanuto," i.
   252.

   His palace was standing till very lately, a Gothic building of the
   fourteenth century, of which Mr. Brown possesses a drawing. It is now
   destroyed, and a modern square-windowed house built on its site. A
   statue, said to be a portrait of Moro, but a most paltry work, is set
   in a niche in the modern wall.


    P

 PANTALEONE, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Paul Veronese; otherwise of
   no importance.

 PATERNIAN, CHURCH OF ST. Its little leaning tower forms an interesting
   object as the traveller sees it from the narrow canal which passes
   beneath the Porte San Paternian. The two arched lights of the belfry
   appear of very early workmanship, probably of the beginning of the
   thirteenth century.

 PESARO PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. The most powerful and impressive
   in effect of all the palaces of the Grotesque Renaissance. The heads
   upon its foundation are very characteristic of the period, but there
   is more genius in them than usual. Some of the mingled expressions of
   faces and grinning casques are very clever.

 PIAZZETTA, pillars of, see Final Appendix under head "Capital." The
   two magnificent blocks of marble brought from St. Jean d'Acre, which
   form one of the principal ornaments of the Piazzetta, are Greek
   sculpture of the sixth century, and will be described in my folio
   work.

 PIETA, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 PIETRO, CHURCH OF ST., at Murano. Its pictures, once valuable, are now
   hardly worth examination, having been spoiled by neglect.

 PIETRO, DI CASTELLO, CHURCH OF ST., I. 7, 361. It is said to contain
   a Paul Veronese, and I suppose the so-called "Chair of St. Peter" must
   be worth examining.

 PISANI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. The latest Venetian Gothic, just
   passing into Renaissance. The capitals of the first floor windows are,
   however, singularly spirited and graceful, very daringly under-cut,
   and worth careful examination. The Paul Veronese, once the glory of
   this palace, is, I believe, not likely to remain in Venice. The other
   picture in the same room, the "Death of Darius," is of no value.

 PISANI, PALAZZO, at St. Stefano. Late Renaissance, and of no merit,
   but grand in its colossal proportions, especially when seen from the
   narrow canal at its side, which terminated by the apse of the Church
   of San Stefano, is one of the most picturesque and impressive little
   pieces of water scenery in Venice.

 POLO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance, except as an example of the
   advantages accruing from restoration. M. Lazari says of it, "Before
   this church was modernized, its principal chapel was adorned with
   Mosaics, and possessed a pala of silver gilt, of Byzantine
   workmanship, which is now lost."

 POLO, SQUARE OF ST. (Campo San Polo.) A large and important square,
   rendered interesting chiefly by three palaces on the side of it
   opposite the church, of central Gothic (1360), and fine of their time,
   though small. One of their capitals has been given in Plate II. of
   this volume, fig. 12. They are remarkable as being decorated with
   sculptures of the Gothic time, in imitation of Byzantine ones; the
   period being marked by the dog-tooth and cable being used instead of
   the dentil round the circles.

 POLO, PALAZZO, at San G. Grisostomo (the house of Marco Polo), II. 139.
   Its interior court is full of interest, showing fragments of the old
   building in every direction, cornices, windows, and doors, of almost
   every period, mingled among modern rebuilding and restoration of all
   degrees of dignity.

 PORTA DELLA CARTA, II. 302.

 PRIULI, PALAZZO. A most important and beautiful early Gothic Palace,
   at San Severo; the main entrance is from the Fundamento San Severo,
   but the principal façade is on the other side, towards the canal. The
   entrance has been grievously defaced, having had winged lions filling
   the spandrils of its pointed arch, of which only feeble traces are now
   left, the façade has very early fourth order windows in the lower
   story, and above, the beautiful range of fifth order windows drawn at
   the bottom of Plate XVIII. Vol. II., where the heads of the fourth
   order range are also seen (note their inequality, the larger one at
   the flank). This Palace has two most interesting traceried angle
   windows also, which, however, I believe are later than those on the
   façade; and finally, a rich and bold interior staircase.

   PROCURATIE NUOVE, see "LIBRERIA" VECCHIA: A graceful series buildings,
   of late fifteenth century design, forming the northern side of St.
   Mark's Place, but of no particular interest.


    Q

 QUERINI, PALAZZO, now the Beccherie, II. 255, III. 234.


    R

 RAFFAELLE, CHIESA DELL'ANGELO. Said to contain a Bonifazio, otherwise of
   no importance.

 REDENTORE, CHURCH OF THE, II. 378. It contains three interesting John
   Bellinis, and also, in the sacristy, a most beautiful Paul Veronese.

 REMER, CORTE DEL, house in. II. 251.

 REZZONICO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of the Grotesque Renaissance
   time, but less extravagant than usual.

 RIALTO, BRIDGE OF THE. The best building raised in the time of the
   Grotesque Renaissance; very noble in its simplicity, in its
   proportions, and in its masonry. Note especially the grand way in
   which the oblique archstones rest on the butments of the bridge, safe,
   palpably both to the sense and eye: note also the sculpture of the
   Annunciation on the southern side of it; how beautifully arranged, so
   as to give more lightness and a grace to the arch--_the dove, flying
   towards the Madonna, forming the keystone_,--and thus the whole action
   of the figures being parallel to the curve of the arch, while all the
   masonry is at right angles to it. Note, finally, one circumstance
   which gives peculiar firmness to the figure of the angel, and
   associates itself with the general expression of strength in the
   whole building; namely that the sole of the advanced foot is set
   perfectly level, as if placed on the ground, instead of being thrown
   back behind like a heron's, as in most modern figures of this kind.

   The sculptures themselves are not good; but these pieces of feeling in
   them are very admirable. The two figures on the other side, St. Mark
   and St. Theodore, are inferior, though all by the same sculptor,
   Girolamo Campagna.

   The bridge was built by Antonio da Ponte, in 1588. It was anciently of
   wood, with a drawbridge in the centre, a representation of which may
   be seen in one of Carpaccio's pictures at the Accademia delle Belle
   Arti: and the traveller should observe that the interesting effect,
   both of this and the Bridge of Sighs, depends in great part on their
   both being _more_ than bridges; the one a covered passage, the other a
   row of shops, sustained on an arch. No such effect can be produced
   merely by the masonry of the roadway itself.

 RIO DEL PALAZZO, II. 282.

 ROCCO, CAMPIELLO DI SAN, windows in, II. 258.

 ROCCO, CHURCH OF ST. Notable only for the most interesting pictures by
   Tintoret which it contains, namely:

   1. _San Rocco before the Pope._ (On the left of the door as we enter.)
   A delightful picture in his best manner, but not much labored; and,
   like several other pictures in this church, it seems to me to have
   been executed at some period of the painter's life when he was either
   in ill health, or else had got into a mechanical way of painting, from
   having made too little reference to nature for a long time. There is
   something stiff and forced in the white draperies on both sides, and a
   general character about the whole which I can feel better than I can
   describe; but which, if I had been the painter's physician, would have
   immediately caused me to order him to shut up his painting-room, and
   take a voyage to the Levant, and back again. The figure of the Pope
   is, however, extremely beautiful, and is not unworthy, in its jewelled
   magnificence, here dark against the sky, of comparison with the figure
   of the high priest in the "Presentation," in the Scuola di San Rocco.

   2. _Annunciation._ (On the other side of the door, on entering.) A
   most disagreeable and dead picture, having all the faults of the age,
   and none of the merits of the painter. It must be a matter of future
   investigation to me, what could cause the fall of his mind from a
   conception so great and so fiery as that of the "Annunciation" in the
   Scuola di San Rocco, to this miserable reprint of an idea worn out
   centuries before. One of the most inconceivable things in it,
   considered as the work of Tintoret, is that where the angel's robe
   drifts away behind his limb, one cannot tell by the character of the
   outline, or by the tones of the color, whether the cloud comes in
   before the robe, or whether the robe cuts upon the cloud. The Virgin
   is uglier than that of the Scuola, and not half so real; and the
   draperies are crumpled in the most commonplace and ignoble folds. It
   is a picture well worth study, as an example of the extent to which
   the greatest mind may be betrayed by the abuse of its powers, and the
   neglect of its proper food in the study of nature.

   3. _Pool of Bethesda._ (On the right side of the church, in its
   centre, the lowest of the two pictures which occupy the wall.) A noble
   work, but eminently disagreeable, as must be all pictures of this
   subject; and with the same character in it of undefinable want, which
   I have noticed in the two preceding works. The main figure in it is
   the cripple, who has taken up his bed; but the whole effect of this
   action is lost by his not turning to Christ, but flinging it on his
   shoulder like a triumphant porter with a huge load; and the corrupt
   Renaissance architecture, among which the figures are crowded, is both
   ugly in itself, and much too small for them. It is worth noticing, for
   the benefit of persons who find fault with the perspective of the
   Pre-Raphaelites, that the perspective of the brackets beneath these
   pillars is utterly absurd; and that, in fine, the presence or absence
   of perspective has nothing to do with the merits of a great picture:
   not that the perspective of the Pre-Raphaelites _is_ false in any case
   that I have examined, the objection being just as untenable as it is
   ridiculous.

   4. _San Rocco in the Desert._ (Above the last-named picture.) A single
   recumbent figure in a not very interesting landscape, deserving less
   attention than a picture of St. Martin just opposite to it,--a noble
   and knightly figure on horseback by Pordenone, to which I cannot pay a
   greater compliment than by saying that I was a considerable time in
   doubt whether or not it was another Tintoret.

   5. _San Rocco in the Hospital._ (On the right-hand side of the altar.)
   There are four vast pictures by Tintoret in the dark choir of this
   church, not only important by their size (each being some twenty-five
   feet long by ten feet high), but also elaborate compositions; and
   remarkable, one for its extraordinary landscape, and the other as the
   most studied picture in which the painter has introduced horses in
   violent action. In order to show what waste of human mind there is in
   these dark churches of Venice, it is worth recording that, as I was
   examining these pictures, there came in a party of eighteen German
   tourists, not hurried, nor jesting among themselves as large parties
   often do, but patiently submitting to their cicerone, and evidently
   desirous of doing their duty as intelligent travellers. They sat down
   for a long time on the benches of the nave, looked a little at the
   "Pool of Bethesda," walked up into the choir and there heard a lecture
   of considerable length from their _valet-de-place_ upon some subject
   connected with the altar itself, which, being in German, I did not
   understand; they then turned and went slowly out of the church, not
   one of the whole eighteen ever giving a single glance to any of the
   four Tintorets, and only one of them, as far as I saw, even raising
   his eyes to the walls on which they hung, and immediately withdrawing
   them, with a jaded and _nonchalant_ expression easily interpretable
   into "Nothing but old black pictures." The two Tintorets above
   noticed, at the end of the church, were passed also without a glance;
   and this neglect is not because the pictures have nothing in them
   capable of arresting the popular mind, but simply because they are
   totally in the dark, or confused among easier and more prominent
   objects of attention. This picture, which I have called "St. Rocco in
   the Hospital," shows him, I suppose, in his general ministrations at
   such places, and is one of the usual representations of a disgusting
   subject from which neither Orcagna nor Tintoret seems ever to have
   shrunk. It is a very noble picture, carefully composed and highly
   wrought; but to me gives no pleasure, first, on account of its
   subject, secondly, on account of its dull brown tone all over,--it
   being impossible, or nearly so, in such a scene, and at all events
   inconsistent with its feeling, to introduce vivid color of any kind.
   So it is a brown study of diseased limbs in a close room.

   6. _Cattle Piece._ (Above the picture last described.) I can give no
   other name to this picture, whose subject I can neither guess nor
   discover, the picture being in the dark, and the guide-books leaving
   me in the same position. All I can make out of it is, that there is a
   noble landscape with cattle and figures. It seems to me the best
   landscape of Tintoret's in Venice, except the "Flight into Egypt;" and
   is even still more interesting from its savage character, the
   principal trees being pines, something like Titian's in his "St.
   Francis receiving the Stigmata," and chestnuts on the slopes and in
   the hollows of the hills; the animals also seem first-rate. But it is
   too high, too much faded, and too much in the dark to be made out. It
   seems never to have been rich in color, rather cool and grey, and very
   full of light.

   7. _Finding of Body of San Rocco._ (On the left-hand side of the
   altar.) An elaborate, but somewhat confused picture, with a flying
   angel in a blue drapery; but it seemed to me altogether uninteresting,
   or perhaps requiring more study than I was able to give it.

   8. _San Rocco in Campo d' Armata._ So this picture is called by the
   sacristan. I could see no San Rocco in it; nothing but a wild group of
   horses and warriors in the most magnificent confusion of fall and
   flight ever painted by man. They seem all dashed different ways as if
   by a whirlwind; and a whirlwind there must be, or a thunderbolt,
   behind them, for a huge tree is torn up and hurled into the air beyond
   the central figure, as if it were a shivered lance. Two of the horses
   meet in the midst, as if in a tournament; but in madness of fear, not
   in hostility; on the horse to the right is a standard-bearer, who
   stoops as from some foe behind him, with the lance laid across his
   saddle-bow, level, and the flag stretched out behind him as he flies,
   like the sail of a ship drifting from its mast; the central horseman,
   who meets the shock, of storm, or enemy, whatever it be, is hurled
   backwards from his seat, like a stone from a sling; and this figure
   with the shattered tree trunk behind it, is the most noble part of the
   picture. There is another grand horse on the right, however, also in
   full action. Two gigantic figures on foot, on the left, meant to be
   nearer than the others, would, it seems to me, have injured the
   picture, had they been clearly visible; but time has reduced them to
   perfect subordination.


 ROCCO, SCUOLA DI SAN, bases of, I. 291, 431; soffit ornaments of, I.
   337. An interesting building of the early Renaissance (1517), passing
   into Roman Renaissance. The wreaths of leafage about its shafts are
   wonderfully delicate and fine, though misplaced.

   As regards the pictures which it contains, it is one of the three most
   precious buildings in Italy; buildings, I mean, consistently decorated
   with a series of paintings at the time of their erection, and still
   exhibiting that series in its original order. I suppose there can be
   little question, but that the three most important edifices of this
   kind in Italy are the Sistine Chapel, the Campo Santo of Pisa, and the
   Scuola di San Rocco at Venice: the first is painted by Michael Angelo;
   the second by Orcagna, Benozzo Gozzoli, Pietro Laurati, and several
   other men whose works are as rare as they are precious; and the third
   by Tintoret.

   Whatever the traveller may miss in Venice, he should therefore give
   unembarrassed attention and unbroken time to the Scuola di San Rocco;
   and I shall, accordingly, number the pictures, and note in them, one
   by one, what seemed to me most worthy of observation.

   There are sixty-two in all, but eight of these are merely of children
   or children's heads, and two of unimportant figures. The number of
   valuable pictures is fifty-two; arranged on the walls and ceilings of
   three rooms, so badly lighted, in consequence of the admirable
   arrangements of the Renaissance architect, that it is only in the
   early morning that some of the pictures can be seen at all, nor can
   they ever be seen but imperfectly. They were all painted, however, for
   their places in the dark, and, as compared with Tintoret's other
   works, are therefore, for the most part, nothing more than vast
   sketches, made to produce, under a certain degree of shadow, the
   effect of finished pictures. Their treatment is thus to be considered
   as a kind of scene-painting; differing from ordinary scene-painting
   only in this, that the effect aimed at is not _that of a natural
   scene_ but _a perfect picture_. They differ in this respect from all
   other existing works; for there is not, as far as I know, any other
   instance in which a great master has consented to work for a room
   plunged into almost total obscurity. It is probable that none but
   Tintoret would have undertaken the task, and most fortunate that he
   was forced to it. For in this magnificent scene-painting we have, of
   course, more wonderful examples, both of his handling, and knowledge
   of effect, than could ever have been exhibited in finished pictures;
   while the necessity of doing much with few strokes keeps his mind so
   completely on the stretch throughout the work (while yet the velocity
   of production prevented his being wearied), that no other series of
   his works exhibits powers so exalted. On the other hand, owing to the
   velocity and coarseness of the painting, it is more liable to injury
   through drought or damp; and, as the walls have been for years
   continually running down with rain, and what little sun gets into the
   place contrives to fall all day right on one or other of the pictures,
   they are nothing but wrecks of what they were; and the ruins of
   paintings originally coarse are not likely ever to be attractive to
   the public mind. Twenty or thirty years ago they were taken down to be
   retouched; but the man to whom the task was committed providentially
   died, and only one of them was spoiled. I have found traces of his
   work upon another, but not to an extent very seriously destructive.
   The rest of the sixty-two, or, at any rate, all that are in the upper
   room, appear entirely intact.

   Although, as compared with his other works, they are all very scenic
   in execution, there are great differences in their degrees of finish;
   and, curiously enough, some on the ceilings and others in the darkest
   places in the lower room are very nearly finished pictures, while the
   "Agony in the Garden," which is in one of the best lights in the upper
   room, appears to have been painted in a couple of hours with a broom
   for a brush.

   For the traveller's greater convenience, I shall give a rude plan of
   the arrangement, and list of the subjects, of each group of pictures
   before examining them in detail.

   First Group. On the walls of the room on the ground floor.

   [Illustration:

      1. Annunciation.                5. The Magdalen.
      2. Adoration of Magi.           6. St. Mary of Egypt.
      3. Flight into Egypt.           7. Circumcision.
      4. Massacre of Innocents.       8. Assumption of Virgin.

      At the turn of the stairs leading to the upper room:
      9. Visitation.]

   1. _The Annunciation._ This, which first strikes the eye, is a very
   just representative of the whole group, the execution being carried to
   the utmost limits of boldness consistent with completion. It is a
   well-known picture, and need not therefore be specially described, but
   one or two points in it require notice. The face of the Virgin is very
   disagreeable to the spectator from below, giving the idea of a woman
   about thirty, who had never been handsome. If the face is untouched,
   it is the only instance I have ever seen of Tintoret's failing in an
   intended effect, for, when seen near, the face is comely and youthful,
   and expresses only surprise, instead of the pain and fear of which it
   bears the aspect in the distance. I could not get near enough to see
   whether it had been retouched. It looks like Tintoret's work, though
   rather hard; but, as there are unquestionable marks in the retouching
   of this picture, it is possible that some slight restoration of lines
   supposed to be faded, entirely alter the distant expression of the
   face. One of the evident pieces of repainting is the scarlet of the
   Madonna's lap, which is heavy and lifeless. A far more injurious one
   is the strip of sky seen through the doorway by which the angel
   enters, which has originally been of the deep golden color of the
   distance on the left, and which the blundering restorer has daubed
   over with whitish blue, so that it looks like a bit of the wall;
   luckily he has not touched the outlines of the angel's black wings, on
   which the whole expression of the picture depends. This angel and the
   group of small cherubs above form a great swinging chain, of which the
   dove representing the Holy Spirit forms the bend. The angels in their
   flight seem to be attached to this as the train of fire is to a
   rocket; all of them appearing to have swooped down with the swiftness
   of a falling star.

   2. _Adoration of the Magi._ The most finished picture in the Scuola,
   except the "Crucifixion," and perhaps the most delightful of the
   whole. It unites every source of pleasure that a picture can possess:
   the highest elevation of principal subject, mixed with the lowest
   detail of picturesque incident; the dignity of the highest ranks of
   men, opposed to the simplicity of the lowest; the quietness and
   serenity of an incident in cottage life, contrasted with the
   turbulence of troops of horsemen and the spiritual power of angels.
   The placing of the two doves as principal points of light in the front
   of the picture, in order to remind the spectator of the poverty of the
   mother whose child is receiving the offerings and adoration of three
   monarchs, is one of Tintoret's master touches; the whole scene,
   indeed, is conceived in his happiest manner. Nothing can be at once
   more humble or more dignified than the bearing of the kings; and there
   is a sweet reality given to the whole incident by the Madonna's
   stooping forward and lifting her hand in admiration of the vase of
   gold which has been set before the Christ, though she does so with
   such gentleness and quietness that her dignity is not in the least
   injured by the simplicity of the action. As if to illustrate the means
   by which the Wise men were brought from the East, the whole picture is
   nothing but a large star, of which Christ is the centre; all the
   figures, even the timbers of the roof, radiate from the small bright
   figure on which the countenances of the flying angels are bent, the
   star itself, gleaming through the timbers above, being quite
   subordinate. The composition would almost be too artificial were it
   not broken by the luminous distance where the troop of horsemen are
   waiting for the kings. These, with a dog running at full speed, at
   once interrupt the symmetry of the lines, and form a point of relief
   from the over concentration of all the rest of the action.

   3. _Flight into Egypt._ One of the principal figures here is the
   donkey. I have never seen any of the nobler animals--lion, or leopard,
   or horse, or dragon--made so sublime as this quiet head of the
   domestic ass, chiefly owing to the grand motion in the nostril and
   writhing in the ears. The space of the picture is chiefly occupied by
   lovely landscape, and the Madonna and St. Joseph are pacing their way
   along a shady path upon the banks of a river at the side of the
   picture. I had not any conception, until I got near, how much pains
   had been taken with the Virgin's head; its expression is as sweet and
   as intense as that of any of Raffaelle's, its reality far greater. The
   painter seems to have intended that everything should be subordinate
   to the beauty of this single head; and the work is a wonderful proof
   of the way in which a vast field of canvas may be made conducive to
   the interest of a single figure. This is partly accomplished by
   slightness of painting, so that on close examination, while there is
   everything to astonish in the masterly handling and purpose, there is
   not much perfect or very delightful painting; in fact, the two figures
   are treated like the living figures in a scene at the theatre, and
   finished to perfection, while the landscape is painted as hastily as
   the scenes, and with the same kind of opaque size color. It has,
   however, suffered as much as any of the series, and it is hardly fair
   to judge of its tones and colors in its present state.

   4. _Massacre of the Innocents._ The following account of this picture,
   given in "Modern Painters," may be useful to the traveller, and is
   therefore here repeated. "I have before alluded to the painfulness of
   Raffaelle's treatment of the Massacre of the Innocents. Fuseli affirms
   of it, that, 'in dramatic gradation he disclosed all the mother
   through every image of pity and terror.' If this be so, I think the
   philosophical spirit has prevailed over the imaginative. The
   imagination never errs; it sees all that is, and all the relations
   and bearings of it; but it would not have confused the mortal frenzy
   of maternal terror, with various development of maternal character.
   Fear, rage, and agony, at their utmost pitch, sweep away all
   character: humanity itself would be lost in maternity, the woman would
   become the mere personification of animal fury or fear. For this
   reason all the ordinary representations of this subject are, I think,
   false and cold: the artist has not heard the shrieks, nor mingled with
   the fugitives; he has sat down in his study to convulse features
   methodically, and philosophize over insanity. Not so Tintoret.
   Knowing, or feeling, that the expression of the human face was, in
   such circumstances, not to be rendered, and that the effort could only
   end in an ugly falsehood, he denies himself all aid from the features,
   he feels that if he is to place himself or us in the midst of that
   maddened multitude, there can be no time allowed for watching
   expression. Still less does he depend on details of murder or
   ghastliness of death; there is no blood, no stabbing or cutting, but
   there is an awful substitute for these in the chiaroscuro. The scene
   is the outer vestibule of a palace, the slippery marble floor is
   fearfully barred across by sanguine shadows, so that our eyes seem to
   become bloodshot and strained with strange horror and deadly vision; a
   lake of life before them, like the burning seen of the doomed Moabite
   on the water that came by the way of Edom: a huge flight of stairs,
   without parapet, descends on the left; down this rush a crowd of women
   mixed with the murderers; the child in the arms of one has been seized
   by the limbs, _she hurls herself over the edge, and falls head
   downmost, dragging the child out of the grasp by her weight_;--she
   will be dashed dead in a second:--close to us is the great struggle; a
   heap of the mothers, entangled in one mortal writhe with each other
   and the swords; one of the murderers dashed down and crushed beneath
   them, the sword of another caught by the blade and dragged at by a
   woman's naked hand; the youngest and fairest of the women, her child
   just torn away from a death grasp, and clasped to her breast with the
   grip of a steel vice, falls backwards, helpless over the heap, right
   on the sword points; all knit together and hurled down in one
   hopeless, frenzied, furious abandonment of body and soul in the
   effort to save. Far back, at the bottom of the stairs, there is
   something in the shadow like a heap of clothes. It is a woman, sitting
   quiet,--quite quiet,--still as any stone; she looks down steadfastly
   on her dead child, laid along on the floor before her, and her hand is
   pressed softly upon her brow."

   I have nothing to add to the above description of this picture, except
   that I believe there may have been some change in the color of the
   shadow that crosses the pavement. The chequers of the pavements are,
   in the light, golden white and pale grey; in the shadow, red and dark
   grey, the white in the sunshine becoming red in the shadow. I formerly
   supposed that this was meant to give greater horror to the scene, and
   it is very like Tintoret if it be so; but there is a strangeness and
   discordance in it which makes me suspect the colors may have changed.

   5. _The Magdalen._ This and the picture opposite to it, "St. Mary of
   Egypt," have been painted to fill up narrow spaces between the windows
   which were not large enough to receive compositions, and yet in which
   single figures would have looked awkwardly thrust into the corner.
   Tintoret has made these spaces as large as possible by filling them
   with landscapes, which are rendered interesting by the introduction of
   single figures of very small size. He has not, however, considered his
   task, of making a small piece of wainscot look like a large one, worth
   the stretch of his powers, and has painted these two landscapes just
   as carelessly and as fast as an upholsterer's journeyman finishing a
   room at a railroad hotel. The color is for the most part opaque, and
   dashed or scrawled on in the manner of a scene-painter; and as during
   the whole morning the sun shines upon the one picture, and during the
   afternoon upon the other, hues, which were originally thin and
   imperfect, are now dried in many places into mere dirt upon the
   canvas. With all these drawbacks the pictures are of very high
   interest, for although, as I said, hastily and carelessly, they are
   not languidly painted; on the contrary, he has been in his hottest and
   grandest temper; and in this first one ("Magdalen") the laurel tree,
   with its leaves driven hither and thither among flakes of fiery cloud,
   has been probably one of the greatest achievements that his hand
   performed in landscape: its roots are entangled in underwood; of which
   every leaf seems to be articulated, yet all is as wild as if it had
   grown there instead of having been painted; there has been a mountain
   distance, too, and a sky of stormy light, of which I infinitely regret
   the loss, for though its masses of light are still discernible, its
   variety of hue is all sunk into a withered brown. There is a curious
   piece of execution in the striking of the light upon a brook which
   runs under the roots of the laurel in the foreground: these roots are
   traced in shadow against the bright surface of the water; another
   painter would have drawn the light first, and drawn the dark roots
   over it. Tintoret has laid in a brown ground which he has left for the
   roots, and painted the water through their interstices with a few
   mighty rolls of his brush laden with white.

   6. _St. Mary of Egypt._ This picture differs but little in the plan,
   from the one opposite, except that St. Mary has her back towards us,
   and the Magdalen her face, and that the tree on the other side of the
   brook is a palm instead of a laurel. The brook (Jordan?) is, however,
   here much more important; and the water painting is exceedingly fine.
   Of all painters that I know, in old times, Tintoret is the fondest of
   running water; there was a sort of sympathy between it and his own
   impetuous spirit. The rest of the landscape is not of much interest,
   except so far as it is pleasant to see trunks of trees drawn by single
   strokes of the brush.

   7. _The Circumcision of Christ._ The custode has some story about this
   picture having been painted in imitation of Paul Veronese. I much
   doubt if Tintoret ever imitated any body; but this picture is the
   expression of his perception of what Veronese delighted in, the
   nobility that there may be in mere golden tissue and colored drapery.
   It is, in fact, a picture of the moral power of gold and color; and
   the chief use of the attendant priest is to support upon his shoulders
   the crimson robe, with its square tablets of black and gold; and yet
   nothing is withdrawn from the interest or dignity of the scene.
   Tintoret has taken immense pains with the head of the high-priest. I
   know not any existing old man's head so exquisitely tender, or so
   noble in its lines. He receives the Infant Christ in his arms
   kneeling, and looking down upon the Child with infinite veneration and
   love; and the flashing of golden rays from its head is made the centre
   of light, and all interest. The whole picture is like a golden charger
   to receive the Child; the priest's dress is held up behind him, that
   it may occupy larger space; the tables and floor are covered with
   chequer-work; the shadows of the temple are filled with brazen lamps;
   and above all are hung masses of curtains, whose crimson folds are
   strewn over with golden flakes. Next to the "Adoration of the Magi"
   this picture is the most laboriously finished of the Scuola di San
   Rocco, and it is unquestionably the highest existing type of the
   sublimity which may be thrown into the treatment of accessaries of
   dress and decoration.

   8. _Assumption of the Virgin._ On the tablet or panel of stone which
   forms the side of the tomb out of which the Madonna rises, is this
   inscription, in large letters, REST. ANTONIUS FLORIAN, 1834. Exactly
   in proportion to a man's idiocy, is always the size of the letters in
   which he writes his name on the picture that he spoils. The old
   mosaicists in St. Mark's have not, in a single instance, as far as I
   know, signed their names; but the spectator who wishes to know who
   destroyed the effect of the nave, may see his name inscribed, twice
   over, in letters half a foot high, BARTOLOMEO BOZZA. I have never seen
   Tintoret's name signed, except in the great "Crucifixion;" but this
   Antony Florian, I have no doubt, repainted the whole side of the tomb
   that he might put his name on it. The picture is, of course, ruined
   wherever he touched it; that is to say, half over; the circle of
   cherubs in the sky is still pure; and the design of the great painter
   is palpable enough yet in the grand flight of the horizontal angel, on
   whom the Madonna half leans as she ascends. It has been a noble
   picture, and is a grievous loss; but, happily, there are so many pure
   ones, that we need not spend time in gleaning treasures out of the
   ruins of this.

   9. _Visitation._ A small picture, painted in his very best manner;
   exquisite in its simplicity, unrivalled in vigor, well preserved, and,
   as a piece of painting, certainly one of the most precious in Venice.
   Of course it does not show any of his high inventive powers; nor can a
   picture of four middle-sized figures be made a proper subject of
   comparison with large canvases containing forty or fifty; but it is,
   for this very reason, painted with such perfect ease, and yet with no
   slackness either of affection or power, that there is no picture that
   I covet so much. It is, besides, altogether free from the Renaissance
   taint of dramatic effect. The gestures are as simple and natural as
   Giotto's, only expressed by grander lines, such as none but Tintoret
   ever reached. The draperies are dark, relieved against a light sky,
   the horizon being excessively low, and the outlines of the drapery so
   severe, that the intervals between the figures look like ravines
   between great rocks, and have all the sublimity of an Alpine valley at
   twilight. This precious picture is hung about thirty feet above the
   eye, but by looking at it in a strong light, it is discoverable that
   the Saint Elizabeth is dressed in green and crimson, the Virgin in the
   peculiar red which all great colorists delight in--a sort of glowing
   brick-color or brownish scarlet, opposed to rich golden brownish
   black; and both have white kerchiefs, or drapery, thrown over their
   shoulders. Zacharias leans on his staff behind them in a black dress
   with white sleeves. The stroke of brilliant white light, which
   outlines the knee of Saint Elizabeth, is a curious instance of the
   habit of the painter to relieve his dark forms by a sort of halo of
   more vivid light, which, until lately, one would have been apt to
   suppose a somewhat artificial and unjustifiable means of effect. The
   daguerreotype has shown, what the naked eye never could, that the
   instinct of the great painter was true, and that there is actually
   such a sudden and sharp line of light round the edges of dark objects
   relieved by luminous space.

   Opposite this picture is a most precious Titian, the "Annunciation,"
   full of grace and beauty. I think the Madonna one of the sweetest
   figures he ever painted. But if the traveller has entered at all into
   the spirit of Tintoret, he will immediately feel the comparative
   feebleness and conventionality of the Titian. Note especially the mean
   and petty folds of the angel's drapery, and compare them with the
   draperies of the opposite picture. The larger pictures at the sides of
   the stairs by Zanchi and Negri, are utterly worthless.

   [Illustration: Second Group. On the walls of the upper room.

      10. Adoration of Shepherds.     17. Resurrection of Lazarus.
      11. Baptism.                    18. Ascension.
      12. Resurrection.               19. Pool of Bethesda.
      13. Agony in Garden.            20. Temptation.
      14. Last Supper.                21. St. Rocco.
      15. Altar Piece: St. Rocco.     22. St. Sebastian.
      16. Miracle of Loaves.]

   10. _The Adoration of the Shepherds._ This picture commences the
   series of the upper room, which, as already noticed, is painted with
   far less care than that of the lower. It is one of the painter's
   inconceivable caprices that the only canvases that are in good light
   should be covered in this hasty manner, while those in the dungeon
   below, and on the ceiling above, are all highly labored. It is,
   however, just possible that the covering of these walls may have been
   an after-thought, when he had got tired of his work. They are also,
   for the most part, illustrative of a principle of which I am more and
   more convinced every day, that historical and figure pieces ought not
   to be made vehicles for effects of light. The light which is fit for a
   historical picture is that tempered semi-sunshine of which, in
   general, the works of Titian are the best examples, and of which the
   picture we have just passed, "The Visitation," is a perfect example
   from the hand of one greater than Titian; so also the three
   "Crucifixions" of San Rocco, San Cassano, and St. John and Paul; the
   "Adoration of the Magi" here; and, in general, the finest works of
   the master; but Tintoret was not a man to work in any formal or
   systematic manner; and, exactly like Turner, we find him recording
   every effect which Nature herself displays. Still he seems to regard
   the pictures which deviate from the great general principle of
   colorists rather as "tours de force" than as sources of pleasure; and
   I do not think there is any instance of his having worked out one of
   these tricky pictures with thorough affection, except only in the case
   of the "Marriage of Cana." By tricky pictures, I mean those which
   display light entering in different directions, and attract the eye to
   the effects rather than to the figure which displays them. Of this
   treatment, we have already had a marvellous instance in the
   candle-light picture of the "Last Supper" in San Giorgio Maggiore.
   This "Adoration of the Shepherds" has probably been nearly as
   wonderful when first painted: the Madonna is seated on a kind of
   hammock floor made of rope netting, covered with straw; it divides the
   picture into two stories, of which the uppermost contains the Virgin,
   with two women who are adoring Christ, and shows light entering from
   above through the loose timbers of the roof of the stable, as well as
   through the bars of a square window; the lower division shows this
   light falling behind the netting upon the stable floor, occupied by a
   cock and a cow, and against this light are relieved the figures of the
   shepherds, for the most part in demi-tint, but with flakes of more
   vigorous sunshine falling here and there upon them from above. The
   optical illusion has originally been as perfect as one of Hunt's best
   interiors; but it is most curious that no part of the work seems to
   have been taken any pleasure in by the painter; it is all by his hand,
   but it looks as if he had been bent only on getting over the ground.
   It is literally a piece of scene-painting, and is exactly what we
   might fancy Tintoret to have done, had he been forced to paint scenes
   at a small theatre at a shilling a day. I cannot think that the whole
   canvas, though fourteen feet high and ten wide, or thereabouts, could
   have taken him more than a couple of days to finish: and it is very
   noticeable that exactly in proportion to the brilliant effects of
   light is the coarseness of the execution, for the figures of the
   Madonna and of the women above, which are not in any strong effect,
   are painted with some care, while the shepherds and the cow are alike
   slovenly; and the latter, which is in full sunshine, is recognizable
   for a cow more by its size and that of its horns, than by any care
   given to its form. It is interesting to contrast this slovenly and
   mean sketch with the ass's head in the "Flight into Egypt," on which
   the painter exerted his full power; as an effect of light, however,
   the work is, of course, most interesting. One point in the treatment
   is especially noticeable: there is a peacock in the rack beyond the
   cow; and under other circumstances, one cannot doubt that Tintoret
   would have liked a peacock in full color, and would have painted it
   green and blue with great satisfaction. It is sacrificed to the light,
   however, and is painted in warm grey, with a dim eye or two in the
   tail: this process is exactly analogous to Turner's taking the colors
   out of the flags of his ships in the "Gosport." Another striking point
   is the litter with which the whole picture is filled in order more to
   confuse the eye: there is straw sticking from the roof, straw all over
   the hammock floor, and straw struggling hither and thither all over
   the floor itself; and, to add to the confusion, the glory around the
   head of the infant, instead of being united and serene, is broken into
   little bits, and is like a glory of chopped straw. But the most
   curious thing, after all, is the want of delight in any of the
   principal figures, and the comparative meanness and commonplaceness of
   even the folds of the drapery. It seems as if Tintoret had determined
   to make the shepherds as uninteresting as possible; but one does not
   see why their very clothes should be ill painted, and their
   disposition unpicturesque. I believe, however, though it never struck
   me until I had examined this picture, that this is one of the
   painter's fixed principles: he does not, with German sentimentality,
   make shepherds and peasants graceful or sublime, but he purposely
   vulgarizes them, not by making their actions or their faces boorish or
   disagreeable, but rather by painting them ill, and composing their
   draperies tamely. As far as I recollect at present, the principle is
   universal with him; exactly in proportion to the dignity of character
   is the beauty of the painting. He will not put out his strength upon
   any man belonging to the lower classes; and, in order to know what the
   painter is, one must see him at work on a king, a senator, or a
   saint. The curious connexion of this with the aristocratic tendencies
   of the Venetian nation, when we remember that Tintoret was the
   greatest man whom that nation produced, may become very interesting,
   if followed out. I forgot to note that, though the peacock is painted
   with great regardlessness of color, there is a feature in it which no
   common painter would have observed,--the peculiar flatness of the
   back, and undulation of the shoulders: the bird's body is all there,
   though its feathers are a good deal neglected; and the same thing is
   noticeable in a cock who is pecking among the straw near the
   spectator, though in other respects a shabby cock enough. The fact is,
   I believe, he had made his shepherds so commonplace that he dare not
   paint his animals well, otherwise one would have looked at nothing in
   the picture but the peacock, cock, and cow. I cannot tell what the
   shepherds are offering; they look like milk bowls, but they are
   awkwardly held up, with such twistings of body as would have certainly
   spilt the milk. A woman in front has a basket of eggs; but this I
   imagine to be merely to keep up the rustic character of the scene, and
   not part of the shepherd's offerings.

   11. _Baptism._ There is more of the true picture quality in this work
   than in the former one, but still very little appearance of enjoyment
   or care. The color is for the most part grey and uninteresting, and
   the figures are thin and meagre in form, and slightly painted; so much
   so, that of the nineteen figures in the distance, about a dozen are
   hardly worth calling figures, and the rest are so sketched and
   flourished in that one can hardly tell which is which. There is one
   point about it very interesting to a landscape painter: the river is
   seen far into the distance, with a piece of copse bordering it; the
   sky beyond is dark, but the water nevertheless receives a brilliant
   reflection from some unseen rent in the clouds, so brilliant, that
   when I was first at Venice, not being accustomed to Tintoret's slight
   execution, or to see pictures so much injured, I took this piece of
   water for a piece of sky. The effect as Tintoret has arranged it, is
   indeed somewhat unnatural, but it is valuable as showing his
   recognition of a principle unknown to half the historical painters of
   the present day,--that the reflection seen in the water is totally
   different from the object seen above it, and that it is very possible
   to have a bright light in reflection where there appears nothing but
   darkness to be reflected. The clouds in the sky itself are round,
   heavy, and lightless, and in a great degree spoil what would otherwise
   be a fine landscape distance. Behind the rocks on the right, a single
   head is seen, with a collar on the shoulders: it seems to be intended
   for a portrait of some person connected with the picture.

   12. _Resurrection._ Another of the "effect of light" pictures, and not
   a very striking one, the best part of it being the two distant figures
   of the Maries seen in the dawn of the morning. The conception of the
   Resurrection itself is characteristic of the worst points of Tintoret.
   His impetuosity is here in the wrong place; Christ bursts out of the
   rock like a thunderbolt, and the angels themselves seem likely to be
   crushed under the rent stones of the tomb. Had the figure of Christ
   been sublime, this conception might have been accepted; but, on the
   contrary, it is weak, mean, and painful; and the whole picture is
   languidly or roughly painted, except only the fig-tree at the top of
   the rock, which, by a curious caprice, is not only drawn in the
   painter's best manner, but has golden ribs to all its leaves, making
   it look like one of the beautiful crossed or chequered patterns, of
   which he is so fond in his dresses; the leaves themselves being a dark
   olive brown.

   13. _The Agony in the Garden._ I cannot at present understand the
   order of these subjects; but they may have been misplaced. This, of
   all the San Rocco pictures, is the most hastily painted, but it is
   not, like those we have been passing, _clodly_ painted; it seems to
   have been executed altogether with a hearth-broom, and in a few hours.
   It is another of the "effects," and a very curious one; the Angel who
   bears the cup to Christ is surrounded by a red halo; yet the light
   which falls upon the shoulders of the sleeping disciples, and upon the
   leaves of the olive-trees, is cool and silvery, while the troop coming
   up to seize Christ are seen by torch-light. Judas, who is the second
   figure, points to Christ, but turns his head away as he does so, as
   unable to look at him. This is a noble touch; the foliage is also
   exceedingly fine, though what kind of olive-tree bears such leaves I
   know not, each of them being about the size of a man's hand. If there
   be any which bear such foliage, their olives must be the size of
   cocoa-nuts. This, however, is true only of the underwood, which is,
   perhaps, not meant for olive. There are some taller trees at the top
   of the picture, whose leaves are of a more natural size. On closely
   examining the figures of the troops on the left, I find that the
   distant ones are concealed, all but the limbs, by a sort of arch of
   dark color, which is now so injured, that I cannot tell whether it was
   foliage or ground: I suppose it to have been a mass of close foliage,
   through which the troop is breaking its way; Judas rather showing them
   the path, than actually pointing to Christ, as it is written, "Judas,
   who betrayed him, knew the place." St. Peter, as the most zealous of
   the three disciples, the only one who was to endeavor to defend his
   Master, is represented as awakening and turning his head toward the
   troop, while James and John are buried in profound slumber, laid in
   magnificent languor among the leaves. The picture is singularly
   impressive, when seen far enough off, as an image of thick forest
   gloom amidst the rich and tender foliage of the South; the leaves,
   however, tossing as in disturbed night air, and the flickering of the
   torches, and of the branches, contrasted with the steady flame which
   from the Angel's presence is spread over the robes of the disciples.
   The strangest feature in the whole is that the Christ also is
   represented as sleeping. The angel seems to appear to him in a dream.

   14. _The Last Supper._ A most unsatisfactory picture; I think about
   the worst I know of Tintoret's, where there is no appearance of
   retouching. He always makes the disciples in this scene too vulgar;
   they are here not only vulgar, but diminutive, and Christ is at the
   end of the table, the smallest figure of them all. The principal
   figures are two mendicants sitting on steps in front; a kind of
   supporters, but I suppose intended to be waiting for the fragments; a
   dog, in still more earnest expectation, is watching the movements of
   the disciples, who are talking together, Judas having just gone out.
   Christ is represented as giving what one at first supposes is the sop
   to Judas, but as the disciple who received it has a glory, and there
   are only eleven at table, it is evidently the Sacramental bread. The
   room in which they are assembled is a sort of large kitchen, and the
   host is seen employed at a dresser in the background. This picture has
   not only been originally poor, but is one of those exposed all day to
   the sun, and is dried into mere dusty canvas: where there was once
   blue, there is now nothing.

   15. _Saint Rocco in Glory._ One of the worst order of Tintorets, with
   apparent smoothness and finish, yet languidly painted, as if in
   illness or fatigue; very dark and heavy in tone also; its figures, for
   the most part, of an awkward middle size, about five feet high, and
   very uninteresting. St. Rocco ascends to heaven, looking down upon a
   crowd of poor and sick persons who are blessing and adoring him. One
   of these, kneeling at the bottom, is very nearly a repetition, though
   a careless and indolent one, of that of St. Stephen, in St. Giorgio
   Maggiore, and of the central figure in the "Paradise" of the Ducal
   Palace. It is a kind of lay figure, of which he seems to have been
   fond; its clasped hands are here shockingly painted--I should think
   unfinished. It forms the only important light at the bottom, relieved
   on a dark ground; at the top of the picture, the figure of St. Rocco
   is seen in shadow against the light of the sky, and all the rest is in
   confused shadow. The commonplaceness of this composition is curiously
   connected with the languor of thought and touch throughout the work.

   16. _Miracle of the Loaves._ Hardly anything but a fine piece of
   landscape is here left; it is more exposed to the sun than any other
   picture in the room, and its draperies having been, in great part,
   painted in blue, are now mere patches of the color of starch; the
   scene is also very imperfectly conceived. The twenty-one figures,
   including Christ and his Disciples, very ill represent a crowd of
   seven thousand; still less is the marvel of the miracle expressed by
   perfect ease and rest of the reclining figures in the foreground, who
   do not so much as look surprised; considered merely as reclining
   figures, and as pieces of effect in half light, they have once been
   fine. The landscape, which represents the slope of a woody hill, has a
   very grand and far-away look. Behind it is a great space of streaky
   sky, almost prismatic in color, rosy and golden clouds covering up its
   blue, and some fine vigorous trees thrown against it; painted in about
   ten minutes each, however, by curly touches of the brush, and looking
   rather more like seaweed than foliage.

   17. _Resurrection of Lazarus._ Very strangely, and not impressively
   conceived. Christ is half reclining, half sitting, at the bottom of
   the picture, while Lazarus is disencumbered of his grave-clothes at
   the top of it; the scene being the side of a rocky hill, and the mouth
   of the tomb probably once visible in the shadow on the left; but all
   that is now discernible is a man having his limbs unbound, as if
   Christ were merely ordering a prisoner to be loosed. There appears
   neither awe nor agitation, nor even much astonishment, in any of the
   figures of the group; but the picture is more vigorous than any of the
   three last mentioned, and the upper part of it is quite worthy of the
   master, especially its noble fig-tree and laurel, which he has
   painted, in one of his usual fits of caprice, as carefully as that in
   the "Resurrection of Christ," opposite. Perhaps he has some meaning in
   this; he may have been thinking of the verse, "Behold the fig-tree,
   and all the trees; when they now shoot forth," &c. In the present
   instance, the leaves are dark only, and have no golden veins. The
   uppermost figures also come dark against the sky, and would form a
   precipitous mass, like a piece of the rock itself, but that they are
   broken in upon by one of the limbs of Lazarus, bandaged and in full
   light, which, to my feeling, sadly injures the picture, both as a
   disagreeable object, and a light in the wrong place. The grass and
   weeds are, throughout, carefully painted, but the lower figures are of
   little interest, and the face of the Christ a grievous failure.

   18. _The Ascension._ I have always admired this picture, though it is
   very slight and thin in execution, and cold in color; but it is
   remarkable for its thorough effect of open air, and for the sense of
   motion and clashing in the wings of the Angels which sustain the
   Christ: they owe this effect a good deal to the manner in which they
   are set, edge on; all seem like sword-blades cutting the air. It is
   the most curious in conception of all the pictures in the Scuola, for
   it represents, beneath the Ascension, a kind of epitome of what took
   place before the Ascension. In the distance are two Apostles walking,
   meant, I suppose, for the two going to Emmaus; nearer are a group
   round a table, to remind us of Christ appearing to them as they sat at
   meat; and in the foreground is a single reclining figure of, I
   suppose, St. Peter, because we are told that "he was seen of Cephas,
   then of the twelve:" but this interpretation is doubtful; for why
   should not the vision by the Lake of Tiberias be expressed also? And
   the strange thing of all is the scene, for Christ ascended from the
   Mount of Olives; but the Disciples are walking, and the table is set,
   in a little marshy and grassy valley, like some of the bits near
   Maison Neuve on the Jura, with a brook running through it, so
   capitally expressed, that I believe it is this which makes me so fond
   of the picture. The reflections are as scientific in the diminution,
   in the image, of large masses of bank above, as any of Turner's, and
   the marshy and reedy ground looks as if one would sink into it; but
   what all this has to do with the Ascension I cannot see. The figure of
   Christ is not undignified, but by no means either interesting or
   sublime.

   19. _Pool of Bethesda._ I have no doubt the principal figures have
   been repainted; but as the colors are faded, and the subject
   disgusting, I have not paid this picture sufficient attention to say
   how far the injury extends; nor need any one spend time upon it,
   unless after having first examined all the other Tintorets in Venice.
   All the great Italian painters appear insensible to the feeling of
   disgust at disease; but this study of the population of an hospital is
   without any points of contrast, and I wish Tintoret had not
   condescended to paint it. This and the six preceding paintings have
   all been uninteresting,--I believe chiefly owing to the observance in
   them of Sir Joshua's rule for the heroic, "that drapery is to be mere
   drapery, and not silk, nor satin, nor brocade." However wise such a
   rule may be when applied to works of the purest religious art, it is
   anything but wise as respects works of color. Tintoret is never quite
   himself unless he has fur or velvet, or rich stuff of one sort or the
   other, or jewels, or armor, or something that he can put play of color
   into, among his figures, and not dead folds of linsey-woolsey; and I
   believe that even the best pictures of Raffaelle and Angelico are not
   a little helped by their hems of robes, jewelled crowns, priests'
   copes, and so on; and the pictures that have nothing of this kind in
   them, as for instance the "Transfiguration," are to my mind not a
   little dull.

   20. _Temptation._ This picture singularly illustrates what has just
   been observed; it owes great part of its effect to the lustre of the
   jewels in the armlet of the evil angel, and to the beautiful colors of
   his wings. These are slight accessaries apparently, but they enhance
   the value of all the rest, and they have evidently been enjoyed by the
   painter. The armlet is seen by reflected light, its stones shining by
   inward lustre; this occult fire being the only hint given of the real
   character of the Tempter, who is otherways represented in the form of
   a beautiful angel, though the face is sensual: we can hardly tell how
   far it was intended to be therefore expressive of evil; for Tintoret's
   good angels have not always the purest features; but there is a
   peculiar subtlety in this telling of the story by so slight a
   circumstance as the glare of the jewels in the darkness. It is curious
   to compare this imagination with that of the mosaics in St. Mark's, in
   which Satan is a black monster, with horns, and head, and tail,
   complete. The whole of the picture is powerfully and carefully
   painted, though very broadly; it is a strong effect of light, and
   therefore, as usual, subdued in color. The painting of the stones in
   the foreground I have always thought, and still think, the best piece
   of rock drawing before Turner, and the most amazing instance of
   Tintoret's perceptiveness afforded by any of his pictures.

   21. _St. Rocco._ Three figures occupy the spandrils of the window
   above this and the following picture, painted merely in light and
   shade, two larger than life, one rather smaller. I believe these to be
   by Tintoret; but as they are quite in the dark, so that the execution
   cannot be seen, and very good designs of the kind have been furnished
   by other masters, I cannot answer for them. The figure of St. Rocco,
   as well as its companion, St. Sebastian, is colored; they occupy the
   narrow intervals between the windows, and are of course invisible
   under ordinary circumstances. By a great deal of straining of the
   eyes, and sheltering them with the hand from the light, some little
   idea of the design may be obtained. The "St. Rocco" is a fine figure,
   though rather coarse, but, at all events, worth as much light as would
   enable us to see it.

   22. _St. Sebastian._ This, the companion figure, is one of the finest
   things in the whole room, and assuredly the most majestic Saint
   Sebastian in existence; as far as mere humanity can be majestic, for
   there is no effort at any expression of angelic or saintly
   resignation; the effort is simply to realize the fact of the
   martyrdom, and it seems to me that this is done to an extent not even
   attempted by any other painter. I never saw a man die a violent death,
   and therefore cannot say whether this figure be true or not, but it
   gives the grandest and most intense impression of truth. The figure is
   dead, and well it may be, for there is one arrow through the forehead
   and another through the heart; but the eyes are open, though glazed,
   and the body is rigid in the position in which it last stood, the left
   arm raised and the left limb advanced, something in the attitude of a
   soldier sustaining an attack under his shield, while the dead eyes are
   still turned in the direction from which the arrows came: but the most
   characteristic feature is the way these arrows are fixed. In the
   common martyrdoms of St. Sebastian they are stuck into him here and
   there like pins, as if they had been shot from a great distance and
   had come faltering down, entering the flesh but a little way, and
   rather bleeding the saint to death than mortally wounding him; but
   Tintoret had no such ideas about archery. He must have seen bows drawn
   in battle, like that of Jehu when he smote Jehoram between the
   harness: all the arrows in the saint's body lie straight in the same
   direction, broad-feathered and strong-shafted, and sent apparently
   with the force of thunderbolts; every one of them has gone through him
   like a lance, two through the limbs, one through the arm, one through
   the heart, and the last has crashed through the forehead, nailing the
   head to the tree behind as if it had been dashed in by a
   sledge-hammer. The face, in spite of its ghastliness, is beautiful,
   and has been serene; and the light which enters first and glistens on
   the plumes of the arrows, dies softly away upon the curling hair, and
   mixes with the glory upon the forehead. There is not a more remarkable
   picture in Venice, and yet I do not suppose that one in a thousand of
   the travellers who pass through the Scuola so much as perceives there
   is a picture in the place which it occupies.

   [Illustration: Third Group. On the roof of the upper room.

      23. Moses striking the Rock.       29. Elijah.
      24. Plague of Serpents.            30. Jonah.
      25. Fall of Manna.                 31. Joshua.
      26. Jacob's Dream.                 32. Sacrifice of Isaac.
      27. Ezekiel's Vision.              33. Elijah at the Brook.
      28. Fall of Man.                   34. Paschal Feast.
                 35. Elisha feeding the People.]

   23. _Moses striking the Rock._ We now come to the series of pictures
   upon which the painter concentrated the strength he had reserved for
   the upper room; and in some sort wisely, for, though it is not
   pleasant to examine pictures on a ceiling, they are at least
   distinctly visible without straining the eyes against the light. They
   are carefully conceived and thoroughly well painted in proportion to
   their distance from the eye. This carefulness of thought is apparent
   at a glance: the "Moses striking the Rock" embraces the whole of the
   seventeenth chapter of Exodus, and even something more, for it is not
   from that chapter, but from parallel passages that we gather the facts
   of the impatience of Moses and the wrath of God at the waters of
   Meribah; both which facts are shown by the leaping of the stream out
   of the rock half-a-dozen ways at once, forming a great arch over the
   head of Moses, and by the partial veiling of the countenance of the
   Supreme Being. This latter is the most painful part of the whole
   picture, at least as it is seen from below; and I believe that in some
   repairs of the roof this head must have been destroyed and repainted.
   It is one of Tintoret's usual fine thoughts that the lower part of the
   figure is veiled, not merely by clouds, but in a kind of watery
   sphere, showing the Deity coming to the Israelites at that particular
   moment as the Lord of the Rivers and of the Fountain of the Waters.
   The whole figure, as well as that of Moses and the greater number of
   those in the foreground, is at once dark and warm, black and red being
   the prevailing colors, while the distance is bright gold touched with
   blue, and seems to open into the picture like a break of blue sky
   after rain. How exquisite is this expression, by mere color, of the
   main force of the fact represented! that is to say, joy and
   refreshment after sorrow and scorching heat. But, when we examine of
   what this distance consists, we shall find still more cause for
   admiration. The blue in it is not the blue of sky, it is obtained by
   blue stripes upon white tents glowing in the sunshine; and in front of
   these tents is seen that great battle with Amalek of which the account
   is given in the remainder of the chapter, and for which the Israelites
   received strength in the streams which ran out of the rock in Horeb.
   Considered merely as a picture, the opposition of cool light to warm
   shadow is one of the most remarkable pieces of color in the Scuola,
   and the great mass of foliage which waves over the rocks on the left
   appears to have been elaborated with his highest power and his most
   sublime invention. But this noble passage is much injured, and now
   hardly visible.

   24. _Plague of Serpents._ The figures in the distance are remarkably
   important in this picture, Moses himself being among them; in fact,
   the whole scene is filled chiefly with middle-sized figures, in order
   to increase the impression of space. It is interesting to observe the
   difference in the treatment of this subject by the three great
   painters, Michael Angelo, Rubens, and Tintoret. The first two, equal
   to the latter in energy, had less love of liberty: they were fond of
   binding their compositions into knots, Tintoret of scattering his far
   and wide: they all alike preserve the unity of composition, but the
   unity in the first two is obtained by binding, and that of the last by
   springing from one source; and, together with this feeling, comes his
   love of space, which makes him less regard the rounding and form of
   objects themselves, than their relations of light and shade and
   distance. Therefore Rubens and Michael Angelo made the fiery serpents
   huge boa constrictors, and knotted the sufferers together with them.
   Tintoret does not like to be so bound; so he makes the serpents little
   flying and fluttering monsters like lampreys with wings; and the
   children of Israel, instead of being thrown into convulsed and
   writhing groups, are scattered, fainting in the fields, far away in
   the distance. As usual, Tintoret's conception, while thoroughly
   characteristic of himself, is also truer to the words of Scripture. We
   are told that "the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they
   _bit_ the people;" we are not told that they crushed the people to
   death. And while thus the truest, it is also the most terrific
   conception. M. Angelo's would be terrific if one could believe in it:
   but our instinct tells us that boa constrictors do not come in armies;
   and we look upon the picture with as little emotion as upon the handle
   of a vase, or any other form worked out of serpents, where there is no
   probability of serpents actually occurring. But there is a probability
   in Tintoret's conception. We feel that it is not impossible that there
   should come up a swarm of these small winged reptiles: and their
   horror is not diminished by their smallness: not that they have any of
   the grotesque terribleness of German invention; they might have been
   made infinitely uglier with small pains, but it is their
   _veritableness_ which makes them awful. They have triangular heads
   with sharp beaks or muzzle; and short, rather thick bodies, with bony
   processes down the back like those of sturgeons; and small wings
   spotted with orange and black; and round glaring eyes, not very large,
   but very ghastly, with an intense delight in biting expressed in them.
   (It is observable, that the Venetian painter has got his main idea of
   them from the sea-horses and small reptiles of the Lagoons.) These
   monsters are fluttering and writhing about everywhere, fixing on
   whatever they come near with their sharp venomous heads; and they are
   coiling about on the ground, and all the shadows and thickets are full
   of them, so that there is no escape anywhere: and, in order to give
   the idea of greater extent to the plague, Tintoret has not been
   content with one horizon; I have before mentioned the excessive
   strangeness of this composition, in having a cavern open in the right
   of the foreground, through which is seen another sky and another
   horizon. At the top of the picture, the Divine Being is seen borne by
   angels, apparently passing over the congregation in wrath, involved in
   masses of dark clouds; while, behind, an Angel of mercy is descending
   toward Moses, surrounded by a globe of white light. This globe is
   hardly seen from below; it is not a common glory, but a transparent
   sphere, like a bubble, which not only envelopes the angel, but crosses
   the figure of Moses, throwing the upper part of it into a subdued pale
   color, as if it were crossed by a sunbeam. Tintoret is the only
   painter who plays these tricks with transparent light, the only man
   who seems to have perceived the effects of sunbeams, mists, and
   clouds, in the far away atmosphere; and to have used what he saw on
   towers, clouds, or mountains, to enhance the sublimity of his figures.
   The whole upper part of this picture is magnificent, less with respect
   to individual figures, than for the drift of its clouds, and
   originality and complication of its light and shade; it is something
   like Raffaelle's "Vision of Ezekiel," but far finer. It is difficult
   to understand how any painter, who could represent floating clouds so
   nobly as he has done here, could ever paint the odd, round, pillowy
   masses which so often occur in his more carelessly designed sacred
   subjects. The lower figures are not so interesting, and the whole is
   painted with a view to effect from below, and gains little by close
   examination.

   25. _Fall of Manna._ In none of these three large compositions has the
   painter made the slightest effort at expression in the human
   countenance; everything is done by gesture, and the faces of the
   people who are drinking from the rock, dying from the serpent-bites,
   and eating the manna, are all alike as calm as if nothing was
   happening; in addition to this, as they are painted for distant
   effect, the heads are unsatisfactory and coarse when seen near, and
   perhaps in this last picture the more so, and yet the story is
   exquisitely told. We have seen in the Church of San Giorgio Maggiore
   another example of his treatment of it, where, however, the gathering
   of manna is a subordinate employment, but here it is principal. Now,
   observe, we are told of the manna, that it was found in the morning;
   that then there lay round about the camp a small round thing like the
   hoar-frost, and that "when the sun waxed hot it melted." Tintoret has
   endeavored, therefore, first of all, to give the idea of coolness; the
   congregation are reposing in a soft green meadow, surrounded by blue
   hills, and there are rich trees above them, to the branches of one of
   which is attached a great grey drapery to catch the manna as it comes
   down. In any other picture such a mass of drapery would assuredly have
   had some vivid color, but here it is grey; the fields are cool frosty
   green, the mountains cold blue, and, to complete the expression and
   meaning of all this, there is a most important point to be noted in
   the form of the Deity, seen above, through an opening in the clouds.
   There are at least ten or twelve other pictures in which the form of
   the Supreme Being occurs, to be found in the Scuola di San Rocco
   alone; and in every one of these instances it is richly colored, the
   garments being generally red and blue, but in this picture of the
   manna the figure is _snow white_. Thus the painter endeavors to show
   the Deity as the giver of bread, just as in the "Striking of the Rock"
   we saw that he represented Him as the Lord of the rivers, the
   fountains, and the waters. There is one other very sweet incident at
   the bottom of the picture; four or five sheep, instead of pasturing,
   turn their heads aside to catch the manna as it comes down, or seem to
   be licking it off each other's fleeces. The tree above, to which the
   drapery is tied, is the most delicate and delightful piece of leafage
   in all the Scuola; it has a large sharp leaf, something like that of a
   willow, but five times the size.

   26. _Jacob's Dream._ A picture which has good effect from below, but
   gains little when seen near. It is an embarrassing one for any
   painter, because angels always look awkward going up and down stairs;
   one does not see the use of their wings. Tintoret has thrown them into
   buoyant and various attitudes, but has evidently not treated the
   subject with delight; and it is seen to all the more disadvantage
   because just above the painting of the "Ascension," in which the full
   fresh power of the painter is developed. One would think this latter
   picture had been done just after a walk among hills, for it is full of
   the most delicate effects of transparent cloud, more or less veiling
   the faces and forms of the angels, and covering with white light the
   silvery sprays of the palms, while the clouds in the "Jacob's Dream"
   are the ordinary rotundities of the studio.

   27. _Ezekiel's Vision._ I suspect this has been repainted, it is so
   heavy and dead in color; a fault, however, observable in many of the
   small pictures on the ceiling, and perhaps the natural result of the
   fatigue of such a mind as Tintoret's. A painter who threw such intense
   energy into some of his works can hardly but have been languid in
   others in a degree never experienced by the more tranquil minds of
   less powerful workmen; and when this languor overtook him whilst he
   was at work on pictures where a certain space had to be covered by
   mere force of arm, this heaviness of color could hardly but have been
   the consequence: it shows itself chiefly in reds and other hot hues,
   many of the pictures in the Ducal Palace also displaying it in a
   painful degree. This "Ezekiel's Vision" is, however, in some measure
   worthy of the master, in the wild and horrible energy with which the
   skeletons are leaping up about the prophet; but it might have been
   less horrible and more sublime, no attempt being made to represent the
   space of the Valley of Dry Bones, and the whole canvas being occupied
   only by eight figures, of which five are half skeletons. It it is
   strange that, in such a subject, the prevailing hues should be red and
   brown.

   28. _Fall of Man._ The two canvases last named are the most
   considerable in size upon the roof, after the centre pieces. We now
   come to the smaller subjects which surround the "Striking the Rock;"
   of these this "Fall of Man" is the best, and I should think it very
   fine anywhere but in the Scuola di San Rocco; there is a grand light
   on the body of Eve, and the vegetation is remarkably rich, but the
   faces are coarse, and the composition uninteresting. I could not get
   near enough to see what the grey object is upon which Eve appears to
   be sitting, nor could I see any serpent. It is made prominent in the
   picture of the Academy of this same subject, so that I suppose it is
   hidden in the darkness, together with much detail which it would be
   necessary to discover in order to judge the work justly.

   29. _Elijah (?)._ A prophet holding down his face, which is covered
   with his hand. God is talking with him, apparently in rebuke. The
   clothes on his breast are rent, and the action of the figures might
   suggest the idea of the scene between the Deity and Elijah at Horeb:
   but there is no suggestion of the past magnificent scenery,--of the
   wind, the earthquake, or the fire; so that the conjecture is good for
   very little. The painting is of small interest; the faces are vulgar,
   and the draperies have too much vapid historical dignity to be
   delightful.

   30. _Jonah._ The whale here occupies fully one-half of the canvas;
   being correspondent in value with a landscape background. His mouth is
   as large as a cavern, and yet, unless the mass of red color in the
   foreground be a piece of drapery, his tongue is too large for it. He
   seems to have lifted Jonah out upon it, and not yet drawn it back, so
   that it forms a kind of crimson cushion for him to kneel upon in his
   submission to the Deity. The head to which this vast tongue belongs is
   sketched in somewhat loosely, and there is little remarkable about it
   except its size, nor much in the figures, though the submissiveness of
   Jonah is well given. The great thought of Michael Angelo renders one
   little charitable to any less imaginative treatment of this subject.

   31. _Joshua (?)._ This is a most interesting picture, and it is a
   shame that its subject is not made out, for it is not a common one.
   The figure has a sword in its hand, and looks up to a sky full of
   fire, out of which the form of the Deity is stooping, represented as
   white and colorless. On the other side of the picture there is seen
   among the clouds a pillar apparently falling, and there is a crowd at
   the feet of the principal figure, carrying spears. Unless this be
   Joshua at the fall of Jericho, I cannot tell what it means; it is
   painted with great vigor, and worthy of a better place.

   32. _Sacrifice of Isaac._ In conception, it is one of the least worthy
   of the master in the whole room, the three figures being thrown into
   violent attitudes, as inexpressive as they are strained and
   artificial. It appears to have been vigorously painted, but vulgarly;
   that is to say, the light is concentrated upon the white beard and
   upturned countenance of Abraham, as it would have been in one of the
   dramatic effects of the French school, the result being that the head
   is very bright and very conspicuous, and perhaps, in some of the late
   operations upon the roof, recently washed and touched. In consequence,
   every one who comes into the room, is first invited to observe the
   "bella testa di Abramo." The only thing characteristic of Tintoret is
   the way in which the pieces of ragged wood are tossed hither and
   thither in the pile upon which Isaac is bound, although this
   scattering of the wood is inconsistent with the Scriptural account of
   Abraham's deliberate procedure, for we are told of him that "he set
   the wood in order." But Tintoret had probably not noticed this, and
   thought the tossing of the timber into the disordered heap more like
   the act of the father in his agony.

   33. _Elijah at the Brook Cherith (?)._ I cannot tell if I have rightly
   interpreted the meaning of this picture, which merely represents a
   noble figure couched upon the ground, and an angel appearing to him;
   but I think that between the dark tree on the left, and the recumbent
   figure, there is some appearance of a running stream, at all events
   there is of a mountainous and stony place. The longer I study this
   master, the more I feel the strange likeness between him and Turner,
   in our never knowing what subject it is that will stir him to
   exertion. We have lately had him treating Jacob's Dream, Ezekiel's
   Vision, Abraham's Sacrifice, and Jonah's Prayer, (all of them subjects
   on which the greatest painters have delighted to expend their
   strength,) with coldness, carelessness, and evident absence of
   delight; and here, on a sudden, in a subject so indistinct that one
   cannot be sure of its meaning, and embracing only two figures, a man
   and an angel, forth he starts in his full strength. I believe he must
   somewhere or another, the day before, have seen a kingfisher; for this
   picture seems entirely painted for the sake of the glorious downy
   wings of the angel,--white clouded with blue, as the bird's head and
   wings are with green,--the softest and most elaborate in plumage that
   I have seen in any of his works: but observe also the general
   sublimity obtained by the mountainous lines of the drapery of the
   recumbent figure, dependent for its dignity upon these forms alone, as
   the face is more than half hidden, and what is seen of it
   expressionless.

   34. _The Paschal Feast._ I name this picture by the title given in the
   guide-books; it represents merely five persons watching the increase
   of a small fire lighted on a table or altar in the midst of them. It
   is only because they have all staves in their hands that one may
   conjecture this fire to be that kindled to consume the Paschal
   offering. The effect is of course a fire light; and, like all mere
   fire lights that I have ever seen, totally devoid of interest.

   35. _Elisha feeding the People._ I again guess at the subject: the
   picture only represents a figure casting down a number of loaves
   before a multitude; but, as Elisha has not elsewhere occurred, I
   suppose that these must be the barley loaves brought from
   Baalshalisha. In conception and manner of painting, this picture and
   the last, together with the others above-mentioned, in comparison with
   the "Elijah at Cherith," may be generally described as "dregs of
   Tintoret:" they are tired, dead, dragged out upon the canvas
   apparently in the heavy-hearted state which a man falls into when he
   is both jaded with toil and sick of the work he is employed upon. They
   are not hastily painted; on the contrary, finished with considerably
   more care than several of the works upon the walls; but those, as, for
   instance, the "Agony in the Garden," are hurried sketches with the
   man's whole heart in them, while these pictures are exhausted
   fulfilments of an appointed task. Whether they were really amongst the
   last painted, or whether the painter had fallen ill at some
   intermediate time, I cannot say; but we shall find him again in his
   utmost strength in the room which we last enter.

   [Illustration: Fourth Group. Inner room on the upper floor.

                              On the Roof.

      36 to 39. Children's Heads.          41 to 44. Children.
      40. St. Rocco in Heaven.             45 to 56. Allegorical Figures.

                             On the Walls.

      57. Figure in Niche.                 60. Ecce Homo.
      58. Figure in Niche.                 61. Christ bearing his Cross.
      59. Christ before Pilate.            62. CRUCIFIXION.]

   36 to 39. _Four Children's Heads_, which it is much to be regretted
   should be thus lost in filling small vacuities of the ceiling.

   40. _St. Rocco in Heaven._ The central picture of the roof, in the
   inner room. From the well-known anecdote respecting the production of
   this picture, whether in all its details true or not, we may at least
   gather that having been painted in competition with Paul Veronese and
   other powerful painters of the day, it was probably Tintoret's
   endeavor to make it as popular and showy as possible. It is quite
   different from his common works; bright in all its tints and tones;
   the faces carefully drawn, and of an agreeable type; the outlines
   firm, and the shadows few; the whole resembling Correggio more than
   any Venetian painter. It is, however, an example of the danger, even
   to the greatest artist, of leaving his own style; for it lacks all the
   great virtues of Tintoret, without obtaining the lusciousness of
   Correggio. One thing, at all events, is remarkable in it,--that,
   though painted while the competitors were making their sketches, it
   shows no sign of haste or inattention.

   41 to 44. _Figures of Children_, merely decorative.

   45 to 56. _Allegorical Figures on the Roof._ If these were not in the
   same room with the "Crucifixion," they would attract more public
   attention than any works in the Scuola, as there are here no black
   shadows, nor extravagances of invention, but very beautiful figures
   richly and delicately colored, a good deal resembling some of the best
   works of Andrea del Sarto. There is nothing in them, however,
   requiring detailed examination. The two figures between the windows
   are very slovenly, if they are his at all; and there are bits of
   marbling and fruit filling the cornices, which may or may not be his:
   if they are, they are tired work, and of small importance.

   59. _Christ before Pilate._ A most interesting picture, but, which is
   unusual, best seen on a dark day, when the white figure of Christ
   alone draws the eye, looking almost like a spirit; the painting of the
   rest of the picture being both somewhat thin and imperfect. There is a
   certain meagreness about all the minor figures, less grandeur and
   largeness in the limbs and draperies, and less solidity, it seems,
   even in the color, although its arrangements are richer than in many
   of the compositions above described. I hardly know whether it is owing
   to this thinness of color, or on purpose, that the horizontal clouds
   shine through the crimson flag in the distance; though I should think
   the latter, for the effect is most beautiful. The passionate action of
   the Scribe in lifting his hand to dip the pen into the ink-horn is,
   however, affected and overstrained, and the Pilate is very mean;
   perhaps intentionally, that no reverence might be withdrawn from the
   person of Christ. In work of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
   the figures of Pilate and Herod are always intentionally made
   contemptible.

   _Ecce Homo._ As usual, Tintoret's own peculiar view of the subject.
   Christ is laid fainting on the ground, with a soldier standing on one
   side of him; while Pilate, on the other, withdraws the robe from the
   scourged and wounded body, and points it out to the Jews. Both this
   and the picture last mentioned resemble Titian more than Tintoret in
   the style of their treatment.

   61. _Christ bearing his Cross._ Tintoret is here recognizable again in
   undiminished strength. He has represented the troops and attendants
   climbing Calvary by a winding path, of which two turns are seen, the
   figures on the uppermost ledge, and Christ in the centre of them,
   being relieved against the sky; but, instead of the usual simple
   expedient of the bright horizon to relieve the dark masses, there is
   here introduced, on the left, the head of a white horse, which blends
   itself with the sky in one broad mass of light. The power of the
   picture is chiefly in effect, the figure of Christ being too far off
   to be very interesting, and only the malefactors being seen on the
   nearer path; but for this very reason it seems to me more impressive,
   as if one had been truly present at the scene, though not exactly in
   the right place for seeing it.

   62. _The Crucifixion._ I must leave this picture to work its will on
   the spectator; for it is beyond all analysis, and above all praise.


    S

 SAGREDO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, II. 256. Much defaced, but full
   of interest. Its sea story is restored; its first floor has a most
   interesting arcade of the early thirteenth century third order
   windows; its upper windows are the finest fourth and fifth orders of
   early fourteenth century; the group of fourth orders in the centre
   being brought into some resemblance to the late Gothic traceries by
   the subsequent introduction of the quatrefoils above them.

 SALUTE, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA DELLA, on the Grand Canal, II. 378. One
   of the earliest buildings of the Grotesque Renaissance, rendered
   impressive by its position, size, and general proportions. These
   latter are exceedingly good; the grace of the whole building being
   chiefly dependent on the inequality of size in its cupolas, and pretty
   grouping of the two campaniles behind them. It is to be generally
   observed that the proportions of buildings have nothing whatever to
   do with the style or general merits of their architecture. An
   architect trained in the worst schools, and utterly devoid of all
   meaning or purpose in his work, may yet have such a natural gift of
   massing and grouping as will render all his structures effective when
   seen from a distance: such a gift is very general with the late
   Italian builders, so that many of the most contemptible edifices in
   the country have good stage effect so long as we do not approach them.
   The Church of the Salute is farther assisted by the beautiful flight
   of steps in front of it down to the canal; and its façade is rich and
   beautiful of its kind, and was chosen by Turner for the principal
   object in his well-known view of the Grand Canal. The principal faults
   of the building are the meagre windows in the sides of the cupola, and
   the ridiculous disguise of the buttresses under the form of colossal
   scrolls; the buttresses themselves being originally a hypocrisy, for
   the cupola is stated by Lazari to be of timber, and therefore needs
   none. The sacristy contains several precious pictures: the three on
   its roof by Titian, much vaunted, are indeed as feeble as they are
   monstrous; but the small Titian, "St. Mark, with Sts. Cosmo and
   Damian," was, when I first saw it, to my judgment, by far the first
   work of Titian's in Venice. It has since been restored by the Academy,
   and it seemed to me entirely destroyed, but I had not time to examine
   it carefully.

   At the end of the larger sacristy is the lunette which once decorated
   the tomb of the Doge Francesco Dandolo (see above, page 74); and, at
   the side of it, one of the most highly finished Tintorets in Venice,
   namely:

   _The Marriage in Cana._ An immense picture, some twenty-five feet long
   by fifteen high, and said by Lazari to be one of the few which
   Tintoret signed with his name. I am not surprised at his having done
   so in this case. Evidently the work has been a favorite with him, and
   he has taken as much pains as it was ever necessary for his colossal
   strength to take with anything. The subject is not one which admits of
   much singularity or energy in composition. It was always a favorite
   one with Veronese, because it gave dramatic interest to figures in gay
   costumes and of cheerful countenances; but one is surprised to find
   Tintoret, whose tone of mind was always grave, and who did not like to
   make a picture out of brocades and diadems, throwing his whole
   strength into the conception of a marriage feast; but so it is, and
   there are assuredly no female heads in any of his pictures in Venice
   elaborated so far as those which here form the central light. Neither
   is it often that the works of this mighty master conform themselves to
   any of the rules acted upon by ordinary painters; but in this instance
   the popular laws have been observed, and an academy student would be
   delighted to see with what severity the principal light is arranged in
   a central mass, which is divided and made more brilliant by a vigorous
   piece of shadow thrust into the midst of it, and which dies away in
   lesser fragments and sparkling towards the extremities of the picture.
   This mass of light is as interesting by its composition as by its
   intensity. The cicerone who escorts the stranger round the sacristy in
   the course of five minutes, and allows him some forty seconds for the
   contemplation of a picture which the study of six months would not
   entirely fathom, directs his attention very carefully to the "bell'
   effetto di prospettivo," the whole merit of the picture being, in the
   eyes of the intelligent public, that there is a long table in it, one
   end of which looks farther off than the other; but there is more in
   the "bell' effetto di prospettivo" than the observance of the common
   laws of optics. The table is set in a spacious chamber, of which the
   windows at the end let in the light from the horizon, and those in the
   side wall the intense blue of an Eastern sky. The spectator looks all
   along the table, at the farther end of which are seated Christ and the
   Madonna, the marriage guests on each side of it,--on one side men, on
   the other women; the men are set with their backs to the light, which
   passing over their heads and glancing slightly on the tablecloth,
   falls in full length along the line of young Venetian women, who thus
   fill the whole centre of the picture with one broad sunbeam, made up
   of fair faces and golden hair. Close to the spectator a woman has
   risen in amazement, and stretches across the table to show the wine in
   her cup to those opposite; her dark red dress intercepts and enhances
   the mass of gathered light. It is rather curious, considering the
   subject of the picture, that one cannot distinguish either the bride
   or the bridegroom; but the fourth figure from the Madonna in the line
   of women, who wears a white head-dress of lace and rich chains of
   pearls in her hair, may well be accepted for the former, and I think
   that between her and the woman on the Madonna's left hand the unity of
   the line of women is intercepted by a male figure; be this as it may,
   this fourth female face is the most beautiful, as far as I recollect,
   that occurs in the works of the painter, with the exception only of
   the Madonna in the "Flight into Egypt." It is an ideal which occurs
   indeed elsewhere in many of his works, a face at once dark and
   delicate, the Italian cast of feature moulded with the softness and
   childishness of English beauty some half a century ago; but I have
   never seen the ideal so completely worked out by the master. The face
   may best be described as one of the purest and softest of Stothard's
   conceptions, executed with all the strength of Tintoret. The other
   women are all made inferior to this one, but there are beautiful
   profiles and bendings of breasts and necks along the whole line. The
   men are all subordinate, though there are interesting portraits among
   them; perhaps the only fault of the picture being that the faces are a
   little too conspicuous, seen like balls of light among the crowd of
   minor figures which fill the background of the picture. The tone of
   the whole is sober and majestic in the highest degree; the dresses are
   all broad masses of color, and the only parts of the picture which lay
   claim to the expression of wealth or splendor are the head-dresses of
   the women. In this respect the conception of the scene differs widely
   from that of Veronese, and approaches more nearly to the probable
   truth. Still the marriage is not an unimportant one; an immense crowd,
   filling the background, forming superbly rich mosaic of color against
   the distant sky. Taken as a whole, the picture is perhaps the most
   perfect example which human art has produced of the utmost possible
   force and sharpness of shadow united with richness of local color. In
   all the other works of Tintoret, and much more of other colorists,
   either the light and shade or the local color is predominant; in the
   one case the picture has a tendency to look as if painted by
   candle-light, in the other it becomes daringly conventional, and
   approaches the conditions of glass-painting. This picture unites
   color as rich as Titian's with light and shade as forcible as
   Rembrandt's, and far more decisive.

   There are one or two other interesting pictures of the early Venetian
   schools in this sacristy, and several important tombs in the adjoining
   cloister; among which that of Francesco Dandolo, transported here from
   the Church of the Frari, deserves especial attention. See above, p.
   74.

 SALVATORE, CHURCH OF ST. Base Renaissance, occupying the place of the
   ancient church, under the porch of which the Pope Alexander III. is
   said to have passed the night. M. Lazari states it to have been richly
   decorated with mosaics; now all is gone.

   In the interior of the church are some of the best examples of
   Renaissance sculptural monuments in Venice. (See above, Chap. II. §
   LXXX.) It is said to possess an important pala of silver, of the
   thirteenth century, one of the objects in Venice which I much regret
   having forgotten to examine; besides two Titians, a Bonifazio, and a
   John Bellini. The latter ("The Supper at Emmaus") must, I think, have
   been entirely repainted: it is not only unworthy of the master, but
   unlike him; as far, at least, as I could see from below, for it is
   hung high.

 SANUDO PALAZZO. At the Miracoli. A noble Gothic palace of the fourteenth
   century, with Byzantine fragments and cornices built into its walls,
   especially round the interior court, in which the staircase is very
   noble. Its door, opening on the quay, is the only one in Venice
   entirely uninjured; retaining its wooden valve richly sculptured, its
   wicket for examination of the stranger demanding admittance, and its
   quaint knocker in the form of a fish.

 SCALZI, CHURCH OF THE. It possesses a fine John Bellini, and is renowned
   through Venice for its precious marbles. I omitted to notice above, in
   speaking of the buildings of the Grotesque Renaissance, that many of
   them are remarkable for a kind of dishonesty, even in the use of
   _true_ marbles, resulting not from motives of economy, but from mere
   love of juggling and falsehood for their own sake. I hardly know which
   condition of mind is meanest, that which has pride in plaster made to
   look like marble, or that which takes delight in marble made to look
   like silk. Several of the later churches in Venice, more especially
   those of the Jesuiti, of San Clemente, and this of the Scalzi, rest
   their chief claims to admiration on their having curtains and cushions
   cut out of rock. The most ridiculous example is in San Clemente, and
   the most curious and costly are in the Scalzi; which latter church is
   a perfect type of the vulgar abuse of marble in every possible way, by
   men who had no eye for color, and no understanding of any merit in a
   work of art but that which arises from costliness of material, and
   such powers of imitation as are devoted in England to the manufacture
   of peaches and eggs out of Derbyshire spar.

 SEBASTIAN, CHURCH OF ST. The tomb, and of old the monument, of Paul
   Veronese. It is full of his noblest pictures, or of what once were
   such; but they seemed to me for the most part destroyed by repainting.
   I had not time to examine them justly, but I would especially direct
   the traveller's attention to the small Madonna over the second altar
   on the right of the nave, still a perfect and priceless treasure.

 SERVI, CHURCH OF THE. Only two of its gates and some ruined walls are
   left, in one of the foulest districts of the city. It was one of the
   most interesting monuments of the early fourteenth century Gothic; and
   there is much beauty in the fragments yet remaining. How long they may
   stand I know not, the whole building having been offered me for sale,
   ground and all, or stone by stone, as I chose, by its present
   proprietor, when I was last in Venice. More real good might at present
   be effected by any wealthy person who would devote his resources to
   the preservation of such monuments wherever they exist, by freehold
   purchase of the entire ruin, and afterwards by taking proper charge of
   it, and forming a garden round it, than by any other mode of
   protecting or encouraging art. There is no school, no lecturer, like a
   ruin of the early ages.

 SEVERO, FONDAMENTA SAN, palace at, II. 264.

 SILVESTRO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance in itself, but it contains
   two very interesting pictures: the first, a "St. Thomas of Canterbury
   with the Baptist and St. Francis," by Girolamo Santa Croce, a superb
   example of the Venetian religious school; the second by Tintoret,
   namely:

   _The Baptism of Christ._ (Over the first altar on the right of the
   nave.) An upright picture, some ten feet wide by fifteen high; the top
   of it is arched, representing the Father supported by angels. It
   requires little knowledge of Tintoret to see that these figures are
   not by his hand. By returning to the opposite side of the nave, the
   join in the canvas may be plainly seen, the upper part of the picture
   having been entirely added on: whether it had this upper part before
   it was repainted, or whether originally square, cannot now be told,
   but I believe it had an upper part which has been destroyed. I am not
   sure if even the dove and the two angels which are at the top of the
   older part of the picture are quite genuine. The rest of it is
   magnificent, though both the figures of the Saviour and the Baptist
   show some concession on the part of the painter to the imperative
   requirement of his age, that nothing should be done except in an
   attitude; neither are there any of his usual fantastic imaginations.
   There is simply the Christ in the water and the St. John on the shore,
   without attendants, disciples, or witnesses of any kind; but the power
   of the light and shade, and the splendor of the landscape, which on
   the whole is well preserved, render it a most interesting example. The
   Jordan is represented as a mountain brook, receiving a tributary
   stream in a cascade from the rocks, in which St. John stands: there is
   a rounded stone in the centre of the current; and the parting of the
   water at this, as well as its rippling among the roots of some dark
   trees on the left, are among the most accurate remembrances of nature
   to be found in any of the works of the great masters. I hardly know
   whether most to wonder at the power of the man who thus broke through
   the neglect of nature which was universal at his time; or at the
   evidences, visible throughout the whole of the conception, that he was
   still content to paint from slight memories of what he had seen in
   hill countries, instead of following out to its full depth the
   fountain which he had opened. There is not a stream among the hills of
   Priuli which in any quarter of a mile of its course would not have
   suggested to him finer forms of cascade than those which he has idly
   painted at Venice.

 SIMEONE, PROFETA, CHURCH OF ST. Very important, though small, possessing
   the precious statue of St. Simeon, above noticed, II. 309. The rare
   early Gothic capitals of the nave are only interesting to the
   architect; but in the little passage by the side of the church,
   leading out of the Campo, there is a curious Gothic monument built
   into the wall, very beautiful in the placing of the angels in the
   spandrils, and rich in the vine-leaf moulding above.

 SIMEONE, PICCOLO, CHURCH OF ST. One of the ugliest churches in Venice or
   elsewhere. Its black dome, like an unusual species of gasometer, is
   the admiration of modern Italian architects.


 SOSPIRI, PONTE DE'. The well known "Bridge of Sighs," a work of no
   merit, and of a late period (see Vol. II. p. 304), owing the interest
   it possesses chiefly to its pretty name, and to the ignorant
   sentimentalism of Byron.

 SPIRITO SANTO, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 STEFANO, CHURCH OF ST. An interesting building of central Gothic, the
   best ecclesiastical example of it in Venice. The west entrance is much
   later than any of the rest, and is of the richest Renaissance Gothic,
   a little anterior to the Porta della Carta, and first-rate of its
   kind. The manner of the introduction of the figure of the angel at the
   top of the arch is full of beauty. Note the extravagant crockets and
   cusp finials as signs of decline.

 STEFANO, CHURCH OF ST., at Murano (pugnacity of its abbot), II. 33. The
   church no longer exists.

 STROPE, CAMPIELLO DELLA, house in, II. 266.


    T


 TANA, windows at the, II. 260.

 TIEPOLO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 TOLENTINI, CHURCH OF THE. One of the basest and coldest works of the
   late Renaissance. It is said to contain two Bonifazios.

 TOMA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 TOMA, PONTE SAN. There is an interesting ancient doorway opening on the
   canal close to this bridge, probably of the twelfth century, and a
   good early Gothic door, opening upon the bridge itself.

 TORCELLO, general aspect of, II. 12; Santa Fosca at, I. 117, II. 13;
   duomo, II. 14; mosaics of, II. 196; measures of, II. 378; date of, II.
   380.

 TREVISAN, PALAZZO, I. 369, III. 212.

 TRON, PALAZZO. Of no importance.

 TROVASO, CHURCH OF ST. Itself of no importance, but containing two
   pictures by Tintoret, namely:

   1. _The Temptation of St. Anthony._ (Altar piece in the chapel on the
   left of the choir.) A small and very carefully finished picture, but
   marvellously temperate and quiet in treatment, especially considering
   the subject, which one would have imagined likely to inspire the
   painter with one of his most fantastic visions. As if on purpose to
   disappoint us, both the effect, and the conception of the figures, are
   perfectly quiet, and appear the result much more of careful study than
   of vigorous imagination. The effect is one of plain daylight; there
   are a few clouds drifting in the distance, but with no wildness in
   them, nor is there any energy or heat in the flames which mantle about
   the waist of one of the figures. But for the noble workmanship, we
   might almost fancy it the production of a modern academy; yet as we
   begin to read the picture, the painter's mind becomes felt. St.
   Anthony is surrounded by four figures, one of which only has the form
   of a demon, and he is in the background, engaged in no more terrific
   act of violence toward St. Anthony, than endeavoring to pull off his
   mantle; he has, however, a scourge over his shoulder, but this is
   probably intended for St. Anthony's weapon of self-discipline, which
   the fiend, with a very Protestant turn of mind, is carrying off. A
   broken staff, with a bell hanging to it, at the saint's feet, also
   expresses his interrupted devotion. The three other figures beside him
   are bent on more cunning mischief: the woman on the left is one of
   Tintoret's best portraits of a young and bright-eyed Venetian beauty.
   It is curious that he has given so attractive a countenance to a type
   apparently of the temptation to violate the power of poverty, for this
   woman places one hand in a vase full of coins, and shakes golden
   chains with the other. On the opposite side of the saint, another
   woman, admirably painted, but of a far less attractive countenance, is
   a type of the lusts of the flesh, yet there is nothing gross or
   immodest in her dress or gesture. She appears to have been baffled,
   and for the present to have given up addressing the saint: she lays
   one hand upon her breast, and might be taken for a very respectable
   person, but that there are flames playing about her loins. A recumbent
   figure on the ground is of less intelligible character, but may
   perhaps be meant for Indolence; at all events, he has torn the saint's
   book to pieces. I forgot to note, that under the figure representing
   Avarice, there is a creature like a pig; whether actual pig or not is
   unascertainable, for the church is dark, the little light that comes
   on the picture falls on it the wrong way, and one third of the lower
   part of it is hidden by a white case, containing a modern daub, lately
   painted by way of an altar piece; the meaning, as well as the merit,
   of the grand old picture being now far beyond the comprehension both
   of priests and people.

   2. _The Last Supper._ (On the left-hand side of the Chapel of the
   Sacrament.) A picture which has been through the hands of the Academy,
   and is therefore now hardly worth notice. Its conception seems always
   to have been vulgar, and far below Tintoret's usual standard; there is
   singular baseness in the circumstance, that one of the near Apostles,
   while all the others are, as usual, intent upon Christ's words, "One
   of you shall betray me," is going to help himself to wine out of a
   bottle which stands behind him. In so doing he stoops towards the
   table, the flask being on the floor. If intended for the action of
   Judas at this moment, there is the painter's usual originality in the
   thought; but it seems to me rather done to obtain variation of
   posture, in bringing the red dress into strong contrast with the
   tablecloth. The color has once been fine, and there are fragments of
   good painting still left; but the light does not permit these to be
   seen, and there is too much perfect work of the master's in Venice, to
   permit us to spend time on retouched remnants. The picture is only
   worth mentioning, because it is ignorantly and ridiculously referred
   to by Kugler as characteristic of Tintoret.


    V

 VITALI, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a picture by Vittor Carpaccio,
   over the high altar: otherwise of no importance.


 VOLTO SANTO, CHURCH OF THE. An interesting but desecrated ruin of the
   fourteenth century; fine in style. Its roof retains some fresco
   coloring, but, as far as I recollect, of later date than the
   architecture.


    Z

 ZACCARIA, CHURCH OF ST. Early Renaissance, and fine of its kind; a
   Gothic chapel attached to it is of great beauty. It contains the best
   John Bellini in Venice, after that of San G. Grisostomo, "The Virgin,
   with Four Saints;" and is said to contain another John Bellini and a
   Tintoret, neither of which I have seen.

 ZITELLE, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 ZOBENIGO, CHURCH OF SANTA MARIA, III. 124. It contains one valuable
   Tintoret, namely:

   _Christ with Sta. Justina and St. Augustin._ (Over the third altar on
   the south side of the nave.) A picture of small size, and upright,
   about ten feet by eight. Christ appears to be descending out of the
   clouds between the two saints, who are both kneeling on the sea shore.
   It is a Venetian sea, breaking on a flat beach, like the Lido, with a
   scarlet galley in the middle distance, of which the chief use is to
   unite the two figures by a point of color. Both the saints are
   respectable Venetians of the lower class, in homely dresses and with
   homely faces. The whole picture is quietly painted, and somewhat
   slightly; free from all extravagance, and displaying little power
   except in the general truth or harmony of colors so easily laid on. It
   is better preserved than usual, and worth dwelling upon as an instance
   of the style of the master when _at rest_.


FOOTNOTES:

  [71]  "Am I in Italy? Is this the Mincius?
         Are those the distant turrets of Verona?
         And shall I sup where Juliet at the Masque
         Saw her loved Montague, and now sleeps by him?
         Such questions hourly do I ask myself;
         And not a stone in a crossway inscribed
         'To Mantua,' 'To Ferrara,' but excites
         Surprise, and doubt, and self-congratulation."

    Alas, after a few short months, spent even in the scenes dearest to
    history, we can feel thus no more.

  [72] I have always called this church, in the text, simply "St. John
    and Paul," not Sts. John and Paul, just as the Venetians say San
    Giovanni e Paolo, and not Santi G., &c.





       *       *       *       *       *





Library Edition

The Complete Works of John Ruskin

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUMES I-II







National Library Association
New York             Chicago




The Complete Works of John Ruskin

Volume VIII

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME II




THE STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME II.

The Sea Stories




ADVERTISEMENT.


It was originally intended that this Work should consist of two volumes
only; the subject has extended to three. The second volume, however,
will conclude the account of the ancient architecture of Venice. The
third will embrace the Early, the Roman, and the Grotesque Renaissance;
and an Index, which, as it gives, in alphabetical order, a brief account
of all the buildings in Venice, or references to the places where they
are mentioned in the text, will be found a convenient guide for the
traveller. In order to make it more serviceable, I have introduced some
notices of the pictures which I think most interesting in the various
churches, and in the Scuola di San Rocco.




CONTENTS.


  FIRST, OR BYZANTINE, PERIOD.

                         CHAPTER I.
                                                      PAGE
    The Throne,                                          1

                        CHAPTER II.
    Torcello,                                           11

                       CHAPTER III.
    Murano,                                             27

                        CHAPTER IV.
    St. Mark's,                                         57

                        CHAPTER V.
    Byzantine Palaces,                                 118


  SECOND, OR GOTHIC, PERIOD.

                        CHAPTER VI.
    The Nature of Gothic,                              151

                       CHAPTER VII.
    Gothic Palaces,                                    231

                       CHAPTER VIII.
    The Ducal Palace,                                  281


  APPENDIX.

     1. The Gondolier's Cry,                           375
     2. Our Lady of Salvation,                         378
     3. Tides of Venice and Measures at Torcello,      378
     4. Date of the Duomo of Torcello,                 380
     5. Modern Pulpits,                                380
     6. Apse of Murano,                                382
     7. Early Venetian Dress,                          383
     8. Inscriptions at Murano,                        384
     9. Shafts of St. Mark's,                          384
    10. Proper Sense of the Word Idolatry,             388
    11. Situations of Byzantine Palaces,               391
    12. Modern Paintings on Glass,                     394




LIST OF PLATES.


                                                           Facing Page
 Plate 1. Plans of Torcello and Murano,                             14

   "   2. The Acanthus of Torcello,                                 15

   "   3. Inlaid Bands of Murano,                                   40

   "   4. Sculptures of Murano,                                     42

   "   5. Archivolt in the Duomo of Murano,                         45

   "   6. The Vine, Free and in Service,                            96

   "   7. Byzantine Capitals--Convex Group,                        131

   "   8. Byzantine Capitals--Concave Group,                       132

   "   9. Lily Capital of St. Mark's,                              136

   "  10. The Four Venetian Flower Order,                          137

   "  11. Byzantine Sculptures,                                    138

   "  12. Linear and Surface Gothic,                               224

   "  13. Balconies,                                               247

   "  14. The Orders of Venetian Arches,                           248

   "  15. Windows of the Second Order,                             254

   "  16. Windows of the Fourth Order,                             257

   "  17. Windows of the Early Gothic Palaces,                     259

   "  18. Windows of the Fifth Order,                              266

   "  19. Leafage of the Vine Angle,                               308

   "  20. Leafage of the Venetian Capitals,                        368




               THE

        STONES OF VENICE.

  FIRST, OR BYZANTINE, PERIOD.




CHAPTER I.

THE THRONE.


§ I. In the olden days of travelling, now to return no more, in which
distance could not be vanquished without toil, but in which that toil
was rewarded, partly by the power of deliberate survey of the countries
through which the journey lay, and partly by the happiness of the
evening hours, when, from the top of the last hill he had surmounted,
the traveller beheld the quiet village where he was to rest, scattered
among the meadows beside its valley stream; or, from the long-hoped-for
turn in the dusty perspective of the causeway, saw, for the first time,
the towers of some famed city, faint in the rays of sunset--hours of
peaceful and thoughtful pleasure, for which the rush of the arrival in
the railway station is perhaps not always, or to all men, an
equivalent,--in those days, I say, when there was something more to be
anticipated and remembered in the first aspect of each successive
halting-place, than a new arrangement of glass roofing and iron girder,
there were few moments of which the recollection was more fondly
cherished by the traveller than that which, as I endeavored to describe
in the close of the last chapter, brought him within sight of Venice, as
his gondola shot into the open lagoon from the canal of Mestre. Not but
that the aspect of the city itself was generally the source of some
slight disappointment, for, seen in this direction, its buildings are
far less characteristic than those of the other great towns of Italy;
but this inferiority was partly disguised by distance, and more than
atoned for by the strange rising of its walls and towers out of the
midst, as it seemed, of the deep sea, for it was impossible that the
mind or the eye could at once comprehend the shallowness of the vast
sheet of water which stretched away in leagues of rippling lustre to the
north and south, or trace the narrow line of islets bounding it to the
east. The salt breeze, the white moaning sea-birds, the masses of black
weed separating and disappearing gradually, in knots of heaving shoal,
under the advance of the steady tide, all proclaimed it to be indeed the
ocean on whose bosom the great city rested so calmly; not such blue,
soft, lake-like ocean as bathes the Neapolitan promontories, or sleeps
beneath the marble rocks of Genoa, but a sea with the bleak power of our
own northern waves, yet subdued into a strange spacious rest, and
changed from its angry pallor into a field of burnished gold, as the sun
declined behind the belfry tower of the lonely island church, fitly
named "St. George of the Seaweed." As the boat drew nearer to the city,
the coast which the traveller had just left sank behind him into one
long, low, sad-colored line, tufted irregularly with brushwood and
willows: but, at what seemed its northern extremity, the hills of Arqua
rose in a dark cluster of purple pyramids, balanced on the bright mirage
of the lagoon; two or three smooth surges of inferior hill extended
themselves about their roots, and beyond these, beginning with the
craggy peaks above Vicenza, the chain of the Alps girded the whole
horizon to the north--a wall of jagged blue, here and there showing
through its clefts a wilderness of misty precipices, fading far back
into the recesses of Cadore, and itself rising and breaking away
eastward, where the sun struck opposite upon its snow, into mighty
fragments of peaked light, standing up behind the barred clouds of
evening, one after another, countless, the crown of the Adrian Sea,
until the eye turned back from pursuing them, to rest upon the nearer
burning of the campaniles of Murano, and on the great city, where it
magnified itself along the waves, as the quick silent pacing of the
gondola drew nearer and nearer. And at last, when its walls were
reached, and the outmost of its untrodden streets was entered, not
through towered gate or guarded rampart, but as a deep inlet between two
rocks of coral in the Indian sea; when first upon the traveller's sight
opened the long ranges of columned palaces,--each with its black boat
moored at the portal,--each with its image cast down, beneath its feet,
upon that green pavement which every breeze broke into new fantasies of
rich tessellation; when first, at the extremity of the bright vista, the
shadowy Rialto threw its colossal curve slowly forth from behind the
palace of the Camerlenghi; that strange curve, so delicate, so
adamantine, strong as a mountain cavern, graceful as a bow just bent;
when first, before its moonlike circumference was all risen, the
gondolier's cry, "Ah! Stalí,"[1] struck sharp upon the ear, and the prow
turned aside under the mighty cornices that half met over the narrow
canal, where the plash of the water followed close and loud, ringing
along the marble by the boat's side; and when at last that boat darted
forth upon the breadth of silver sea, across which the front of the
Ducal palace, flushed with its sanguine veins, looks to the snowy dome
of Our Lady of Salvation,[2] it was no marvel that the mind should be so
deeply entranced by the visionary charm of a scene so beautiful and so
strange, as to forget the darker truths of its history and its being.
Well might it seem that such a city had owed her existence rather to the
rod of the enchanter, than the fear of the fugitive; that the waters
which encircled her had been chosen for the mirror of her state, rather
than the shelter of her nakedness; and that all which in nature was wild
or merciless,--Time and Decay, as well as the waves and tempests,--had
been won to adorn her instead of to destroy, and might still spare, for
ages to come, that beauty which seemed to have fixed for its throne the
sands of the hour-glass as well as of the sea.

§ II. And although the last few eventful years, fraught with change to
the face of the whole earth, have been more fatal in their influence on
Venice than the five hundred that preceded them; though the noble
landscape of approach to her can now be seen no more, or seen only by a
glance, as the engine slackens its rushing on the iron line; and though
many of her palaces are for ever defaced, and many in desecrated ruins,
there is still so much of magic in her aspect, that the hurried
traveller, who must leave her before the wonder of that first aspect has
been worn away, may still be led to forget the humility of her origin,
and to shut his eyes to the depth of her desolation. They, at least, are
little to be envied, in whose hearts the great charities of the
imagination lie dead, and for whom the fancy has no power to repress the
importunity of painful impressions, or to raise what is ignoble, and
disguise what is discordant, in a scene so rich in its remembrances, so
surpassing in its beauty. But for this work of the imagination there
must be no permission during the task which is before us. The impotent
feelings of romance, so singularly characteristic of this century, may
indeed gild, but never save the remains of those mightier ages to which
they are attached like climbing flowers; and they must be torn away from
the magnificent fragments, if we would see them as they stood in their
own strength. Those feelings, always as fruitless as they are fond, are
in Venice not only incapable of protecting, but even of discerning, the
objects to which they ought to have been attached. The Venice of modern
fiction and drama is a thing of yesterday, a mere efflorescence of
decay, a stage dream which the first ray of daylight must dissipate into
dust. No prisoner, whose name is worth remembering, or whose sorrow
deserved sympathy, ever crossed that "Bridge of Sighs," which is the
centre of the Byronic ideal of Venice; no great merchant of Venice ever
saw that Rialto under which the traveller now passes with breathless
interest: the statue which Byron makes Faliero address as of one of his
great ancestors was erected to a soldier of fortune a hundred and fifty
years after Faliero's death; and the most conspicuous parts of the city
have been so entirely altered in the course of the last three centuries,
that if Henry Dandolo or Francis Foscari could be summoned from their
tombs, and stood each on the deck of his galley at the entrance of the
Grand Canal, that renowned entrance, the painter's favorite subject, the
novelist's favorite scene, where the water first narrows by the steps of
the Church of La Salute,--the mighty Doges would not know in what spot
of the world they stood, would literally not recognize one stone of the
great city, for whose sake, and by whose ingratitude, their grey hairs
had been brought down with bitterness to the grave. The remains of
_their_ Venice lie hidden behind the cumbrous masses which were the
delight of the nation in its dotage; hidden in many a grass-grown court,
and silent pathway, and lightless canal, where the slow waves have
sapped their foundations for five hundred years, and must soon prevail
over them for ever. It must be our task to glean and gather them forth,
and restore out of them some faint image of the lost city, more gorgeous
a thousand-fold than that which now exists, yet not created in the
day-dream of the prince, nor by the ostentation of the noble, but built
by iron hands and patient hearts, contending against the adversity of
nature and the fury of man, so that its wonderfulness cannot be grasped
by the indolence of imagination, but only after frank inquiry into the
true nature of that wild and solitary scene, whose restless tides and
trembling sands did indeed shelter the birth of the city, but long
denied her dominion.

§ III. When the eye falls casually on a map of Europe, there is no
feature by which it is more likely to be arrested than the strange
sweeping loop formed by the junction of the Alps and Apennines, and
enclosing the great basin of Lombardy. This return of the mountain chain
upon itself causes a vast difference in the character of the
distribution of its débris on its opposite sides. The rock fragments and
sediment which the torrents on the north side of the Alps bear into the
plains are distributed over a vast extent of country, and, though here
and there lodged in beds of enormous thickness, soon permit the firm
substrata to appear from underneath them; but all the torrents which
descend from the southern side of the High Alps, and from the northern
slope of the Apennines, meet concentrically in the recess or mountain
bay which the two ridges enclose; every fragment which thunder breaks
out of their battlements, and every grain of dust which the summer rain
washes from their pastures, is at last laid at rest in the blue sweep of
the Lombardic plain; and that plain must have risen within its rocky
barriers as a cup fills with wine, but for two contrary influences which
continually depress, or disperse from its surface, the accumulation of
the ruins of ages.

§ IV. I will not tax the reader's faith in modern science by insisting
on the singular depression of the surface of Lombardy, which appears for
many centuries to have taken place steadily and continually; the main
fact with which we have to do is the gradual transport, by the Po and
its great collateral rivers, of vast masses of the finer sediment to the
sea. The character of the Lombardic plains is most strikingly expressed
by the ancient walls of its cities, composed for the most part of large
rounded Alpine pebbles alternating with narrow courses of brick; and was
curiously illustrated in 1848, by the ramparts of these same pebbles
thrown up four or five feet high round every field, to check the
Austrian cavalry in the battle under the walls of Verona. The finer dust
among which these pebbles are dispersed is taken up by the rivers, fed
into continual strength by the Alpine snow, so that, however pure their
waters may be when they issue from the lakes at the foot of the great
chain, they become of the color and opacity of clay before they reach
the Adriatic; the sediment which they bear is at once thrown down as
they enter the sea, forming a vast belt of low land along the eastern
coast of Italy. The powerful stream of the Po of course builds forward
the fastest; on each side of it, north and south, there is a tract of
marsh, fed by more feeble streams, and less liable to rapid change than
the delta of the central river. In one of these tracts is built RAVENNA,
and in the other VENICE.

§ V. What circumstances directed the peculiar arrangement of this great
belt of sediment in the earliest times, it is not here the place to
inquire. It is enough for us to know that from the mouths of the Adige
to those of the Piave there stretches, at a variable distance of from
three to five miles from the actual shore, a bank of sand, divided into
long islands by narrow channels of sea. The space between this bank and
the true shore consists of the sedimentary deposits from these and other
rivers, a great plain of calcareous mud, covered, in the neighborhood of
Venice, by the sea at high water, to the depth in most places of a foot
or a foot and a half, and nearly everywhere exposed at low tide, but
divided by an intricate network of narrow and winding channels, from
which the sea never retires. In some places, according to the run of the
currents, the land has risen into marshy islets, consolidated, some by
art, and some by time, into ground firm enough to be built upon, or
fruitful enough to be cultivated: in others, on the contrary, it has not
reached the sea-level; so that, at the average low water, shallow
lakelets glitter among its irregularly exposed fields of seaweed. In the
midst of the largest of these, increased in importance by the confluence
of several large river channels towards one of the openings in the sea
bank, the city of Venice itself is built, on a crowded cluster of
islands; the various plots of higher ground which appear to the north
and south of this central cluster, have at different periods been also
thickly inhabited, and now bear, according to their size, the remains of
cities, villages, or isolated convents and churches, scattered among
spaces of open ground, partly waste and encumbered by ruins, partly
under cultivation for the supply of the metropolis.

§ VI. The average rise and fall of the tide is about three feet (varying
considerably with the seasons[3]); but this fall, on so flat a shore, is
enough to cause continual movement in the waters, and in the main canals
to produce a reflux which frequently runs like a mill stream. At high
water no land is visible for many miles to the north or south of Venice,
except in the form of small islands crowned with towers or gleaming with
villages: there is a channel, some three miles wide, between the city
and the mainland, and some mile and a half wide between it and the sandy
breakwater called the Lido, which divides the lagoon from the Adriatic,
but which is so low as hardly to disturb the impression of the city's
having been built in the midst of the ocean, although the secret of its
true position is partly, yet not painfully, betrayed by the clusters of
piles set to mark the deep-water channels, which undulate far away in
spotty chains like the studded backs of huge sea-snakes, and by the
quick glittering of the crisped and crowded waves that flicker and dance
before the strong winds upon the unlifted level of the shallow sea. But
the scene is widely different at low tide. A fall of eighteen or twenty
inches is enough to show ground over the greater part of the lagoon; and
at the complete ebb the city is seen standing in the midst of a dark
plain of seaweed, of gloomy green, except only where the larger branches
of the Brenta and its associated streams converge towards the port of
the Lido. Through this salt and sombre plain the gondola and the
fishing-boat advance by tortuous channels, seldom more than four or five
feet deep, and often so choked with slime that the heavier keels furrow
the bottom till their crossing tracks are seen through the clear sea
water like the ruts upon a wintry road, and the oar leaves blue gashes
upon the ground at every stroke, or is entangled among the thick weed
that fringes the banks with the weight of its sullen waves, leaning to
and fro upon the uncertain sway of the exhausted tide. The scene is
often profoundly oppressive, even at this day, when every plot of higher
ground bears some fragment of fair building: but, in order to know what
it was once, let the traveller follow in his boat at evening the
windings of some unfrequented channel far into the midst of the
melancholy plain; let him remove, in his imagination, the brightness of
the great city that still extends itself in the distance, and the walls
and towers from the islands that are near; and so wait, until the bright
investiture and sweet warmth of the sunset are withdrawn from the
waters, and the black desert of their shore lies in its nakedness
beneath the night, pathless, comfortless, infirm, lost in dark languor
and fearful silence, except where the salt runlets plash into the
tideless pools, or the sea-birds flit from their margins with a
questioning cry; and he will be enabled to enter in some sort into the
horror of heart with which this solitude was anciently chosen by man for
his habitation. They little thought, who first drove the stakes into the
sand, and strewed the ocean reeds for their rest, that their children
were to be the princes of that ocean, and their palaces its pride; and
yet, in the great natural laws that rule that sorrowful wilderness, let
it be remembered what strange preparation had been made for the things
which no human imagination could have foretold, and how the whole
existence and fortune of the Venetian nation were anticipated or
compelled, by the setting of those bars and doors to the rivers and the
sea. Had deeper currents divided their islands, hostile navies would
again and again have reduced the rising city into servitude; had
stronger surges beaten their shores, all the richness and refinement of
the Venetian architecture must have been exchanged for the walls and
bulwarks of an ordinary sea-port. Had there been no tide, as in other
parts of the Mediterranean, the narrow canals of the city would have
become noisome, and the marsh in which it was built pestiferous. Had the
tide been only a foot or eighteen inches higher in its rise, the
water-access to the doors of the palaces would have been impossible:
even as it is, there is sometimes a little difficulty, at the ebb, in
landing without setting foot upon the lower and slippery steps: and the
highest tides sometimes enter the courtyards, and overflow the entrance
halls. Eighteen inches more of difference between the level of the flood
and ebb would have rendered the doorsteps of every palace, at low water,
a treacherous mass of weeds and limpets, and the entire system of
water-carriage for the higher classes, in their easy and daily
intercourse, must have been done away with. The streets of the city
would have been widened, its network of canals filled up, and all the
peculiar character of the place and the people destroyed.

§ VII. The reader may perhaps have felt some pain in the contrast
between this faithful view of the site of the Venetian Throne, and the
romantic conception of it which we ordinarily form; but this pain, if he
have felt it, ought to be more than counterbalanced by the value of the
instance thus afforded to us at once of the inscrutableness and the
wisdom of the ways of God. If, two thousand years ago, we had been
permitted to watch the slow settling of the slime of those turbid rivers
into the polluted sea, and the gaining upon its deep and fresh waters of
the lifeless, impassable, unvoyageable plain, how little could we have
understood the purpose with which those islands were shaped out of the
void, and the torpid waters enclosed with their desolate walls of sand!
How little could we have known, any more than of what now seems to us
most distressful, dark, and objectless, the glorious aim which was then
in the mind of Him in whose hand are all the corners of the earth! how
little imagined that in the laws which were stretching forth the gloomy
margins of those fruitless banks, and feeding the bitter grass among
their shallows, there was indeed a preparation, and _the only
preparation possible_, for the founding of a city which was to be set
like a golden clasp on the girdle of the earth, to write her history on
the white scrolls of the sea-surges, and to word it in their thunder,
and to gather and give forth, in worldwide pulsation, the glory of the
West and of the East, from the burning heart of her Fortitude and
Splendor.


FOOTNOTES

  [1] Appendix 1, "The Gondolier's Cry."

  [2] Appendix 2, "Our Lady of Salvation."

  [3] Appendix 3, "Tides of Venice."




CHAPTER II.

Torcello.


§ I. Seven miles to the north of Venice, the banks of sand, which near
the city rise little above low-water mark, attain by degrees a higher
level, and knit themselves at last into fields of salt morass, raised
here and there into shapeless mounds, and intercepted by narrow creeks
of sea. One of the feeblest of these inlets, after winding for some time
among buried fragments of masonry, and knots of sunburnt weeds whitened
with webs of fucus, stays itself in an utterly stagnant pool beside a
plot of greener grass covered with ground ivy and violets. On this mound
is built a rude brick campanile, of the commonest Lombardic type, which
if we ascend towards evening (and there are none to hinder us, the door
of its ruinous staircase swinging idly on its hinges), we may command
from it one of the most notable scenes in this wide world of ours. Far
as the eye can reach, a waste of wild sea moor, of a lurid ashen grey;
not like our northern moors with their jet-black pools and purple heath,
but lifeless, the color of sackcloth, with the corrupted sea-water
soaking through the roots of its acrid weeds, and gleaming hither and
thither through its snaky channels. No gathering of fantastic mists, nor
coursing of clouds across it; but melancholy clearness of space in the
warm sunset, oppressive, reaching to the horizon of its level gloom. To
the very horizon, on the north-east; but, to the north and west, there
is a blue line of higher land along the border of it, and above this,
but farther back, a misty band of mountains, touched with snow. To the
east, the paleness and roar of the Adriatic, louder at momentary
intervals as the surf breaks on the bars of sand; to the south, the
widening branches of the calm lagoon, alternately purple and pale
green, as they reflect the evening clouds or twilight sky; and almost
beneath our feet, on the same field which sustains the tower we gaze
from, a group of four buildings, two of them little larger than cottages
(though built of stone, and one adorned by a quaint belfry), the third
an octagonal chapel, of which we can see but little more than the flat
red roof with its rayed tiling, the fourth, a considerable church with
nave and aisles, but of which, in like manner, we can see little but the
long central ridge and lateral slopes of roof, which the sunlight
separates in one glowing mass from the green field beneath and grey moor
beyond. There are no living creatures near the buildings, nor any
vestige of village or city round about them. They lie like a little
company of ships becalmed on a far-away sea.

§ II. Then look farther to the south. Beyond the widening branches of
the lagoon, and rising out of the bright lake into which they gather,
there are a multitude of towers, dark, and scattered among square-set
shapes of clustered palaces, a long and irregular line fretting the
southern sky.

Mother and daughter, you behold them both in their widowhood,--TORCELLO
and VENICE.

Thirteen hundred years ago, the grey moorland looked as it does this
day, and the purple mountains stood as radiantly in the deep distances
of evening; but on the line of the horizon, there were strange fires
mixed with the light of sunset, and the lament of many human voices
mixed with the fretting of the waves on their ridges of sand. The flames
rose from the ruins of Altinum; the lament from the multitude of its
people, seeking, like Israel of old, a refuge from the sword in the
paths of the sea.

The cattle are feeding and resting upon the site of the city that they
left; the mower's scythe swept this day at dawn over the chief street of
the city that they built, and the swathes of soft grass are now sending
up their scent into the night air, the only incense that fills the
temple of their ancient worship. Let us go down into that little space
of meadow land.

§ III. The inlet which runs nearest to the base of the campanile is not
that by which Torcello is commonly approached. Another, somewhat
broader, and overhung by alder copse, winds out of the main channel of
the lagoon up to the very edge of the little meadow which was once the
Piazza of the city, and there, stayed by a few grey stones which present
some semblance of a quay, forms its boundary at one extremity. Hardly
larger than an ordinary English farmyard, and roughly enclosed on each
side by broken palings and hedges of honeysuckle and briar, the narrow
field retires from the water's edge, traversed by a scarcely traceable
footpath, for some forty or fifty paces, and then expanding into the
form of a small square, with buildings on three sides of it, the fourth
being that which opens to the water. Two of these, that on our left and
that in front of us as we approach from the canal, are so small that
they might well be taken for the out-houses of the farm, though the
first is a conventual building, and the other aspires to the title of
the "Palazzo publico," both dating as far back as the beginning of the
fourteenth century; the third, the octagonal church of Santa Fosca, is
far more ancient than either, yet hardly on a larger scale. Though the
pillars of the portico which surrounds it are of pure Greek marble, and
their capitals are enriched with delicate sculpture, they, and the
arches they sustain, together only raise the roof to the height of a
cattle-shed; and the first strong impression which the spectator
receives from the whole scene is, that whatever sin it may have been
which has on this spot been visited with so utter a desolation, it could
not at least have been ambition. Nor will this impression be diminished
as we approach, or enter, the larger church to which the whole group of
building is subordinate. It has evidently been built by men in flight
and distress,[4] who sought in the hurried erection of their island
church such a shelter for their earnest and sorrowful worship as, on the
one hand, could not attract the eyes of their enemies by its splendor,
and yet, on the other, might not awaken too bitter feelings by its
contrast with the churches which they had seen destroyed. There is
visible everywhere a simple and tender effort to recover some of the
form of the temples which they had loved, and to do honor to God by that
which they were erecting, while distress and humiliation prevented the
desire, and prudence precluded the admission, either of luxury of
ornament or magnificence of plan. The exterior is absolutely devoid of
decoration, with the exception only of the western entrance and the
lateral door, of which the former has carved sideposts and architrave,
and the latter, crosses of rich sculpture; while the massy stone
shutters of the windows, turning on huge rings of stone, which answer
the double purpose of stanchions and brackets, cause the whole building
rather to resemble a refuge from Alpine storm than the cathedral of a
populous city; and, internally, the two solemn mosaics of the eastern
and western extremities,--one representing the Last Judgment, the other
the Madonna, her tears falling as her hands are raised to bless,--and
the noble range of pillars which enclose the space between, terminated
by the high throne for the pastor and the semicircular raised seats for
the superior clergy, are expressive at once of the deep sorrow and the
sacred courage of men who had no home left them upon earth, but who
looked for one to come, of men "persecuted but not forsaken, cast down
but not destroyed."

§ IV. I am not aware of any other early church in Italy which has this
peculiar expression in so marked a degree; and it is so consistent with
all that Christian architecture ought to express in every age (for the
actual condition of the exiles who built the cathedral of Torcello is
exactly typical of the spiritual condition which every Christian ought
to recognize in himself, a state of homelessness on earth, except so far
as he can make the Most High his habitation), that I would rather fix
the mind of the reader on this general character than on the separate
details, however interesting, of the architecture itself. I shall
therefore examine these only so far as is necessary to give a clear idea
of the means by which the peculiar expression of the building is
attained.

[Illustration: Plate I.
               PLANS OF TORCELLO AND MURANO.]

§ V. On the opposite page, the uppermost figure, 1, is a rude plan
of the church. I do not answer for the thickness and external
disposition of the walls, which are not to our present purpose, and
which I have not carefully examined; but the interior arrangement is
given with sufficient accuracy. The church is built on the usual plan of
the Basilica[5] that is to say, its body divided into a nave and aisles
by two rows of massive shafts, the roof of the nave being raised high
above the aisles by walls sustained on two ranks of pillars, and pierced
with small arched windows. At Torcello the aisles are also lighted in
the same manner, and the nave is nearly twice their breadth.[6]

[Illustration: Plate II.
               THE ACANTHUS OF TORCELLO.]

The capitals of all the great shafts are of white marble, and are among
the best I have ever seen, as examples of perfectly calculated effect
from every touch of the chisel. Mr. Hope calls them "indifferently
imitated from the Corinthian:"[7] but the expression is as inaccurate as
it is unjust; every one of them is different in design, and their
variations are as graceful as they are fanciful. I could not, except by
an elaborate drawing, give any idea of the sharp, dark, deep
penetrations of the chisel into their snowy marble, but a single example
is given in the opposite plate, fig. 1, of the nature of the changes
effected in them from the Corinthian type. In this capital, although a
kind of acanthus (only with rounded lobes) is indeed used for the upper
range of leaves, the lower range is not acanthus at all, but a kind of
vine, or at least that species of plant which stands for vine in all
early Lombardic and Byzantine work (vide Vol. I. Appendix 8); the leaves
are trefoiled, and the stalks cut clear so that they might be grasped
with the hand, and cast sharp dark shadows, perpetually changing, across
the bell of the capital behind them. I have drawn one of these vine
plants larger in fig. 2, that the reader may see how little imitation
of the Corinthian there is in them, and how boldly the stems of the
leaves are detached from the ground. But there is another circumstance
in this ornament still more noticeable. The band which encircles the
shaft beneath the spring of the leaves is copied from the common
classical wreathed or braided fillet, of which the reader may see
examples on almost every building of any pretensions in modern London.
But the mediæval builders could not be content with the dead and
meaningless scroll: the Gothic energy and love of life, mingled with the
early Christian religious symbolism, were struggling daily into more
vigorous expression, and they turned the wreathed band into a serpent of
three times the length necessary to undulate round the shaft, which,
knotting itself into a triple chain, shows at one side of the shaft its
tail and head, as if perpetually gliding round it beneath the stalks of
the vines. The vine, as is well known, was one of the early symbols of
Christ, and the serpent is here typical either of the eternity of his
dominion, or of the Satanic power subdued.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

§ VI. Nor even when the builder confines himself to the acanthus leaf
(or to that representation of it, hereafter to be more particularly
examined, constant in Romanesque work) can his imagination allow him to
rest content with its accustomed position. In a common Corinthian
capital the leaves nod forward only, thrown out on every side from the
bell which they surround: but at the base of one of the capitals on the
opposite side of the nave from this of the vines,[8] two leaves are
introduced set with their sides outwards, forming spirals by curling
back, half-closed, in the position shown in fig. 4 in Plate II., there
represented as in a real acanthus leaf; for it will assist our future
inquiries into the ornamentation of capitals that the reader should be
acquainted with the form of the acanthus leaf itself. I have drawn it,
therefore, in the two positions, figs. 3 and 4 in Plate II.; while fig.
5 is the translation of the latter form into marble by the sculptor of
Torcello. It is not very like the acanthus, but much liker than any
Greek work; though still entirely conventional in its cinquefoiled
lobes. But these are disposed with the most graceful freedom of line,
separated at the roots by deep drill holes, which tell upon the eye far
away like beads of jet; and changed, before they become too crowded to
be effective, into a vigorous and simple zigzagged edge, which saves the
designer some embarrassment in the perspective of the terminating
spiral. But his feeling of nature was greater than his knowledge of
perspective; and it is delightful to see how he has rooted the whole
leaf in the strong rounded under-stem, the indication of its closing
with its face inwards, and has thus given organization and elasticity to
the lovely group of spiral lines; a group of which, even in the lifeless
sea-shell, we are never weary, but which becomes yet more delightful
when the ideas of elasticity and growth are joined to the sweet
succession of its involution.

§ VII. It is not, however, to be expected that either the mute language
of early Christianity (however important a part of the expression of the
building at the time of its erection), or the delicate fancies of the
Gothic leafage springing into new life, should be read, or perceived, by
the passing traveller who has never been taught to expect anything in
architecture except five orders: yet he can hardly fail to be struck by
the simplicity and dignity of the great shafts themselves; by the frank
diffusion of light, which prevents their severity from becoming
oppressive; by the delicate forms and lovely carving of the pulpit and
chancel screen; and, above all, by the peculiar aspect of the eastern
extremity of the church, which, instead of being withdrawn, as in later
cathedrals, into a chapel dedicated to the Virgin, or contributing by
the brilliancy of its windows to the splendor of the altar, and
theatrical effect of the ceremonies performed there, is a simple and
stern semicircular recess, filled beneath by three ranks of seats,
raised one above the other, for the bishop and presbyters, that they
might watch as well as guide the devotions of the people, and discharge
literally in the daily service the functions of bishops or _overseers_
of the flock of God.

§ VIII. Let us consider a little each of these characters in succession;
and first (for of the shafts enough has been said already), what is very
peculiar to this church, its luminousness. This perhaps strikes the
traveller more from its contrast with the excessive gloom of the Church
of St. Mark's; but it is remarkable when we compare the Cathedral of
Torcello with any of the contemporary basilicas in South Italy or
Lombardic churches in the North. St. Ambrogio at Milan, St. Michele at
Pavia, St. Zeno at Verona, St. Frediano at Lucca, St. Miniato at
Florence, are all like sepulchral caverns compared with Torcello, where
the slightest details of the sculptures and mosaics are visible, even
when twilight is deepening. And there is something especially touching
in our finding the sunshine thus freely admitted into a church built by
men in sorrow. They did not need the darkness; they could not perhaps
bear it. There was fear and depression upon them enough, without a
material gloom. They sought for comfort in their religion, for tangible
hopes and promises, not for threatenings or mysteries; and though the
subjects chosen for the mosaics on the walls are of the most solemn
character, there are no artificial shadows cast upon them, nor dark
colors used in them: all is fair and bright, and intended evidently to
be regarded in hopefulness, and not with terror.

§ IX. For observe this choice of subjects. It is indeed possible that
the walls of the nave and aisles, which are now whitewashed, may have
been covered with fresco or mosaic, and thus have supplied a series of
subjects, on the choice of which we cannot speculate. I do not, however,
find record of the destruction of any such works; and I am rather
inclined to believe that at any rate the central division of the
building was originally decorated, as it is now, simply by mosaics
representing Christ, the Virgin, and the apostles, at one extremity, and
Christ coming to judgment at the other. And if so, I repeat, observe the
significance of this choice. Most other early churches are covered with
imagery sufficiently suggestive of the vivid interest of the builders in
the history and occupations of the world. Symbols or representations of
political events, portraits of living persons, and sculptures of
satirical, grotesque, or trivial subjects are of constant occurrence,
mingled with the more strictly appointed representations of scriptural
or ecclesiastical history; but at Torcello even these usual, and one
should have thought almost necessary, successions of Bible events do not
appear. The mind of the worshipper was fixed entirely upon two great
facts, to him the most precious of all facts,--the present mercy of
Christ to His Church, and His future coming to judge the world. That
Christ's mercy was, at this period, supposed chiefly to be attainable
through the pleading of the Virgin, and that therefore beneath the
figure of the Redeemer is seen that of the weeping Madonna in the act of
intercession, may indeed be matter of sorrow to the Protestant beholder,
but ought not to blind him to the earnestness and singleness of the
faith with which these men sought their sea-solitudes; not in hope of
founding new dynasties, or entering upon new epochs of prosperity, but
only to humble themselves before God, and to pray that in His infinite
mercy He would hasten the time when the sea should give up the dead
which were in it, and Death and Hell give up the dead which were in
them, and when they might enter into the better kingdom, "where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest."

§ X. Nor were the strength and elasticity of their minds, even in the
least matters, diminished by thus looking forward to the close of all
things. On the contrary, nothing is more remarkable than the finish and
beauty of all the portions of the building, which seem to have been
actually executed for the place they occupy in the present structure.
The rudest are those which they brought with them from the mainland; the
best and most beautiful, those which appear to have been carved for
their island church: of these, the new capitals already noticed, and the
exquisite panel ornaments of the chancel screen, are the most
conspicuous; the latter form a low wall across the church between the
six small shafts whose places are seen in the plan, and serve to enclose
a space raised two steps above the level of the nave, destined for the
singers, and indicated also in the plan by an open line _a b c d_. The
bas-reliefs on this low screen are groups of peacocks and lions, two
face to face on each panel, rich and fantastic beyond description,
though not expressive of very accurate knowledge either of leonine or
pavonine forms. And it is not until we pass to the back of the stair of
the pulpit, which is connected with the northern extremity of this
screen, that we find evidence of the haste with which the church was
constructed.

§ XI. The pulpit, however, is not among the least noticeable of its
features. It is sustained on the four small detached shafts marked at
_p_ in the plan, between the two pillars at the north side of the
screen; both pillars and pulpit studiously plain, while the staircase
which ascends to it is a compact mass of masonry (shaded in the plan),
faced by carved slabs of marble; the parapet of the staircase being also
formed of solid blocks like paving-stones, lightened by rich, but not
deep, exterior carving. Now these blocks, or at least those which adorn
the staircase towards the aisle, have been brought from the mainland;
and, being of size and shape not easily to be adjusted to the
proportions of the stair, the architect has cut out of them pieces of
the size he needed, utterly regardless of the subject or symmetry of the
original design. The pulpit is not the only place where this rough
procedure has been permitted: at the lateral door of the church are two
crosses, cut out of slabs of marble, formerly covered with rich
sculpture over their whole surfaces, of which portions are left on the
surface of the crosses; the lines of the original design being, of
course, just as arbitrarily cut by the incisions between the arms, as
the patterns upon a piece of silk which has been shaped anew. The fact
is, that in all early Romanesque work, large surfaces are covered with
sculpture for the sake of enrichment only; sculpture which indeed had
always meaning, because it was easier for the sculptor to work with some
chain of thought to guide his chisel, than without any; but it was not
always intended, or at least not always hoped, that this chain of
thought might be traced by the spectator. All that was proposed appears
to have been the enrichment of surface, so as to make it delightful to
the eye; and this being once understood, a decorated piece of marble
became to the architect just what a piece of lace or embroidery is to a
dressmaker, who takes of it such portions as she may require, with
little regard to the places where the patterns are divided. And though
it may appear, at first sight, that the procedure is indicative of
bluntness and rudeness of feeling, we may perceive, upon reflection,
that it may also indicate the redundance of power which sets little
price upon its own exertion. When a barbarous nation builds its
fortress-walls out of fragments of the refined architecture it has
overthrown, we can read nothing but its savageness in the vestiges of
art which may thus chance to have been preserved; but when the new work
is equal, if not superior, in execution, to the pieces of the older art
which are associated with it, we may justly conclude that the rough
treatment to which the latter have been subjected is rather a sign of
the hope of doing better things, than of want of feeling for those
already accomplished. And, in general, this careless fitting of ornament
is, in very truth, an evidence of life in the school of builders, and of
their making a due distinction between work which is to be used for
architectural effect, and work which is to possess an abstract
perfection; and it commonly shows also that the exertion of design is so
easy to them, and their fertility so inexhaustible, that they feel no
remorse in using somewhat injuriously what they can replace with so
slight an effort.

§ XII. It appears however questionable in the present instance, whether,
if the marbles had not been carved to his hand, the architect would have
taken the trouble to enrich them. For the execution of the rest of the
pulpit is studiously simple, and it is in this respect that its design
possesses, it seems to me, an interest to the religious spectator
greater than he will take in any other portion of the building. It is
supported, as I said, on a group of four slender shafts; itself of a
slightly oval form, extending nearly from one pillar of the nave to the
next, so as to give the preacher free room for the action of the entire
person, which always gives an unaffected impressiveness to the
eloquence of the southern nations. In the centre of its curved front, a
small bracket and detached shaft sustain the projection of a narrow
marble desk (occupying the place of a cushion in a modern pulpit), which
is hollowed out into a shallow curve on the upper surface, leaving a
ledge at the bottom of the slab, so that a book laid upon it, or rather
into it, settles itself there, opening as if by instinct, but without
the least chance of slipping to the side, or in any way moving beneath
the preacher's hands.[9] Six balls, or rather almonds, of purple marble
veined with white are set round the edge of the pulpit, and form its
only decoration. Perfectly graceful, but severe and almost cold in its
simplicity, built for permanence and service, so that no single member,
no stone of it, could be spared, and yet all are firm and uninjured as
when they were first set together, it stands in venerable contrast both
with the fantastic pulpits of mediæval cathedrals and with the rich
furniture of those of our modern churches. It is worth while pausing for
a moment to consider how far the manner of decorating a pulpit may have
influence on the efficiency of its service, and whether our modern
treatment of this, to us all-important, feature of a church be the best
possible.

§ XIII. When the sermon is good we need not much concern ourselves about
the form of the pulpit. But sermons cannot always be good; and I believe
that the temper in which the congregation set themselves to listen may
be in some degree modified by their perception of fitness or unfitness,
impressiveness or vulgarity, in the disposition of the place appointed
for the speaker,--not to the same degree, but somewhat in the same way,
that they may be influenced by his own gestures or expression,
irrespective of the sense of what he says. I believe, therefore, in the
first place, that pulpits ought never to be highly decorated; the
speaker is apt to look mean or diminutive if the pulpit is either on a
very large scale or covered with splendid ornament, and if the interest
of the sermon should flag the mind is instantly tempted to wander. I
have observed that in almost all cathedrals, when the pulpits are
peculiarly magnificent, sermons are not often preached from them; but
rather, and especially if for any important purpose, from some temporary
erection in other parts of the building: and though this may often be
done because the architect has consulted the effect upon the eye more
than the convenience of the ear in the placing of his larger pulpit, I
think it also proceeds in some measure from a natural dislike in the
preacher to match himself with the magnificence of the rostrum, lest the
sermon should not be thought worthy of the place. Yet this will rather
hold of the colossal sculptures, and pyramids of fantastic tracery which
encumber the pulpits of Flemish and German churches, than of the
delicate mosaics and ivory-like carving of the Romanesque basilicas, for
when the form is kept simple, much loveliness of color and costliness of
work may be introduced, and yet the speaker not be thrown into the shade
by them.

§ XIV. But, in the second place, whatever ornaments we admit ought
clearly to be of a chaste, grave, and noble kind; and what furniture we
employ, evidently more for the honoring of God's word than for the ease
of the preacher. For there are two ways of regarding a sermon, either as
a human composition, or a Divine message. If we look upon it entirely as
the first, and require our clergymen to finish it with their utmost care
and learning, for our better delight whether of ear or intellect, we
shall necessarily be led to expect much formality and stateliness in its
delivery, and to think that all is not well if the pulpit have not a
golden fringe round it, and a goodly cushion in front of it, and if the
sermon be not fairly written in a black book, to be smoothed upon the
cushion in a majestic manner before beginning; all this we shall duly
come to expect: but we shall at the same time consider the treatise thus
prepared as something to which it is our duty to listen without
restlessness for half an hour or three quarters, but which, when that
duty has been decorously performed, we may dismiss from our minds in
happy confidence of being provided with another when next it shall be
necessary. But if once we begin to regard the preacher, whatever his
faults, as a man sent with a message to us, which it is a matter of life
or death whether we hear or refuse; if we look upon him as set in charge
over many spirits in danger of ruin, and having allowed to him but an
hour or two in the seven days to speak to them; if we make some endeavor
to conceive how precious these hours ought to be to him, a small vantage
on the side of God after his flock have been exposed for six days
together to the full weight of the world's temptation, and he has been
forced to watch the thorn and the thistle springing in their hearts, and
to see what wheat had been scattered there snatched from the wayside by
this wild bird and the other, and at last, when breathless and weary
with the week's labor they give him this interval of imperfect and
languid hearing, he has but thirty minutes to get at the separate hearts
of a thousand men, to convince them of all their weaknesses, to shame
them for all their sins, to warn them of all their dangers, to try by
this way and that to stir the hard fastenings of those doors where the
Master himself has stood and knocked yet none opened, and to call at the
openings of those dark streets where Wisdom herself hath stretched forth
her hands and no man regarded,--thirty minutes to raise the dead
in,--let us but once understand and feel this, and we shall look with
changed eyes upon that frippery of gay furniture about the place from
which the message of judgment must be delivered, which either breathes
upon the dry bones that they may live, or, if ineffectual, remains
recorded in condemnation, perhaps against the utterer and listener
alike, but assuredly against one of them. We shall not so easily bear
with the silk and gold upon the seat of judgment, nor with ornament of
oratory in the mouth of the messenger: we shall wish that his words may
be simple, even when they are sweetest, and the place from which he
speaks like a marble rock in the desert, about which the people have
gathered in their thirst.

§ XV. But the severity which is so marked in the pulpit at Torcello is
still more striking in the raised seats and episcopal throne which
occupy the curve of the apse. The arrangement at first somewhat recalls
to the mind that of the Roman amphitheatres; the flight of steps which
lead up to the central throne divides the curve of the continuous steps
or seats (it appears in the first three ranges questionable which were
intended, for they seem too high for the one, and too low and close for
the other), exactly as in an amphitheatre the stairs for access
intersect the sweeping ranges of seats. But in the very rudeness of this
arrangement, and especially in the want of all appliances of comfort
(for the whole is of marble, and the arms of the central throne are not
for convenience, but for distinction, and to separate it more
conspicuously from the undivided seats), there is a dignity which no
furniture of stalls nor carving of canopies ever could attain, and well
worth the contemplation of the Protestant, both as sternly significative
of an episcopal authority which in the early days of the Church was
never disputed, and as dependent for all its impressiveness on the utter
absence of any expression either of pride or self-indulgence.

§ XVI. But there is one more circumstance which we ought to remember as
giving peculiar significance to the position which the episcopal throne
occupies in this island church, namely, that in the minds of all early
Christians the Church itself was most frequently symbolized under the
image of a ship, of which the bishop was the pilot. Consider the force
which this symbol would assume in the imaginations of men to whom the
spiritual Church had become an ark of refuge in the midst of a
destruction hardly less terrible than that from which the eight souls
were saved of old, a destruction in which the wrath of man had become as
broad as the earth and as merciless as the sea, and who saw the actual
and literal edifice of the Church raised up, itself like an ark in the
midst of the waters. No marvel if with the surf of the Adriatic rolling
between them and the shores of their birth, from which they were
separated for ever, they should have looked upon each other as the
disciples did when the storm came down on the Tiberias Lake, and have
yielded ready and loving obedience to those who ruled them in His name,
who had there rebuked the winds and commanded stillness to the sea. And
if the stranger would yet learn in what spirit it was that the dominion
of Venice was begun, and in what strength she went forth conquering and
to conquer, let him not seek to estimate the wealth of her arsenals or
number of her armies, nor look upon the pageantry of her palaces, nor
enter into the secrets of her councils; but let him ascend the highest
tier of the stern ledges that sweep round the altar of Torcello, and
then, looking as the pilot did of old along the marble ribs of the
goodly temple ship, let him repeople its veined deck with the shadows of
its dead mariners, and strive to feel in himself the strength of heart
that was kindled within them, when first, after the pillars of it had
settled in the sand, and the roof of it had been closed against the
angry sky that was still reddened by the fires of their
homesteads,--first, within the shelter of its knitted walls, amidst the
murmur of the waste of waves and the beating of the wings of the
sea-birds round the rock that was strange to them,--rose that ancient
hymn, in the power of their gathered voices:

  THE SEA IS HIS, AND HE MADE IT:
  AND HIS HANDS PREPARED THE DRY LAND.


FOOTNOTES

  [4] Appendix 4, "Date of the Duomo of Torcello."

  [5] For a full account of the form and symbolical meaning of the
    Basilica, see Lord Lindsay's "Christian Art," vol. i. p. 12. It is
    much to be regretted that the Chevalier Bunsen's work on the
    Basilicas of Rome is not translated into English.

  [6] The measures are given in Appendix 3.

  [7] Hope's "Historical Essay on Architecture" (third edition, 1840),
    chap. ix. p. 95. In other respects Mr. Hope has done justice to this
    building, and to the style of the early Christian churches in
    general.

  [8] A sketch has been given of this capital in my folio work.

  [9] Appendix 5, "Modern Pulpits."




CHAPTER III.

MURANO.


§ I. The decay of the city of Venice is, in many respects, like that of
an outwearied and aged human frame; the cause of its decrepitude is
indeed at the heart, but the outward appearances of it are first at the
extremities. In the centre of the city there are still places where some
evidence of vitality remains, and where, with kind closing of the eyes
to signs, too manifest even there, of distress and declining fortune,
the stranger may succeed in imagining, for a little while, what must
have been the aspect of Venice in her prime. But this lingering
pulsation has not force enough any more to penetrate into the suburbs
and outskirts of the city; the frost of death has there seized upon it
irrevocably, and the grasp of mortal disease is marked daily by the
increasing breadth of its belt of ruin. Nowhere is this seen more
grievously than along the great north-eastern boundary, once occupied by
the smaller palaces of the Venetians, built for pleasure or repose; the
nobler piles along the grand canal being reserved for the pomp and
business of daily life. To such smaller palaces some garden ground was
commonly attached, opening to the water-side; and, in front of these
villas and gardens, the lagoon was wont to be covered in the evening by
gondolas: the space of it between this part of the city and the island
group of Murano being to Venice, in her time of power, what its parks
are to London; only gondolas were used instead of carriages, and the
crowd of the population did not come out till towards sunset, and
prolonged their pleasures far into the night, company answering to
company with alternate singing.

§ II. If, knowing this custom of the Venetians, and with a vision in
his mind of summer palaces lining the shore, and myrtle gardens sloping
to the sea, the traveller now seeks this suburb of Venice, he will be
strangely and sadly surprised to find a new but perfectly desolate quay,
about a mile in length, extending from the arsenal to the Sacca della
Misericordia, in front of a line of miserable houses built in the course
of the last sixty or eighty years, yet already tottering to their ruin;
and not less to find that the principal object in the view which these
houses (built partly in front and partly on the ruins of the ancient
palaces) now command is a dead brick wall, about a quarter of a mile
across the water, interrupted only by a kind of white lodge, the
cheerfulness of which prospect is not enhanced by his finding that this
wall encloses the principal public cemetery of Venice. He may, perhaps,
marvel for a few moments at the singular taste of the old Venetians in
taking their pleasure under a churchyard wall: but, on further inquiry,
he will find that the building on the island, like those on the shore,
is recent, that it stands on the ruins of the Church of St. Cristoforo
della Pace; and that with a singular, because unintended, moral, the
modern Venetians have replaced the Peace of the Christ-bearer by the
Peace of Death, and where they once went, as the sun set daily, to their
pleasure, now go, as the sun sets to each of them for ever, to their
graves.

§ III. Yet the power of Nature cannot be shortened by the folly, nor her
beauty altogether saddened by the misery, of man. The broad tides still
ebb and flow brightly about the island of the dead, and the linked
conclave of the Alps know no decline from their old pre-eminence, nor
stoop from their golden thrones in the circle of the horizon. So lovely
is the scene still, in spite of all its injuries, that we shall find
ourselves drawn there again and again at evening out of the narrow
canals and streets of the city, to watch the wreaths of the sea-mists
weaving themselves like mourning veils around the mountains far away,
and listen to the green waves as they fret and sigh along the cemetery
shore.

§ IV. But it is morning now: we have a hard day's work to do at Murano,
and our boat shoots swiftly from beneath the last bridge of Venice, and
brings us out into the open sea and sky.

The pure cumuli of cloud lie crowded and leaning against one another,
rank beyond rank, far over the shining water, each cut away at its
foundation by a level line, trenchant and clear, till they sink to the
horizon like a flight of marble steps, except where the mountains meet
them, and are lost in them, barred across by the grey terraces of those
cloud foundations, and reduced into one crestless bank of blue, spotted
here and there with strange flakes of wan, aerial, greenish light,
strewed upon them like snow. And underneath is the long dark line of the
mainland, fringed with low trees; and then the wide-waving surface of
the burnished lagoon trembling slowly, and shaking out into forked bands
of lengthening light the images of the towers of cloud above. To the
north, there is first the great cemetery wall, then the long stray
buildings of Murano, and the island villages beyond, glittering in
intense crystalline vermilion, like so much jewellery scattered on a
mirror, their towers poised apparently in the air a little above the
horizon, and their reflections, as sharp and vivid and substantial as
themselves, thrown on the vacancy between them and the sea. And thus the
villages seem standing on the air; and, to the east, there is a cluster
of ships that seem sailing on the land; for the sandy line of the Lido
stretches itself between us and them, and we can see the tall white
sails moving beyond it, but not the sea, only there is a sense of the
great sea being indeed there, and a solemn strength of gleaming light in
sky above.

§ V. The most discordant feature in the whole scene is the cloud which
hovers above the glass furnaces of Murano; but this we may not regret,
as it is one of the last signs left of human exertion among the ruinous
villages which surround us. The silent gliding of the gondola brings it
nearer to us every moment; we pass the cemetery, and a deep sea-channel
which separates it from Murano, and finally enter a narrow water-street,
with a paved footpath on each side, raised three or four feet above the
canal, and forming a kind of quay between the water and the doors of the
houses. These latter are, for the most part, low, but built with massy
doors and windows of marble or Istrian stone, square-set and barred with
iron; buildings evidently once of no mean order, though now inhabited
only by the poor. Here and there an ogee window of the fourteenth
century, or a doorway deeply enriched with cable mouldings, shows itself
in the midst of more ordinary features; and several houses, consisting
of one story only carried on square pillars, forming a short arcade
along the quay, have windows sustained on shafts of red Verona marble,
of singular grace and delicacy. All now in vain: little care is there
for their delicacy or grace among the rough fishermen sauntering on the
quay with their jackets hanging loose from their shoulders, jacket and
cap and hair all of the same dark-greenish sea-grey. But there is some
life in the scene, more than is usual in Venice: the women are sitting
at their doors knitting busily, and various workmen of the glass-houses
sifting glass dust upon the pavement, and strange cries coming from one
side of the canal to the other, and ringing far along the crowded water,
from venders of figs and grapes, and gourds and shell-fish; cries partly
descriptive of the eatables in question, but interspersed with others of
a character unintelligible in proportion to their violence, and
fortunately so if we may judge by a sentence which is stencilled in
black, within a garland, on the whitewashed walls of nearly every other
house in the street, but which, how often soever written, no one seems
to regard: "Bestemme non più. Lodate Gesù."

§ VI. We push our way on between large barges laden with fresh water
from Fusina, in round white tubs seven feet across, and complicated
boats full of all manner of nets that look as if they could never be
disentangled, hanging from their masts and over their sides; and
presently pass under a bridge with the lion of St. Mark on its
archivolt, and another on a pillar at the end of the parapet, a small
red lion with much of the puppy in his face, looking vacantly up into
the air (in passing we may note that, instead of feathers, his wings are
covered with hair, and in several other points the manner of his
sculpture is not uninteresting). Presently the canal turns a little to
the left, and thereupon becomes more quiet, the main bustle of the
water-street being usually confined to the first straight reach of it,
some quarter of a mile long, the Cheapside of Murano. We pass a
considerable church on the left, St. Pietro, and a little square
opposite to it with a few acacia trees, and then find our boat suddenly
seized by a strong green eddy, and whirled into the tide-way of one of
the main channels of the lagoon, which divides the town of Murano into
two parts by a deep stream some fifty yards over, crossed only by one
wooden bridge. We let ourselves drift some way down the current, looking
at the low line of cottages on the other side of it, hardly knowing if
there be more cheerfulness or melancholy in the way the sunshine glows
on their ruinous but whitewashed walls, and sparkles on the rushing of
the green water by the grass-grown quay. It needs a strong stroke of the
oar to bring us into the mouth of another quiet canal on the farther
side of the tide-way, and we are still somewhat giddy when we run the
head of the gondola into the sand on the left-hand side of this more
sluggish stream, and land under the east end of the Church of San
Donato, the "Matrice" or "Mother" Church of Murano.

§ VII. It stands, it and the heavy campanile detached from it a few
yards, in a small triangular field of somewhat fresher grass than is
usual near Venice, traversed by a paved walk with green mosaic of short
grass between the rude squares of its stones, bounded on one side by
ruinous garden walls, on another by a line of low cottages, on the
third, the base of the triangle, by the shallow canal from which we have
just landed. Near the point of the triangular space is a simple well,
bearing date 1502; in its widest part, between the canal and campanile,
is a four-square hollow pillar, each side formed by a separate slab of
stone, to which the iron hasps are still attached that once secured the
Venetian standard.

The cathedral itself occupies the northern angle of the field,
encumbered with modern buildings, small outhouse-like chapels, and
wastes of white wall with blank square windows, and itself utterly
defaced in the whole body of it, nothing but the apse having been
spared; the original plan is only discoverable by careful examination,
and even then but partially. The whole impression and effect of the
building are irretrievably lost, but the fragments of it are still most
precious.

We must first briefly state what is known of its history.

§ VIII. The legends of the Romish Church, though generally more insipid
and less varied than those of Paganism, deserve audience from us on this
ground, if on no other, that they have once been sincerely believed by
good men, and have had no ineffective agency in the foundation of the
existent European mind. The reader must not therefore accuse me of
trifling, when I record for him the first piece of information I have
been able to collect respecting the cathedral of Murano: namely, that
the emperor Otho the Great, being overtaken by a storm on the Adriatic,
vowed, if he were preserved, to build and dedicate a church to the
Virgin, in whatever place might be most pleasing to her; that the storm
thereupon abated; and the Virgin appearing to Otho in a dream showed
him, covered with red lilies, that very triangular field on which we
were but now standing, amidst the ragged weeds and shattered pavement.
The emperor obeyed the vision; and the church was consecrated on the
15th of August, 957.

§ IX. Whatever degree of credence we may feel disposed to attach to this
piece of history, there is no question that a church was built on this
spot before the close of the tenth century: since in the year 999 we
find the incumbent of the Basilica (note this word, it is of some
importance) di Santa Maria Plebania di Murano taking an oath of
obedience to the Bishop of the Altinat church, and engaging at the same
time to give the said bishop his dinner on the Domenica in Albis, when
the prelate held a confirmation in the mother church, as it was then
commonly called, of Murano. From this period, for more than a century, I
can find no records of any alterations made in the fabric of the church,
but there exist very full details of the quarrels which arose between
its incumbents and those of San Stefano, San Cipriano, San Salvatore,
and the other churches of Murano, touching the due obedience which their
less numerous or less ancient brotherhoods owed to St. Mary's.

These differences seem to have been renewed at the election of every new
abbot by each of the fraternities, and must have been growing serious
when the patriarch of Grado, Henry Dandolo, interfered in 1102, and, in
order to seal a peace between the two principal opponents, ordered that
the abbot of St. Stephen's should be present at the service in St.
Mary's on the night of the Epiphany, and that the abbot of St. Mary's
should visit him of St. Stephen's on St. Stephen's day; and that then
the two abbots "should eat apples and drink good wine together, in peace
and charity."[10]

§ X. But even this kindly effort seems to have been without result: the
irritated pride of the antagonists remained unsoothed by the love-feast
of St. Stephen's day; and the breach continued to widen until the abbot
of St. Mary's obtained a timely accession to his authority in the year
1125. The Doge Domenico Michele, having in the second crusade secured
such substantial advantages for the Venetians as might well
counterbalance the loss of part of their trade with the East, crowned
his successes by obtaining possession in Cephalonia of the body of St.
Donato, bishop of Euroea; which treasure he having presented on his
return to the Murano basilica, that church was thenceforward called the
church of Sts. Mary and Donato. Nor was the body of the saint its only
acquisition: St. Donato's principal achievement had been the destruction
of a terrible dragon in Epirus; Michele brought home the bones of the
dragon as well as of the saint; the latter were put in a marble
sarcophagus, and the former hung up over the high altar.

§ XI. But the clergy of St. Stefano were indomitable. At the very moment
when their adversaries had received this formidable accession of
strength, they had the audacity "ad onta de' replicati giuramenti, e
dell'inveterata consuetudine,"[11] to refuse to continue in the
obedience which they had vowed to their mother church. The matter was
tried in a provincial council; the votaries of St. Stephen were
condemned, and remained quiet for about twenty years, in wholesome dread
of the authority conferred on the abbot of St. Donate, by the Pope's
legate, to suspend any o the clergy of the island from their office if
they refused submission. In 1172, however, they appealed to Pope
Alexander III, and were condemned again: and we find the struggle
renewed at every promising opportunity, during the course of the 12th
and 13th centuries; until at last, finding St. Donate and the dragon
together too strong for him, the abbot of St. Stefano "discovered" in
his church the bodies of two hundred martyrs at once!--a discovery, it
is to be remembered, in some sort equivalent in those days to that of
California in ours. The inscription, however, on the façade of the
church, recorded it with quiet dignity:--"MCCCLXXIV. a di XIV. di
Aprile. Furono trovati nella presente chiesa del protomartire San
Stefano, duecento e più corpi de' Santi Martiri, dal Ven. Prete Matteo
Fradello, piovano della chiesa."[12] Corner, who gives this inscription,
which no longer exists, goes on to explain with infinite gravity, that
the bodies in question, "being of infantile form and stature, are
reported by tradition to have belonged to those fortunate innocents who
suffered martyrdom under King Herod; but that when, or by whom, the
church was enriched with so vast a treasure, is not manifested by any
document."[13]

§ XII. The issue of the struggle is not to our present purpose. We have
already arrived at the fourteenth century without finding record of any
effort made by the clergy of St. Mary's to maintain their influence by
restoring or beautifying their basilica; which is the only point at
present of importance to us. That great alterations were made in it at
the time of the acquisition of the body of St. Donato is however highly
probable, the mosaic pavement of the interior, which bears its date
inscribed, 1140, being probably the last of the additions. I believe
that no part of the ancient church can be shown to be of more recent
date than this; and I shall not occupy the reader's time by any inquiry
respecting the epochs or authors of the destructive modern restorations;
the wreck of the old fabric, breaking out beneath them here and there,
is generally distinguishable from them at a glance; and it is enough for
the reader to know that none of these truly ancient fragments can be
assigned to a more recent date than 1140, and that some of them may with
probability be looked upon as remains of the shell of the first church,
erected in the course of the latter half of the tenth century. We shall
perhaps obtain some further reason for this belief as we examine these
remains themselves.

§ XIII. Of the body of the church, unhappily, they are few and obscure;
but the general form and extent of the building, as shown in the plan,
Plate I. fig. 2, are determined, first, by the breadth of the uninjured
east end D E; secondly, by some remains of the original brickwork of the
clerestory, and in all probability of the side walls also, though these
have been refaced; and finally by the series of nave shafts, which are
still perfect. The doors A and B may or may not be in their original
positions; there must of course have been always, as now, a principal
entrance at the west end. The ground plan is composed, like that of
Torcello, of nave and aisles only, but the clerestory has transepts
extending as far as the outer wall of the aisles. The semicircular apse,
thrown out in the centre of the east end, is now the chief feature of
interest in the church, though the nave shafts and the eastern
extremities of the aisles, outside, are also portions of the original
building; the latter having been modernized in the interior, it cannot
now be ascertained whether, as is probable, the aisles had once round
ends as well as the choir. The spaces F G form small chapels, of which G
has a straight terminal wall behind its altar, and F a curved one,
marked by the dotted line; the partitions which divide these chapels
from the presbytery are also indicated by dotted lines, being modern
work.

§ XIV. The plan is drawn carefully to scale, but the relation in which
its proportions are disposed can hardly be appreciated by the eye. The
width of the nave from shaft to opposite shaft is 32 feet 8 inches: of
the aisles, from the shaft to the wall, 16 feet 2 inches, or allowing 2
inches for the thickness of the modern wainscot, 16 feet 4 inches, half
the breadth of the nave exactly. The intervals between the shafts are
exactly one fourth of the width of the nave, or 8 feet 2 inches, and the
distance between the great piers which form the pseudo-transept is 24
feet 6 inches, exactly three times the interval of the shafts. So the
four distances are accurately in arithmetical proportion; i.e.

                                  Ft. In.
  Interval of shafts               8   2
  Width of aisle                  16   4
  Width of transept               24   6
  Width of nave                   32   8

The shafts average 5 feet 4 inches in circumference, as near the base as
they can be got at, being covered with wood; and the broadest sides of
the main piers are 4 feet 7 inches wide, their narrowest sides 3 feet 6
inches. The distance _a c_ from the outmost angle of these piers to the
beginning of the curve of the apse is 25 feet, and from that point the
apse is nearly semicircular, but it is so encumbered with renaissance
fittings that its form cannot be ascertained with perfect accuracy. It
is roofed by a concha, or semi-dome; and the external arrangement of its
walls provides for the security of this dome by what is, in fact, a
system of buttresses as effective and definite as that of any of the
northern churches, although the buttresses are obtained entirely by
adaptations of the Roman shaft and arch, the lower story being formed by
a thick mass of wall lightened by ordinary semicircular round-headed
niches, like those used so extensively afterwards in renaissance
architecture, each niche flanked by a pair of shafts standing clear of
the wall, and bearing deeply moulded arches thrown over the niche. The
wall with its pillars thus forms a series of massy buttresses (as seen
in the ground plan), on the top of which is an open gallery, backed by a
thinner wall, and roofed by arches whose shafts are set above the pairs
of shafts below. On the heads of these arches rests the roof. We have,
therefore, externally a heptagonal apse, chiefly of rough and common
brick, only with marble shafts and a few marble ornaments; but for that
very reason all the more interesting, because it shows us what may be
done, and what was done, with materials such as are now at our own
command; and because in its proportions, and in the use of the few
ornaments it possesses, it displays a delicacy of feeling rendered
doubly notable by the roughness of the work in which laws so subtle are
observed, and with which so thoughtful ornamentation is associated.

§ XV. First, for its proportions: I shall have occasion in Chapter V. to
dwell at some length on the peculiar subtlety of the early Venetian
perception for ratios of magnitude; the relations of the sides of this
heptagonal apse supply one of the first and most curious instances of
it. The proportions above given of the nave and aisles might have been
dictated by a mere love of mathematical precision; but those of the apse
could only have resulted from a true love of harmony.

In fig. 6, Plate I. the plan of this part of the church is given on a
large scale, showing that its seven external sides are arranged on a
line less than a semicircle, so that if the figure were completed, it
would have sixteen sides; and it will be observed also, that the seven
sides are arranged in four magnitudes, the widest being the central one.
The brickwork is so much worn away, that the measures of the arches are
not easily ascertainable, but those of the plinth on which they stand,
which is nearly uninjured, may be obtained accurately. This plinth is
indicated by the open line in the ground plan, and its sides measure
respectively:

                                  Ft.  In.
  1st. _a b_ in plan               6    7
  2nd. _b c_                       7    7
  3rd. _c d_                       7    5
  4th. _d e_ (central)             7   10
  5th. _e f_                       7    5
  6th  _f g_                       7    8
  7th. _g h_                       6   10

§ XVI. Now observe what subtle feeling is indicated by this delicacy of
proportion. How fine must the perceptions of grace have been in those
builders who could not be content without _some_ change between the
second and third, the fifth and sixth terms of proportion, such as
should oppose the general direction of its cadence, and yet _were_
content with a diminution of two inches on a breadth of seven feet and a
half! For I do not suppose that the reader will think the curious
lessening of the third and fifth arch a matter of accident, and even if
he did so, I shall be able to prove to him hereafter that it was not,
but that the early builders were always desirous of obtaining some
alternate proportion of this kind. The relations of the numbers are not
easily comprehended in the form of feet and inches, but if we reduce the
first four of them into inches, and then subtract some constant number,
suppose 75, from them all, the remainders 4, 16, 14, 19, will exhibit
the ratio of proportion in a clearer, though exaggerated form.

§ XVII. The pairs of circular spots at _b_, _c_, _d_, etc., on the
ground plan fig. 6, represent the bearing shafts, which are all of solid
marble as well as their capitals. Their measures and various other
particulars respecting them are given in Appendix 6. "Apse of Murano;"
here I only wish the reader to note the coloring of their capitals.
Those of the two single shafts in the angles (_a_, _h_) are both of deep
purple marble; the two next pairs, _b_ and _g_, are of white marble; the
pairs _c_ and _f_ are of purple, and _d_ and _e_ are of white: thus
alternating with each other on each side; two white meeting in the
centre. Now observe, _the purple capitals are all left plain; the white
are all sculptured_. For the old builders knew that by carving the
purple capitals they would have injured them in two ways: first, they
would have mixed a certain quantity of grey shadow with the surface hue,
and so adulterated the purity of the color; secondly, they would have
drawn away the thoughts from the color, and prevented the mind from
fixing upon it or enjoying it, by the degree of attention which the
sculpture would have required. So they left their purple capitals full
broad masses of color; and sculptured the white ones, which would
otherwise have been devoid of interest.

§ XVIII. But the feature which is most to be noted in this apse is a
band of ornament, which runs round it like a silver girdle, composed of
sharp wedges of marble, preciously inlaid, and set like jewels into the
brickwork; above it there is another band of triangular recesses in the
bricks, of nearly similar shape, and it seems equally strange that all
the marbles should have fallen from it, or that it should have been
originally destitute of them. The reader may choose his hypothesis; but
there is quite enough left to interest us in the lower band, which is
fortunately left in its original state, as is sufficiently proved by the
curious niceties in the arrangement of its colors, which are assuredly
to be attributed to the care of the first builder. A word or two, in the
first place, respecting the means of color at his disposal.

§ XIX. I stated that the building was, for the most part, composed of
yellow brick. This yellow is very nearly pure, much more positive and
somewhat darker than that of our English light brick, and the material
of the brick is very good and hard, looking, in places, almost
vitrified, and so compact as to resemble stone. Together with this brick
occurs another of a deep full red, and more porous substance, which is
used for decoration chiefly, while all the parts requiring strength are
composed of the yellow brick. Both these materials are _cast into any
shape and size_ the builder required, either into curved pieces for the
arches, or flat tiles for filling the triangles; and, what is still more
curious, the thickness of the yellow bricks used for the walls varies
considerably, from two inches to four; and their length also, some of
the larger pieces used in important positions being a foot and a half
long.

With these two kinds of brick, the builder employed five or six kinds of
marble: pure white, and white veined with purple; a brecciated marble of
white and black; a brecciated marble of white and deep green; another,
deep red, or nearly of the color of Egyptian porphyry; and a grey and
black marble, in fine layers.

§ XX. The method of employing these materials will be understood at once
by a reference to the opposite plate (Plate III.), which represents two
portions of the lower band. I could not succeed in expressing the
variation and chequering of color in marble, by real tints in the print;
and have been content, therefore, to give them in line engraving. The
different triangles are, altogether, of ten kinds:

  a. Pure white marble with sculptured surface (as the third and fifth
       in the upper series of Plate III.).

  b. Cast triangle of red brick with a sculptured round-headed piece of
       white marble inlaid (as the first and seventh of the upper
       series, Plate III.).

  c. A plain triangle of greenish black marble, now perhaps
       considerably paler in color than when first employed (as the
       second and sixth of the upper series of Plate III.).

  d. Cast red brick triangle, with a diamond inlaid of the
       above-mentioned black marble (as the fourth in the upper series
       of Plate III.).

  e. Cast white brick, with an inlaid round-headed piece of marble,
       variegated with black and yellow, or white and violet (not seen
       in the plate).

  f. Occurs only once, a green-veined marble, forming the upper part of
       the triangle, with a white piece below.

  g. Occurs only once. A brecciated marble of intense black and pure
       white, the centre of the lower range in Plate III.

  h. Sculptured white marble with a triangle of veined purple marble
       inserted (as the first, third, fifth, and seventh of the lower
       range in Plate III.).

  i. Yellow or white marble veined with purple (as the second and sixth
       of the lower range in Plate III.).

  k. Pure purple marble, not seen in this plate.

[Illustration: Plate III.
               INLAID BANDS OF MURANO.]

§ XXI. The band, then, composed of these triangles, set close to each
other in varied but not irregular relations, is thrown, like a necklace
of precious stones, round the apse and along the ends of the aisles;
each side of the apse taking, of course, as many triangles as its width
permits. If the reader will look back to the measures of the sides of
the apse, given before, p. 42, he will see that the first and seventh of
the series, being much narrower than the rest, cannot take so many
triangles in their band. Accordingly, they have only six each, while the
other five sides have seven. Of these groups of seven triangles each,
that used for the third and fifth sides of the apse is the uppermost in
Plate III.; and that used for the centre of the apse, and of the whole
series, is the lowermost in the same plate; _the piece of black and
white marble being used to emphasize the centre of the chain_, exactly
as a painter would use a dark touch for a similar purpose.

§ XXII. And now, with a little trouble, we can set before the reader, at
a glance, the arrangement of the groups along the entire extremity of
the church.

There are thirteen recesses, indicative of thirteen arches, seen in the
ground plan, fig. 2, Plate I. Of these, the second and twelfth arches
rise higher than the rest; so high as to break the decorated band; and
the groups of triangles we have to enumerate are, therefore, only eleven
in number; one above each of the eleven low arches. And of these eleven,
the first and second, tenth and eleventh, are at the ends of the aisles;
while the third to the ninth, inclusive, go round the apse. Thus, in the
following table, the numerals indicate the place of each entire group
(counting from the south to the north side of the church, or from left
to right), and the letters indicate the species of triangle of which it
is composed, as described in the list given above.

                        6. h. i. h. g. h. i. h.
         5. b. c. a. d. a. c. b.       7. b. c. a. d. a. c. b.
      4. b. a. b. c. a. e. a.             8. a. e. a. c. b. a. b.
    3. b. a. b. e. b. a.                       9. a. b. e. b. a. b.
  2. a. b. c.                                     10. a. b. c. b.
  1. a. b. c. b. a.                               11. b. a. c. f. a. a.

The central group is put first, that it may be seen how the series on
the two sides of the apse answer each other. It was a very curious freak
to insert the triangle e, in the outermost place _but one_ of both the
fourth and eighth sides of the apse, and in the outermost _but two_ in
the third and ninth; in neither case having any balance to it in its own
group, and the real balance being only effected on the other side of the
apse, which it is impossible that any one should see at the same time.
This is one of the curious pieces of system which so often occur in
mediæval work, of which the key is now lost. The groups at the ends of
the transepts correspond neither in number nor arrangement; we shall
presently see why, but must first examine more closely the treatment of
the triangles themselves, and the nature of the floral sculpture
employed upon them.

[Illustration: Plate IV.
               SCULPTURES OF MURANO.]

§ XXIII. As the scale of Plate III. is necessarily small, I have given
three of the sculptured triangles on a larger scale in Plate IV.
opposite. Fig. 3 is one of the four in the lower series of Plate IV.,
and figs. 4 and 5 from another group. The forms of the trefoils are here
seen more clearly; they, and all the other portions of the design, are
thrown out in low and flat relief, the intermediate spaces being cut out
to the depth of about a quarter of an inch. I believe these vacant
spaces were originally filled with a black composition, which is used in
similar sculptures at St. Mark's, and of which I found some remains in
an archivolt moulding here, though not in the triangles. The surface of
the whole would then be perfectly smooth, and the ornamental form
relieved by a ground of dark grey; but, even though this ground is lost,
the simplicity of the method insures the visibility of all its parts at
the necessary distance (17 or 18 feet), and the quaint trefoils have a
crispness and freshness of effect which I found it almost impossible to
render in a drawing. Nor let us fail to note in passing how strangely
delightful to the human mind the trefoil always is. We have it here
repeated five or six hundred times in the space of a few yards, and yet
are never weary of it. In fact, there are two mystical feelings at the
root of our enjoyment of this decoration: the one is the love of
trinity in unity, the other that of the sense of fulness with order; of
every place being instantly filled, and yet filled with propriety and
ease; the leaves do not push each other, nor put themselves out of their
own way, and yet whenever there is a vacant space, a leaf is always
ready to step in and occupy it.

§ XXIV. I said the trefoil was five or six hundred times repeated. It is
so, but observe, it is hardly ever twice of the same size; and this law
is studiously and resolutely observed. In the carvings _a_ and _b_ of
the upper series, Plate III., the diminution of the leaves might indeed
seem merely representative of the growth of the plant. But look at the
lower: the triangles of inlaid purple marble are made much more nearly
equilateral than those of white marble, into whose centres they are set,
so that the leaves may continually diminish in size as the ornament
descends at the sides. The reader may perhaps doubt the accuracy of the
drawing on the smaller scale, but in that given larger, fig. 3, Plate
IV., the angles are all measured, and the _purposeful_ variation of
width in the border therefore admits of no dispute.[14] Remember how
absolutely this principle is that of nature; the same leaf continually
repeated, but never twice of the same size. Look at the clover under
your feet, and then you will see what this Murano builder meant, and
that he was not altogether a barbarian.

§ XXV. Another point I wish the reader to observe is, the importance
attached to _color_ in the mind of the designer. Note especially--for it
is of the highest importance to see how the great principles of art are
carried out through the whole building--that, as only the white capitals
are sculptured below, only the white triangles are sculptured above. No
colored triangle is touched with sculpture; note also, that in the two
principal groups of the apse, given in Plate III., the centre of the
group is color, not sculpture, and the eye is evidently intended to be
drawn as much to the chequers of the stone, as to the intricacies of the
chiselling. It will be noticed also how much more precious the lower
series, which is central in the apse, is rendered, than the one above it
in the plate, which flanks it: there is no brick in the lower one, and
three kinds of variegated marble are used in it, whereas the upper is
composed of brick, with black and white marble only; and lastly--for
this is especially delightful--see how the workman made his chiselling
finer where it was to go with the variegated marbles, and used a bolder
pattern with the coarser brick and dark stone. The subtlety and
perfection of artistical feeling in all this are so redundant, that in
the building itself the eye can rest upon this colored chain with the
same kind of delight that it has in a piece of the embroidery of Paul
Veronese.

[Illustration: Fig. II.]

§ XXVI. Such being the construction of the lower band, that of the upper
is remarkable only for the curious change in its proportions. The two
are separated, as seen in the little woodcut here at the side, by a
string-course composed of two layers of red bricks, of which the
uppermost projects as a cornice, and is sustained by an intermediate
course of irregular brackets, obtained by setting the thick yellow
bricks edgeways, in the manner common to this day. But the wall above is
carried up perpendicularly from this projection, so that the whole upper
band is advanced to the thickness of a brick over the lower one. The
result of this is, of course, that each side of the apse is four or five
inches broader above than below; so that the same number of triangles
which filled a whole side of the lower band, leave an inch or two blank
at each angle in the upper. This would have looked awkward, if there had
been the least appearance of its being an accidental error; so that, in
order to draw the eye to it, and show that it is done on purpose, the
upper triangles are made about two inches higher than the lower ones, so
as to be much more acute in proportion and effect, and actually to
look considerably narrower, though of the same width at the base. By
this means they are made lighter in effect, and subordinated to the
richly decorated series of the lower band, and the two courses, instead
of repeating, unite with each other, and become a harmonious whole.

[Illustration: Plate V.
               Archivolt in the Duomo of Murano.]

In order, however, to make still more sure that this difference in the
height of the triangles should not escape the eye, another course of
plain bricks is added above their points, increasing the width of the
band by another two inches. There are five courses of bricks in the
lower band, and it measures 1 ft. 6 in. in height: there are seven
courses in the upper (of which six fall between the triangles), and it
measures 1 ft. 10 in. in height, except at the extremity of the northern
aisle, where for some mysterious reason the intermediate cornice is
sloped upwards so as to reduce the upper triangles to the same height as
those below. And here, finally, observe how determined the builder was
that the one series should not be a mere imitation of the other; he
could not now make them acute by additional height--so he here, and here
only, _narrowed their bases_, and we have seven of them above, to six
below.

§ XXVII. We come now to the most interesting portion of the whole east
end, the archivolt at the end of the northern aisle.

It was above stated, that the band of triangles was broken by two higher
arches at the ends of the aisles. That, however, on the northern side of
the apse does not entirely interrupt, but lifts it, and thus forms a
beautiful and curious archivolt, drawn opposite, in Plate V. The upper
band of triangles cannot rise together with the lower, as it would
otherwise break the cornice prepared to receive the second story; and
the curious zigzag with which its triangles die away against the sides
of the arch, exactly as waves break upon the sand, is one of the most
curious features in the structure.

It will be also seen that there is a new feature in the treatment of the
band itself when it turns the arch. Instead of leaving the bricks
projecting between the sculptured or colored stones, reversed triangles
of marble are used, inlaid to an equal depth with the others in the
brickwork, but projecting beyond them so as to produce a sharp dark line
of zigzag at their junctions. Three of these supplementary stones have
unhappily fallen out, so that it is now impossible to determine the full
harmony of color in which they were originally arranged. The central
one, corresponding to the keystone in a common arch, is, however, most
fortunately left, with two lateral ones on the right hand, and one on
the left.

§ XXVIII. The keystone, if it may be so called, is of white marble, the
lateral voussoirs of purple; and these are the only colored stones in
the whole building which are sculptured; but they are sculptured in a
way which, more satisfactorily proves that the principle above stated
was understood by the builders, than if they had been left blank. The
object, observe, was to make the archivolt as rich as possible; eight of
the white sculptured marbles were used upon it in juxtaposition. Had the
purple marbles been left altogether plain, they would have been out of
harmony with the elaboration of the rest. It became necessary to touch
them with sculpture as a mere sign of carefulness and finish, but at the
same time destroying their colored surface as little as possible. _The
ornament is merely outlined upon them with a fine incision_, as if it
had been etched out on their surface preparatory to being carved. In two
of them it is composed merely of three concentric lines, parallel with
the sides of the triangle; in the third, it is a wreath of beautiful
design, which I have drawn of larger size in fig. 2, Plate V., that the
reader may see how completely the surface is left undestroyed by the
delicate incisions of the chisel, and may compare the method of working
with that employed on the white stones, two of which are given in that
plate, figs. 4 and 5. The keystone, of which we have not yet spoken, is
the only white stone worked with the light incision; its design not
being capable of the kind of workmanship given to the floral ornaments,
and requiring either to be carved in complete relief, or left as we see
it. It is given at fig. 1 of Plate IV. The sun and moon on each side of
the cross are, as we shall see in the fifth Chapter, constantly employed
on the keystones of Byzantine arches.

§ XXIX. We must not pass without notice the grey and green pieces of
marble inserted at the flanks of the arch. For, observe, there was a
difficulty in getting the forms of the triangle into anything like
reconciliation at this point, and a mediæval artist always delights in a
difficulty: instead of concealing it, he boasts of it; and just as we
saw above that he directed the eye to the difficulty of filling the
expanded sides of the upper band by elongating his triangles, so here,
having to put in a piece of stone of awkward shape, he makes that very
stone the most conspicuous in the whole arch, on both sides, by using in
one case a dark, cold grey; in the other a vigorous green, opposed to
the warm red and purple and white of the stones above and beside it. The
green and white piece on the right is of a marble, as far as I know,
exceedingly rare. I at first thought the white fragments were inlaid, so
sharply are they defined upon their ground. They are indeed inlaid, but
I believe it is by nature; and that the stone is a calcareous breccia of
great mineralogical interest. The white spots are of singular value in
giving piquancy to the whole range of more delicate transitional hues
above. The effect of the whole is, however, generally injured by the
loss of the three large triangles above. I have no doubt they were
purple, like those which remain, and that the whole arch was thus one
zone of white, relieved on a purple ground, encircled by the scarlet
cornices of brick, and the whole chord of color contrasted by the two
precious fragments of grey and green at either side.

§ XXX. The two pieces of carved stone inserted at each side of the arch,
as seen at the bottom of Plate V., are of different workmanship from the
rest; they do not match each other, and form part of the evidence which
proves that portions of the church had been brought from the mainland.
One bears an inscription, which, as its antiquity is confirmed by the
shapelessness of its letters, I was much gratified by not being able to
read; but M. Lazari, the intelligent author of the latest and best
Venetian guide, with better skill, has given as much of it as remains,
thus:

[Illustration: T    SCEMARIEDIGENETRICISETBEATIESTEFANIMART
               IRIEGOINDIGNVSETPECCATURDOMENICUST]

I have printed the letters as they are placed in the inscription, in
order that the reader may form some idea of the difficulty of reading
such legends when the letters, thus thrown into one heap, are themselves
of strange forms, and half worn away; any gaps which at all occur
between them coming in the wrong places. There is no doubt, however, as
to the reading of this fragment:--"T ... Sancte Marie Domini Genetricis
et beati Estefani martiri ego indignus et peccator Domenicus T." On
these two initial and final T's, expanding one into Templum, the other
into Torcellanus, M. Lazari founds an ingenious conjecture that the
inscription records the elevation of the church under a certain bishop
Dominic of Torcello (named in the Altinat Chronicle), who flourished in
the middle of the ninth century. If this were so, as the inscription
occurs broken off on a fragment inserted scornfully in the present
edifice, this edifice must be of the twelfth century, worked with
fragments taken from the ruins of that built in the ninth. The two T's
are, however, hardly a foundation large enough to build the church upon,
a hundred years before the date assigned to it both by history and
tradition (see above, § VIII.): and the reader has yet to be made aware
of the principal fact bearing on the question.

§ XXXI. Above the first story of the apse runs, as he knows already, a
gallery under open arches, protected by a light balustrade. This
balustrade is worked on the _outside_ with mouldings, of which I shall
only say at present that they are of exactly the same school as the
greater part of the work of the existing church. But the great
horizontal pieces of stone which form the top of this balustrade are
fragments of an older building turned inside out. They are covered with
sculptures on the back, only to be seen by mounting into the gallery.
They have once had an arcade of low wide arches traced on their surface,
the spandrils filled with leafage, and archivolts enriched with studded
chainwork and with crosses in their centres. These pieces have been used
as waste marble by the architect of the existing apse. The small arches
of the present balustrade are cut mercilessly through the old work, and
the profile of the balustrade is cut out of what was once the back of
the stone; only some respect is shown for the crosses in the old design,
the blocks are cut so that these shall be not only left uninjured, but
come in the centre of the balustrades.

§ XXXII. Now let the reader observe carefully that this balustrade of
Murano is a fence of other things than the low gallery round the
deserted apse. It is a barrier between two great schools of early
architecture. On one side it was cut by Romanesque workmen of the early
Christian ages, and furnishes us with a distinct type of a kind of
ornament which, as we meet with other examples of it, we shall be able
to describe in generic terms, and to throw back behind this balustrade,
out of our way. The _front_ of the balustrade presents us with a totally
different condition of design, less rich, more graceful, and here shown
in its simplest possible form. From the outside of this bar of marble we
shall commence our progress in the study of existing Venetian
architecture. The only question is, do we begin from the tenth or from
the twelfth century?

§ XXXIII. I was in great hopes once of being able to determine this
positively; but the alterations in all the early buildings of Venice are
so numerous, and the foreign fragments introduced so innumerable, that I
was obliged to leave the question doubtful. But one circumstance must be
noted, bearing upon it closely.

In the woodcut on page 50, Fig. III., _b_ is an archivolt of Murano, _a_
one of St. Mark's; the latter acknowledged by all historians and all
investigators to be of the twelfth century.

_All_ the twelfth century archivolts in Venice, without exception, are
on the model of _a_, differing only in their decorations and sculpture.
There is not one which resembles that of Murano.

But the deep mouldings of Murano are almost exactly similar to those of
St. Michele of Pavia, and other Lombard churches built, some as early as
the seventh, others in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries.

On this ground it seems to me probable that the existing apse of Murano
is part of the original earliest church, and that the inscribed
fragments used in it have been brought from the mainland. The
balustrade, however, may still be later than the rest; it will be
examined, hereafter, more carefully.[15]

I have not space to give any farther account of the exterior of the
building, though one half of what is remarkable in it remains untold. We
must now see what is left of interest within the walls.

[Illustration: Fig. III.]

§ XXXIV. All hope is taken away by our first glance; for it falls on a
range of shafts whose bases are concealed by wooden panelling, and which
sustain arches decorated in the most approved style of Renaissance
upholstery, with stucco roses in squares under the soffits, and egg and
arrow mouldings on the architraves, gilded, on a ground of spotty black
and green, with a small pink-faced and black-eyed cherub on every
keystone; the rest of the church being for the most part concealed
either by dirty hangings, or dirtier whitewash, or dim pictures on
warped and wasting canvas; all vulgar, vain, and foul. Yet let us not
turn back, for in the shadow of the apse our more careful glance shows
us a Greek Madonna, pictured on a field of gold; and we feel giddy at
the first step we make on the pavement, for it, also, is of Greek mosaic
waved like the sea, and dyed like a dove's neck.

§ XXXV. Nor are the original features of the rest of the edifice
altogether indecipherable; the entire series of shafts marked in the
ground plan on each side of the nave, from the western entrance to the
apse, are nearly uninjured; and I believe the stilted arches they
sustain are those of the original fabric, though the masonry is covered
by the Renaissance stucco mouldings. Their capitals, for a wonder, are
left bare, and appear to have sustained no farther injury than has
resulted from the insertion of a large brass chandelier into each of
their abaci, each chandelier carrying a sublime wax candle two inches
thick, fastened with wire to the wall above. The due arrangement of
these appendages, previous to festal days, can only be effected from a
ladder set against the angle of the abacus; and ten minutes before I
wrote this sentence, I had the privilege of watching the candlelighter
at his work, knocking his ladder about the heads of the capitals as if
they had given him personal offence. He at last succeeded in breaking
away one of the lamps altogether, with a bit of the marble of the
abacus; the whole falling in ruin to the pavement, and causing much
consultation and clamor among a tribe of beggars who were assisting the
sacristan with their wisdom respecting the festal arrangements.

§ XXXVI. It is fortunate that the capitals themselves, being somewhat
rudely cut, can bear this kind of treatment better than most of those in
Venice. They are all founded on the Corinthian type, but the leaves are
in every one different: those of the easternmost capital of the southern
range are the best, and very beautiful, but presenting no feature of
much interest, their workmanship being inferior to most of the
imitations of Corinthian common at the period; much more to the rich
fantasies which we have seen at Torcello. The apse itself, to-day (12th
September, 1851), is not to be described; for just in front of it,
behind the altar, is a magnificent curtain of new red velvet with a
gilt edge and two golden tassels, held up in a dainty manner by two
angels in the upholsterer's service; and above all, for concentration of
effect, a star or sun, some five feet broad, the spikes of which conceal
the whole of the figure of the Madonna except the head and hands.

§ XXXVII. The pavement is however still left open, and it is of infinite
interest, although grievously distorted and defaced. For whenever a new
chapel has been built, or a new altar erected, the pavement has been
broken up and readjusted so as to surround the newly inserted steps or
stones with some appearance of symmetry; portions of it either covered or
carried away, others mercilessly shattered or replaced by modern
imitations, and those of very different periods, with pieces of the old
floor left here and there in the midst of them, and worked round so as to
deceive the eye into acceptance of the whole as ancient. The portion,
however, which occupies the western extremity of the nave, and the parts
immediately adjoining it in the aisles, are, I believe, in their original
positions, and very little injured: they are composed chiefly of groups
of peacocks, lions, stags, and griffins,--two of each in a group,
drinking out of the same vase, or shaking claws together,--enclosed by
interlacing bands, and alternating with chequer or star patterns, and
here and there an attempt at representation of architecture, all worked
in marble mosaic. The floors of Torcello and of St. Mark's are executed
in the same manner; but what remains at Murano is finer than either, in
the extraordinary play of color obtained by the use of variegated
marbles. At St. Mark's the patterns are more intricate, and the pieces
far more skilfully set together; but each piece is there commonly of one
color: at Murano every fragment is itself variegated, and all are
arranged with a skill and feeling not to be caught, and to be observed
with deep reverence, for that pavement is not dateless, like the rest of
the church; it bears its date on one of its central circles, 1140, and
is, in my mind, one of the most precious monuments in Italy, showing thus
early, and in those rude chequers which the bared knee of the Murano
fisher wears in its daily bending, the beginning of that mighty spirit of
Venetian color, which was to be consummated in Titian.

§ XXXVIII. But we must quit the church for the present, for its
garnishings are completed; the candles are all upright in their sockets,
and the curtains drawn into festoons, and a paste-board crescent, gay
with artificial flowers, has been attached to the capital of every
pillar, in order, together with the gilt angels, to make the place look
as much like Paradise as possible. If we return to-morrow, we shall find
it filled with woful groups of aged men and women, wasted and
fever-struck, fixed in paralytic supplication, half-kneeling,
half-couched upon the pavement; bowed down, partly in feebleness, partly
in a fearful devotion, with their grey clothes cast far over their
faces, ghastly and settled into a gloomy animal misery, all but the
glittering eyes and muttering lips.

Fit inhabitants, these, for what was once the Garden of Venice, "a
terrestrial paradise,--a place of nymphs and demi-gods!"[16]

§ XXXIX. We return, yet once again, on the following day. Worshippers
and objects of worship, the sickly crowd and gilded angels, all are
gone; and there, far in the apse, is seen the sad Madonna standing in
her folded robe, lifting her hands in vanity of blessing. There is
little else to draw away our thoughts from the solitary image. An old
wooden tablet, carved into a rude effigy of San Donato, which occupies
the central niche in the lower part of the tribune, has an interest of
its own, but is unconnected with the history of the older church. The
faded frescoes of saints, which cover the upper tier of the wall of the
apse, are also of comparatively recent date, much more the piece of
Renaissance workmanship, shaft and entablature, above the altar, which
has been thrust into the midst of all, and has cut away part of the feet
of the Madonna. Nothing remains of the original structure but the
semi-dome itself, the cornice whence it springs, which is the same as
that used on the exterior of the church, and the border and face-arch
which surround it. The ground of the dome is of gold, unbroken except by
the upright Madonna, and usual inscription, M R [Greek: Theta] V. The
figure wears a robe of blue, deeply fringed with gold, which seems to be
gathered on the head and thrown back on the shoulders, crossing the
breast, and falling in many folds to the ground. The under robe, shown
beneath it where it opens at the breast, is of the same color; the
whole, except the deep gold fringe, being simply the dress of the women
of the time. "Le donne, anco elle del 1100, vestivano _di turchino con
manti in spalla_, che le coprivano dinanzi e di dietro."[17]

Round the dome there is a colored mosaic border; and on the edge of its
arch, legible by the whole congregation, this inscription:

  "QUOS EVA CONTRIVIT, PIA VIRGO MARIA REDEMIT;
   HANC CUNCTI LAUDENT, QUI CRISTI MUNERE GAUDENT."[18]

The whole edifice is, therefore, simply a temple to the Virgin: to her
is ascribed the fact of Redemption, and to her its praise.

§ XL. "And is this," it will be asked of me, "the time, is this the
worship, to which you would have us look back with reverence and
regret?" Inasmuch as redemption is ascribed to the Virgin, No. Inasmuch
as redemption is a thing desired, believed, rejoiced in, Yes,--and Yes a
thousand times. As far as the Virgin is worshipped in place of God, No;
but as far as there is the evidence of worship itself, and of the sense
of a Divine presence, Yes. For there is a wider division of men than
that into Christian and Pagan: before we ask what a man worships, we
have to ask whether he worships at all. Observe Christ's own words on
this head: "God is a spirit; and they that worship Him must worship Him
in spirit, _and_ in truth." The worshipping in spirit comes first, and
it does not necessarily imply the worshipping in truth. Therefore, there
is first the broad division of men into Spirit worshippers and Flesh
worshippers; and then, of the Spirit worshippers, the farther division
into Christian and Pagan,--worshippers in Falsehood or in Truth. I
therefore, for the moment, omit all inquiry how far the Mariolatry of
the early church did indeed eclipse Christ, or what measure of deeper
reverence for the Son of God was still felt through all the grosser
forms of Madonna worship. Let that worship be taken at its worst; let
the goddess of this dome of Murano be looked upon as just in the same
sense an idol as the Athene of the Acropolis, or the Syrian Queen of
Heaven; and then, on this darkest assumption, balance well the
difference between those who worship and those who worship not;--that
difference which there is in the sight of God, in all ages, between the
calculating, smiling, self-sustained, self-governed man, and the
believing, weeping, wondering, struggling, Heaven-governed man;--between
the men who say in their hearts "there is no God," and those who
acknowledge a God at every step, "if haply they might feel after Him and
find Him." For that is indeed the difference which we shall find, in the
end, between the builders of this day and the builders on that sand
island long ago. They _did_ honor something out of themselves; they did
believe in spiritual presence judging, animating, redeeming them; they
built to its honor and for its habitation; and were content to pass away
in nameless multitudes, so only that the labor of their hands might fix
in the sea-wilderness a throne for their guardian angel. In this was
their strength, and there was indeed a Spirit walking with them on the
waters, though they could not discern the form thereof, though the
Masters voice came not to them, "It is I." What their error cost them,
we shall see hereafter; for it remained when the majesty and the
sincerity of their worship had departed, and remains to this day.
Mariolatry is no special characteristic of the twelfth century; on the
outside of that very tribune of San Donato, in its central recess, is an
image of the Virgin which receives the reverence once paid to the blue
vision upon the inner dome. With rouged cheeks and painted brows, the
frightful doll stands in wretchedness of rags, blackened with the smoke
of the votive lamps at its feet; and if we would know what has been lost
or gained by Italy in the six hundred years that have worn the marbles
of Murano, let us consider how far the priests who set up this to
worship, the populace who have this to adore, may be nobler than the men
who conceived that lonely figure standing on the golden field, or than
those to whom it seemed to receive their prayer at evening, far away,
where they only saw the blue clouds rising out of the burning sea.


FOOTNOTES

  [10] "Mela, e buon vino, con pace e carità," Memorie Storiche de'
    Veneti Primi e Secondi, di Jacopo Filiasi (Padua, 1811), tom. iii.
    cap. 23. Perhaps, in the choice of the abbot's cheer, there was some
    occult reference to the verse of Solomon's Song: "Stay me with
    flagons, comfort me with apples."

  [11] Notizie Storiche delle Chiese di Venezia, illustrate da Flaminio
    Corner (Padua, 1758), p. 615.

  [12] "On the 14th day of April, 1374, there were found, in this
    church of the first martyr St. Stefano, two hundred and more bodies
    of holy martyrs, by the venerable priest, Matthew Fradello,
    incumbent of the church."

  [13] Notizie Storiche, p. 620.

  [14] The intention is farther confirmed by the singular variation in
    the breadth of the small fillet which encompasses the inner marble.
    It is much narrower at the bottom than at the sides, so as to
    recover the original breadth in the lower border.

  [15] Its elevation is given to scale in fig. 4, Plate XIII., below.

  [16] "Luogo de' ninfe e de' semidei."--_M. Andrea Calmo_, quoted by
    Mutinelli, Annali Urbani di Venezia (Venice, 1841), p. 362.

  [17] "The women, even as far back as 1100, wore dresses of blue,
    with mantles on the shoulder, which clothed them before and
    behind."--_Sansorino_.

    It would be difficult to imagine a dress more modest and beautiful.
    See Appendix 7.

  [18]   "Whom Eve destroyed, the pious Virgin Mary redeemed;
          All praise her, who rejoice in the Grace of Christ."

    Vide Appendix 8.




CHAPTER IV.

ST. MARK'S.


§ I. "And so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus." If as the
shores of Asia lessened upon his sight, the spirit of prophecy had
entered into the heart of the weak disciple who had turned back when his
hand was on the plough, and who had been judged, by the chiefest of
Christ's captains, unworthy thenceforward to go forth with him to the
work,[19] how wonderful would he have thought it, that by the lion
symbol in future ages he was to be represented among men! how woful,
that the war-cry of his name should so often reanimate the rage of the
soldier, on those very plains where he himself had failed in the courage
of the Christian, and so often dye with fruitless blood that very
Cypriot Sea, over whose waves, in repentance and shame, he was following
the Son of Consolation!

§ II. That the Venetians possessed themselves of his body in the ninth
century, there appears no sufficient reason to doubt, nor that it was
principally in consequence of their having done so, that they chose him
for their patron saint. There exists, however, a tradition that before
he went into Egypt he had founded the Church at Aquileia, and was thus,
in some sort, the first bishop of the Venetian isles and people. I
believe that this tradition stands on nearly as good grounds as that of
St. Peter having been the first bishop of Rome;[20] but, as usual, it is
enriched by various later additions and embellishments, much resembling
the stories told respecting the church of Murano. Thus we find it
recorded by the Santo Padre who compiled the "Vite de' Santi spettanti
alle Chiese di Venezia,"[21] that "St. Mark having seen the people of
Aquileia well grounded in religion, and being called to Rome by St.
Peter, before setting off took with him the holy bishop Hermagoras, and
went in a small boat to the marshes of Venice. There were at that period
some houses built upon a certain high bank called Rialto, and the boat
being driven by the wind was anchored in a marshy place, when St. Mark,
snatched into ecstasy, heard the voice of an angel saying to him: 'Peace
be to thee, Mark; here shall thy body rest.'" The angel goes on to
foretell the building of "una stupenda, ne più veduta Città;" but the
fable is hardly ingenious enough to deserve farther relation.

§ III. But whether St. Mark was first bishop of Aquileia or not, St.
Theodore was the first patron of the city; nor can he yet be considered
as having entirely abdicated his early right, as his statue, standing on
a crocodile, still companions the winged lion on the opposing pillar of
the piazzetta. A church erected to this Saint is said to have occupied,
before the ninth century, the site of St. Mark's; and the traveller,
dazzled by the brilliancy of the great square, ought not to leave it
without endeavoring to imagine its aspect in that early time, when it
was a green field cloister-like and quiet,[22] divided by a small canal,
with a line of trees on each side; and extending between the two
churches of St. Theodore and St. Geminian, as the little piazza of
Torcello lies between its "palazzo" and cathedral.

§ IV. But in the year 813, when the seat of government was finally
removed to the Rialto, a Ducal Palace, built on the spot where the
present one stands, with a Ducal Chapel beside it,[23] gave a very
different character to the Square of St. Mark; and fifteen years later,
the acquisition of the body of the Saint, and its deposition in the
Ducal Chapel, perhaps not yet completed, occasioned the investiture of
that chapel with all possible splendor. St. Theodore was deposed from
his patronship, and his church destroyed, to make room for the
aggrandizement of the one attached to the Ducal Palace, and
thenceforward known as "St. Mark's."[24]

§ V. This first church was however destroyed by fire, when the Ducal
Palace was burned in the revolt against Candiano, in 976. It was partly
rebuilt by his successor, Pietro Orseolo, on a larger scale; and, with
the assistance of Byzantine architects, the fabric was carried on under
successive Doges for nearly a hundred years; the main building being
completed in 1071, but its incrustation with marble not till
considerably later. It was consecrated on the 8th of October, 1085,[25]
according to Sansovino and the author of the "Chiesa Ducale di S.
Marco," in 1094 according to Lazari, but certainly between 1084 and
1096, those years being the limits of the reign of Vital Falier; I
incline to the supposition that it was soon after his accession to the
throne in 1085, though Sansovino writes, by mistake, Ordelafo instead of
Vital Falier. But, at all events, before the close of the eleventh
century the great consecration of the church took place. It was again
injured by fire in 1106, but repaired; and from that time to the fall of
Venice there was probably no Doge who did not in some slight degree
embellish or alter the fabric, so that few parts of it can be
pronounced boldly to be of any given date. Two periods of interference
are, however, notable above the rest: the first, that in which the
Gothic school, had superseded the Byzantine towards the close of the
fourteenth century, when the pinnacles, upper archivolts, and window
traceries were added to the exterior, and the great screen, with various
chapels and tabernacle-work, to the interior; the second, when the
Renaissance school superseded the Gothic, and the pupils of Titian and
Tintoret substituted, over one half of the church, their own
compositions for the Greek mosaics with which it was originally
decorated;[26] happily, though with no good will, having left enough to
enable us to imagine and lament what they destroyed. Of this irreparable
loss we shall have more to say hereafter; meantime, I wish only to fix
in the reader's mind the succession of periods of alteration as firmly
and simply as possible.

§ VI. We have seen that the main body of the church may be broadly
stated to be of the eleventh century, the Gothic additions of the
fourteenth, and the restored mosaics of the seventeenth. There is no
difficulty in distinguishing at a glance the Gothic portions from the
Byzantine; but there is considerable difficulty in ascertaining how
long, during the course of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
additions were made to the Byzantine church, which cannot be easily
distinguished from the work of the eleventh century, being purposely
executed in the same manner. Two of the most important pieces of
evidence on this point are, a mosaic in the south transept, and another
over the northern door of the façade; the first representing the
interior, the second the exterior, of the ancient church.

§ VII. It has just been stated that the existing building was
consecrated by the Doge Vital Falier. A peculiar solemnity was given to
that act of consecration, in the minds of the Venetian people, by what
appears to have been one of the best arranged and most successful
impostures ever attempted by the clergy of the Romish church. The body
of St. Mark had, without doubt, perished in the conflagration of 976;
but the revenues of the church depended too much upon the devotion
excited by these relics to permit the confession of their loss. The
following is the account given by Corner, and believed to this day by
the Venetians, of the pretended miracle by which it was concealed.

"After the repairs undertaken by the Doge Orseolo, the place in which
the body of the holy Evangelist rested had been altogether forgotten; so
that the Doge Vital Falier was entirely ignorant of the place of the
venerable deposit. This was no light affliction, not only to the pious
Doge, but to all the citizens and people; so that at last, moved by
confidence in the Divine mercy, they determined to implore, with prayer
and fasting, the manifestation of so great a treasure, which did not now
depend upon any human effort. A general fast being therefore proclaimed,
and a solemn procession appointed for the 25th day of June, while the
people assembled in the church interceded with God in fervent prayers
for the desired boon, they beheld, with as much amazement as joy, a
slight shaking in the marbles of a pillar (near the place where the
altar of the Cross is now), which, presently falling to the earth,
exposed to the view of the rejoicing people the chest of bronze in which
the body of the Evangelist was laid."

§ VIII. Of the main facts of this tale there is no doubt. They were
embellished afterwards, as usual, by many fanciful traditions; as, for
instance, that, when the sarcophagus was discovered, St. Mark extended
his hand out of it, with a gold ring on one of the fingers, which he
permitted a noble of the Dolfin family to remove; and a quaint and
delightful story was further invented of this ring, which I shall not
repeat here, as it is now as well known as any tale of the Arabian
Nights. But the fast and the discovery of the coffin, by whatever means
effected, are facts; and they are recorded in one of the best-preserved
mosaics of the north transept, executed very certainly not long after
the event had taken place, closely resembling in its treatment that of
the Bayeux tapestry, and showing, in a conventional manner, the
interior of the church, as it then was, filled by the people, first in
prayer, then in thanksgiving, the pillar standing open before them, and
the Doge, in the midst of them, distinguished by his crimson bonnet
embroidered with gold, but more unmistakably by the inscription "Dux"
over his head, as uniformly is the case in the Bayeux tapestry, and most
other pictorial works of the period. The church is, of course, rudely
represented, and the two upper stories of it reduced to a small scale in
order to form a background to the figures; one of those bold pieces of
picture history which we in our pride of perspective, and a thousand
things besides, never dare attempt. We should have put in a column or
two of the real or perspective size, and subdued it into a vague
background: the old workman crushed the church together that he might
get it all in, up to the cupolas; and has, therefore, left us some
useful notes of its ancient form, though any one who is familiar with
the method of drawing employed at the period will not push the evidence
too far. The two pulpits are there, however, as they are at this day,
and the fringe of mosaic flower-work which then encompassed the whole
church, but which modern restorers have destroyed, all but one fragment
still left in the south aisle. There is no attempt to represent the
other mosaics on the roof, the scale being too small to admit of their
being represented with any success; but some at least of those mosaics
had been executed at that period, and their absence in the
representation of the entire church is especially to be observed, in
order to show that we must not trust to any negative evidence in such
works. M. Lazari has rashly concluded that the central archivolt of St.
Mark's _must_ be posterior to the year 1205, because it does not appear
in the representation of the exterior of the church over the northern
door;[27] but he justly observes that this mosaic (which is the other
piece of evidence we possess respecting the ancient form of the
building) cannot itself be earlier than 1205, since it represents the
bronze horses which were brought from Constantinople in that year. And
this one fact renders it very difficult to speak with confidence
respecting the date of any part of the exterior of St. Mark's; for we
have above seen that it was consecrated in the eleventh century, and yet
here is one of its most important exterior decorations assuredly
retouched, if not entirely added, in the thirteenth, although its style
would have led us to suppose it had been an original part of the fabric.
However, for all our purposes, it will be enough for the reader to
remember that the earliest parts of the building belong to the eleventh,
twelfth, and first part of the thirteenth century; the Gothic portions
to the fourteenth; some of the altars and embellishments to the
fifteenth and sixteenth; and the modern portion of the mosaics to the
seventeenth.

§ IX. This, however, I only wish him to recollect in order that I may
speak generally of the Byzantine architecture of St. Mark's, without
leading him to suppose the whole church to have been built and decorated
by Greek artists. Its later portions, with the single exception of the
seventeenth century mosaics, have been so dexterously accommodated to
the original fabric that the general effect is still that of a Byzantine
building; and I shall not, except when it is absolutely necessary,
direct attention to the discordant points, or weary the reader with
anatomical criticism. Whatever in St. Mark's arrests the eye, or affects
the feelings, is either Byzantine, or has been modified by Byzantine
influence; and our inquiry into its architectural merits need not
therefore be disturbed by the anxieties of antiquarianism, or arrested
by the obscurities of chronology.

§ X. And now I wish that the reader, before I bring him into St. Mark's
Place, would imagine himself for a little time in a quiet English
cathedral town, and walk with me to the west front of its cathedral. Let
us go together up the more retired street, at the end of which we can
see the pinnacles of one of the towers, and then through the low grey
gateway, with its battlemented top and small latticed window in the
centre, into the inner private-looking road or close, where nothing
goes in but the carts of the tradesmen who supply the bishop and the
chapter, and where there are little shaven grass-plots, fenced in by
neat rails, before old-fashioned groups of somewhat diminutive and
excessively trim houses, with little oriel and bay windows jutting out
here and there, and deep wooden cornices and eaves painted cream color
and white, and small porches to their doors in the shape of
cockle-shells, or little, crooked, thick, indescribable wooden gables
warped a little on one side; and so forward till we come to larger
houses, also old-fashioned, but of red brick, and with gardens behind
them, and fruit walls, which show here and there, among the nectarines,
the vestiges of an old cloister arch or shaft, and looking in front on
the cathedral square itself, laid out in rigid divisions of smooth grass
and gravel walk, yet not uncheerful, especially on the sunny side where
the canons' children are walking with their nurserymaids. And so, taking
care not to tread on the grass, we will go along the straight walk to
the west front, and there stand for a time, looking up at its
deep-pointed porches and the dark places between their pillars where
there were statues once, and where the fragments, here and there, of a
stately figure are still left, which has in it the likeness of a king,
perhaps indeed a king on earth, perhaps a saintly king long ago in
heaven; and so higher and higher up to the great mouldering wall of
rugged sculpture and confused arcades, shattered, and grey, and grisly
with heads of dragons and mocking fiends, worn by the rain and swirling
winds into yet unseemlier shape, and colored on their stony scales by
the deep russet-orange lichen, melancholy gold; and so, higher still, to
the bleak towers, so far above that the eye loses itself among the
bosses of their traceries, though they are rude and strong, and only
sees like a drift of eddying black points, now closing, now scattering,
and now settling suddenly into invisible places among the bosses and
flowers, the crowed of restless birds that fill the whole square with
that strange clangor of theirs, so harsh and yet so soothing, like the
cries of birds on a solitary coast between the cliffs and sea.

§ XI. Think for a little while of that scene, and the meaning of all its
small formalisms, mixed with its serene sublimity. Estimate its
secluded, continuous, drowsy felicities, and its evidence of the sense
and steady performance of such kind of duties as can be regulated by the
cathedral clock; and weigh the influence of those dark towers on all who
have passed through the lonely square at their feet for centuries, and
on all who have seen them rising far away over the wooded plain, or
catching on their square masses the last rays of the sunset, when the
city at their feet was indicated only by the mist at the bend of the
river. And then let us quickly recollect that we are in Venice, and land
at the extremity of the Calle Lunga San Moisè, which may be considered
as there answering to the secluded street that led us to our English
cathedral gateway.

§ XII. We find ourselves in a paved alley, some seven feet wide where it
is widest, full of people, and resonant with cries of itinerant
salesmen,--a shriek in their beginning, and dying away into a kind of
brazen ringing, all the worse for its confinement between the high
houses of the passage along which we have to make our way. Over-head an
inextricable confusion of rugged shutters, and iron balconies and
chimney flues pushed out on brackets to save room, and arched windows
with projecting sills of Istrian stone, and gleams of green leaves here
and there where a fig-tree branch escapes over a lower wall from some
inner cortile, leading the eye up to the narrow stream of blue sky high
over all. On each side, a row of shops, as densely set as may be,
occupying, in fact, intervals between the square stone shafts, about
eight feet high, which carry the first floors: intervals of which one is
narrow and serves as a door; the other is, in the more respectable
shops, wainscoted to the height of the counter and glazed above, but in
those of the poorer tradesmen left open to the ground, and the wares
laid on benches and tables in the open air, the light in all cases
entering at the front only, and fading away in a few feet from the
threshold into a gloom which the eye from without cannot penetrate, but
which is generally broken by a ray or two from a feeble lamp at the
back of the shop, suspended before a print of the Virgin. The less pious
shop-keeper sometimes leaves his lamp unlighted, and is contented with a
penny print; the more religious one has his print colored and set in a
little shrine with a gilded or figured fringe, with perhaps a faded
flower or two on each side, and his lamp burning brilliantly. Here at
the fruiterer's, where the dark-green water-melons are heaped upon the
counter like cannon balls, the Madonna has a tabernacle of fresh laurel
leaves; but the pewterer next door has let his lamp out, and there is
nothing to be seen in his shop but the dull gleam of the studded
patterns on the copper pans, hanging from his roof in the darkness. Next
comes a "Vendita Frittole e Liquori," where the Virgin, enthroned in a
very humble manner beside a tallow candle on a back shelf, presides over
certain ambrosial morsels of a nature too ambiguous to be defined or
enumerated. But a few steps farther on, at the regular wine-shop of the
calle, where we are offered "Vino Nostrani a Soldi 28·32," the Madonna
is in great glory, enthroned above ten or a dozen large red casks of
three-year-old vintage, and flanked by goodly ranks of bottles of
Maraschino, and two crimson lamps; and for the evening, when the
gondoliers will come to drink out, under her auspices, the money they
have gained during the day, she will have a whole chandelier.

§ XIII. A yard or two farther, we pass the hostelry of the Black Eagle,
and, glancing as we pass through the square door of marble, deeply
moulded, in the outer wall, we see the shadows of its pergola of vines
resting on an ancient well, with a pointed shield carved on its side;
and so presently emerge on the bridge and Campo San Moisè, whence to the
entrance into St. Mark's Place, called the Bocca di Piazza (mouth of the
square), the Venetian character is nearly destroyed, first by the
frightful façade of San Moisè, which we will pause at another time to
examine, and then by the modernizing of the shops as they near the
piazza, and the mingling with the lower Venetian populace of lounging
groups of English and Austrians. We will push fast through them into the
shadow of the pillars at the end of the "Bocca di Piazza," and then we
forget them all; for between those pillars there opens a great light,
and, in the midst of it, as we advance slowly, the vast tower of St.
Mark seems to lift itself visibly forth from the level field of
chequered stones; and, on each side, the countless arches prolong
themselves into ranged symmetry, as if the rugged and irregular houses
that pressed together above us in the dark alley had been struck back
into sudden obedience and lovely order, and all their rude casements and
broken walls had been transformed into arches charged with goodly
sculpture, and fluted shafts of delicate stone.

§ XIV. And well may they fall back, for beyond those troops of ordered
arches there rises a vision out of the earth, and all the great square
seems to have opened from it in a kind of awe, that we may see it far
away;--a multitude of pillars and white domes, clustered into a long low
pyramid of colored light; a treasure-heap, it seems, partly of gold, and
partly of opal and mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into five great
vaulted porches, ceiled with fair mosaic, and beset with sculpture of
alabaster, clear as amber and delicate as ivory,--sculpture fantastic
and involved, of palm leaves and lilies, and grapes and pomegranates,
and birds clinging and fluttering among the branches, all twined
together into an endless network of buds and plumes; and, in the midst
of it, the solemn forms of angels, sceptred, and robed to the feet, and
leaning to each other across the gates, their figures indistinct among
the gleaming of the golden ground through the leaves beside them,
interrupted and dim, like the morning light as it faded back among the
branches of Eden, when first its gates were angel-guarded long ago. And
round the walls of the porches there are set pillars of variegated
stones, jasper and porphyry, and deep-green serpentine spotted with
flakes of snow, and marbles, that half refuse and half yield to the
sunshine, Cleopatra-like, "their bluest veins to kiss"--the shadow, as
it steals back from them, revealing line after line of azure undulation,
as a receding tide leaves the waved sand; their capitals rich with
interwoven tracery, rooted knots of herbage, and drifting leaves of
acanthus and vine, and mystical signs, all beginning and ending in the
Cross; and above them, in the broad archivolts, a continuous chain of
language and of life--angels, and the signs of heaven, and the labors of
men, each in its appointed season upon the earth; and above these,
another range of glittering pinnacles, mixed with white arches edged
with scarlet flowers,--a confusion of delight, amidst which the breasts
of the Greek horses are seen blazing in their breadth of golden
strength, and the St. Mark's Lion, lifted on a blue field covered with
stars, until at last, as if in ecstasy, the crests of the arches break
into a marble foam, and toss themselves far into the blue sky in flashes
and wreaths of sculptured spray, as if the breakers on the Lido shore
had been frost-bound before they fell, and the sea-nymphs had inlaid
them with coral and amethyst.

Between that grim cathedral of England and this, what an interval! There
is a type of it in the very birds that haunt them; for, instead of the
restless crowd, hoarse-voiced and sable-winged, drifting on the bleak
upper air, the St. Mark's porches are full of doves, that nestle among
the marble foliage, and mingle the soft iridescence of their living
plumes, changing at every motion, with the tints, hardly less lovely,
that have stood unchanged for seven hundred years.

§ XV. And what effect has this splendor on those who pass beneath it?
You may walk from sunrise to sunset, to and fro, before the gateway of
St. Mark's, and you will not see an eye lifted to it, nor a countenance
brightened by it. Priest and layman, soldier and civilian, rich and
poor, pass by it alike regardlessly. Up to the very recesses of the
porches, the meanest tradesmen of the city push their counters; nay, the
foundations of its pillars are themselves the seats--not "of them that
sell doves" for sacrifice, but of the vendors of toys and caricatures.
Round the whole square in front of the church there is almost a
continuous line of cafés, where the idle Venetians of the middle classes
lounge, and read empty journals; in its centre the Austrian bands play
during the time of vespers, their martial music jarring with the organ
notes,--the march drowning the miserere, and the sullen crowd
thickening round them,--a crowd, which, if it had its will, would
stiletto every soldier that pipes to it. And in the recesses of the
porches, all day long, knots of men of the lowest classes, unemployed
and listless, lie basking in the sun like lizards; and unregarded
children,--every heavy glance of their young eyes full of desperation
and stony depravity, and their throats hoarse with cursing,--gamble,
and fight, and snarl, and sleep, hour after hour, clashing their bruised
centesimi upon the marble ledges of the church porch. And the images of
Christ and His angels look down upon it continually.

That we may not enter the church out of the midst of the horror of this,
let us turn aside under the portico which looks towards the sea, and
passing round within the two massive pillars brought from St. Jean
d'Acre, we shall find the gate of the Baptistery; let us enter there.
The heavy door closes behind us instantly, and the light, and the
turbulence of the Piazzetta, are together shut out by it.

§ XVI. We are in a low vaulted room; vaulted, not with arches, but with
small cupolas starred with gold, and chequered with gloomy figures: in
the centre is a bronze font charged with rich bas-reliefs, a small
figure of the Baptist standing above it in a single ray of light that
glances across the narrow room, dying as it falls from a window high in
the wall, and the first thing that it strikes, and the only thing that
it strikes brightly, is a tomb. We hardly know if it be a tomb indeed;
for it is like a narrow couch set beside the window, low-roofed and
curtained, so that it might seem, but that it has some height above the
pavement, to have been drawn towards the window, that the sleeper might
be wakened early;--only there are two angels who have drawn the curtain
back, and are looking down upon him. Let us look also, and thank that
gentle light that rests upon his forehead for ever, and dies away upon
his breast.

The face is of a man in middle life, but there are two deep furrows
right across the forehead, dividing it like the foundations of a tower:
the height of it above is bound by the fillet of the ducal cap. The
rest of the features are singularly small and delicate, the lips sharp,
perhaps the sharpness of death being added to that of the natural lines;
but there is a sweet smile upon them, and a deep serenity upon the whole
countenance. The roof of the canopy above has been blue, filled with
stars; beneath, in the centre of the tomb on which the figure rests, is
a seated figure of the Virgin, and the border of it all around is of
flowers and soft leaves, growing rich and deep, as if in a field in
summer.

It is the Doge Andrea Dandolo, a man early great among the great of
Venice; and early lost. She chose him for her king in his 36th year; he
died ten years later, leaving behind him that history to which we owe
half of what we know of her former fortunes.

§ XVII. Look round at the room in which he lies. The floor of it is of
rich mosaic, encompassed by a low seat of red marble, and its walls are
of alabaster, but worn and shattered, and darkly stained with age,
almost a ruin,--in places the slabs of marble have fallen away
altogether, and the rugged brickwork is seen through the rents, but all
beautiful; the ravaging fissures fretting their way among the islands
and channelled zones of the alabaster, and the time-stains on its
translucent masses darkened into fields of rich golden brown, like the
color of seaweed when the sun strikes on it through deep sea. The light
fades away into the recess of the chamber towards the altar, and the eye
can hardly trace the lines of the bas-relief behind it of the baptism of
Christ: but on the vaulting of the roof the figures are distinct, and
there are seen upon it two great circles, one surrounded by the
"Principalities and powers in heavenly places," of which Milton has
expressed the ancient division in the single massy line,

  "Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,"

and around the other, the Apostles; Christ the centre of both; and upon
the walls, again and again repeated, the gaunt figure of the Baptist, in
every circumstance of his life and death; and the streams of the Jordan
running down between their cloven rocks; the axe laid to the root of a
fruitless tree that springs upon their shore. "Every tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire." Yes,
verily: to be baptized with fire, or to be cast therein; it is the
choice set before all men. The march-notes still murmur through the
grated window, and mingle with the sounding in our ears of the sentence
of judgment, which the old Greek has written on that Baptistery wall.
Venice has made her choice.

§ XVIII. He who lies under that stony canopy would have taught her
another choice, in his day, if she would have listened to him; but he
and his counsels have long been forgotten by her, and the dust lies upon
his lips.

Through the heavy door whose bronze network closes the place of his
rest, let us enter the church itself. It is lost in still deeper
twilight, to which the eye must be accustomed for some moments before
the form of the building can be traced; and then there opens before us a
vast cave, hewn out into the form of a Cross, and divided into shadowy
aisles by many pillars. Round the domes of its roof the light enters
only through narrow apertures like large stars; and here and there a ray
or two from some far away casement wanders into the darkness, and casts
a narrow phosphoric stream upon the waves of marble that heave and fall
in a thousand colors along the floor. What else there is of light is
from torches, or silver lamps, burning ceaselessly in the recesses of
the chapels; the roof sheeted with gold, and the polished walls covered
with alabaster, give back at every curve and angle some feeble gleaming
to the flames; and the glories round the heads of the sculptured saints
flash out upon us as we pass them, and sink again into the gloom. Under
foot and over head, a continual succession of crowded imagery, one
picture passing into another, as in a dream; forms beautiful and
terrible mixed together; dragons and serpents, and ravening beasts of
prey, and graceful birds that in the midst of them drink from running
fountains and feed from vases of crystal; the passions and the pleasures
of human life symbolized together, and the mystery of its redemption;
for the mazes of interwoven lines and changeful pictures lead always at
last to the Cross, lifted and carved in every place and upon every
stone; sometimes with the serpent of eternity wrapt round it, sometimes
with doves beneath its arms, and sweet herbage growing forth from its
feet; but conspicuous most of all on the great rood that crosses the
church before the altar, raised in bright blazonry against the shadow of
the apse. And although in the recesses of the aisles and chapels, when
the mist of the incense hangs heavily, we may see continually a figure
traced in faint lines upon their marble, a woman standing with her eyes
raised to heaven, and the inscription above her, "Mother of God," she is
not here the presiding deity. It is the Cross that is first seen, and
always, burning in the centre of the temple; and every dome and hollow
of its roof has the figure of Christ in the utmost height of it, raised
in power, or returning in judgment.

§ XIX. Nor is this interior without effect on the minds of the people.
At every hour of the day there are groups collected before the various
shrines, and solitary worshippers scattered through the darker places of
the church, evidently in prayer both deep and reverent, and, for the
most part, profoundly sorrowful. The devotees at the greater number of
the renowned shrines of Romanism may be seen murmuring their appointed
prayers with wandering eyes and unengaged gestures; but the step of the
stranger does not disturb those who kneel on the pavement of St. Mark's;
and hardly a moment passes, from early morning to sunset, in which we
may not see some half-veiled figure enter beneath the Arabian porch,
cast itself into long abasement on the floor of the temple, and then
rising slowly with more confirmed step, and with a passionate kiss and
clasp of the arms given to the feet of the crucifix, by which the lamps
burn always in the northern aisle, leave the church, as if comforted.

§ XX. But we must not hastily conclude from this that the nobler
characters of the building have at present any influence in fostering a
devotional spirit. There is distress enough in Venice to bring many to
their knees, without excitement from external imagery; and whatever
there may be in the temper of the worship offered in St. Mark's more
than can be accounted for by reference to the unhappy circumstances of
the city, is assuredly not owing either to the beauty of its
architecture or to the impressiveness of the Scripture histories
embodied in its mosaics. That it has a peculiar effect, however slight,
on the popular mind, may perhaps be safely conjectured from the number
of worshippers which it attracts, while the churches of St. Paul and the
Frari, larger in size and more central in position, are left
comparatively empty.[28] But this effect is altogether to be ascribed to
its richer assemblage of those sources of influence which address
themselves to the commonest instincts of the human mind, and which, in
all ages and countries, have been more or less employed in the support
of superstition. Darkness and mystery; confused recesses of building;
artificial light employed in small quantity, but maintained with a
constancy which seems to give it a kind of sacredness; preciousness of
material easily comprehended by the vulgar eye; close air loaded with a
sweet and peculiar odor associated only with religious services, solemn
music, and tangible idols or images having popular legends attached to
them,--these, the stage properties of superstition, which have been from
the beginning of the world, and must be to the end of it, employed by
all nations, whether openly savage or nominally civilized, to produce a
false awe in minds incapable of apprehending the true nature of the
Deity, are assembled in St. Mark's to a degree, as far as I know,
unexampled in any other European church. The arts of the Magus and the
Brahmin are exhausted in the animation of a paralyzed Christianity; and
the popular sentiment which these arts excite is to be regarded by us
with no more respect than we should have considered ourselves justified
in rendering to the devotion of the worshippers at Eleusis, Ellora, or
Edfou.[29]

§ XXI. Indeed, these inferior means of exciting religious emotion were
employed in the ancient Church as they are at this day, but not employed
alone. Torchlight there was, as there is now; but the torchlight
illumined Scripture histories on the walls, which every eye traced and
every heart comprehended, but which, during my whole residence in
Venice, I never saw one Venetian regard for an instant. I never heard
from any one the most languid expression of interest in any feature of
the church, or perceived the slightest evidence of their understanding
the meaning of its architecture; and while, therefore, the English
cathedral, though no longer dedicated to the kind of services for which
it was intended by its builders, and much at variance in many of its
characters with the temper of the people by whom it is now surrounded,
retains yet so much of its religious influence that no prominent feature
of its architecture can be said to exist altogether in vain, we have in
St. Mark's a building apparently still employed in the ceremonies for
which it was designed, and yet of which the impressive attributes have
altogether ceased to be comprehended by its votaries. The beauty which
it possesses is unfelt, the language it uses is forgotten; and in the
midst of the city to whose service it has so long been consecrated, and
still filled by crowds of the descendants of those to whom it owes its
magnificence, it stands, in reality, more desolate than the ruins
through which the sheep-walk passes unbroken in our English valleys; and
the writing on its marble walls is less regarded and less powerful for
the teaching of men, than the letters which the shepherd follows with
his finger, where the moss is lightest on the tombs in the desecrated
cloister.

§ XXII. It must therefore be altogether without reference to its present
usefulness, that we pursue our inquiry into the merits and meaning of
the architecture of this marvellous building; and it can only be after
we have terminated that inquiry, conducting it carefully on abstract
grounds, that we can pronounce with any certainty how far the present
neglect of St. Mark's is significative of the decline of the Venetian
character, or how far this church is to be considered as the relic of a
barbarous age, incapable of attracting the admiration, or influencing
the feelings of a civilized community.

The inquiry before us is twofold. Throughout the first volume, I
carefully kept the study of _expression_ distinct from that of abstract
architectural perfection; telling the reader that in every building we
should afterwards examine, he would have first to form a judgment of its
construction and decorative merit, considering it merely as a work of
art; and then to examine farther, in what degree it fulfilled its
expressional purposes. Accordingly, we have first to judge of St. Mark's
merely as a piece of architecture, not as a church; secondly, to
estimate its fitness for its special duty as a place of worship, and the
relation in which it stands, as such, to those northern cathedrals that
still retain so much of the power over the human heart, which the
Byzantine domes appear to have lost for ever.

§ XXIII. In the two succeeding sections of this work, devoted
respectively to the examination of the Gothic and Renaissance buildings
in Venice, I have endeavored to analyze and state, as briefly as
possible, the true nature of each school,--first in Spirit, then in
Form. I wished to have given a similar analysis, in this section, of the
nature of Byzantine architecture; but could not make my statements
general, because I have never seen this kind of building on its native
soil. Nevertheless, in the following sketch of the principles
exemplified in St. Mark's, I believe that most of the leading features
and motives of the style will be found clearly enough distinguished to
enable the reader to judge of it with tolerable fairness, as compared
with the better known systems of European architecture in the middle
ages.

§ XXIV. Now the first broad characteristic of the building, and the root
nearly of every other important peculiarity in it, is its confessed
_incrustation_. It is the purest example in Italy of the great school of
architecture in which the ruling principle is the incrustation of brick
with more precious materials; and it is necessary before we proceed to
criticise any one of its arrangements, that the reader should carefully
consider the principles which are likely to have influenced, or might
legitimately influence, the architects of such a school, as
distinguished from those whose designs are to be executed in massive
materials.

It is true, that among different nations, and at different times, we may
find examples of every sort and degree of incrustation, from the mere
setting of the larger and more compact stones by preference at the
outside of the wall, to the miserable construction of that modern brick
cornice, with its coating of cement, which, but the other day, in
London, killed its unhappy workmen in its fall.[30] But just as it is
perfectly possible to have a clear idea of the opposing characteristics
of two different species of plants or animals, though between the two
there are varieties which it is difficult to assign either to the one or
the other, so the reader may fix decisively in his mind the legitimate
characteristics of the incrusted and the massive styles, though between
the two there are varieties which confessedly unite the attributes of
both. For instance, in many Roman remains, built of blocks of tufa and
incrusted with marble, we have a style, which, though truly solid,
possesses some of the attributes of incrustation; and in the Cathedral
of Florence, built of brick and coated with marble, the marble facing is
so firmly and exquisitely set, that the building, though in reality
incrusted, assumes the attributes of solidity. But these intermediate
examples need not in the least confuse our generally distinct ideas of
the two families of buildings: the one in which the substance is alike
throughout, and the forms and conditions of the ornament assume or prove
that it is so, as in the best Greek buildings, and for the most part in
our early Norman and Gothic; and the other, in which the substance is of
two kinds, one internal, the other external, and the system of
decoration is founded on this duplicity, as pre-eminently in St. Mark's.

§ XXV. I have used the word duplicity in no depreciatory sense. In
chapter ii. of the "Seven Lamps," § 18, I especially guarded this
incrusted school from the imputation of insincerity, and I must do so
now at greater length. It appears insincere at first to a Northern
builder, because, accustomed to build with solid blocks of freestone, he
is in the habit of supposing the external superficies of a piece of
masonry to be some criterion of its thickness. But, as soon as he gets
acquainted with the incrusted style, he will find that the Southern
builders had no intention to deceive him. He will see that every slab of
facial marble is fastened to the next by a confessed _rivet_, and that
the joints of the armor are so visibly and openly accommodated to the
contours of the substance within, that he has no more right to complain
of treachery than a savage would have, who, for the first time in his
life seeing a man in armor, had supposed him to be made of solid steel.
Acquaint him with the customs of chivalry, and with the uses of the coat
of mail, and he ceases to accuse of dishonesty either the panoply or the
knight.

These laws and customs of the St. Mark's architectural chivalry it must
be our business to develope.

§ XXVI. First, consider the natural circumstances which give rise to
such a style. Suppose a nation of builders, placed far from any quarries
of available stone, and having precarious access to the mainland where
they exist; compelled therefore either to build entirely with brick, or
to import whatever stone they use from great distances, in ships of
small tonnage, and for the most part dependent for speed on the oar
rather than the sail. The labor and cost of carriage are just as great,
whether they import common or precious stone, and therefore the natural
tendency would always be to make each shipload as valuable as possible.
But in proportion to the preciousness of the stone, is the limitation of
its possible supply; limitation not determined merely by cost, but by
the physical conditions of the material, for of many marbles, pieces
above a certain size are not to be had for money. There would also be a
tendency in such circumstances to import as much stone as possible ready
sculptured, in order to save weight; and therefore, if the traffic of
their merchants led them to places where there were ruins of ancient
edifices, to ship the available fragments of them home. Out of this
supply of marble, partly composed of pieces of so precious a quality
that only a few tons of them could be on any terms obtained, and partly
of shafts, capitals, and other portions of foreign buildings, the island
architect has to fashion, as best he may, the anatomy of his edifice. It
is at his choice either to lodge his few blocks of precious marble here
and there among his masses of brick, and to cut out of the sculptured
fragments such new forms as may be necessary for the observance of fixed
proportions in the new building; or else to cut the colored stones into
thin pieces, of extent sufficient to face the whole surface of the
walls, and to adopt a method of construction irregular enough to admit
the insertion of fragmentary sculptures; rather with a view of
displaying their intrinsic beauty, than of setting them to any regular
service in the support of the building.

An architect who cared only to display his own skill, and had no respect
for the works of others, would assuredly have chosen the former
alternative, and would have sawn the old marbles into fragments in order
to prevent all interference with his own designs. But an architect who
cared for the preservation of noble work, whether his own or others',
and more regarded the beauty of his building than his own fame, would
have done what those old builders of St. Mark's did for us, and saved
every relic with which he was entrusted.

§ XXVII. But these were not the only motives which influenced the
Venetians in the adoption of their method of architecture. It might,
under all the circumstances above stated, have been a question with
other builders, whether to import one shipload of costly jaspers, or
twenty of chalk flints; and whether to build a small church faced with
porphyry and paved with agate, or to raise a vast cathedral in
freestone. But with the Venetians it could not be a question for an
instant; they were exiles from ancient and beautiful cities, and had
been accustomed to build with their ruins, not less in affection than in
admiration: they had thus not only grown familiar with the practice of
inserting older fragments in modern buildings, but they owed to that
practice a great part of the splendor of their city, and whatever charm
of association might aid its change from a Refuge into a Home. The
practice which began in the affections of a fugitive nation, was
prolonged in the pride of a conquering one; and beside the memorials of
departed happiness, were elevated the trophies of returning victory. The
ship of war brought home more marble in triumph than the merchant vessel
in speculation; and the front of St. Mark's became rather a shrine at
which to dedicate the splendor of miscellaneous spoil, than the
organized expression of any fixed architectural law, or religious
emotion.

§ XXVIII. Thus far, however, the justification of the style of this
church depends on circumstances peculiar to the time of its erection,
and to the spot where it arose. The merit of its method, considered in
the abstract, rests on far broader grounds.

In the fifth chapter of the "Seven Lamps," § 14, the reader will find
the opinion of a modern architect of some reputation, Mr. Wood, that the
chief thing remarkable in this church "is its extreme ugliness;" and he
will find this opinion associated with another, namely, that the works
of the Caracci are far preferable to those of the Venetian painters.
This second statement of feeling reveals to us one of the principal
causes of the first; namely, that Mr. Wood had not any perception of
color, or delight in it. The perception of color is a gift just as
definitely granted to one person, and denied to another, as an ear for
music; and the very first requisite for true judgment of St. Mark's, is
the perfection of that color-faculty which few people ever set
themselves seriously to find out whether they possess or not. For it is
on its value as a piece of perfect and unchangeable coloring, that the
claims of this edifice to our respect are finally rested; and a deaf man
might as well pretend to pronounce judgment on the merits of a full
orchestra, as an architect trained in the composition of form only, to
discern the beauty of St. Mark's. It possesses the charm of color in
common with the greater part of the architecture, as well as of the
manufactures, of the East; but the Venetians deserve especial note as
the only European people who appear to have sympathized to the full with
the great instinct of the Eastern races. They indeed were compelled to
bring artists from Constantinople to design the mosaics of the vaults of
St. Mark's, and to group the colors of its porches; but they rapidly
took up and developed, under more masculine conditions, the system of
which the Greeks had shown them the example: while the burghers and
barons of the North were building their dark streets and grisly castles
of oak and sandstone, the merchants of Venice were covering their
palaces with porphyry and gold; and at last, when her mighty painters
had created for her a color more priceless than gold or porphyry, even
this, the richest of her treasures, she lavished upon walls whose
foundations were beaten by the sea; and the strong tide, as it runs
beneath the Rialto, is reddened to this day by the reflection of the
frescoes of Giorgione.

§ XXIX. If, therefore, the reader does not care for color, I must
protest against his endeavor to form any judgment whatever of this
church of St. Mark's. But, if he both cares for and loves it, let him
remember that the school of incrusted architecture is _the only one in
which perfect and permanent chromatic decoration is possible_; and let
him look upon every piece of jasper and alabaster given to the architect
as a cake of very hard color, of which a certain portion is to be ground
down or cut off, to paint the walls with. Once understand this
thoroughly, and accept the condition that the body and availing strength
of the edifice are to be in brick, and that this under muscular power
of brickwork is to be clothed with the defence and the brightness of the
marble, as the body of an animal is protected and adorned by its scales
or its skin, and all the consequent fitnesses and laws of the structure
will be easily discernible: These I shall state in their natural order.

§ XXX. LAW I. _That the plinths and cornices used for binding the armor
are to be light and delicate._ A certain thickness, at least two or
three inches, must be required in the covering pieces (even when
composed of the strongest stone, and set on the least exposed parts), in
order to prevent the chance of fracture, and to allow for the wear of
time. And the weight of this armor must not be trusted to cement; the
pieces must not be merely glued to the rough brick surface, but
connected with the mass which they protect by binding cornices and
string courses; and with each other, so as to secure mutual support,
aided by the rivetings, but by no means dependent upon them. And, for
the full honesty and straight-forwardness of the work, it is necessary
that these string courses and binding plinths should not be of such
proportions as would fit them for taking any important part in the hard
work of the inner structure, or render them liable to be mistaken for
the great cornices and plinths already explained as essential parts of
the best solid building. They must be delicate, slight, and visibly
incapable of severer work than that assigned to them.

§ XXXI. LAW II. _Science of inner structure is to be abandoned._ As the
body of the structure is confessedly of inferior, and comparatively
incoherent materials, it would be absurd to attempt in it any expression
of the higher refinements of construction. It will be enough that by its
mass we are assured of its sufficiency and strength; and there is the
less reason for endeavoring to diminish the extent of its surface by
delicacy of adjustment, because on the breadth of that surface we are to
depend for the better display of the color, which is to be the chief
source of our pleasure in the building. The main body of the work,
therefore, will be composed of solid walls and massive piers; and
whatever expression of finer structural science we may require, will be
thrown either into subordinate portions of it, or entirely directed to
the support of the external mail, where in arches or vaults it might
otherwise appear dangerously independent of the material within.

§ XXXII. LAW III. _All shafts are to be solid._ Wherever, by the
smallness of the parts, we may be driven to abandon the incrusted
structure at all, it must be abandoned altogether. The eye must never be
left in the least doubt as to what is solid and what is coated. Whatever
appears _probably_ solid, must be _assuredly_ so, and therefore it
becomes an inviolable law that no shaft shall ever be incrusted. Not
only does the whole virtue of a shaft depend on its consolidation, but
the labor of cutting and adjusting an incrusted coat to it would be
greater than the saving of material is worth. Therefore the shaft, of
whatever size, is always to be solid; and because the incrusted
character of the rest of the building renders it more difficult for the
shafts to clear themselves from suspicion, they must not, in this
incrusted style, be in any place jointed. No shaft must ever be used but
of one block; and this the more, because the permission given to the
builder to have his walls and piers as ponderous as he likes, renders it
quite unnecessary for him to use shafts of any fixed size. In our Norman
and Gothic, where definite support is required at a definite point, it
becomes lawful to build up a tower of small stones in the shape of a
shaft. But the Byzantine is allowed to have as much support as he wants
from the walls in every direction, and he has no right to ask for
further license in the structure of his shafts. Let him, by generosity
in the substance of his pillars, repay us for the permission we have
given him to be superficial in his walls. The builder in the chalk
valleys of France and England may be blameless in kneading his clumsy
pier out of broken flint and calcined lime; but the Venetian, who has
access to the riches of Asia and the quarries of Egypt, must frame at
least his shafts out of flawless stone.

§ XXXIII. And this for another reason yet. Although, as we have said, it
is impossible to cover the walls of a large building with color, except
on the condition of dividing the stone into plates, there is always a
certain appearance of meanness and niggardliness in the procedure. It is
necessary that the builder should justify himself from this suspicion;
and prove that it is not in mere economy or poverty, but in the real
impossibility of doing otherwise, that he has sheeted his walls so
thinly with the precious film. Now the shaft is exactly the portion of
the edifice in which it is fittest to recover his honor in this respect.
For if blocks of jasper or porphyry be inserted in the walls, the
spectator cannot tell their thickness, and cannot judge of the
costliness of the sacrifice. But the shaft he can measure with his eye
in an instant, and estimate the quantity of treasure both in the mass of
its existing substance, and in that which has been hewn away to bring it
into its perfect and symmetrical form. And thus the shafts of all
buildings of this kind are justly regarded as an expression of their
wealth, and a form of treasure, just as much as the jewels or gold in
the sacred vessels; they are, in fact, nothing else than large
jewels,[31] the block of precious serpentine or jasper being valued
according to its size and brilliancy of color, like a large emerald or
ruby; only the bulk required to bestow value on the one is to be
measured in feet and tons, and on the other in lines and carats. The
shafts must therefore be, without exception, of one block in all
buildings of this kind; for the attempt in any place to incrust or joint
them would be a deception like that of introducing a false stone among
jewellery (for a number of joints of any precious stone are of course
not equal in value to a single piece of equal weight), and would put an
end at once to the spectator's confidence in the expression of wealth in
any portion of the structure, or of the spirit of sacrifice in those who
raised it.

§ XXXIV. LAW IV. _The shafts may sometimes be independent of the
construction._ Exactly in proportion to the importance which the shaft
assumes as a large jewel, is the diminution of its importance as a
sustaining member; for the delight which we receive in its abstract
bulk, and beauty of color, is altogether independent of any perception
of its adaptation to mechanical necessities. Like other beautiful things
in this world, its end is to _be_ beautiful; and, in proportion to its
beauty, it receives permission to be otherwise useless. We do not blame
emeralds and rubies because we cannot make them into heads of hammers.
Nay, so far from our admiration of the jewel shaft being dependent on
its doing work for us, it is very possible that a chief part of its
preciousness may consist in a delicacy, fragility, and tenderness of
material, which must render it utterly unfit for hard work; and
therefore that we shall admire it the more, because we perceive that if
we were to put much weight upon it, it would be crushed. But, at all
events, it is very clear that the primal object in the placing of such
shafts must be the display of their beauty to the best advantage, and
that therefore all imbedding of them in walls, or crowding of them into
groups, in any position in which either their real size or any portion
of their surface would be concealed, is either inadmissible altogether,
or objectionable in proportion to their value; that no symmetrical or
scientific arrangements of pillars are therefore ever to be expected in
buildings of this kind, and that all such are even to be looked upon as
positive errors and misapplications of materials: but that, on the
contrary, we must be constantly prepared to see, and to see with
admiration, shafts of great size and importance set in places where
their real service is little more than nominal, and where the chief end
of their existence is to catch the sunshine upon their polished sides,
and lead the eye into delighted wandering among the mazes of their azure
veins.

§ XXXV. LAW V. _The shafts may be of variable size._ Since the value of
each shaft depends upon its bulk, and diminishes with the diminution of
its mass, in a greater ratio than the size itself diminishes, as in the
case of all other jewellery, it is evident that we must not in general
expect perfect symmetry and equality among the series of shafts, any
more than definiteness of application; but that, on the contrary, an
accurately observed symmetry ought to give us a kind of pain, as proving
that considerable and useless loss has been sustained by some of the
shafts, in being cut down to match with the rest. It is true that
symmetry is generally sought for in works of smaller jewellery; but,
even there, not a perfect symmetry, and obtained under circumstances
quite different from those which affect the placing of shafts in
architecture. First: the symmetry is usually imperfect. The stones that
seem to match each other in a ring or necklace, appear to do so only
because they are so small that their differences are not easily measured
by the eye; but there is almost always such difference between them as
would be strikingly apparent if it existed in the same proportion
between two shafts nine or ten feet in height. Secondly: the quantity of
stones which pass through a jeweller's hands, and the facility of
exchange of such small objects, enable the tradesman to select any
number of stones of approximate size; a selection, however, often
requiring so much time, that perfect symmetry in a group of very fine
stones adds enormously to their value. But the architect has neither the
time nor the facilities of exchange. He cannot lay aside one column in a
corner of his church till, in the course of traffic, he obtain another
that will match it; he has not hundreds of shafts fastened up in
bundles, out of which he can match sizes at his ease; he cannot send to
a brother-tradesman and exchange the useless stones for available ones,
to the convenience of both. His blocks of stone, or his ready hewn
shafts, have been brought to him in limited number, from immense
distances; no others are to be had; and for those which he does not
bring into use, there is no demand elsewhere. His only means of
obtaining symmetry will therefore be, in cutting down the finer masses
to equality with the inferior ones; and this we ought not to desire him
often to do. And therefore, while sometimes in a Baldacchino, or an
important chapel or shrine, this costly symmetry may be necessary, and
admirable in proportion to its probable cost, in the general fabric we
must expect to see shafts introduced of size and proportion continually
varying, and such symmetry as may be obtained among them never
altogether perfect, and dependent for its charm frequently on strange
complexities and unexpected rising and falling of weight and accent in
its marble syllables; bearing the same relation to a rigidly chiselled
and proportioned architecture that the wild lyric rhythm of Æschylus or
Pindar bears to the finished measures of Pope.

§ XXXVI. The application of the principles of jewellery to the smaller
as well as the larger blocks, will suggest to us another reason for the
method of incrustation adopted in the walls. It often happens that the
beauty of the veining in some varieties of alabaster is so great, that
it becomes desirable to exhibit it by dividing the stone, not merely to
economize its substance, but to display the changes in the disposition
of its fantastic lines. By reversing one of two thin plates successively
taken from the stone, and placing their corresponding edges in contact,
a perfectly symmetrical figure may be obtained, which will enable the
eye to comprehend more thoroughly the position of the veins. And this is
actually the method in which, for the most part, the alabasters of St.
Mark are employed; thus accomplishing a double good,--directing the
spectator, in the first place, to close observation of the nature of the
stone employed, and in the second, giving him a farther proof of the
honesty of intention in the builder: for wherever similar veining is
discovered in two pieces, the fact is declared that they have been cut
from the same stone. It would have been easy to disguise the similarity
by using them in different parts of the building; but on the contrary
they are set edge to edge, so that the whole system of the architecture
may be discovered at a glance by any one acquainted with the nature of
the stones employed. Nay, but, it is perhaps answered me, not by an
ordinary observer; a person ignorant of the nature of alabaster might
perhaps fancy all these symmetrical patterns to have been found in the
stone itself, and thus be doubly deceived, supposing blocks to be solid
and symmetrical which were in reality subdivided and irregular. I grant
it; but be it remembered, that in all things, ignorance is liable to be
deceived, and has no right to accuse anything but itself as the source
of the deception. The style and the words are dishonest, not which are
liable to be misunderstood if subjected to no inquiry, but which are
deliberately calculated to lead inquiry astray. There are perhaps no
great or noble truths, from those of religion downwards, which present
no mistakeable aspect to casual or ignorant contemplation. Both the
truth and the lie agree in hiding themselves at first, but the lie
continues to hide itself with effort, as we approach to examine it; and
leads us, if undiscovered, into deeper lies; the truth reveals itself in
proportion to our patience and knowledge, discovers itself kindly to our
pleading, and leads us, as it is discovered, into deeper truths.

§ XXXVII. LAW VI. _The decoration must be shallow in cutting._ The
method of construction being thus systematized, it is evident that a
certain style of decoration must arise out of it, based on the primal
condition that over the greater part of the edifice there can be _no
deep cutting_. The thin sheets of covering stones do not admit of it; we
must not cut them through to the bricks; and whatever ornaments we
engrave upon them cannot, therefore, be more than an inch deep at the
utmost. Consider for an instant the enormous differences which this
single condition compels between the sculptural decoration of the
incrusted style, and that of the solid stones of the North, which may be
hacked and hewn into whatever cavernous hollows and black recesses we
choose; struck into grim darknesses and grotesque projections, and
rugged ploughings up of sinuous furrows, in which any form or thought
may be wrought out on any scale,--mighty statues with robes of rock and
crowned foreheads burning in the sun, or venomous goblins and stealthy
dragons shrunk into lurking-places of untraceable shade: think of this,
and of the play and freedom given to the sculptor's hand and temper, to
smite out and in, hither and thither, as he will; and then consider what
must be the different spirit of the design which is to be wrought on
the smooth surface of a film of marble, where every line and shadow must
be drawn with the most tender pencilling and cautious reserve of
resource,--where even the chisel must not strike hard, lest it break
through the delicate stone, nor the mind be permitted in any impetuosity
of conception inconsistent with the fine discipline of the hand.
Consider that whatever animal or human form is to be suggested, must be
projected on a flat surface; that all the features of the countenance,
the folds of the drapery, the involutions of the limbs, must be so
reduced and subdued that the whole work becomes rather a piece of fine
drawing than of sculpture; and then follow out, until you begin to
perceive their endlessness, the resulting differences of character which
will be necessitated in every part of the ornamental designs of these
incrusted churches, as compared with that of the Northern schools. I
shall endeavor to trace a few of them only.

§ XXXVIII. The first would of course be a diminution of the builder's
dependence upon human form as a source of ornament: since exactly in
proportion to the dignity of the form itself is the loss which it must
sustain in being reduced to a shallow and linear bas-relief, as well as
the difficulty of expressing it at all under such conditions. Wherever
sculpture can be solid, the nobler characters of the human form at once
lead the artist to aim at its representation, rather than at that of
inferior organisms; but when all is to be reduced to outline, the forms
of flowers and lower animals are always more intelligible, and are felt
to approach much more to a satisfactory rendering of the objects
intended, than the outlines of the human body. This inducement to seek
for resources of ornament in the lower fields of creation was powerless
in the minds of the great Pagan nations, Ninevite, Greek, or Egyptian:
first, because their thoughts were so concentrated on their own
capacities and fates, that they preferred the rudest suggestion of human
form to the best of an inferior organism; secondly, because their
constant practice in solid sculpture, often colossal, enabled them to
bring a vast amount of science into the treatment of the lines, whether
of the low relief, the monochrome vase, or shallow hieroglyphic.

§ XXXIX. But when various ideas adverse to the representation of animal,
and especially of human, form, originating with the Arabs and iconoclast
Greeks, had begun at any rate to direct the builders' minds to seek for
decorative materials in inferior types, and when diminished practice in
solid sculpture had rendered it more difficult to find artists capable
of satisfactorily reducing the high organisms to their elementary
outlines, the choice of subject for surface sculpture would be more and
more uninterruptedly directed to floral organisms, and human and animal
form would become diminished in size, frequency, and general importance.
So that, while in the Northern solid architecture we constantly find the
effect of its noblest features dependent on ranges of statues, often
colossal, and full of abstract interest, independent of their
architectural service, in the Southern incrusted style we must expect to
find the human form for the most part subordinate and diminutive, and
involved among designs of foliage and flowers, in the manner of which
endless examples had been furnished by the fantastic ornamentation of
the Romans, from which the incrusted style had been directly derived.

§ XL. Farther. In proportion to the degree in which his subject must be
reduced to abstract outline will be the tendency in the sculptor to
abandon naturalism of representation, and subordinate every form to
architectural service. Where the flower or animal can be hewn into bold
relief, there will always be a temptation to render the representation
of it more complete than is necessary, or even to introduce details and
intricacies inconsistent with simplicity of distant effect. Very often a
worse fault than this is committed; and in the endeavor to give vitality
to the stone, the original ornamental purpose of the design is
sacrificed or forgotten. But when nothing of this kind can be attempted,
and a slight outline is all that the sculptor can command, we may
anticipate that this outline will be composed with exquisite grace; and
that the richness of its ornamental arrangement will atone for the
feebleness of its power of portraiture. On the porch of a Northern
cathedral we may seek for the images of the flowers that grow in the
neighboring fields, and as we watch with wonder the grey stones that
fret themselves into thorns, and soften into blossoms, we may care
little that these knots of ornament, as we retire from them to
contemplate the whole building, appear unconsidered or confused. On the
incrusted building we must expect no such deception of the eye or
thoughts. It may sometimes be difficult to determine, from the
involutions of its linear sculpture, what were the natural forms which
originally suggested them: but we may confidently expect that the grace
of their arrangement will always be complete; that there will not be a
line in them which could be taken away without injury, nor one wanting
which could be added with advantage.

§ XLI. Farther. While the sculptures of the incrusted school will thus
be generally distinguished by care and purity rather than force, and
will be, for the most part, utterly wanting in depth of shadow, there
will be one means of obtaining darkness peculiarly simple and obvious,
and often in the sculptor's power. Wherever he can, without danger,
leave a hollow behind his covering slabs, or use them, like glass, to
fill an aperture in the wall, he can, by piercing them with holes,
obtain points or spaces of intense blackness to contrast with the light
tracing of the rest of his design. And we may expect to find this
artifice used the more extensively, because, while it will be an
effective means of ornamentation on the exterior of the building, it
will be also the safest way of admitting light to the interior, still
totally excluding both rain and wind. And it will naturally follow that
the architect, thus familiarized with the effect of black and sudden
points of shadow, will often seek to carry the same principle into other
portions of his ornamentation, and by deep drill-holes, or perhaps
inlaid portions of black color, to refresh the eye where it may be
wearied by the lightness of the general handling.

§ XLII. Farther. Exactly in proportion to the degree in which the force
of sculpture is subdued, will be the importance attached to color as a
means of effect or constituent of beauty. I have above stated that the
incrusted style was the only one in which perfect or permanent color
decoration was _possible_. It is also the only one in which a true
system of color decoration was ever likely to be invented. In order to
understand this, the reader must permit me to review with some care the
nature of the principles of coloring adopted by the Northern and
Southern nations.

§ XLIII. I believe that from the beginning of the world there has never
been a true or fine school of art in which color was despised. It has
often been imperfectly attained and injudiciously applied, but I believe
it to be one of the essential signs of life in a school of art, that it
loves color; and I know it to be one of the first signs of death in the
Renaissance schools, that they despised color.

Observe, it is not now the question whether our Northern cathedrals are
better with color or without. Perhaps the great monotone grey of Nature
and of Time is a better color than any that the human hand can give; but
that is nothing to our present business. The simple fact is, that the
builders of those cathedrals laid upon them the brightest colors they
could obtain, and that there is not, as far as I am aware, in Europe,
any monument of a truly noble school which has not been either painted
all over, or vigorously touched with paint, mosaic, and gilding in its
prominent parts. Thus far Egyptians, Greeks, Goths, Arabs, and mediæval
Christians all agree: none of them, when in their right senses, ever
think of doing without paint; and, therefore, when I said above that the
Venetians were the only people who had thoroughly sympathized with the
Arabs in this respect, I referred, first, to their intense love of
color, which led them to lavish the most expensive decorations on
ordinary dwelling-houses; and, secondly, to that perfection of the
color-instinct in them, which enabled them to render whatever they did,
in this kind, as just in principle as it was gorgeous in appliance. It
is this principle of theirs, as distinguished from that of the Northern
builders, which we have finally to examine.

§ XLIV. In the second chapter of the first volume, it was noticed that
the architect of Bourges Cathedral liked hawthorn, and that the porch of
his cathedral was therefore decorated with a rich wreath of it; but
another of the predilections of that architect was there unnoticed,
namely, that he did not at all like _grey_ hawthorn, but preferred it
green, and he painted it green accordingly, as bright as he could. The
color is still left in every sheltered interstice of the foliage. He
had, in fact, hardly the choice of any other color; he might have gilded
the thorns, by way of allegorizing human life, but if they were to be
painted at all, they could hardly be painted any tiling but green, and
green all over. People would have been apt to object to any pursuit of
abstract harmonies of color, which might have induced him to paint his
hawthorn blue.

§ XLV. In the same way, whenever the subject of the sculpture was
definite, its color was of necessity definite also; and, in the hands of
the Northern builders, it often became, in consequence, rather the means
of explaining and animating the stories of their stone-work, than a
matter of abstract decorative science. Flowers were painted red, trees
green, and faces flesh-color; the result of the whole being often far
more entertaining than beautiful. And also, though in the lines of the
mouldings and the decorations of shafts or vaults, a richer and more
abstract method of coloring was adopted (aided by the rapid development
of the best principles of color in early glass-painting), the vigorous
depths of shadow in the Northern sculpture confused the architect's eye,
compelling him to use violent colors in the recesses, if these were to
be seen as color at all, and thus injured his perception of more
delicate color harmonies; so that in innumerable instances it becomes
very disputable whether monuments even of the best times were improved
by the color bestowed upon them, or the contrary. But, in the South, the
flatness and comparatively vague forms of the sculpture, while they
appeared to call for color in order to enhance their interest, presented
exactly the conditions which would set it off to the greatest advantage;
breadth of surface displaying even the most delicate tints in the
lights, and faintness of shadow joining with the most delicate and
pearly greys of color harmony; while the subject of the design being in
nearly all cases reduced to mere intricacy of ornamental line, might be
colored in any way the architect chose without any loss of rationality.
Where oak-leaves and roses were carved into fresh relief and perfect
bloom, it was necessary to paint the one green and the other red; but in
portions of ornamentation where there was nothing which could be
definitely construed into either an oak-leaf or a rose, but a mere
labyrinth of beautiful lines, becoming here something like a leaf, and
there something like a flower, the whole tracery of the sculpture might
be left white, and grounded with gold or blue, or treated in any other
manner best harmonizing with the colors around it. And as the
necessarily feeble character of the sculpture called for and was ready
to display the best arrangements of color, so the precious marbles in
the architect's hands give him at once the best examples and the best
means of color. The best examples, for the tints of all natural stones
are as exquisite in quality as endless in change; and the best means,
for they are all permanent.

§ XLVI. Every motive thus concurred in urging him to the study of
chromatic decoration, and every advantage was given him in the pursuit
of it; and this at the very moment when, as presently to be noticed, the
_naïveté_ of barbaric Christianity could only be forcibly appealed to by
the help of colored pictures: so that, both externally and internally,
the architectural construction became partly merged in pictorial effect;
and the whole edifice is to be regarded less as a temple wherein to
pray, than as itself a Book of Common Prayer, a vast illuminated missal,
bound with alabaster instead of parchment, studded with porphyry pillars
instead of jewels, and written within and without in letters of enamel
and gold.

§ XLVII. LAW VII. _That the impression of the architecture is not to be
dependent on size._ And now there is but one final consequence to be
deduced. The reader understands, I trust, by this time, that the claims
of these several parts of the building upon his attention will depend
upon their delicacy of design, their perfection of color, their
preciousness of material, and their legendary interest. All these
qualities are independent of size, and partly even inconsistent with it.
Neither delicacy of surface sculpture, nor subtle gradations of color,
can be appreciated by the eye at a distance; and since we have seen that
our sculpture is generally to be only an inch or two in depth, and that
our coloring is in great part to be produced with the soft tints and
veins of natural stones, it will follow necessarily that none of the
parts of the building can be removed far from the eye, and therefore
that the whole mass of it cannot be large. It is not even desirable that
it should be so; for the temper in which the mind addresses itself to
contemplate minute and beautiful details is altogether different from
that in which it submits itself to vague impressions of space and size.
And therefore we must not be disappointed, but grateful, when we find
all the best work of the building concentrated within a space
comparatively small; and that, for the great cliff-like buttresses and
mighty piers of the North, shooting up into indiscernible height, we
have here low walls spread before us like the pages of a book, and
shafts whose capitals we may touch with our hand.

§ XLVIII. The due consideration of the principles above stated will
enable the traveller to judge with more candor and justice of the
architecture of St. Mark's than usually it would have been possible for
him to do while under the influence of the prejudices necessitated by
familiarity with the very different schools of Northern art. I wish it
were in my power to lay also before the general reader some
exemplification of the manner in which these strange principles are
developed in the lovely building. But exactly in proportion to the
nobility of any work, is the difficulty of conveying a just impression
of it; and wherever I have occasion to bestow high praise, there it is
exactly most dangerous for me to endeavor to illustrate my meaning,
except by reference to the work itself. And, in fact, the principal
reason why architectural criticism is at this day so far behind all
other, is the impossibility of illustrating the best architecture
faithfully. Of the various schools of painting, examples are accessible
to every one, and reference to the works themselves is found sufficient
for all purposes of criticism; but there is nothing like St. Mark's or
the Ducal Palace to be referred to in the National Gallery, and no
faithful illustration of them is possible on the scale of such a volume
as this. And it is exceedingly difficult on any scale. Nothing is so
rare in art, as far as my own experience goes, as a fair illustration of
architecture; _perfect_ illustration of it does not exist. For all good
architecture depends upon the adaptation of its chiselling to the effect
at a certain distance from the eye; and to render the peculiar confusion
in the midst of order, and uncertainty in the midst of decision, and
mystery in the midst of trenchant lines, which are the result of
distance, together with perfect expression of the peculiarities of the
design, requires the skill of the most admirable artist, devoted to the
work with the most severe conscientiousness, neither the skill nor the
determination having as yet been given to the subject. And in the
illustration of details, every building of any pretensions to high
architectural rank would require a volume of plates, and those finished
with extraordinary care. With respect to the two buildings which are the
principal subjects of the present volume, St. Mark's and the Ducal
Palace, I have found it quite impossible to do them the slightest
justice by any kind of portraiture; and I abandoned the endeavor in the
case of the latter with less regret, because in the new Crystal Palace
(as the poetical public insist upon calling it, though it is neither a
palace, nor of crystal) there will be placed, I believe, a noble cast of
one of its angles. As for St. Mark's, the effort was hopeless from the
beginning. For its effect depends not only upon the most delicate
sculpture in every part, but, as we have just stated, eminently on its
color also, and that the most subtle, variable, inexpressible color in
the world,--the color of glass, of transparent alabaster, of polished
marble, and lustrous gold. It would be easier to illustrate a crest of
Scottish mountain, with its purple heather and pale harebells at their
fullest and fairest, or a glade of Jura forest, with its floor of
anemone and moss, than a single portico of St. Mark's. The fragment of
one of its archivolts, given at the bottom of the opposite Plate, is not
to illustrate the thing itself, but to illustrate the impossibility of
illustration.

§ XLIX. It is left a fragment, in order to get it on a larger scale; and
yet even on this scale it is too small to show the sharp folds and
points of the marble vine-leaves with sufficient clearness. The ground
of it is gold, the sculpture in the spandrils is not more than an inch
and a half deep, rarely so much. It is in fact nothing more than an
exquisite sketching of outlines in marble, to about the same depth as in
the Elgin frieze; the draperies, however, being filled with close folds,
in the manner of the Byzantine pictures, folds especially necessary
here, as large masses could not be expressed in the shallow sculpture
without becoming insipid; but the disposition of these folds is always
most beautiful, and often opposed by broad and simple spaces, like that
obtained by the scroll in the hand of the prophet, seen in the plate.

[Illustration: Plate VI.
               THE VINE TREE, AND IN SERVICE.]

The balls in the archivolt project considerably, and the interstices
between their interwoven bands of marble are filled with colors like the
illuminations of a manuscript; violet, crimson, blue, gold, and green
alternately: but no green is ever used without an intermixture of blue
pieces in the mosaic, nor any blue without a little centre of pale
green; sometimes only a single piece of glass a quarter of an inch
square, so subtle was the feeling for color which was thus to be
satisfied.[32] The intermediate circles have golden stars set on an
azure ground, varied in the same manner; and the small crosses seen in
the intervals are alternately blue and subdued scarlet, with two small
circles of white set in the golden ground above and beneath them, each
only about half an inch across (this work, remember, being on the
outside of the building, and twenty feet above the eye), while the blue
crosses have each a pale green centre. Of all this exquisitely
mingled hue, no plate, however large or expensive, could give any
adequate conception; but, if the reader will supply in imagination to
the engraving what he supplies to a common woodcut of a group of
flowers, the decision of the respective merits of modern and of
Byzantine architecture may be allowed to rest on this fragment of St.
Mark's alone.

From the vine-leaves of that archivolt, though there is no direct
imitation of nature in them, but on the contrary a studious subjection
to architectural purpose more particularly to be noticed hereafter, we
may yet receive the same kind of pleasure which we have in seeing true
vine-leaves and wreathed branches traced upon golden light; its stars
upon their azure ground ought to make us remember, as its builder
remembered, the stars that ascend and fall in the great arch of the sky:
and I believe that stars, and boughs, and leaves, and bright colors are
everlastingly lovely, and to be by all men beloved; and, moreover, that
church walls grimly seared with squared lines, are not better nor nobler
things than these. I believe the man who designed and the men who
delighted in that archivolt to have been wise, happy, and holy. Let the
reader look back to the archivolt I have already given out of the
streets of London (Plate XIII. Vol. I.), and see what there is in it to
make us any of the three. Let him remember that the men who design such
work as that call St. Mark's a barbaric monstrosity, and let him judge
between us.

§ L. Some farther details of the St. Mark's architecture, and especially
a general account of Byzantine capitals, and of the principal ones at
the angles of the church, will be found in the following chapter.[33]
Here I must pass on to the second part of our immediate subject, namely,
the inquiry how far the exquisite and varied ornament of St. Mark's fits
it, as a Temple, for its sacred purpose, and would be applicable in the
churches of modern times. We have here evidently two questions: the
first, that wide and continually agitated one, whether richness of
ornament be right in churches at all; the second, whether the ornament
of St. Mark's be of a truly ecclesiastical and Christian character.

§ LI. In the first chapter of the "Seven Lamps of Architecture" I
endeavored to lay before the reader some reasons why churches ought to
be richly adorned, as being the only places in which the desire of
offering a portion of all precious things to God could be legitimately
expressed. But I left wholly untouched the question: whether the church,
as such, stood in need of adornment, or would be better fitted for its
purposes by possessing it. This question I would now ask the reader to
deal with briefly and candidly.

The chief difficulty in deciding it has arisen from its being always
presented to us in an unfair form. It is asked of us, or we ask of
ourselves, whether the sensation which we now feel in passing from our
own modern dwelling-house, through a newly built street, into a
cathedral of the thirteenth century, be safe or desirable as a
preparation for public worship. But we never ask whether that sensation
was at all calculated upon by the builders of the cathedral.

§ LII. Now I do not say that the contrast of the ancient with the modern
building, and the strangeness with which the earlier architectural forms
fall upon the eye, are at this day disadvantageous. But I do say, that
their effect, whatever it may be, was entirely uncalculated upon by the
old builder. He endeavored to make his work beautiful, but never
expected it to be strange. And we incapacitate ourselves altogether from
fair judgment of its intention, if we forget that, when it was built, it
rose in the midst of other work fanciful and beautiful as itself; that
every dwelling-house in the middle ages was rich with the same ornaments
and quaint with the same grotesques which fretted the porches or
animated the gargoyles of the cathedral; that what we now regard with
doubt and wonder, as well as with delight, was then the natural
continuation, into the principal edifice of the city, of a style which
was familiar to every eye throughout all its lanes and streets; and that
the architect had often no more idea of producing a peculiarly
devotional impression by the richest color and the most elaborate
carving, than the builder of a modern meeting-house has by his
whitewashed walls and square-cut casements.[34]

§ LIII. Let the reader fix this great fact well in his mind, and then
follow out its important corollaries. We attach, in modern days, a kind
of sacredness to the pointed arch and the groined roof, because, while
we look habitually out of square windows and live under flat ceilings,
we meet with the more beautiful forms in the ruins of our abbeys. But
when those abbeys were built, the pointed arch was used for every shop
door, as well as for that of the cloister, and the feudal baron and
freebooter feasted, as the monk sang, under vaulted roofs; not because
the vaulting was thought especially appropriate to either the revel or
psalm, but because it was then the form in which a strong roof was
easiest built. We have destroyed the goodly architecture of our cities;
we have substituted one wholly devoid of beauty or meaning; and then we
reason respecting the strange effect upon our minds of the fragments
which, fortunately, we have left in our churches, as if those churches
had always been designed to stand out in strong relief from all the
buildings around them, and Gothic architecture had always been, what it
is now, a religious language, like Monkish Latin. Most readers know, if
they would arouse their knowledge, that this was not so; but they take
no pains to reason the matter out: they abandon themselves drowsily to
the impression that Gothic is a peculiarly ecclesiastical style; and
sometimes, even, that richness in church ornament is a condition or
furtherance of the Romish religion. Undoubtedly it has become so in
modern times: for there being no beauty in our recent architecture, and
much in the remains of the past, and these remains being almost
exclusively ecclesiastical, the High Church and Romanist parties have
not been slow in availing themselves of the natural instincts which were
deprived of all food except from this source; and have willingly
promulgated the theory, that because all the good architecture that is
now left is expressive of High Church or Romanist doctrines, all good
architecture ever has been and must be so,--a piece of absurdity from
which, though here and there a country clergyman may innocently believe
it, I hope the common sense of the nation will soon manfully quit
itself. It needs but little inquiry into the spirit of the past, to
ascertain what, once for all, I would desire here clearly and forcibly
to assert, that wherever Christian church architecture has been good and
lovely, it has been merely the perfect development of the common
dwelling-house architecture of the period; that when the pointed arch
was used in the street, it was used in the church; when the round arch
was used in the street, it was used in the church; when the pinnacle was
set over the garret window, it was set over the belfry tower; when the
flat roof was used for the drawing-room, it was used for the nave. There
is no sacredness in round arches, nor in pointed; none in pinnacles, nor
in buttresses; none in pillars, nor in traceries. Churches were larger
than most other buildings, because they had to hold more people; they
were more adorned than most other buildings, because they were safer
from violence, and were the fitting subjects of devotional offering: but
they were never built in any separate, mystical, and religious style;
they were built in the manner that was common and familiar to everybody
at the time. The flamboyant traceries that adorn the façade of Rouen
Cathedral had once their fellows in every window of every house in the
market-place; the sculptures that adorn the porches of St. Mark's had
once their match on the walls of every palace on the Grand Canal; and
the only difference between the church and the dwelling-house was, that
there existed a symbolical meaning in the distribution of the parts of
all buildings meant for worship, and that the painting or sculpture was,
in the one case, less frequently of profane subject than in the other. A
more severe distinction cannot be drawn: for secular history was
constantly introduced into church architecture; and sacred history or
allusion generally formed at least one half of the ornament of the
dwelling-house.

§ LIV. This fact is so important, and so little considered, that I must
be pardoned for dwelling upon it at some length, and accurately marking
the limits of the assertion I have made. I do not mean that every
dwelling-house of mediæval cities was as richly adorned and as exquisite
in composition as the fronts of their cathedrals, but that they
presented features of the same kind, often in parts quite as beautiful;
and that the churches were not separated by any change of style from the
buildings round them, as they are now, but were merely more finished and
full examples of a universal style, rising out of the confused streets
of the city as an oak tree does out of an oak copse, not differing in
leafage, but in size and symmetry. Of course the quainter and smaller
forms of turret and window necessary for domestic service, the inferior
materials, often wood instead of stone, and the fancy of the
inhabitants, which had free play in the design, introduced oddnesses,
vulgarities, and variations into house architecture, which were
prevented by the traditions, the wealth, and the skill of the monks and
freemasons; while, on the other hand, conditions of vaulting,
buttressing, and arch and tower building, were necessitated by the mere
size of the cathedral, of which it would be difficult to find examples
elsewhere. But there was nothing more in these features than the
adaptation of mechanical skill to vaster requirements; there was nothing
intended to be, or felt to be, especially ecclesiastical in any of the
forms so developed; and the inhabitants of every village and city, when
they furnished funds for the decoration of their church, desired merely
to adorn the house of God as they adorned their own, only a little more
richly, and with a somewhat graver temper in the subjects of the
carving. Even this last difference is not always clearly discernible:
all manner of ribaldry occurs in the details of the ecclesiastical
buildings of the North, and at the time when the best of them were
built, every man's house was a kind of temple; a figure of the Madonna,
or of Christ, almost always occupied a niche over the principal door,
and the Old Testament histories were curiously interpolated amidst the
grotesques of the brackets and the gables.

§ LV. And the reader will now perceive that the question respecting
fitness of church decoration rests in reality on totally different
grounds from those commonly made foundations of argument. So long as our
streets are walled with barren brick, and our eyes rest continually, in
our daily life, on objects utterly ugly, or of inconsistent and
meaningless design, it may be a doubtful question whether the faculties
of eye and mind which are capable of perceiving beauty, having been left
without food during the whole of our active life, should be suddenly
feasted upon entering a place of worship; and color, and music, and
sculpture should delight the senses, and stir the curiosity of men
unaccustomed to such appeal, at the moment when they are required to
compose themselves for acts of devotion;--this, I say, may be a doubtful
question: but it cannot be a question at all, that if once familiarized
with beautiful form and color, and accustomed to see in whatever human
hands have executed for us, even for the lowest services, evidence of
noble thought and admirable skill, we shall desire to see this evidence
also in whatever is built or labored for the house of prayer; that the
absence of the accustomed loveliness would disturb instead of assisting
devotion; and that we should feel it as vain to ask whether, with our
own house full of goodly craftsmanship, we should worship God in a house
destitute of it, as to ask whether a pilgrim whose day's journey had led
him through fair woods and by sweet waters, must at evening turn aside
into some barren place to pray.

§ LVI. Then the second question submitted to us, whether the ornament of
St. Mark's be truly ecclesiastical and Christian, is evidently
determined together with the first; for, if not only the permission of
ornament at all, but the beautiful execution of it, be dependent on our
being familiar with it in daily life, it will follow that no style of
noble architecture _can_ be exclusively ecclesiastical. It must be
practised in the dwelling before it be perfected in the church, and it
is the test of a noble style that it shall be applicable to both; for if
essentially false and ignoble, it may be made to fit the dwelling-house,
but never can be made to fit the church: and just as there are many
principles which will bear the light of the world's opinion, yet will
not bear the light of God's word, while all principles which will bear
the test of Scripture will also bear that of practice, so in
architecture there are many forms which expediency and convenience may
apparently justify, or at least render endurable, in daily use, which
will yet be found offensive the moment they are used for church service;
but there are none good for church service, which cannot bear daily use.
Thus the Renaissance manner of building is a convenient style for
dwelling-houses, but the natural sense of all religious men causes them
to turn from it with pain when it has been used in churches; and this
has given rise to the popular idea that the Roman style is good for
houses and the Gothic for churches. This is not so; the Roman style is
essentially base, and we can bear with it only so long as it gives us
convenient windows and spacious rooms; the moment the question of
convenience is set aside, and the expression or beauty of the style is
tried by its being used in a church, we find it fail. But because the
Gothic and Byzantine styles are fit for churches they are not therefore
less fit for dwellings. They are in the highest sense fit and good for
both, nor were they ever brought to perfection except where they were
used for both.

§ LVII. But there is one character of Byzantine work which, according to
the time at which it was employed, may be considered as either fitting
or unfitting it for distinctly ecclesiastical purposes; I mean the
essentially pictorial character of its decoration. We have already seen
what large surfaces it leaves void of bold architectural features, to be
rendered interesting merely by surface ornament or sculpture. In this
respect Byzantine work differs essentially from pure Gothic styles,
which are capable of filling every vacant space by features purely
architectural, and may be rendered, if we please, altogether independent
of pictorial aid. A Gothic church may be rendered impressive by mere
successions of arches, accumulations of niches, and entanglements of
tracery. But a Byzantine church requires expression and interesting
decoration over vast plane surfaces,--decoration which becomes noble
only by becoming pictorial; that is to say, by representing natural
objects,--men, animals, or flowers. And, therefore, the question whether
the Byzantine style be fit for church service in modern days, becomes
involved in the inquiry, what effect upon religion has been or may yet
be produced by pictorial art, and especially by the art of the
mosaicist?

§ LVIII. The more I have examined the subject the more dangerous I have
found it to dogmatize respecting the character of the art which is
likely, at a given period, to be most useful to the cause of religion.
One great fact first meets me. I cannot answer for the experience of
others, but I never yet met with a Christian whose heart was thoroughly
set upon the world to come, and, so far as human judgment could
pronounce, perfect and right before God, who cared about art at all. I
have known several very noble Christian men who loved it intensely, but
in them there was always traceable some entanglement of the thoughts
with the matters of this world, causing them to fall into strange
distresses and doubts, and often leading them into what they themselves
would confess to be errors in understanding, or even failures in duty. I
do not say that these men may not, many of them, be in very deed nobler
than those whose conduct is more consistent; they may be more tender in
the tone of all their feelings, and farther-sighted in soul, and for
that very reason exposed to greater trials and fears, than those whose
hardier frame and naturally narrower vision enable them with less effort
to give their hands to God and walk with Him. But still, the general
fact is indeed so, that I have never known a man who seemed altogether
right and calm in faith, who seriously cared about art; and when
casually moved by it, it is quite impossible to say beforehand by what
class of art this impression will on such men be made. Very often it is
by a theatrical commonplace, more frequently still by false sentiment. I
believe that the four painters who have had, and still have, the most
influence, such as it is, on the ordinary Protestant Christian mind, are
Carlo Dolci, Guercino, Benjamin West, and John Martin. Raphael, much as
he is talked about, is, I believe in very fact, rarely looked at by
religious people; much less his master, or any of the truly great
religious men of old. But a smooth Magdalen of Carlo Dolci with a tear
on each cheek, or a Guercino Christ or St. John, or a Scripture
illustration of West's, or a black cloud with a flash of lightning in it
of Martin's, rarely fails of being verily, often deeply, felt for the
time.

§ LIX. There are indeed many very evident reasons for this; the chief
one being that, as all truly great religious painters have been hearty
Romanists, there are none of their works which do not embody, in some
portions of them, definitely Romanist doctrines. The Protestant mind is
instantly struck by these, and offended by them, so as to be incapable
of entering, or at least rendered indisposed to enter, farther into the
heart of the work, or to the discovering those deeper characters of it,
which are not Romanist, but Christian, in the everlasting sense and
power of Christianity. Thus most Protestants, entering for the first
time a Paradise of Angelico, would be irrevocably offended by finding
that the first person the painter wished them to speak to was St.
Dominic; and would retire from such a heaven as speedily as
possible,--not giving themselves time to discover, that whether dressed
in black, or white, or grey, and by whatever name in the calendar they
might be called, the figures that filled that Angelico heaven were
indeed more saintly, and pure, and full of love in every feature, than
any that the human hand ever traced before or since. And thus
Protestantism, having foolishly sought for the little help it requires
at the hand of painting from the men who embodied no Catholic doctrine,
has been reduced to receive it from those who believed neither
Catholicism nor Protestantism, but who read the Bible in search of the
picturesque. We thus refuse to regard the painters who passed their
lives in prayer, but are perfectly ready to be taught by those who spent
them in debauchery. There is perhaps no more popular Protestant picture
than Salvator's "Witch of Endor," of which the subject was chosen by the
painter simply because, under the names of Saul and the Sorceress, he
could paint a captain of banditti, and a Neapolitan hag.

§ LX. The fact seems to be that strength of religious feeling is capable
of supplying for itself whatever is wanting in the rudest suggestions of
art, and will either, on the one hand, purify what is coarse into
inoffensiveness, or, on the other, raise what is feeble into
impressiveness. Probably all art, as such, is unsatisfactory to it; and
the effort which it makes to supply the void will be induced rather by
association and accident than by the real merit of the work submitted to
it. The likeness to a beloved friend, the correspondence with a habitual
conception, the freedom from any strange or offensive particularity,
and, above all, an interesting choice of incident, will win admiration
for a picture when the noblest efforts of religious imagination would
otherwise fail of power. How much more, when to the quick capacity of
emotion is joined a childish trust that the picture does indeed
represent a fact! it matters little whether the fact be well or ill
told; the moment we believe the picture to be true, we complain little
of its being ill-painted. Let it be considered for a moment, whether the
child, with its colored print, inquiring eagerly and gravely which is
Joseph, and which is Benjamin, is not more capable of receiving a
strong, even a sublime, impression from the rude symbol which it invests
with reality by its own effort, than the connoisseur who admires the
grouping of the three figures in Raphael's "Telling of the Dreams;" and
whether also, when the human mind is in right religious tone, it has not
always this childish power--I speak advisedly, this power--a noble one,
and possessed more in youth than at any period of after life, but
always, I think, restored in a measure by religion--of raising into
sublimity and reality the rudest symbol which is given to it of
accredited truth.

§ LXI. Ever since the period of the Renaissance, however, the truth has
not been accredited; the painter of religious subject is no longer
regarded as the narrator of a fact, but as the inventor of an idea.[35]
We do not severely criticise the manner in which a true history is
told, but we become harsh investigators of the faults of an invention;
so that in the modern religious mind, the capacity of emotion, which
renders judgment uncertain, is joined with an incredulity which renders
it severe; and this ignorant emotion, joined with ignorant observance of
faults, is the worst possible temper in which any art can be regarded,
but more especially sacred art. For as religious faith renders emotion
facile, so also it generally renders expression simple; that is to say a
truly religious painter will very often be ruder, quainter, simpler, and
more faulty in his manner of working, than a great irreligious one. And
it was in this artless utterance, and simple acceptance, on the part of
both the workman and the beholder, that all noble schools of art have
been cradled; it is in them that they _must_ be cradled to the end of
time. It is impossible to calculate the enormous loss of power in modern
days, owing to the imperative requirement that art shall be methodical
and learned: for as long as the constitution of this world remains
unaltered, there will be more intellect in it than there can be
education; there will be many men capable of just sensation and vivid
invention, who never will have time to cultivate or polish their natural
powers. And all unpolished power is in the present state of society
lost; in other things as well as in the arts, but in the arts
especially: nay, in nine cases out of ten, people mistake the polish for
the power. Until a man has passed through a course of academy
studentship, and can draw in an approved manner with French chalk, and
knows foreshortening, and perspective, and something of anatomy, we do
not think he can possibly be an artist; what is worse, we are very apt
to think that we can _make_ him an artist by teaching him anatomy, and
how to draw with French chalk; whereas the real gift in him is utterly
independent of all such accomplishments: and I believe there are many
peasants on every estate, and laborers in every town, of Europe, who
have imaginative powers of a high order, which nevertheless cannot be
used for our good, because we do not choose to look at anything but what
is expressed in a legal and scientific way. I believe there is many a
village mason who, set to carve a series of Scripture or any other
histories, would find many a strange and noble fancy in his head, and
set it down, roughly enough indeed, but in a way well worth our having.
But we are too grand to let him do this, or to set up his clumsy work
when it is done; and accordingly the poor stone-mason is kept hewing
stones smooth at the corners, and we build our church of the smooth
square stones, and consider ourselves wise.

§ LXII. I shall pursue this subject farther in another place; but I
allude to it here in order to meet the objections of those persons who
suppose the mosaics of St. Mark's, and others of the period, to be
utterly barbarous as representations of religious history. Let it be
granted that they are so; we are not for that reason to suppose they
were ineffective in religious teaching. I have above spoken of the whole
church as a great Book of Common Prayer; the mosaics were its
illuminations, and the common people of the time were taught their
Scripture history by means of them, more impressively perhaps, though
far less fully, than ours are now by Scripture reading. They had no
other Bible, and--Protestants do not often enough consider this--_could_
have no other. We find it somewhat difficult to furnish our poor with
printed Bibles; consider what the difficulty must have been when they
could be given only in manuscript. The walls of the church necessarily
became the poor man's Bible, and a picture was more easily read upon the
walls than a chapter. Under this view, and considering them merely as
the Bible pictures of a great nation in its youth, I shall finally
invite the reader to examine the connexion and subjects of these
mosaics; but in the meantime I have to deprecate the idea of their
execution being in any sense barbarous. I have conceded too much to
modern prejudice, in permitting them to be rated as mere childish
efforts at colored portraiture: they have characters in them of a very
noble kind; nor are they by any means devoid of the remains of the
science of the later Roman empire. The character of the features is
almost always fine, the expression stern and quiet, and very solemn, the
attitudes and draperies always majestic in the single figures, and in
those of the groups which are not in violent action;[36] while the
bright coloring and disregard of chiaroscuro cannot be regarded as
imperfections, since they are the only means by which the figures could
be rendered clearly intelligible in the distance and darkness of the
vaulting. So far am I from considering them barbarous, that I believe of
all works of religious art whatsoever, these, and such as these, have
been the most effective. They stand exactly midway between the debased
manufacture of wooden and waxen images which is the support of Romanist
idolatry all over the world, and the great art which leads the mind away
from the religious subject to the art itself. Respecting neither of
these branches of human skill is there, nor can there be, any question.
The manufacture of puppets, however influential on the Romanist mind of
Europe, is certainly not deserving of consideration as one of the fine
arts. It matters literally nothing to a Romanist what the image he
worships is like. Take the vilest doll that is screwed together in a
cheap toy-shop, trust it to the keeping of a large family of children,
let it be beaten about the house by them till it is reduced to a
shapeless block, then dress it in a satin frock and declare it to have
fallen from heaven, and it will satisfactorily answer all Romanist
purposes. Idolatry,[37] it cannot be too often repeated, is no
encourager of the fine arts. But, on the other hand, the highest
branches of the fine arts are no encouragers either of idolatry or of
religion. No picture of Leonardo's or Raphael's, no statue of Michael
Angelo's, has ever been worshipped, except by accident. Carelessly
regarded, and by ignorant persons, there is less to attract in them than
in commoner works. Carefully regarded, and by intelligent persons, they
instantly divert the mind from their subject to their art, so that
admiration takes the place of devotion. I do not say that the Madonna di
S. Sisto, the Madonna del Cardellino, and such others, have not had
considerable religious influence on certain minds, but I say that on the
mass of the people of Europe they have had none whatever; while by far
the greater number of the most celebrated statues and pictures are never
regarded with any other feelings than those of admiration of human
beauty, or reverence for human skill. Effective religious art,
therefore, has always lain, and I believe must always lie, between the
two extremes--of barbarous idol-fashioning on one side, and magnificent
craftsmanship on the other. It consists partly in missal painting, and
such book-illustrations as, since the invention of printing, have taken
its place; partly in glass-painting; partly in rude sculpture on the
outsides of buildings; partly in mosaics; and partly in the frescoes and
tempera pictures which, in the fourteenth century, formed the link
between this powerful, because imperfect, religious art, and the
impotent perfection which succeeded it.

§ LXIII. But of all these branches the most important are the inlaying
and mosaic of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, represented in a
central manner by these mosaics of St. Mark's. Missal-painting could
not, from its minuteness, produce the same sublime impressions, and
frequently merged itself in mere ornamentation of the page. Modern
book-illustration has been so little skilful as hardly to be worth
naming. Sculpture, though in some positions it becomes of great
importance, has always a tendency to lose itself in architectural
effect; and was probably seldom deciphered, in all its parts, by the
common people, still less the traditions annealed in the purple burning
of the painted window. Finally, tempera pictures and frescoes were often
of limited size or of feeble color. But the great mosaics of the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries covered the walls and roofs of the churches
with inevitable lustre; they could not be ignored or escaped from; their
size rendered them majestic, their distance mysterious, their color
attractive. They did not pass into confused or inferior decorations;
neither were they adorned with any evidences of skill or science, such
as might withdraw the attention from their subjects. They were before
the eyes of the devotee at every interval of his worship; vast
shadowings forth of scenes to whose realization he looked forward, or of
spirits whose presence he invoked. And the man must be little capable of
receiving a religious impression of any kind, who, to this day, does not
acknowledge some feeling of awe, as he looks up at the pale countenances
and ghastly forms which haunt the dark roofs of the Baptisteries of
Parma and Florence, or remains altogether untouched by the majesty of
the colossal images of apostles, and of Him who sent apostles, that look
down from the darkening gold of the domes of Venice and Pisa.

§ LXIV. I shall, in a future portion of this work, endeavor to discover
what probabilities there are of our being able to use this kind of art
in modern churches; but at present it remains for us to follow out the
connexion of the subjects represented in St. Mark's so as to fulfil our
immediate object, and form an adequate conception of the feelings of its
builders, and of its uses to those for whom it was built.

Now there is one circumstance to which I must, in the outset, direct the
reader's special attention, as forming a notable distinction between
ancient and modern days. Our eyes are now familiar and wearied with
writing; and if an inscription is put upon a building, unless it be
large and clear, it is ten to one whether we ever trouble ourselves to
decipher it. But the old architect was sure of readers. He knew that
every one would be glad to decipher all that he wrote; that they would
rejoice in possessing the vaulted leaves of his stone manuscript; and
that the more he gave them, the more grateful would the people be. We
must take some pains, therefore, when we enter St. Mark's, to read all
that is inscribed, or we shall not penetrate into the feeling either of
the builder or of his times.

§ LXV. A large atrium or portico is attached to two sides of the church,
a space which was especially reserved for unbaptized persons and new
converts. It was thought right that, before their baptism, these persons
should be led to contemplate the great facts of the Old Testament
history; the history of the Fall of Man, and of the lives of Patriarchs
up to the period of the Covenant by Moses: the order of the subjects in
this series being very nearly the same as in many Northern churches, but
significantly closing with the Fall of the Manna, in order to mark to
the catechumen the insufficiency of the Mosaic covenant for
salvation,--"Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are
dead,"--and to turn his thoughts to the true Bread of which that manna
was the type.

§ LXVI. Then, when after his baptism he was permitted to enter the
church, over its main entrance he saw, on looking back, a mosaic of
Christ enthroned, with the Virgin on one side and St. Mark on the other,
in attitudes of adoration. Christ is represented as holding a book open
upon his knee, on which is written: "I AM THE DOOR; BY ME IF ANY MAN
ENTER IN, HE SHALL BE SAVED." On the red marble moulding which surrounds
the mosaic is written: "I AM THE GATE OF LIFE; LET THOSE WHO ARE MINE
ENTER BY ME." Above, on the red marble fillet which forms the cornice of
the west end of the church, is written, with reference to the figure of
Christ below: "WHO HE WAS, AND FROM WHOM HE CAME, AND AT WHAT PRICE HE
REDEEMED THEE, AND WHY HE MADE THEE, AND GAVE THEE ALL THINGS, DO THOU
CONSIDER."

Now observe, this was not to be seen and read only by the catechumen
when he first entered the church; every one who at any time entered, was
supposed to look back and to read this writing; their daily entrance
into the church was thus made a daily memorial of their first entrance
into the spiritual Church; and we shall find that the rest of the book
which was opened for them upon its walls continually led them in the
same manner to regard the visible temple as in every part a type of the
invisible Church of God.

§ LXVII. Therefore the mosaic of the first dome, which is over the head
of the spectator as soon as he has entered by the great door (that door
being the type of baptism), represents the effusion of the Holy Spirit,
as the first consequence and seal of the entrance into the Church of
God. In the centre of the cupola is the Dove, enthroned in the Greek
manner, as the Lamb is enthroned, when the Divinity of the Second and
Third Persons is to be insisted upon together with their peculiar
offices. From the central symbol of the Holy Spirit twelve streams of
fire descend upon the heads of the twelve apostles, who are represented
standing around the dome; and below them, between the windows which are
pierced in its walls, are represented, by groups of two figures for each
separate people, the various nations who heard the apostles speak, at
Pentecost, every man in his own tongue. Finally, on the vaults, at the
four angles which support the cupola, are pictured four angels, each
bearing a tablet upon the end of a rod in his hand: on each of the
tablets of the three first angels is inscribed the word "Holy;" on that
of the fourth is written "Lord;" and the beginning of the hymn being
thus put into the mouths of the four angels, the words of it are
continued around the border of the dome, uniting praise to God for the
gift of the Spirit, with welcome to the redeemed soul received into His
Church:

    "HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF SABAOTH:
       HEAVEN AND EARTH ARE FULL OF THY GLORY.
          HOSANNA IN THE HIGHEST:
  BLESSED IS HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LORD."

And observe in this writing that the convert is required to regard the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit especially as a work of _sanctification_.
It is the _holiness_ of God manifested in the giving of His Spirit to
sanctify those who had become His children, which the four angels
celebrate in their ceaseless praise; and it is on account of this
holiness that the heaven and earth are said to be full of His glory.

§ LXVIII. After thus hearing praise rendered to God by the angels for
the salvation of the newly-entered soul, it was thought fittest that the
worshipper should be led to contemplate, in the most comprehensive forms
possible, the past evidence and the future hopes of Christianity, as
summed up in three facts without assurance of which all faith is vain;
namely that Christ died, that He rose again, and that He ascended into
heaven, there to prepare a place for His elect. On the vault between the
first and second cupolas are represented the crucifixion and
resurrection of Christ, with the usual series of intermediate
scenes,--the treason of Judas, the judgment of Pilate, the crowning with
thorns, the descent into Hades, the visit of the women to the sepulchre,
and the apparition to Mary Magdalene. The second cupola itself, which is
the central and principal one of the church, is entirely occupied by the
subject of the Ascension. At the highest point of it Christ is
represented as rising into the blue heaven, borne up by four angels, and
throned upon a rainbow, the type of reconciliation. Beneath him, the
twelve apostles are seen upon the Mount of Olives, with the Madonna,
and, in the midst of them, the two men in white apparel who appeared at
the moment of the Ascension, above whom, as uttered by them, are
inscribed the words, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This Christ, the Son of God, as He is taken from you, shall so
come, the arbiter of the earth, trusted to do judgment and justice."

§ LXIX. Beneath the circle of the apostles, between the windows of the
cupola, are represented the Christian virtues, as sequent upon the
crucifixion of the flesh, and the spiritual ascension together with
Christ. Beneath them, on the vaults which support the angles of the
cupola, are placed the four Evangelists, because on their evidence our
assurance of the fact of the ascension rests; and, finally, beneath
their feet, as symbols of the sweetness and fulness of the Gospel which
they declared, are represented the four rivers of Paradise, Pison,
Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates.

§ LXX. The third cupola, that over the altar, represents the witness of
the Old Testament to Christ; showing him enthroned in its centre, and
surrounded by the patriarchs and prophets. But this dome was little seen
by the people;[38] their contemplation was intended to be chiefly drawn to
that of the centre of the church, and thus the mind of the worshipper was
at once fixed on the main groundwork and hope of Christianity,--"Christ is
risen," and "Christ shall come." If he had time to explore the minor
lateral chapels and cupolas, he could find in them the whole series of
New Testament history, the events of the Life of Christ, and the
Apostolic miracles in their order, and finally the scenery of the Book
of Revelation;[39] but if he only entered, as often the common people do
to this hour, snatching a few moments before beginning the labor of the
day to offer up an ejaculatory prayer, and advanced but from the main
entrance as far as the altar screen, all the splendor of the glittering
nave and variegated dome, if they smote upon his heart, as they might
often, in strange contrast with his reed cabin among the shallows of the
lagoon, smote upon it only that they might proclaim the two great
messages--"Christ is risen," and "Christ shall come." Daily, as the
white cupolas rose like wreaths of sea-foam in the dawn, while the
shadowy campanile and frowning palace were still withdrawn into the
night, they rose with the Easter Voice of Triumph,--"Christ is risen;"
and daily, as they looked down upon the tumult of the people, deepening
and eddying in the wide square that opened from their feet to the sea,
they uttered above them the sentence of warning,--"Christ shall come."

§ LXXXI. And this thought may surely dispose the reader to look with
some change of temper upon the gorgeous building and wild blazonry of
that shrine of St. Mark's. He now perceives that it was in the hearts of
the old Venetian people far more than a place of worship. It was at once
a type of the Redeemed Church of God, and a scroll for the written word
of God. It was to be to them, both an image of the Bride, all glorious
within, her clothing of wrought gold; and the actual Table of the Law
and the Testimony, written within and without. And whether honored as
the Church or as the Bible, was it not fitting that neither the gold nor
the crystal should be spared in the adornment of it; that, as the symbol
of the Bride, the building of the wall thereof should be of jasper,[40]
and the foundations of it garnished with all manner of precious stones;
and that, as the channel of the World, that triumphant utterance of the
Psalmist should be true of it,--"I have rejoiced in the way of thy
testimonies, as much as in all riches?" And shall we not look with
changed temper down the long perspective of St. Mark's Place towards the
sevenfold gates and glowing domes of its temple, when we know with what
solemn purpose the shafts of it were lifted above the pavement of the
populous square? Men met there from all countries of the earth, for
traffic or for pleasure; but, above the crowd swaying for ever to and
fro in the restlessness of avarice or thirst of delight, was seen
perpetually the glory of the temple, attesting to them, whether they
would hear or whether they would forbear, that there was one treasure
which the merchantmen might buy without a price, and one delight better
than all others, in the word and the statutes of God. Not in the
wantonness of wealth, not in vain ministry to the desire of the eyes or
the pride of life, were those marbles hewn into transparent strength,
and those arches arrayed in the colors of the iris. There is a message
written in the dyes of them, that once was written in blood; and a sound
in the echoes of their vaults, that one day shall fill the vault of
heaven,--"He shall return, to do judgment and justice." The strength of
Venice was given her, so long as she remembered this: her destruction
found her when she had forgotten this; and it found her irrevocably,
because she forgot it without excuse. Never had city a more glorious
Bible. Among the nations of the North, a rude and shadowy sculpture
filled their temples with confused and hardly legible imagery; but, for
her, the skill and the treasures of the East had gilded every letter,
and illumined every page, till the Book-Temple shone from afar off like
the star of the Magi. In other cities, the meetings of the people were
often in places withdrawn from religious association, subject to
violence and to change; and on the grass of the dangerous rampart, and
in the dust of the troubled street, there were deeds done and counsels
taken, which, if we cannot justify, we may sometimes forgive. But the
sins of Venice, whether in her palace or in her piazza, were done with
the Bible at her right hand. The walls on which its testimony was
written were separated but by a few inches of marble from those which
guarded the secrets of her councils, or confined the victims of her
policy. And when in her last hours she threw off all shame and all
restraint, and the great square of the city became filled with the
madness of the whole earth, be it remembered how much her sin was
greater, because it was done in the face of the House of God, burning
with the letters of His Law. Mountebank and masquer laughed their laugh,
and went their way; and a silence has followed them, not unforetold; for
amidst them all, through century after century of gathering vanity and
festering guilt, that white dome of St. Mark's had uttered in the dead
ear of Venice, "Know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee
into judgment."


FOOTNOTES

  [19] Acts, xiii. 13; xv. 38, 39.

  [20] The reader who desires to investigate it may consult Galliciolli,
    "Delle Memorie Venete" (Venice, 1795), tom. ii. p. 332, and the
    authorities quoted by him.

  [21] Venice, 1761, tom. i. p. 126.

  [22] St. Mark's Place, "partly covered by turf, and planted with a
    few trees; and on account of its pleasant aspect called Brollo or
    Broglio, that is to say, Garden." The canal passed through it, over
    which is built the bridge of the Malpassi, Galliciolli, lib. i. cap.
    viii.

  [23] My authorities for this statement are given below, in the chapter
    on the Ducal Palace.

  [24] In the Chronicles, "Sancti Marci Ducalis Cappella."

  [25] "To God the Lord, the glorious Virgin Annunciate, and the
    Protector St. Mark."--_Corner_, p. 14. It is needless to trouble the
    reader with the various authorities for the above statements: I have
    consulted the best. The previous inscription once existing on the
    church itself:

      "Anno milleno transacto bisque trigeno
       Desuper undecimo fuit facta primo,"

    is no longer to be seen, and is conjectured by Corner, with much
    probability, to have perished "in qualche ristauro."

  [26] Signed Bartolomeus Bozza, 1634, 1647, 1656, &c.

  [27] Guida di Venezia, p. 6.

  [28] The mere warmth of St. Mark's in winter, which is much greater
    than that of the other two churches above named, must, however, be
    taken into consideration, as one of the most efficient causes of its
    being then more frequented.

  [29] I said above that the larger number of the devotees entered by
    the "Arabian" porch; the porch, that is to say, on the north side of
    the church, remarkable for its rich Arabian archivolt, and through
    which access is gained immediately to the northern transept. The
    reason is, that in that transept is the chapel of the Madonna, which
    has a greater attraction for the Venetians than all the rest of the
    church besides. The old builders kept their images of the Virgin
    subordinate to those of Christ; but modern Romanism has retrograded
    from theirs, and the most glittering portions of the whole church
    are the two recesses behind this lateral altar, covered with silver
    hearts dedicated to the Virgin.

  [30] Vide "Builder," for October, 1851.

  [31] "Quivi presso si vedi una colonna di tanta bellezza e finezza
    che e riputato _piutosto gioia che pietra_."--_Sansovino_, of the
    verd-antique pillar in San Jacomo dell' Orio. A remarkable piece of
    natural history and moral philosophy, connected with this subject,
    will be found in the second chapter of our third volume, quoted from
    the work of a Florentine architect of the fifteenth century.

  [32] The fact is, that no two tesseræ of the glass are exactly of
    the same tint, the greens being all varied with blues, the blues of
    different depths, the reds of different clearness, so that the
    effect of each mass of color is full of variety, like the stippled
    color of a fruit piece.

  [33] Some illustration, also, of what was said in § XXXIII. above,
    respecting the value of the shafts of St. Mark's as large jewels,
    will be found in Appendix 9, "Shafts of St. Mark's."

  [34] See the farther notice of this subject in Vol. III. Chap. IV.

  [35] I do not mean that modern Christians believe less in the
    _facts_ than ancient Christians, but they do not believe in the
    representation of the facts as true. We look upon the picture as
    this or that painter's conception; the elder Christians looked upon
    it as this or that painter's description of what had actually taken
    place. And in the Greek Church all painting is, to this day,
    strictly a branch of tradition. See M. Dideron's admirably written
    introduction to his Iconographie Chrétienne, p. 7:--"Un de mes
    compagnons s'étonnait de retrouver à la Panagia de St. Luc, le saint
    Jean Chrysostome qu'il avait dessiné dans le baptistère de St. Marc,
    à Venise. Le costume des personnages est partout et en tout temps le
    même, non-seulement pour la forme, mais pour la couleur, mais pour
    le dessin, mais jusque pour le nombre et l'épaisseur des plis."

  [36] All the effects of Byzantine art to represent violent action
    are inadequate, most of them ludicrously so, even when the
    sculptural art is in other respects far advanced. The early Gothic
    sculptors, on the other hand, fail in all points of refinement, but
    hardly ever in expression of action. This distinction is of course
    one of the necessary consequences of the difference in all respects
    between the repose of the Eastern, and activity of the Western,
    mind, which we shall have to trace out completely in the inquiry
    into the nature of Gothic.

  [37] Appendix 10, "Proper Sense of the word Idolatry."

  [38] It is also of inferior workmanship, and perhaps later than the
    rest. Vide Lord Lindsay, vol. i. p. 124, note.

  [39] The old mosaics from the Revelation have perished, and have been
    replaced by miserable work of the seventeenth century.

  [40] Rev. xxi. 18.




CHAPTER V.

BYZANTINE PALACES.


§ I. The account of the architecture of St. Mark's given in the previous
chapter has, I trust, acquainted the reader sufficiently with the spirit
of the Byzantine style: but he has probably, as yet, no clear idea of
its generic forms. Nor would it be safe to define these after an
examination of St. Mark's alone, built as it was upon various models,
and at various periods. But if we pass through the city, looking for
buildings which resemble St. Mark's--first, in the most important
feature of incrustation; secondly, in the character of the
mouldings,--we shall find a considerable number, not indeed very
attractive in their first address to the eye, but agreeing perfectly,
both with each other, and with the earliest portions of St. Mark's, in
every important detail; and to be regarded, therefore, with profound
interest, as indeed the remains of an ancient city of Venice, altogether
different in aspect from that which now exists. From these remains we
may with safety deduce general conclusions touching the forms of
Byzantine architecture, as practised in Eastern Italy, during the
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.

§ II. They agree in another respect, as well as in style. All are either
ruins, or fragments disguised by restoration. Not one of them is
uninjured or unaltered; and the impossibility of finding so much as an
angle or a single story in perfect condition is a proof, hardly less
convincing than the method of their architecture, that they were indeed
raised during the earliest phases of the Venetian power. The mere
fragments, dispersed in narrow streets, and recognizable by a single
capital, or the segment of an arch, I shall not enumerate: but, of
important remains, there are six in the immediate neighborhood of the
Rialto, one in the Rio di Ca' Foscari, and one conspicuously placed
opposite the great Renaissance Palace known as the Vendramin Calerghi,
one of the few palaces still inhabited[41] and well maintained; and
noticeable, moreover, as having a garden beside it, rich with
evergreens, and decorated by gilded railings and white statues that cast
long streams of snowy reflection down into the deep water. The vista of
canal beyond is terminated by the Church of St. Geremia, another but
less attractive work of the Renaissance; a mass of barren brickwork,
with a dull leaden dome above, like those of our National Gallery. So
that the spectator has the richest and meanest of the late architecture
of Venice before him at once: the richest, let him observe, a piece of
private luxury; the poorest, that which was given to God. Then, looking
to the left, he will see the fragment of the work of earlier ages,
testifying against both, not less by its utter desolation than by the
nobleness of the traces that are still left of it.

§ III. It is a ghastly ruin; whatever is venerable or sad in its wreck
being disguised by attempts to put it to present uses of the basest
kind. It has been composed of arcades borne by marble shafts, and walls
of brick faced with marble: but the covering stones have been torn away
from it like the shroud from a corpse; and its walls, rent into a
thousand chasms, are filled and refilled with fresh brickwork, and the
seams and hollows are choked with clay and whitewash, oozing and
trickling over the marble,--itself blanched into dusty decay by the
frosts of centuries. Soft grass and wandering leafage have rooted
themselves in the rents, but they are not suffered to grow in their own
wild and gentle way, for the place is in a sort inhabited; rotten
partitions are nailed across its corridors, and miserable rooms
contrived in its western wing; and here and there the weeds are
indolently torn down, leaving their haggard fibres to struggle again
into unwholesome growth when the spring next stirs them: and thus, in
contest between death and life, the unsightly heap is festering to its
fall.

Of its history little is recorded, and that little futile. That it once
belonged to the dukes of Ferrara, and was bought from them in the
sixteenth century, to be made a general receptacle for the goods of the
Turkish merchants, whence it is now generally known as the Fondaco, or
Fontico, de' Turchi, are facts just as important to the antiquary, as
that, in the year 1852, the municipality of Venice allowed its lower
story to be used for a "deposito di Tabacchi." Neither of this, nor of
any other remains of the period, can we know anything but what their own
stones will tell us.

§ IV. The reader will find in Appendix 11, written chiefly for the
traveller's benefit, an account of the situation and present state of
the other seven Byzantine palaces. Here I shall only give a general
account of the most interesting points in their architecture.

They all agree in being round-arched and incrusted with marble, but
there are only six in which the original disposition of the parts is
anywise traceable; namely, those distinguished in the Appendix as the
Fondaco de' Turchi, Casa Loredan, Caso Farsetti, Rio-Foscari House,
Terraced House, and Madonnetta House:[42] and these six agree farther in
having continuous arcades along their entire fronts from one angle to
the other, and in having their arcades divided, in each case, into a
centre and wings; both by greater size in the midmost arches, and by the
alternation of shafts in the centre, with pilasters, or with small
shafts, at the flanks.

§ V. So far as their structure can be traced, they agree also in having
tall and few arches in their lower stories, and shorter and more
numerous arches above: but it happens most unfortunately that in the
only two cases in which the second stories are left the ground floors
are modernized, and in the others where the sea stories are left the
second stories are modernized; so that we never have more than two
tiers of the Byzantine arches, one above the other. These, however, are
quite enough to show the first main point on which I wish to insist,
namely, the subtlety of the feeling for proportion in the Greek
architects; and I hope that even the general reader will not allow
himself to be frightened by the look of a few measurements, for, if he
will only take the little pains necessary to compare them, he will, I am
almost certain, find the result not devoid of interest.

[Illustration: Fig. IV.]

§ VI. I had intended originally to give elevations of all these palaces;
but have not had time to prepare plates requiring so much labor and
care. I must, therefore, explain the position of their parts in the
simplest way in my power.

The Fondaco de' Turchi has sixteen arches in its sea story, and
twenty-six above them in its first story, the whole based on a
magnificent foundation, built of blocks of red marble, some of them
seven feet long by a foot and a half thick, and raised to a height of
about five feet above high-water mark. At this level, the elevation of
one half of the building, from its flank to the central pillars of its
arcades, is rudely given in Fig. IV., in the previous page. It is only
drawn to show the arrangement of the parts, as the sculptures which are
indicated by the circles and upright oblongs between the arches are too
delicate to be shown in a sketch three times the size of this. The
building once was crowned with an Arabian parapet; but it was taken down
some years since, and I am aware of no authentic representation of its
details. The greater part of the sculptures between the arches,
indicated in the woodcut only by blank circles, have also fallen, or
been removed, but enough remain on the two flanks to justify the
representation given in the diagram of their original arrangement.

And now observe the dimensions. The small arches of the wings in the
ground story, _a_, _a_, _a_, measure, in breadth, from

                                  Ft.  In.
  shaft to shaft                   4    5
  interval _b_                     7    6½
  interval _c_                     7   11
  intervals _d_, _e_, _f_, &c.     8    1

The difference between the width of the arches _b_ and _c_ is
necessitated by the small recess of the cornice on the left hand as
compared with that of the great capitals; but this sudden difference of
half a foot between the two extreme arches of the centre offended the
builder's eye, so he diminished the next one, _unnecessarily_, two
inches, and thus obtained the gradual cadence to the flanks, from eight
feet down to four and a half, in a series of continually increasing
steps. Of course the effect cannot be shown in the diagram, as the first
difference is less than the thickness of its lines. In the upper story
the capitals are all nearly of the same height, and there was no
occasion for the difference between the extreme arches. Its twenty-six
arches are placed, four small ones above each lateral three of the lower
arcade, and eighteen larger above the central ten; thus throwing the
shafts into all manner of relative positions, and completely confusing
the eye in any effort to count them: but there is an exquisite symmetry
running through their apparent confusion; for it will be seen that the
four arches in each flank are arranged in two groups, of which one has a
large single shaft in the centre, and the other a pilaster and two small
shafts. The way in which the large shaft is used as an echo of those in
