Such an institution would be a perpetual blister applied to the most
peccant parts of human nature. It amounts to offering 658 prizes for
the most successful flatterer, the most adroit misleader of a body of
his fellow-countrymen. Under no despotism has there been such an
organized system of tillage for raising a rich crop of vicious
courtiership. [7] When, by reason of pre-eminent qualifications
(as may at any time happen to be the case), it is desirable that a
person entirely without independent means, either derived from
property or from a trade or profession, should be brought into
Parliament to render services which no other person accessible can
render as well, there is the resource of a public subscription; he may
be supported while in Parliament, like Andrew Marvel, by the
contributions of his constituents. This mode is unobjectionable for
such an honor will never be paid to mere subserviency: bodies of men
do not care so much for the difference between one sycophant and
another as to go to the expense of his maintenance in order to be
flattered by that particular individual. Such a support will only be
given in consideration of striking and impressive personal qualities,
which, though no absolute proof of fitness to be a national
representative, are some presumption of it, and, at all events, some
guaranty for the possession of an independent opinion and will.



Chapter XI

Of the Duration of Parliaments.


After how long a term should members of Parliament be subject to
re-election? The principles involved are here very obvious; the
difficulty lies in their application. On the one hand, the member
ought not to have so long a tenure of his seat as to make him forget
his responsibility, take his duties easily, conduct them with a view
to his own personal advantage, or neglect those free and public
conferences with his constituents which, whether he agrees or differs
with them, are one of the benefits of representative government. On
the other hand, he should have such a term of office to look forward
to as will enable him to be judged, not by a single act, but by his
course of action. It is important that he should have the greatest
latitude of individual opinion and discretion compatible with the
popular control essential to free government; and for this purpose it
is necessary that the control should be exercised, as in any case it
is best exercised, after sufficient time has been given him to show
all the qualities he possesses, and to prove that there is some other
way than that of a mere obedient voter and advocate of their opinions,
by which he can render himself, in the eyes of his constituents, a
desirable and creditable representative. It is impossible to fix, by
any universal rule, the boundary between these principles. Where the
democratic power in the constitution is weak or over-passive, and
requires stimulation; where the representative, on leaving his
constituents, enters at once into a courtly or aristocratic
atmosphere, whose influences all tend to deflect his course into a
different direction from the popular one, to tone down any democratic
feelings which he may have brought with him, and make him forget the
wishes and grow cool to the interests of those who chose him, the
obligation of a frequent return to them for a renewal of his
commission is indispensable to keeping his temper and character up to
the right mark. Even three years, in such circumstances, are almost
too long a period, and any longer term is absolutely inadmissible.
Where, on the contrary, democracy is the ascendant power, and still
tends to increase, requiring rather to be moderated in its exercise
than encouraged to any abnormal activity; where unbounded publicity,
and an ever-present newspaper press give the representative assurance
that his every act will be immediately known, discussed, and judged by
his constituents, and that he is always either gaining or losing
ground in the estimation, while, by the same means, the influence of
their sentiments, and all other democratic influences, are kept
constantly alive and active in his own mind, less than five years
would hardly be a sufficient period to prevent timid subserviency. The
change which has taken place in English politics as to all these
features explains why annual Parliaments, which forty years ago stood
prominently in front of the creed of the more advanced reformers, are
so little cared for and so seldom heard of at present. It deserves
consideration that, whether the term is short or long, during the last
year of it the members are in position in which they would always be
if Parliaments were annual; so that, if the term were very brief,
there would virtually be annual Parliaments during a great proportion
of all time. As things now are, the period of seven years, though of
unnecessary length, is hardly worth altering for any benefit likely to
be produced, especially since the possibility, always impending, of an
earlier dissolution keeps the motives for standing well with
constituents always before the member's eyes.

Whatever may be the term most eligible for the duration of the
mandate, it might seem natural that the individual member should
vacate his seat at the expiration of that term from the day of his
election, and that there should be no general renewal of the whole
House. A great deal might be said for this system if there were any
practical object in recommending it. But it is condemned by much
stronger reasons than can be alleged in its support. One is, that
there would be no means of promptly getting rid of a majority which
had pursued a course offensive to the nation. The certainty of a
general election after a limited, which would often be a nearly
expired period, and the possibility of it at any time when the
minister either desires it for his own sake, or thinks that it would
make him popular with the country, tend to prevent that wide
divergence between the feelings of the assembly and those of the
constituency, which might subsist indefinitely if the majority of the
House had always several years of their term still to run--if it
received new infusions drop by drop, which would be more likely to
assume than to modify the qualities of the mass they were joined to.
It is as essential that the general sense of the House should accord
in the main with that of the nation as is that distinguished
individuals should be able, without forfeiting their seats, to give
free utterance to the most unpopular sentiments. There is another
reason, of much weight, against the gradual and partial renewal of a
representative assembly. It is useful that there should be a
periodical general muster of opposing forces to gauge the state of the
national mind, and ascertain, beyond dispute, the relative strength of
different parties and opinions. This is not done conclusively by any
partial renewal, even where, as in some of the French constitutions, a
large fraction--a fifth or a third--go out at once.

The reasons for allowing to the executive the power of dissolution
will be considered in a subsequent chapter, relating to the
constitution and functions of the executive in a representative
government.



Chapter XII

Ought Pledges to be Required from Members of Parliament?


Should a member of the legislature be bound by the instructions of his
constituents? Should he be the organ of their sentiments, or of his
own? their ambassador to a congress, or their professional agent,
empowered not only to act for them, but to judge for them what ought
to be done? These two theories of the duty of a legislator in a
representative government have each its supporters, and each is the
recognized doctrine of some representative governments. In the Dutch
United Provinces, the members of the States-General were mere
delegates; and to such a length was the doctrine carried, that when
any important question arose which had not been provided for in their
instructions, they had to refer back to their constituents, exactly as
an ambassador does to the government from which he is accredited. In
this and most other countries which possess representative
constitutions, law and custom warrant a member of Parliament in voting
according to his opinion of right, however different from that of his
constituents; but there is a floating notion of the opposite kind,
which has considerable practical operation on many minds, even of
members of Parliament, and often makes them, independently of desire
for popularity or concern for their re-election, feel bound in
conscience to let their conduct on questions on which their
constituents have a decided opinion be the expression of that opinion
rather than of their own. Abstractedly from positive law, and from the
historical traditions of any particular people, which of these notions
of the duty of a representative is the true one?

Unlike the questions which we have hitherto treated, this is not a
question of constitutional legislation, but of what may more properly
be called constitutional morality--the ethics of representative
government. It does not so much concern institutions as the temper of
mind which the electors ought to bring to the discharge of their
functions, the ideas which should prevail as to the moral duties of an
elector; for, let the system of representation be what it may, it will
be converted into one of mere delegation if the electors so choose. As
long as they are free not to vote, and free to vote as they like, they
can not be prevented from making their vote depend on any condition
they think fit to annex to it. By refusing to elect any one who will
not pledge himself to all their opinions, and even, if they please, to
consult with them before voting on any important subject not foreseen,
they can reduce their representative to their mere mouthpiece, or
compel him in honor, when no longer willing to act in that capacity,
to resign his seat. And since they have the power of doing this, the
theory of the Constitution ought to suppose that they will wish to do
it, since the very principle of constitutional government requires it
to be assumed that political power will be abused to promote the
particular purposes of the holder; not because it always is so, but
because such is the natural tendency of things, to guard against which
is the especial use of free institutions. However wrong, therefore, or
however foolish, we may think it in the electors to convert their
representative into a delegate, that stretch of the electoral
privilege being a natural and not improbable one, the same precautions
ought to be taken as if it were certain. We may hope that the electors
will not act on this notion of the use of the suffrage; but a
representative government needs to be so framed that even if they do,
they shall not be able to effect what ought not to be in the power of
any body of persons--class legislation for their own benefit.

When it is said that the question is only one of political morality,
this does not extenuate its importance. Questions of constitutional
morality are of no less practical moment than those relating to the
constitution itself. The very existence of some governments, and all
that renders others endurable, rests on the practical observance of
doctrines of constitutional morality; traditional notions in the minds
of the several constituted authorities, which modify the use that
might otherwise be made of their powers. In unbalanced
governments--pure monarchy, pure aristocracy, pure democracy--such
maxims are the only barrier which restrains the government from the
utmost excesses in the direction of its characteristic tendency. In
imperfectly balanced governments, where some attempt is made to set
constitutional limits to the impulses of the strongest power, but
where that power is strong enough to overstep them with at least
temporary impunity, it is only by doctrines of constitutional
morality, recognized and sustained by opinion, that any regard at all
is preserved for the checks and limitations of the constitution. In
well-balanced governments, in which the supreme power is divided, and
each sharer is protected against the usurpations of the others in the
only manner possible, namely, by being armed for defense with weapons
as strong as the others can wield for attack, the government can only
be carried on by forbearance on all sides to exercise those extreme
powers, unless provoked by conduct equally extreme on the part of some
other sharer of power; and in this case we may truly say that only by
the regard paid to maxims of constitutional morality is the
constitution kept in existence. The question of pledges is not one of
those which vitally concern the existence of representative
governments, but it is very material to their beneficial operation.
The laws can not prescribe to the electors the principles by which
they shall direct their choice, but it makes a great practical
difference by what principles they think they ought to direct it; and
the whole of that great question is involved in the inquiry whether
they should make it a condition that the representative shall adhere
to certain opinions laid down for him by his constituents.

No reader of this treatise can doubt what conclusion, as to this
matter, results from the general principles which it professes. We
have from the first affirmed, and unveryingly kept in view, the
coequal importance of two great requisites of
government--responsibility to those for whose benefit political power
ought to be, and always professes to be, employed; and jointly
therewith, to obtain, in the greatest measure possible, for the
function of government, the benefits of superior intellect, trained by
long meditation and practical discipline to that special task. If this
second purpose is worth attaining, it is worth the necessary price.
Superior powers of mind and profound study are of no use, if they do
not sometimes lead a person to different conclusions from those which
are formed by ordinary powers of mind without study; and if it be an
object to possess representatives in any intellectual respect superior
to average electors, it must be counted upon that the representative
will sometimes differ in opinion from the majority of his
constituents, and that when he does, his opinion will be the oftenest
right of the two. It follows that the electors will not do wisely if
they insist on absolute conformity to their opinions as the condition
of his retaining his seat.

The principle is thus far obvious; but there are real difficulties in
its application, and we will begin by stating them in their greatest
force. If it is important that the electors should choose a
representative more highly instructed than themselves, it is no less
necessary that this wiser man should be responsible to them; in other
words, they are the judges of the manner in which he fulfils his
trust; and how are they to judge, except by the standard of their own
opinions? How are they even to select him in the first instance but by
the same standard? It will not do to choose by mere brilliancy--by
superiority of showy talent. The tests by which an ordinary man can
judge beforehand of mere ability are very imperfect; such as they are,
they have almost exclusive reference to the arts of expression, and
little or none to the worth of what is expressed. The latter can not
be inferred from the former; and if the electors are to put their own
opinions in abeyance, what criterion remains to them of the ability to
govern well? Neither, if they could ascertain, even infallibly, the
ablest man, ought they to allow him altogether to judge for them,
without any reference to their own opinions. The ablest candidate may
be a Tory, and the electors Liberals; or a Liberal, and they may be
Tories. The political questions of the day may be Church questions,
and he may be a High-Churchman or a Rationalist, while they may be
Dissenters or Evangelicals, and _vice versâ_. His abilities, in these
cases, might only enable him to go greater lengths, and act with
greater effect, in what they may conscientiously believe to be a wrong
course; and they may be bound, by their sincere convictions, to think
it more important that their representative should be kept, on these
points, to what they deem the dictate of duty, than that they should
be represented by a person of more than average abilities. They may
also have to consider, not solely how they can be most ably
represented, but how their particular moral position and mental point
of view shall be represented at all. The influence of every mode of
thinking which is shared by numbers ought to be felt in the
Legislature; and the Constitution being supposed to have made due
provision that other and conflicting modes of thinking shall be
represented likewise, to secure the proper representation for their
own mode may be the most important matter which the electors on the
particular occasion have to attend to. In some cases, too, it may be
necessary that the representative should have his hands tied to keep
him true to their interest, or rather to the public interest as they
conceive it. This would not be needful under a political system which
assured them an indefinite choice of honest and unprejudiced
candidates; but under the existing system, in which the electors are
almost always obliged, by the expenses of election and the general
circumstances of society, to select their representative from persons
of a station in life widely different from theirs, and having a
different class interest, who will affirm that they ought to abandon
themselves to his discretion? Can we blame an elector of the poorer
classes, who has only the choice among two or three rich men, for
requiring from the one he votes for a pledge to those measures which
he considers as a test of emancipation from the class interests of the
rich? It will, moreover, always happens to some members of the
electoral body to be obliged to accept the representative selected by
a majority of their own side. But, though a candidate of their own
choosing would have no chance, their votes may be necessary to the
success of the one chosen for them, and their only means of exerting
their share of influence on his subsequent conduct may be to make
their support of him dependent on his pledging himself to certain
conditions.

These considerations and counter-considerations are so intimately
interwoven with one another; it is so important that the electors
should choose as their representatives wiser men than themselves, and
should consent to be governed according to that superior wisdom, while
it is impossible that conformity to their own opinions, when they have
opinions, should not enter largely into their judgment as to who
possesses the wisdom, and how far its presumed possessor has verified
the presumption by his conduct, that it seems quite impracticable to
lay down for the elector any positive rule of duty; and the result
will depend less on any exact prescription or authoritative doctrine
of political morality than on the general tone of mind of the
electoral body in respect to the important requisite of deference to
mental superiority. Individuals and peoples who are acutely sensible
of the value of superior wisdom are likely to recognize it, where it
exists, by other signs than thinking exactly as they do, and even in
spite of considerable differences of opinion; and when they have
recognized it they will be far too desirous to secure it, at any
admissible cost, to be prone to impose their own opinion as a law upon
persons whom they look up to as wiser than themselves. On the other
hand, there is a character of mind which does not look up to any one;
which thinks no other person's opinion much better than its own, or
nearly so good as that of a hundred or a thousand persons like itself.
Where this is the turn of mind of the electors, they will elect no one
who is not, or at least who does not profess to be, the image of their
own sentiments, and will continue him no longer than while he reflects
those sentiments in his conduct; and all aspirants to political honors
will endeavour, as Plato says in the Gorgias, to fashion themselves
after the model of the Demos, and make themselves as like to it as
possible. It can not be denied that a complete democracy has a strong
tendency to cast the sentiments of the electors in this mould.
Democracy is not favorable to the reverential spirit. That it destroys
reverence for mere social position must be counted among the good, not
the bad part of its influences, though by doing this it closes the
principal _school_ of reverence (as to merely human relations) which
exists in society. But also democracy, in its very essence, insists so
much more forcibly on the things in which all are entitled to be
considered equally than on those in which one person is entitled to
more consideration than another, that respect for even personal
superiority is likely to be below the mark. It is for this, among
other reasons, I hold it of so much importance that the institutions
of the country should stamp the opinions of persons of a more educated
class as entitled to greater weight than those of the less educated;
and I should still contend for assigning plurality of votes to
authenticated superiority of education were it only to give the tone
to public feeling, irrespective of any direct political consequences.

When there does exist in the electoral body an adequate sense of the
extraordinary difference in value between one person and another, they
will not lack signs by which to distinguish the persons whose worth
for their purposes is the greatest. Actual public services will
naturally be the foremost indication: to have filled posts of
magnitude, and done important things in them, of which the wisdom has
been justified by the results; to have been the author of measures
which appear from their effects to have been wisely planned; to have
made predictions which have been of verified by the event, seldom or
never falsified by it; to have given advice, which when taken has been
followed by good consequences--when neglected, by bad. There is
doubtless a large portion of uncertainty in these signs of wisdom; but
we are seeking for such as can be applied by persons of ordinary
discernment. They will do well not to rely much on any one indication,
unless corroborated by the rest, and, in their estimation of the
success or merit of any practical effort, to lay great stress on the
general opinion of disinterested persons conversant with the subject
matter. The tests which I have spoken of are only applicable to tried
men, among whom must be reckoned those who, though untried
practically, have been tried speculatively; who, in public speech or
in print, have discussed public affairs in a manner which proves that
they have given serious study to them. Such persons may, in the mere
character of political thinkers, have exhibited a considerable amount
of the same titles to confidence as those who have been proved in the
position of practical statesmen. When it is necessary to choose
persons wholly untried, the best criteria are, reputation for ability
among those who personally know them, and the confidence placed and
recommendations given by persons already looked up to. By tests like
these, constituencies who sufficiently value mental ability, and
eagerly seek for it, will generally succeed in obtaining men beyond
mediocrity, and often men whom they can trust to carry on public
affairs according to their unfettered judgment; to whom it would be an
affront to require that they should give up that judgment at the
behest of their inferiors in knowledge. If such persons, honestly
sought, are not to be found, then indeed the electors are justified in
taking other precautions, for they can not be expected to postpone
their particular opinions, unless in order that they may be served by
a person of superior knowledge to their own. They would do well,
indeed, even then, to remember that when once chosen, the
representative, if he devotes himself to his duty, has greater
opportunities of correcting an original false judgment than fall to
the lot of most of his constituents; a consideration which generally
ought to prevent them (unless compelled by necessity to choose some
one whose impartiality they do not fully trust) from exacting a pledge
not to change his opinion, or, if he does, to resign his seat. But
when an unknown person, not certified in unmistakable terms by some
high authority, is elected for the first time, the elector can not be
expected not to make conformity to his own sentiments the primary
requisite. It is enough if he does not regard a subsequent change of
those sentiments, honestly avowed, with its grounds undisguisedly
stated, as a peremptory reason for withdrawing his confidence.

Even supposing the most tried ability and acknowledged eminence of
character in the representative, the private opinions of the electors
are not to be placed entirely in abeyance. Deference to mental
superiority is not to go the length of self-annihilation--abnegation
of any personal opinion. But when the difference does not relate to
the fundamentals of politics, however decided the elector may be in
his own sentiments, he ought to consider that when an able man differs
from him there is at least a considerable chance of his being in the
wrong, and that even if otherwise, it is worth while to give up his
opinion in things not absolutely essential, for the sake of the
inestimable advantage of having an able man to act for him in the many
matters in which he himself is not qualified to form a judgment. In
such cases he often endeavours to reconcile both wishes by inducing
the able man to sacrifice his own opinion on the points of difference;
but for the able man to lend himself to this compromise is treason
against his especial office--abdication of the peculiar duties of
mental supremacy, of which it is one of the most sacred not to desert
the cause which has the clamor against it, nor to deprive of his
services those of his opinions which need them the most. A man of
conscience and known ability should insist on full freedom to act as
he in his own judgment deems best, and should not consent to serve on
any other terms. But the electors are entitled to know how he means to
act; what opinions, on all things which concern his public duty, he
intends should guide his conduct. If some of these are unacceptable to
them, it is for him to satisfy them that he nevertheless deserves to
be their representative; and if they are wise, they will overlook, in
favor of his general value, many and great differences between his
opinions and their own. There are some differences, however, which
they can not be expected to overlook. Whoever feels the amount of
interest in the government of his country which befits a freeman, has
some convictions on national affairs which are like his life-blood;
which the strength of his belief in their truth, together with the
importance he attaches to them, forbid him to make a subject of
compromise, or postpone to the judgment of any person, however greatly
his superior. Such convictions, when they exist in a people, or in any
appreciable portion of one, are entitled to influence in virtue of
their mere existence, and not solely in that of the probability of
their being grounded in truth. A people can not be well governed in
opposition to their primary notions of right, even though these may be
in some points erroneous. A correct estimate of the relation which
should subsist between governors and governed does not require the
electors to consent to be represented by one who intends to govern
them in opposition to their fundamental convictions. If they avail
themselves of his capacities of useful service in other respects at a
time when the points on which he is vitally at issue with them are not
likely to be mooted, they are justified in dismissing him at the first
moment when a question arises involving these, and on which there is
not so assured a majority for what they deem right as to make the
dissenting voice of that particular individual unimportant. Thus (I
mention names to illustrate my meaning, not for any personal
application) the opinions supposed to be entertained by Mr. Cobden and
Mr. Bright on resistance to foreign aggression might be overlooked
during the Crimean war, when there was an overwhelming national
feeling on the contrary side, and might yet very properly lead to
their rejection by the electors at the time of the Chinese quarrel
(though in itself a more doubtful question), because it was then for
some time a moot point whether their view of the case might not
prevail.

As the general result of what precedes, we may affirm that actual
pledges should not be required unless, from unfavorable social
circumstances or family institutions, the electors are so narrowed in
their choice as to be compelled to fix it on a person presumptively
under the influence of partialities hostile to their interest: That
they are entitled to a full knowledge of the political opinions and
sentiments of the candidate; and not only entitled, but often bound to
reject one who differs from themselves on the few articles which are
the foundation of their political belief: that, in proportion to the
opinion they entertain of the mental superiority of a candidate, they
ought to put up with his expressing and acting on opinions different
from theirs on any number of things not included in their fundamental
articles of belief: that they ought to be unremitting in their search
for a representative of such calibre as to be intrusted with full
power of obeying the dictates of his own judgment: that they should
consider it a duty which they owe to their fellow-countrymen, to do
their utmost toward placing men of this quality in the Legislature,
and that it is of much greater importance to themselves to be
represented by such a man than by one who professes agreement in a
greater number of their opinions; for the benefits of his ability are
certain, while the hypothesis of his being wrong and their being right
on the points of difference is a very doubtful one.

I have discussed this question on the assumption that the electoral
system, in all that depends on positive institution, conforms to the
principles laid down in the preceding chapters. Even on this
hypothesis, the delegation theory of representation seems to me false,
and its practical operation hurtful, though the mischief would in that
case be confined within certain bounds. But if the securities by which
I have endeavoured to guard the representative principle are not
recognized by the Constitution; if provision is not made for the
representation of minorities, nor any difference admitted in the
numerical value of votes, according to some criterion of the amount of
education possessed by the voters--in that case, no words can
exaggerate the importance in principle of leaving an unfettered
discretion to the representative; for it would then be the only
chance, under universal suffrage, for any other opinions than those of
the majority to be heard in Parliament. In that falsely called
democracy which is really the exclusive rule of the operative classes,
all others being unrepresented and unheard, the only escape from class
legislation in its narrowest, and political ignorance in its most
dangerous form, would lie in such disposition as the uneducated might
have to choose educated representatives, and to defer to their
opinions. Some willingness to do this might reasonably be expected,
and every thing would depend upon cultivating it to the highest point.
But, once invested with political omnipotence, if the operative
classes voluntarily concurred in imposing in this or any other manner
any considerable limitation upon their self-opinion and self-will,
they would prove themselves wiser than any class possessed of absolute
power has shown itself, or, we may venture to say, is ever likely to
show itself under that corrupting influence.



Chapter XIII

Of a Second Chamber.


Of all topics relating to the theory of representative government,
none have been the subject of more discussion, especially on the
Continent, than what is known as the question of the Two Chambers. It
has occupied a greater amount of the attention of thinkers than many
questions of ten times its importance, and has been regarded as a sort
of touchstone which distinguishes the partisans of limited from those
of uncontrolled democracy. For my own part, I set little value on any
check which a Second Chamber can apply to a democracy otherwise
unchecked; and I am inclined to think that if all other constitutional
questions are rightly decided, it is of comparatively little
importance whether the Parliament consists of two Chambers or only of
one.

If there are two chambers, they may either be of similar or of
dissimilar composition. If of similar, both will obey the same
influences, and whatever has a majority in one of the houses will be
likely to have it in the other. It is true that the necessity of
obtaining the consent of both to the passing of any measure may at
times be a material obstacle to improvement, since, assuming both the
houses to be representative and equal in their numbers, a number
slightly exceeding a fourth of the entire representation may prevent
the passing of a bill; while, if there is but one house, a bill is
secure of passing if it has a bare majority. But the case supposed is
rather abstractedly possible than likely to occur in practice. It will
not often happen that, of two houses similarly composed, one will be
almost unanimous, and the other nearly equally divided; if a majority
in one rejects a measure, there will generally have been a large
minority unfavorable to it in the other; any improvement, therefore,
which could be thus impeded, would in almost all cases be one which
had not much more than a simple majority in the entire body, and the
worst consequence that could ensue would be to delay for a short time
the passing of the measure, or give rise to a fresh appeal to the
electors to ascertain if the small majority in Parliament corresponded
to an effective one in the country. The inconvenience of delay, and
the advantages of the appeal to the nation, might be regarded in this
case as about equally balanced.

I attach little weight to the argument oftenest urged for having two
Chambers--to prevent precipitancy, and compel a second deliberation;
for it must be a very ill-constituted representative assembly in which
the established forms of business do not require many more than two
deliberations. The consideration which tells most, in my judgment, in
favor of two Chambers (and this I do regard as of some moment), is the
evil effect produced upon the mind of any holder of power, whether an
individual or an assembly, by the consciousness of having only
themselves to consult. It is important that no set of persons should
be able, even temporarily, to make their _sic volo_ prevail without
asking any one else for his consent. A majority in a single assembly,
when it has assumed a permanent character--when composed of the same
persons habitually acting together, and always assured of victory in
their own House--easily becomes despotic and overweening if released
from the necessity of considering whether its acts will be concurred
in by another constituted authority. The same reason which induced the
Romans to have two consuls makes it desirable there should be two
Chambers--that neither of them may be exposed to the corrupting
influence of undivided power even for the space of a single year. One
of the most indispensable requisites in the practical conduct of
politics, especially in the management of free institutions, is
conciliation; a readiness to compromise; a willingness to concede
something to opponents, and to shape good measures so as to be as
little offensive as possible to persons of opposite views; and of this
salutary habit, the mutual give and take (as it has been called)
between two houses is a perpetual school--useful as such even now, and
its utility would probably be even more felt in a more democratic
constitution of the Legislature.

But the houses need not both be of the same composition; they may be
intended as a check on one another. One being supposed democratic, the
other will naturally be constituted with a view to its being some
restraint upon the democracy. But its efficacy in this respect wholly
depends on the social support which it can command outside the House.
An assembly which does not rest on the basis of some great power in
the country is ineffectual against one which does. An aristocratic
House is only powerful in an aristocratic state of society. The House
of Lords was once the strongest power in our Constitution, and the
Commons only a checking body; but this was when the barons were almost
the only power out of doors. I can not believe that, in a really
democratic state of society, the House of Lords would be of any
practical value as a moderator of democracy. When the force on one
side is feeble in comparison with that on the other, the way to give
it effect is not to draw both out in line, and muster their strength
in open field over against one another. Such tactics would insure the
utter defeat of the less powerful. It can only act to advantage by not
holding itself apart, and compelling every one to declare himself
either with or against it, but taking a position among the crowd
rather than in opposition to it, and drawing to itself the elements
most capable of allying themselves with it on any given point; not
appearing at all as an antagonist body, to provoke a general rally
against it, but working as one of the elements in a mixed mass,
infusing its leaven, and often making what would be the weaker part
the stronger, by the addition of its influence. The really moderating
power in a democratic constitution must act in and through the
democratic House.

That there should be, in every polity, a centre of resistance to the
predominant power in the Constitution--and in a democratic
constitution, therefore, a nucleus of resistance to the democracy--I
have already maintained; and I regard it as a fundamental maxim of
government. If any people who possess a democratic representation are,
from their historical antecedents, more willing to tolerate such a
centre of resistance in the form of a Second Chamber or House of Lords
than in any other shape, this constitutes a stronger reason for having
it in that shape. But it does not appear to me the best shape in
itself, nor by any means the most efficacious for its object. If there
are two houses, one considered to represent the people, the other to
represent only a class, or not to be representative at all, I can not
think that, where democracy is the ruling power in society, the second
House would have any real ability to resist even the aberrations of
the first. It might be suffered to exist in deference to habit and
association, but not as an effective check. If it exercised an
independent will, it would be required to do so in the same general
spirit as the other House; to be equally democratic with it, and to
content itself with correcting the accidental oversights of the more
popular branch of the Legislature, or competing with it in popular
measures.

The practicability of any real check to the ascendancy of the majority
depends henceforth on the distribution of strength in the most popular
branch of the governing body; and I have indicated the mode in which,
to the best of my judgment, a balance of forces might most
advantageously be established there. I have also pointed out that,
even if the numerical majority were allowed to exercise complete
predominance by means of a corresponding majority in Parliament, yet
if minorities also are permitted to enjoy the equal right due to them
on strictly democratic principles, of being represented proportionally
to their numbers, this provision will insure the perpetual presence in
the House, by the same popular title as its other members, of so many
of the first intellects in the country, that without being in any way
banded apart, or invested with any invidious prerogative, this portion
of the national representation will have a personal weight much more
than in proportion to its numerical strength, and will afford, in a
most effective form, the moral centre of resistance which is needed. A
second Chamber, therefore, is not required for this purpose, and would
not contribute to it, but might even, in some degree, tend to
compromise it. If, however, for the other reasons already mentioned,
the decision were taken that there should be such a Chamber, it is
desirable that it should be composed of elements which, without being
open to the imputation of class interests adverse to the majority,
would incline it to oppose itself to the class interests of the
majority, and qualify it to raise its voice with authority against
their errors and weaknesses. These conditions evidently are not found
in a body constituted in the manner of our House of Lords. So soon as
conventional rank and individual riches no longer overawe the
democracy, a House of Lords becomes insignificant.

Of all principles on which a wisely conservative body, destined to
moderate and regulate democratic ascendancy, could possibly be
constructed, the best seems to be that exemplified in the Roman
Senate, itself the most consistently prudent and sagacious body that
ever administered public affairs. The deficiencies of a democratic
assembly, which represents the general public, are the deficiencies of
the public itself, want of special training and knowledge. The
appropriate corrective is to associate with it a body of which special
training and knowledge should be the characteristics. If one House
represents popular feeling, the other should represent personal merit,
tested and guaranteed by actual public service, and fortified by
practical experience. If one is the People's Chamber, the other should
be the Chamber of Statesmen--a council composed of all living public
men who have passed through important political office or employment.
Such a Chamber would be fitted for much more than to be a merely
moderating body. It would not be exclusively a check, but also an
impelling force. In its hands, the power of holding the people back
would be vested in those most competent, and who would then be most
inclined to lead them forward in any right course. The council to whom
the task would be intrusted of rectifying the people's mistakes would
not represent a class believed to be opposed to their interest, but
would consist of their own natural leaders in the path of progress. No
mode of composition could approach to this in giving weight and
efficacy to their function of moderators. It would be impossible to
cry down a body always foremost in promoting improvements as a mere
obstructive body, whatever amount of mischief it might obstruct.

Were the place vacant in England for such a Senate (I need scarcely
say that this is a mere hypothesis), it might be composed of some such
elements as the following: All who were or had been members of the
Legislative Commission described in a former chapter, and which I
regard as an indispensable ingredient in a well constituted popular
government. All who were or had been chief justices, or heads of any
of the superior courts of law or equity. All who had for five years
filled the office of puisne judge. All who had held for two years any
cabinet office; but these should also be eligible to the House of
Commons, and, if elected members of it, their peerage or senatorial
office should be held in suspense. The condition of time is needed to
prevent persons from being named cabinet ministers merely to give them
a seat in the Senate; and the period of two years is suggested, that
the same term which qualifies them for a pension might entitle them to
a senatorship. All who had filled the office of commander-in-chief;
and all who, having commanded an army or a fleet, had been thanked by
Parliament for military or naval successes. All governors general of
India or British America, and all who had held for ten years any
colonial governorships. The permanent civil service should also be
represented; all should be senators who had filled, during ten years,
the important offices of under-secretary to the Treasury, permanent
under-secretary of State, or any others equally high and responsible.
The functions conferring the senatorial dignity should be limited to
those of a legal, political, or military or naval character.
Scientific and literary eminence are too indefinite and disputable:
they imply a power of selection, whereas the other qualifications
speak for themselves; if the writings by which reputation has been
gained are unconnected with politics, they are no evidence of the
special qualities required, while, if political, they would enable
successive ministries to deluge the House with party tools.

The historical antecedents of England render it all but certain that,
unless in the improbable case of a violent subversion of the existing
Constitution, any second Chamber which could possibly exist would have
to be built on the foundation of the House of Lords. It is out of the
question to think practically of abolishing that assembly, to replace
it by such a Senate as I have sketched or by any other; but there
might not be the same insuperable difficulty in aggregating the
classes or categories just spoken of to the existing body in the
character of peers for life. An ulterior, and perhaps, on this
supposition, a necessary step, might be, that the hereditary peerage
should be present in the House by their representatives instead of
personally: a practice already established in the case of the Scotch
and Irish peers, and which the mere multiplication of the order will
probably at some time or other render inevitable. An easy adaptation
of Mr. Hare's plan would prevent the representative peers from
representing exclusively the party which has the majority in the
peerage. If, for example, one representative were allowed for every
ten peers, any ten might be admitted to choose a representative, and
the peers might be free to group themselves for that purpose as they
pleased. The election might be thus conducted: All peers who were
candidates for the representation of their order should be required to
declare themselves such, and enter their names in a list. A day and
place should be appointed at which peers desirous of voting should be
present, either in person, or, in the usual Parliamentary manner, by
their proxies. The votes should be taken, each peer voting for only
one. Every candidate who had as many as ten votes should be declared
elected. If any one had more, all but ten should be allowed to
withdraw their votes, or ten of the number should be selected by lot.
These ten would form his constituency, and the remainder of his voters
would be set free to give their votes over again for some one else.
This process should be repeated until (so far as possible) every peer
present either personally or by proxy was represented. When a number
less than ten remained over, if amounting to five they might still be
allowed to agree on a representative; if fewer than five, their votes
must be lost, or they might be permitted to record them in favor of
somebody already elected. With this inconsiderable exception, every
representative peer would represent ten members of the peerage, all of
whom had not only voted for him, but selected him as the one, among
all open to their choice, by whom they were most desirous to be
represented. As a compensation to the peers who were not chosen
representatives of their order, they should be eligible to the House
of Commons; a justice now refused to Scotch peers, and to Irish peers
in their own part of the kingdom, while the representation in the
House of Lords of any but the most numerous party in the peerage is
denied equally to both.

The mode of composing a Senate which has been here advocated not only
seems the best in itself, but is that for which historical precedent
and actual brilliant success can to the greatest extent be pleaded. It
is not however the only feasible plan that might be proposed. Another
possible mode of forming a Second Chamber would be to have it elected
by the First; subject to the restriction that they should not nominate
any of their own members. Such an assembly, emanating, like the
American Senate, from popular choice only once removed, would not be
considered to clash with democratic institutions, and would probably
acquire considerable popular influence. From the mode of its
nomination, it would be peculiarly unlikely to excite the jealousy of,
or to come into hostile collision with the popular House. It would,
moreover (due provision being made for the representation of the
minority), be almost sure to be well composed, and to comprise many of
that class of highly capable men who, either from accident or for want
of showy qualities, had been unwilling to seek, or unable to obtain,
the suffrages of a popular constituency.

The best constitution of a Second Chamber is that which embodies the
greatest number of elements exempt from the class interests and
prejudices of the majority, but having in themselves nothing offensive
to democratic feeling. I repeat, however, that the main reliance for
tempering the ascendancy of the majority can be placed in a Second
Chamber of any kind. The character of a representative government is
fixed by the constitution of the popular House. Compared with this,
all other questions relating to the form of government are
insignificant.



Chapter XIV

Of the Executive in a Representative Government.


It would be out of place in this treatise to discuss the question into
what departments or branches the executive business of government may
most conveniently be divided. In this respect the exigencies of
different governments are different; and there is little probability
that any great mistake will be made in the classification of the
duties when men are willing to begin at the beginning, and do not hold
themselves bound by the series of accidents which, in an old
government like ours, has produced the existing division of the public
business. It may be sufficient to say that the classification of
functionaries should correspond to that of subjects, and that there
should not be several departments independent of one another, to
superintend different parts of the same natural whole, as in our own
military administration down to a recent period, and in a less degree
even at present. Where the object to be attained is single (such as
that of having an efficient army), the authority commissioned to
attend to it should be single likewise. The entire aggregate of means
provided for one end should be under one and the same control and
responsibility. If they are divided among independent authorities, the
means with each of those authorities become ends, and it is the
business of nobody except the head of the government, who has probably
no departmental experience, to take care of the real end. The
different classes of means are not combined and adapted to one another
under the guidance of any leading idea; and while every department
pushes forward its own requirements, regardless of those of the rest,
the purpose of the work is perpetually sacrificed to the work itself.

As a general rule, every executive function, whether superior or
subordinate, should be the appointed duty of some given individual. It
should be apparent to all the world who did every thing, and through
whose default any thing was left undone. Responsibility is null when
nobody knows who is responsible; nor, even when real, can it be
divided without being weakened. To maintain it at its highest, there
must be one person who receives the whole praise of what is well done,
the whole blame of what is ill. There are, however, two modes of
sharing responsibility; by one it is only enfeebled, by the other
absolutely destroyed. It is enfeebled when the concurrence of more
than one functionary is required to the same act. Each one among them
has still a real responsibility; if a wrong has been done, none of
them can say he did not do it; he is as much a participant as an
accomplice is in an offense: if there has been legal criminality, they
may all be punished legally, and their punishment needs not be less
severe than if there had been only one person concerned. But it is not
so with the penalties any more than with the rewards of opinion; these
are always diminished by being shared. Where there has been no
definite legal offense, no corruption or malversation, only an error
or an imprudence, or what may pass for such, every participator has an
excuse to himself and to the world in the fact that other persons are
jointly involved with him. There is hardly any thing, even to
pecuniary dishonesty, for which men will not feel themselves almost
absolved, if those whose duty it was to resist and remonstrate have
failed to do it, still more if they have given a formal assent.

In this case, however, though responsibility is weakened, there still
is responsibility: every one of those implicated has in his individual
capacity assented to, and joined in the act. Things are much worse
when the act itself is only that of a majority--a board deliberating
with closed doors, nobody knowing, or, except in some extreme case,
being ever likely to know, whether an individual member voted for the
act or against it. Responsibility in this case is a mere name.
"Boards," it is happily said by Bentham, "are screens." What "the
Board" does is the act of nobody, and nobody can be made to answer for
it. The Board suffers, even in reputation, only in its collective
character; and no individual member feels this further than his
disposition leads him to identify his own estimation with that of the
body--a feeling often very strong when the body is a permanent one,
and he is wedded to it for better for worse; but the fluctuations of a
modern official career give no time for the formation of such an
_esprit de corps_, which, if it exists at all, exists only in the
obscure ranks of the permanent subordinates. Boards, therefore, are
not a fit instrument for executive business, and are only admissible
in it when, for other reasons, to give full discretionary power to a
single minister would be worse.

On the other hand, it is also a maxim of experience that in the
multitude of councillors there is wisdom, and that a man seldom judges
right, even in his own concerns, still less in those of the public,
when he makes habitual use of no knowledge but his own, or that of
some single adviser. There is no necessary incompatibility between
this principle and the other. It is easy to give the effective power
and the full responsibility to one, providing him when necessary with
advisers, each of whom is responsible only for the opinion he gives.

In general, the head of a department of the executive government is a
mere politician. He may be a good politician, and a man of merit; and,
unless this is usually the case, the government is bad. But his
general capacity, and the knowledge he ought to possess of the general
interests of the country, will not, unless by occasional accident, be
accompanied by adequate, and what may be called professional knowledge
of the department over which he is called to preside. Professional
advisers must therefore be provided for him. Wherever mere experience
and attainments are sufficient--wherever the qualities required in a
professional adviser may possibly be united in a single well-selected
individual (as in the case, for example, of a law officer), one such
person for general purposes, and a staff of clerks to supply knowledge
of details, meet the demands of the case. But, more frequently, it is
not sufficient that the minister should consult some one competent
person, and, when himself not conversant with the subject, act
implicitly on that person's advice. It is often necessary that he
should, not only occasionally, but habitually, listen to a variety of
opinions, and inform his judgment by the discussions among a body of
advisers. This, for example, is emphatically necessary in military and
naval affairs. The military and naval ministers, therefore, and
probably several others, should be provided with a Council, composed,
at least in those two departments, of able and experienced
professional men. As a means of obtaining the best men for the purpose
under every change of administration, they ought to be permanent; by
which I mean that they ought not, like the Lords of the Admiralty, to
be expected to resign with the ministry by whom they were appointed;
but it is a good rule that all who hold high appointments to which
they have risen by selection, and not by the ordinary course of
promotion, should retain their office only for a fixed term, unless
reappointed, as is now the rule with staff appointments in the British
army. This rule renders appointments somewhat less likely to be
jobbed, not being a provision for life, and the same time affords a
means, without affront to any one, of getting rid of those who are
least worth keeping, and bringing in highly qualified persons of
younger standing, for whom there might never be room if death
vacancies, or voluntary resignations were waited for.

The councils should be consultative merely, in this sense, that the
ultimate decision should rest undividedly with the minister himself;
but neither ought they to be looked upon, or to look upon themselves
as ciphers, or as capable of being reduced to such at his pleasure.
The advisers attached to a powerful and perhaps self-willed man ought
to be placed under conditions which make it impossible for them,
without discredit, not to express an opinion, and impossible for him
not to listen to and consider their recommendations, whether he adopts
them or not. The relation which ought to exist between a chief and
this description of advisers is very accurately hit by the
constitution of the Council of the Governor General and those of the
different Presidencies in India. These councils are composed of
persons who have professional knowledge of Indian affairs, which the
governor general and governors usually lack, and which it would not be
desirable to require of them. As a rule, every member of council is
expected to give an opinion, which is of course very often a simple
acquiescence; but if there is a difference of sentiment, it is at the
option of every member, and is the invariable practice, to record the
reasons of his opinion, the governor general, or governor, doing the
same. In ordinary cases the decision is according to the sense of the
majority; the council, therefore, has a substantial part in the
government; but if the governor general, or governor, thinks fit, he
may set aside even their unanimous opinion, recording his reasons. The
result is, that the chief is individually and effectively responsible
for every act of the government. The members of council have only the
responsibility of advisers; but it is always known, from documents
capable of being produced, and which, if called for by Parliament or
public opinion always are produced, what each has advised, and what
reasons he gave for his advice; while, from their dignified position,
and ostensible participation in all acts of government, they have
nearly as strong motives to apply themselves to the public business,
and to form and express a well-considered opinion on every part of it,
as if the whole responsibility rested with themselves.

This mode of conducting the highest class of administrative business
is one of the most successful instances of the adaptation of means to
ends which political history, not hitherto very prolific in works of
skill and contrivance, has yet to show. It is one of the acquisitions
with which the art of politics has been enriched by the experience of
the East India Company's rule; and, like most of the other wise
contrivances by which India has been preserved to this country, and an
amount of good government produced which is truly wonderful
considering the circumstances and the materials, it is probably
destined to perish in the general holocaust which the traditions of
Indian government seem fated to undergo since they have been placed at
the mercy of public ignorance and the presumptuous vanity of political
men. Already an outcry is raised for abolishing the councils as a
superfluous and expensive clog on the wheels of government; while the
clamor has long been urgent, and is daily obtaining more countenance
in the highest quarters, for the abrogation of the professional civil
service, which breeds the men that compose the councils, and the
existence of which is the sole guaranty for their being of any value.

A most important principle of good government in a popular
constitution is that no executive functionaries should be appointed by
popular election, neither by the votes of the people themselves, nor
by those of their representatives. The entire business of government
is skilled employment; the qualifications for the discharge of it are
of that special and professional kind which can not be properly judged
of except by persons who have themselves some share of those
qualifications, or some practical experience of them. The business of
finding the fittest persons to fill public employments--not merely
selecting the best who offer, but looking out for the absolutely best,
and taking note of all fit persons who are met with, that they may be
found when wanted--is very laborious, and requires a delicate as well
as highly conscientious discernment; and as there is no public duty
which is in general so badly performed, so there is none for which it
is of greater importance to enforce the utmost practicable amount of
personal responsibility, by imposing it as a special obligation on
high functionaries in the several departments. All subordinate public
officers who are not appointed by some mode of public competition
should be selected on the direct responsibility of the minister under
whom they serve. The ministers, all but the chief, will naturally be
selected by the chief; and the chief himself, though really designated
by Parliament, should be, in a regal government, officially appointed
by the crown. The functionary who appoints should be the sole person
empowered to remove any subordinate officer who is liable to removal,
which the far greater number ought not to be, except for personal
misconduct, since it would be vain to expect that the body of persons
by whom the whole detail of the public business is transacted, and
whose qualifications are generally of much more importance to the
public than those of the minister himself, will devote themselves to
their profession, and acquire the knowledge and skill on which the
minister must often place entire dependence, if they are liable at any
moment to be turned adrift for no fault, that the minister may gratify
himself, or promote his political interest, by appointing somebody
else.

To the principle which condemns the appointment of executive officers
by popular suffrage, ought the chief of the executive, in a republican
government, to be an exception? Is it a good rule which, in the
American Constitution, provides for the election of the President once
in every four years by the entire people? The question is not free
from difficulty. There is unquestionably some advantage, in a country
like America, where no apprehension needs be entertained of a _coup
d'état_, in making the chief minister constitutionally independent of
the legislative body, and rendering the two great branches of the
government, while equally popular both in their origin and in their
responsibility, an effective check on one another. The plan is in
accordance with that sedulous avoidance of the concentration of great
masses of power in the same hands, which is a marked characteristic of
the American federal Constitution. But the advantage, in this
instance, is purchased at a price above all reasonable estimates of
its value. It seems far better that the chief magistrate in a republic
should be appointed avowedly, as the chief minister in a
constitutional monarchy is virtually, by the representative body. In
the first place, he is certain, when thus appointed, to be a more
eminent man. The party which has the majority in Parliament would
then, as a rule, appoint its own leader, who is always one of the
foremost, and often the very foremost person in political life; while
the President of the United States, since the last survivor of the
founders of the republic disappeared from the scene, is almost always
either an obscure man, or one who has gained any reputation he may
possess in some other field than politics. And this, as I have before
observed, is no accident, but the natural effect of the situation. The
eminent men of a party, in an election extending to the whole country,
are never its most available candidates. All eminent men have made
personal enemies, or, have done something, or at the lowest, professed
some opinion obnoxious to some local or other considerable division of
the community, and likely to tell with fatal effect upon the number of
votes; whereas a man without antecedents, of whom nothing is known but
that he professes the creed of the party, is readily voted for by its
entire strength. Another important consideration is the great mischief
of unintermitted electioneering. When the highest dignity in the state
is to be conferred by popular election once in every few years, the
whole intervening time is spent in what is virtually a canvass.
President, ministers, chiefs of parties, and their followers, are all
electioneerers: the whole community is kept intent on the mere
personalities of politics, and every public question is discussed and
decided with less reference to its merits than to its expected bearing
on the presidential election. If a system had been devised to make
party spirit the ruling principle of action in all public affairs, and
create an inducement not only to make every question a party question,
but to raise questions for the purpose of founding parties upon them,
it would have been difficult to contrive any means better adapted to
the purpose.

I will not affirm that it would at all times and places be desirable
that the head of the executive should be so completely dependent upon
the votes of a representative assembly as the prime minister is in
England, and is without inconvenience. If it were thought best to
avoid this, he might, though appointed by Parliament, hold his office
for a fixed period, independent of a Parliamentary vote, which would
be the American system minus the popular election and its evils. There
is another mode of giving the head of the administration as much
independence of the Legislature as is at all compatible with the
essentials of free government. He never could be unduly dependent on a
vote of Parliament if he had, as the British prime minister
practically has, the power to dissolve the House and appeal to the
people; if, instead of being turned out of office by a hostile vote,
he could only be reduced by it to the alternative of resignation or
dissolution. The power of dissolving Parliament is one which I think
it desirable he should possess, even under the system by which his own
tenure of office is secured to him for a fixed period. There ought not
to be any possibility of that deadlock in politics which would ensue
on a quarrel breaking out between a president and an assembly, neither
of whom, during an interval which might amount to years, would have
any legal means of ridding itself of the other. To get through such a
period without a _coup d'état_ being attempted, on either side or on
both, requires such a combination of the love of liberty and the habit
of self-restraint as very few nations have yet shown themselves
capable of; and though this extremity were avoided, to expect that the
two authorities would not paralyze each other's operations is to
suppose that the political life of the country will always be pervaded
by a spirit of mutual forbearance and compromise, imperturbable by the
passions and excitements of the keenest party struggles. Such a spirit
may exist, but even where it does there is imprudence in trying it too
far.

Other reasons make it desirable that some power in the state (which
can only be the executive) should have the liberty of at any time, and
at discretion, calling a new Parliament. When there is a real doubt
which of two contending parties has the strongest following, it is
important that there should exist a constitutional means of
immediately testing the point and setting it at rest. No other
political topic has a chance of being properly attended to while this
is undecided; and such an interval is mostly an interregnum for
purposes of legislative or administrative improvement, neither party
having sufficient confidence in its strength to attempt things likely
to provoke opposition in any quarter that has either direct or
indirect influence in the pending struggle.

I have not taken account of the case in which the vast power
centralized in the chief magistrate, and the insufficient attachment
of the mass of the people to free institutions, give him a chance of
success in an attempt to subvert the Constitution, and usurp sovereign
power. Where such peril exists, no first magistrate is admissible whom
the Parliament can not, by a single vote, reduce to a private station.
In a state of things holding out any encouragement to that most
audacious and profligate of all breaches of trust, even this
entireness of constitutional dependence is but a weak protection.

Of all officers of government, those in whose appointment any
participation of popular suffrage is the most objectionable are
judicial officers. While there are no functionaries whose special and
professional qualifications the popular judgment is less fitted to
estimate, there are none in whose case absolute impartiality, and
freedom from connection with politicians or sections of politicians,
are of any thing like equal importance. Some thinkers, among others
Mr. Bentham, have been of opinion that, although it is better that
judges should not be appointed by popular election, the people of
their district ought to have the power, after sufficient experience,
of removing them from their trust. It can not be denied that the
irremovability of any public officer to whom great interests are
intrusted is in itself an evil. It is far from desirable that there
should be no means of getting rid of a bad or incompetent judge,
unless for such misconduct as he can be made to answer for in a
criminal court, and that a functionary on whom so much depends should
have the feeling of being free from responsibility except to opinion
and his own conscience. The question however is, whether, in the
peculiar position of a judge, and supposing that all practicable
securities have been taken for an honest appointment,
irresponsibility, except to his own and the public conscience, has
not, on the whole, less tendency to pervert his conduct than
responsibility to the government or to a popular vote. Experience has
long decided this point in the affirmative as regards responsibility
to the executive, and the case is quite equally strong when the
responsibility sought to be enforced is to the suffrages of electors.
Among the good qualities of a popular constituency, those peculiarly
incumbent upon a judge, calmness and impartiality, are not numbered.
Happily, in that intervention of popular suffrage which is essential
to freedom they are not the qualities required. Even the quality of
justice, though necessary to all human beings, and therefore to all
electors, is not the inducement which decides any popular election.
Justice and impartiality are as little wanted for electing a member of
Parliament as they can be in any transaction of men. The electors have
not to award something which either candidate has a right to, nor to
pass judgment on the general merits of the competitors, but to declare
which of them has most of their personal confidence, or best
represents their political convictions. A judge is bound to treat his
political friend, or the person best known to him, exactly as he
treats other people; but it would be a breach of duty, as well as an
absurdity, if an elector did so. No argument can be grounded on the
beneficial effect produced on judges, as on all other functionaries,
by the moral jurisdiction of opinion; for even in this respect, that
which really exercises a useful control over the proceedings of a
judge, when fit for the judicial office, is not (except sometimes in
political cases) the opinion of the community generally, but that of
the only public by whom his conduct or qualifications can be duly
estimated, the bar of his own court. I must not be understood to say
that the participation of the general public in the administration of
justice is of no importance; it is of the greatest; but in what
manner? By the actual discharge of a part of the judicial office in
the capacity of jurymen. This is one of the few cases in politics in
which it is better that the people should act directly and personally
than through their representatives, being almost the only case in
which the errors that a person exercising authority may commit can be
better borne than the consequences of making him responsible for them.
If a judge could be removed from office by a popular vote, whoever was
desirous of supplanting him would make capital for that purpose out of
all his judicial decisions; would carry all of them, as far as he
found practicable, by irregular appeal before a public opinion wholly
incompetent, for want of having heard the case, or from having heard
it without either the precautions or the impartiality belonging to a
judicial hearing; would play upon popular passion and prejudice where
they existed, and take pains to arouse them where they did not. And in
this, if the case were interesting, and he took sufficient trouble, he
would infallibly be successful, unless the judge or his friends
descended into the arena, and made equally powerful appeals on the
other side. Judges would end by feeling that they risked their office
upon every decision they gave in a case susceptible of general
interest, and that it was less essential for them to consider what
decision was just, than what would be most applauded by the public, or
would least admit of insidious misrepresentation. The practice
introduced by some of the new or revised State Constitutions in
America, of submitting judicial officers to periodical popular
re-election, will be found, I apprehend, to be one of the most
dangerous errors ever yet committed by democracy; and, were it not
that the practical good sense which never totally deserts the people
of the United States is said to be producing a reaction, likely in no
long time to lead to the retraction of the error, it might with reason
be regarded as the first great downward step in the degeneration of
modern democratic government.

With regard to that large and important body which constitutes the
permanent strength of the public service, those who do not change with
changes of politics, but remain to aid every minister by their
experience and traditions, inform him by their knowledge of business,
and conduct official details under his general control--those, in
short, who form the class of professional public servants, entering
their profession as others do while young, in the hope of rising
progressively to its higher grades as they advance in life--it is
evidently inadmissible that these should be liable to be turned out,
and deprived of the whole benefit of their previous service, except
for positive, proved, and serious misconduct. Not, of course, such
delinquency only as makes them amenable to the law, but voluntary
neglect of duty, or conduct implying untrustworthiness for the
purposes for which their trust is given them. Since, therefore, unless
in case of personal culpability, there is no way of getting rid of
them except by quartering them on the public as pensioners, it is of
the greatest importance that the appointments should be well made in
the first instance; and it remains to be considered by what mode of
appointment this purpose can best be attained.

In making first appointments, little danger is to be apprehended from
want of special skill and knowledge in the choosers, but much from
partiality, and private or political interest. Being all appointed at
the commencement of manhood, not as having learned, but in order that
they may learn, their profession, the only thing by which the best
candidates can be discriminated is proficiency in the ordinary
branches of liberal education; and this can be ascertained without
difficulty, provided there be the requisite pains and the requisite
impartiality in those who are appointed to inquire into it. Neither
the one nor the other can reasonably be expected from a minister, who
must rely wholly on recommendations, and, however disinterested as to
his personal wishes, never will be proof against the solicitations of
persons who have the power of influencing his own election, or whose
political adherence is important to the ministry to which he belongs.
These considerations have introduced the practice of submitting all
candidates for first appointments to a public examination, conducted
by persons not engaged in politics, and of the same class and quality
with the examiners for honors at the Universities. This would probably
be the best plan under any system; and under our Parliamentary
government it is the only one which affords a chance, I do not say of
honest appointment, but even of abstinence from such as are manifestly
and flagrantly profligate.

It is also absolutely necessary that the examinations should be
competitive, and the appointments given to those who are most
successful. A mere pass examination never, in the long run, does more
than exclude absolute dunces. When the question, in the mind of an
examiner, lies between blighting the prospects of an individual and
performing a duty to the public which, in the particular instance,
seldom appears of first rate importance, and when he is sure to be
bitterly reproached for doing the first, while in general no one will
either know or care whether he has done the latter, the balance,
unless he is a man of very unusual stamp, inclines to the side of
good-nature. A relaxation in one instance establishes a claim to it in
others, which every repetition of indulgence makes it more difficult
to resist; each of these, in succession, becomes a precedent for more,
until the standard of proficiency sinks gradually to something almost
contemptible. Examinations for degrees at the two great Universities
have generally been as slender in their requirements as those for
honors are trying and serious. Where there is no inducement to exceed
a certain minimum, the minimum comes to be the maximum: it becomes the
general practice not to aim at more; and as in every thing there are
some who do not attain all they aim at, however low the standard may
be pitched, there are always several who fall short of it. When, on
the contrary, the appointments are given to those, among a great
number of candidates, who most distinguish themselves, and where the
successful competitors are classed in order of merit, not only each is
stimulated to do his very utmost, but the influence is felt in every
place of liberal education throughout the country. It becomes with
every schoolmaster an object of ambition and an avenue to success to
have furnished pupils who have gained a high place in these
competitions, and there is hardly any other mode in which the state
can do so much to raise the quality of educational institutions
throughout the country. Though the principle of competitive
examinations for public employment is of such recent introduction in
this country, and is still so imperfectly carried out, the Indian
service being as yet nearly the only case in which it exists in its
completeness, a sensible effect has already begun to be produced on
the places of middle-class education, notwithstanding the difficulties
which the principle has encountered from the disgracefully low
existing state of education in the country, which these very
examinations have brought into strong light. So contemptible has the
standard of acquirement been found to be, among the youths who obtain
the nomination from the minister, which entitles them to offer
themselves as candidates, that the competition of such candidates
produces almost a poorer result than would be obtained from a mere
pass examination; for no one would think of fixing the conditions of a
pass examination so low as is actually found sufficient to enable a
young man to surpass his fellow-candidates. Accordingly, it is said
that successive years show on the whole a decline of attainments, less
effort being made, because the results of former examinations have
proved that the exertions then used were greater than would have been
sufficient to attain the object. Partly from this decrease of effort,
and partly because, even at the examinations which do not require a
previous nomination, conscious ignorance reduces the number of
competitors to a mere handful, it has so happened that though there
have always been a few instances of great proficiency, the lower part
of the list of successful candidates represents but a very moderate
amount of acquirement; and we have it on the word of the commissioners
that nearly all who have been unsuccessful have owed their failure to
ignorance, not of the higher branches of instruction, but of its very
humblest elements--spelling and arithmetic.

The outcries which continue to be made against these examinations by
some of the organs of opinion are often, I regret to say, as little
creditable to the good faith as to the good sense of the assailants.
They proceed partly by misrepresentation of the kind of ignorance
which, as a matter of fact, actually leads to failure in the
examinations. They quote with emphasis the most recondite questions
[8] which can be shown to have been ever asked, and make it appear
as if unexceptionable answers to all these were made the _sine quâ
non_ of success. Yet it has been repeated to satiety that such
questions are not put because it is expected of every one that he
should answer them, but in order that whoever is able to do so may
have the means of proving and availing himself of that portion of his
knowledge. It is not as a ground of rejection, but as an additional
means of success, that this opportunity is given. We are then asked
whether the kind of knowledge supposed in this, that, or the other
question, is calculated to be of any use to the candidate after he has
attained his object. People differ greatly in opinion as to what
knowledge is useful. There are persons in existence, and a late
Foreign Secretary of State is one of them, who think English spelling
a useless accomplishment in a diplomatic attaché or a clerk in a
government office. About one thing the objectors seem to be unanimous,
that general mental cultivation is not useful in these employments,
whatever else may be so. If, however (as I presume to think), it is
useful, or if any education at all is useful, it must be tested by the
tests most likely to show whether the candidate possesses it or not.
To ascertain whether he has been well educated, he must be
interrogated in the things which he is likely to know if he has been
well educated, even though not directly pertinent to the work to which
he is to be appointed. Will those who object to his being questioned
in classics and mathematics, tell us what they would have him
questioned in? There seems, however, to be equal objection to
examining him in these, and to examining him in any thing _but_ these.
If the Commissioners--anxious to open a door of admission to those who
have not gone through the routine of a grammar-school, or who make up
for the smallness of their knowledge of what is there taught by
greater knowledge of something else--allow marks to be gained by
proficiency in any other subject of real utility, they are reproached
for that too. Nothing will satisfy the objectors but free admission of
total ignorance.

We are triumphantly told that neither Clive nor Wellington could have
passed the test which is prescribed for an aspirant to an engineer
cadetship; as if, because Clive and Wellington did not do what was not
required of them, they could not have done it if it had been required.
If it be only meant to inform us that it is possible to be a great
general without these things, so it is without many other things which
are very useful to great generals. Alexander the Great had never heard
of Vauban's rules, nor could Julius Cæsar speak French. We are next
informed that book-worms, a term which seems to be held applicable to
whoever has the smallest tincture of book-knowledge, may not be good
at bodily exercises, or have the habits of gentlemen. This is a very
common line of remark with dunces of condition; but, whatever the
dunces may think, they have no monopoly of either gentlemanly habits
or bodily activity. Wherever these are needed, let them be inquired
into and separately provided for, not to the exclusion of mental
qualifications, but in addition. Meanwhile, I am credibly informed
that in the Military Academy at Woolwich the competition cadets are as
superior to those admitted on the old system of nomination in these
respects as in all others; that they learn even their drill more
quickly, as indeed might be expected, for an intelligent person learns
all things sooner than a stupid one; and that in general demeanor they
contrast so favorably with their predecessors, that the authorities of
the institutions are impatient for the day to arrive when the last
remains of the old leaven shall have disappeared from the place. If
this be so, and it is easy to ascertain whether it is so, it is to be
hoped we shall soon have heard for the last time that ignorance is a
better qualification than knowledge for the military, and, _à
fortiori_, for every other profession, or that any one good quality,
however little apparently connected with liberal education, is at all
likely to be promoted by going without it.

Though the first admission to government employment be decided by
competitive examination, it would in most cases be impossible that
subsequent promotion should be so decided; and it seems proper that
this should take place, as it usually does at present, on a mixed
system of seniority and selection. Those whose duties are of a routine
character should rise by seniority to the highest point to which
duties merely of that description can carry them, while those to whom
functions of particular trust, and requiring special capacity, are
confided, should be selected from the body on the discretion of the
chief of the office. And this selection will generally be made
honestly by him if the original appointments take place by open
competition, for under that system his establishment will generally
consist of individuals to whom, but for the official connection, he
would have been a stranger. If among them there be any in whom he, or
his political friends and supporters, take an interest, it will be but
occasionally, and only when to this advantage of connection is added,
as far as the initiatory examination could test it, at least equality
of real merit; and, except when there is a very strong motive to job
these appointments, there is always a strong one to appoint the
fittest person, being the one who gives to his chief the most useful
assistance, saves him most trouble, and helps most to build up that
reputation for good management of public business which necessarily
and properly redound to the credit of the minister, however much the
qualities to which it is immediately owing may be those of his
subordinates.



Chapter XV

Of Local Representative Bodies.


It is but a small portion of the public business of a country which
can be well done or safely attempted by the central authorities; and
even in our own government, the least centralized in Europe, the
legislative portion at least of the governing body busies itself far
too much with local affairs, employing the supreme power of the State
in cutting small knots which there ought to be other and better means
of untying. The enormous amount of private business which takes up the
time of Parliament and the thoughts of its individual members,
distracting them from the proper occupations of the great council of
the nation, is felt by all thinkers and observers as a serious evil,
and, what is worse, an increasing one.

It would not be appropriate to the limited design of this treatise to
discuss at large the great question, in no way peculiar to
representative government, of the proper limits of governmental
action. I have said elsewhere [9] what seemed to me most essential
respecting the principles by which the extent of that action ought to
be determined. But after subtracting from the functions performed by
most European governments those which ought not to be undertaken by
public authorities at all, there still remains so great and various an
aggregate of duties, that, if only on the principle of division of
labor, it is indispensable to share them between central and local
authorities. Not solely are separate executive officers required for
purely local duties (an amount of separation which exists under all
governments), but the popular control over those officers can only be
advantageously exerted through a separate organ. Their original
appointment, the function of watching and checking them, the duty of
providing or the discretion of withholding the supplies necessary for
their operations, should rest, not with the national Parliament or the
national executive, but with the people of the locality. That the
people should exercise these functions directly and personally is
evidently inadmissable. Administration by the assembled people is a
relic of barbarism opposed to the whole spirit of modern life; yet so
much has the course of English institutions depended on accident, that
this primitive mode of local government remained the general rule in
parochial matters up to the present generation; and, having never been
legally abolished, probably subsists unaltered in many rural parishes
even now. There remains the plan of representative sub-Parliaments for
local affairs, and these must henceforth be considered as one of the
fundamental institutions of a free government. They exist in England
but very incompletely, and with great irregularity and want of system;
in some other countries much less popularly governed, their
constitution is far more rational. In England there has always been
more liberty but worse organization, while in other countries there is
better organization but less liberty. It is necessary, then, that, in
addition to the national representation, there should be municipal and
provisional representations; and the two questions which remain to be
resolved are, how the local representative bodies should be
constituted, and what should be the extent of their functions.

In considering these questions, two points require an equal degree of
our attention: how the local business itself can be best done, and how
its transaction can be made most instrumental to the nourishment of
public spirit and the development of intelligence. In an earlier part
of this inquiry I have dwelt in strong language--hardly any language
is strong enough to express the strength of my conviction--on the
importance of that portion of the operation of free institutions which
may be called the public education of the citizens. Now of this
operation the local administrative institutions are the chief
instrument. Except by the part they may take as jurymen in the
administration of justice, the mass of the population have very little
opportunity of sharing personally in the conduct of the general
affairs of the community. Reading newspapers, and perhaps writing to
them, public meetings, and solicitations of different sorts addressed
to the political authorities, are the extent of the participation of
private citizens in general politics during the interval between one
Parliamentary election and another. Though it is impossible to
exaggerate the importance of these various liberties, both as
securities for freedom and as means of general cultivation, the
practice which they give is more in thinking than in action, and in
thinking without the responsibilities of action, which with most
people amounts to little more than passively receiving the thoughts of
some one else. But in the case of local bodies, besides the function
of electing, many citizens in turn have the chance of being elected,
and many, either by selection or by rotation, fill one or other of the
numerous local executive offices. In these positions they have to act
for public interests, as well as to think and to speak, and the
thinking can not all be done by proxy. It may be added that these
local functions, not being in general sought by the higher ranks,
carry down the important political education which they are the means
of conferring to a much lower grade in society. The mental discipline
being thus a more important feature in local concerns than in the
general affairs of the state, while there are not such vital interests
dependent on the quality of the administration, a greater weight may
be given to the former consideration, and the latter admits much more
frequently of being postponed to it than in matters of general
legislation and the conduct of imperial affairs.

The proper constitution of local representative bodies does not
present much difficulty. The principles which apply to it do not
differ in any respect from those applicable to the national
representation. The same obligation exists, as in the case of the more
important function, for making the bodies elective; and the same
reasons operate as in that case, but with still greater force, for
giving them a widely democratic basis; the dangers being less, and the
advantages, in point of popular education and cultivation, in some
respects even greater. As the principal duty of the local bodies
consists of the imposition and expenditure of local taxation, the
electoral franchise should vest in all who contribute to the local
rates, to the exclusion of all who do not. I assume that there is no
indirect taxation, no _octroi_ duties, or that, if there are, they are
supplementary only, those on whom their burden falls being also rated
to a direct assessment. The representation of minorities should be
provided for in the same manner as in the national Parliament, and
there are the same strong reasons for plurality of votes; only there
is not so decisive an objection, in the inferior as in the higher
body, to making the plural voting depend (as in some of the local
elections of our own country) on a mere money qualification; for the
honest and frugal dispensation of money forms so much larger a part of
the business of the local than of the national body, that there is
more justice as well as policy in allowing a greater proportional
influence to those who have a larger money interest at stake.

In the most recently established of our local representative
institutions, the Boards of Guardians, the justices of peace of the
district sit _ex officio_ along with the elected members, in number
limited by law to a third of the whole. In the peculiar constitution
of English society, I have no doubt of the beneficial effect of this
provision. It secures the presence in these bodies of a more educated
class than it would perhaps be practicable to attract thither on any
other terms; and while the limitation in number of the _ex officio_
members precludes them from acquiring predominance by mere numerical
strength, they, as a virtual representation of another class, having
sometimes a different interest from the rest, are a check upon the
class interests of the farmers or petty shopkeepers who form the bulk
of the elected guardians. A similar commendation can not be given to
the constitution of the only provincial boards we possess, the Quarter
Sessions, consisting of the justices of peace alone, on whom, over and
above their judicial duties, some of the most important parts of the
administrative business of the country depend for their performance.
The mode of formation of these bodies is most anomalous, they being
neither elected, nor, in any proper sense of the term, nominated, but
holding their important functions, like the feudal lords to whom they
succeeded, virtually by right of their acres; the appointment vested
in the crown (or, speaking practically, in one of themselves, the lord
lieutenant) being made use of only as a means of excluding any one who
it is thought would do discredit to the body, or, now and then, one
who is on the wrong side in politics. The institution is the most
aristocratic in principle which now remains in England; far more so
than the House of Lords, for it grants public money and disposes of
important public interests, not in conjunction with a popular
assembly, but alone. It is clung to with proportionate tenacity by our
aristocratic classes, but is obviously at variance with all the
principles which are the foundation of representative government. In a
County Board there is not the same justification as in Boards of
Guardians for even an admixture of _ex officio_ with elected members,
since the business of a county being on a sufficiently large scale to
be an object of interest and attraction to country gentlemen, they
would have no more difficulty in getting themselves elected to the
Board than they have in being returned to Parliament as county
members.

In regard to the proper circumscription of the constituencies which
elect the local representative bodies, the principle which, when
applied as an exclusive and unbending rule to Parliamentary
representation, is inappropriate, namely community of local interests,
is here the only just and applicable one. The very object of having a
local representation is in order that those who have any interest in
common which they do not share with the general body of their
countrymen may manage that joint interest by themselves, and the
purpose is contradicted if the distribution of the local
representation follows any other rule than the grouping of those joint
interests. There are local interests peculiar to every town, whether
great or small, and common to all its inhabitants; every town,
therefore, without distinction of size, ought to have its municipal
council. It is equally obvious that every town ought to have but one.
The different quarters of the same town have seldom or never any
material diversities of local interest; they all require to have the
same things done, the same expenses incurred; and, except as to their
churches, which it is probably desirable to leave under simply
parochial management, the same arrangements may be made to serve for
all. Paving, lighting, water supply, drainage, port and market
regulations, can not, without great waste and inconvenience, be
different for different quarters of the same town. The subdivision of
London into six or seven independent districts, each with its separate
arrangements for local business (several of them without unity of
administration even within themselves), prevents the possibility of
consecutive or well-regulated co-operation for common objects,
precludes any uniform principle for the discharge of local duties,
compels the general government to take things upon itself which would
be best left to local authorities if there were any whose authority
extended to the entire metropolis, and answers no purpose but to keep
up the fantastical trappings of that union of modern jobbing and
antiquated foppery, the Corporation of the City of London.

Another equally important principle is, that in each local
circumscription there should be but one elective body for all local
business, not different bodies for different parts of it. Division of
labor does not mean cutting up every business into minute fractions;
it means the union of such operations as are fit to be performed by
the same persons, and the separation of such as can be better
performed by different persons. The executive duties of the locality
do indeed require to be divided into departments for the same reason
as those of the state--because they are of divers kinds, each
requiring knowledge peculiar to itself, and needing, for its due
performance, the undivided attention of a specially qualified
functionary. But the reasons for subdivision which apply to the
execution do not apply to the control. The business of the elective
body is not to do the work, but to see that it is properly done, and
that nothing necessary is left undone. This function can be fulfilled
for all departments by the same superintending body, and by a
collective and comprehensive far better than by a minute and
microscopic view. It is as absurd in public affairs as it would be in
private, that every workman should be looked after by a superintendent
to himself. The government of the crown consists of many departments,
and there are many ministers to conduct them, but those ministers have
not a Parliament apiece to keep them to their duty. The local, like
the national Parliament, has for its proper business to consider the
interest of the locality as a whole, composed of parts all of which
must be adapted to one another, and attended to in the order and ratio
of their importance. There is another very weighty reason for uniting
the control of all the business of a locality under one body. The
greatest imperfection of popular local institutions, and the chief
cause of the failure which so often attends them, is the low calibre
of the men by whom they are almost always carried on. That these
should be of a very miscellaneous character is, indeed, part of the
usefulness of the institution; it is that circumstance chiefly which
renders it a school of political capacity and general intelligence.
But a school supposes teachers as well as scholars: the utility of the
instruction greatly depends on its bringing inferior minds into
contact with superior, a contact which in the ordinary course of life
is altogether exceptional, and the want of which contributes more than
any thing else to keep the generality of mankind on one level of
contented ignorance. The school, moreover, is worthless, and a school
of evil instead of good, if, through the want of due surveillance, and
of the presence within itself of a higher order of characters, the
action of the body is allowed, as it so often is, to degenerate into
an equally unscrupulous and stupid pursuit of the self-interest of its
members. Now it is quite hopeless to induce persons of a high class,
either socially or intellectually, to take a share of local
administration in a corner by piecemeal, as members of a Paving Board
or a Drainage Commission. The entire local business of their town is
not more than a sufficient object to induce men whose tastes incline
them, and whose knowledge qualifies them for national affairs, to
become members of a mere local body, and devote to it the time and
study which are necessary to render their presence any thing more than
a screen for the jobbing of inferior persons, under the shelter of
their responsibility. A mere Board of Works, though it comprehend the
entire metropolis, is sure to be composed of the same class of persons
as the vestries of the London parishes; nor is it practicable, or even
desirable, that such should not form the majority; but it is important
for every purpose which local bodies are designed to serve, whether it
be the enlightened and honest performance of their special duties, or
the cultivation of the political intelligence of the nation, that
every such body should contain a portion of the very best minds of the
locality, who are thus brought into perpetual contact, of the most
useful kind, with minds of a lower grade, receiving from them what
local or professional knowledge they have to give, and, in return,
inspiring them with a portion of their own more enlarged ideas, and
higher and more enlightened purposes.

A mere village has no claim to a municipal representation. By a
village I mean a place whose inhabitants are not markedly
distinguished by occupation or social relations from those of the
rural districts adjoining, and for whose local wants the arrangements
made for the surrounding territory will suffice. Such small places
have rarely a sufficient public to furnish a tolerable municipal
council: if they contain any talent or knowledge applicable to public
business, it is apt to be all concentrated in some one man, who
thereby becomes the dominator of the place. It is better that such
places should be merged in a larger circumscription. The local
representation of rural districts will naturally be determined by
geographical considerations, with due regard to those sympathies of
feeling by which human beings are so much aided to act in concert, and
which partly follow historical boundaries, such as those of counties
or provinces, and partly community of interest and occupation, as in
agriculture, maritime, manufacturing, or mining districts. Different
kinds of local business require different areas of representation. The
Unions of parishes have been fixed on as the most appropriate basis
for the representative bodies which superintend the relief of
indigence; while, for the proper regulation of highways, or prisons,
or police, a large extent, like that of an average county, is not more
than sufficient. In these large districts, therefore, the maxim, that
an elective body constituted in any locality should have authority
over all the local concerns common to the locality, requires
modification from another principle, as well as from the competing
consideration of the importance of obtaining for the discharge of the
local duties the highest qualifications possible. For example, if it
be necessary (as I believe it to be) for the proper administration of
the poor-laws that the area of rating should not be more extensive
than most of the present Unions, a principle which requires a Board of
Guardians for each Union, yet, as a much more highly qualified class
of persons is likely to be obtainable for a County Board than those
who compose an average Board of Guardians, it may, on that ground, be
expedient to reserve for the County Boards some higher descriptions of
local business, which might otherwise have been conveniently managed
within itself by each separate Union.

Besides the controlling council or local sub-Parliament, local
business has its executive department. With respect to this, the same
questions arise as with respect to the executive authorities in the
state, and they may, for the most part, be answered in the same
manner. The principles applicable to all public trusts are in
substance the same. In the first place, each executive officer should
be single, and singly responsible for the whole of the duty committed
to his charge. In the next place, he should be nominated, not elected.
It is ridiculous that a surveyor, or a health officer, or even a
collector of rates should be appointed by popular suffrage. The
popular choice usually depends on interest with a few local leaders,
who, as they are not supposed to make the appointment, are not
responsible for it; or on an appeal to sympathy, founded on having
twelve children, and having been a rate-payer in the parish for thirty
years. If, in cases of this description, election by the population is
a farce, appointment by the local representative body is little less
objectionable. Such bodies have a perpetual tendency to become
joint-stock associations for carrying into effect the private jobs of
their various members. Appointments should be made on the individual
responsibility of the chairman of the body, let him be called mayor,
chairman of Quarter Sessions, or by whatever other title. He occupies
in the locality a position analogous to that of the prime minister in
the state, and under a well organized system the appointment and
watching of the local officers would be the most important part of his
duty; he himself being appointed by the council from its own number,
subject either to annual re-election, or to removal by a vote of the
body.

From the constitution of the local bodies, I now pass to the equally
important and more difficult subject of their proper attributions.
This question divides itself into two parts: what should be their
duties, and whether they should have full authority within the sphere
of those duties, or should be liable to any, and what, interference on
the part of the central government.

It is obvious, to begin with, that all business purely local--all
which concerns only a single locality--should devolve upon the local
authorities. The paving, lighting, and cleansing of the streets of a
town, and, in ordinary circumstances, the draining of its houses, are
of little consequence to any but its inhabitants. The nation at large
is interested in them in no other way than that in which it is
interested in the private well-being of all its individual citizens.
But among the duties classed as local, or performed by local
functionaries, there are many which might with equal propriety be
termed national, being the share belonging to the locality of some
branch of the public administration in the efficiency of which the
whole nation is alike interested: the jails, for instance, most of
which in this country are under county management; the local police;
the local administration of justice, much of which, especially in
corporate towns, is performed by officers elected by the locality, and
paid from local funds. None of these can be said to be matters of
local, as distinguished from national importance. It would not be a
matter personally indifferent to the rest of the country if any part
of it became a nest of robbers or a focus of demoralization, owing to
the maladministration of its police; or if, through the bad
regulations of its jail, the punishment which the courts of justice
intended to inflict on the criminals confined therein (who might have
come from, or committed their offenses in, any other district) might
be doubled in intensity or lowered to practical impunity. The points,
moreover, which constitute good management of these things are the
same every where; there is no good reason why police, or jails, or the
administration of justice should be differently managed in one part of
the kingdom and in another, while there is great peril that in things
so important, and to which the most instructed minds available to the
state are not more than adequate, the lower average of capacities
which alone can be counted on for the service of the localities might
commit errors of such magnitude as to be a serious blot upon the
general administration of the country. Security of person and
property, and equal justice between individuals, are the first needs
of society and the primary ends of government: if these things can be
left to any responsibility below the highest, there is nothing except
war and treaties which requires a general government at all. Whatever
are the best arrangements for securing these primary objects should be
made universally obligatory, and, to secure their enforcement, should
be placed under central superintendence. It is often useful, and with
the institutions of our own country even necessary, from the scarcity,
in the localities, of officers representing the general government,
that the execution of duties imposed by the central authority should
be intrusted to functionaries appointed for local purposes by the
locality. But experience is daily forcing upon the public a conviction
of the necessity of having at least inspectors appointed by the
general government to see that the local officers do their duty. If
prisons are under local management, the central government appoints
inspectors of prisons, to take care that the rules laid down by
Parliament are observed, and to suggest others if the state of the
jails shows them to be requisite, as there are inspectors of factories
and inspectors of schools, to watch over the observance of the Acts of
Parliament relating to the first, and the fulfillment of the
conditions on which state assistance is granted to the latter.

But if the administration of justice, police and jails included, is
both so universal a concern, and so much a matter of general science,
independent of local peculiarities, that it may be, and ought to be,
uniformly regulated throughout the country, and its regulation
enforced by more trained and skillful hands than those of purely local
authorities, there is also business, such as the administration of the
poor-laws, sanitary regulation, and others, which, while really
interesting to the whole country, can not, consistently with the very
purposes of local administration, be managed otherwise than by the
localities. In regard to such duties, the question arises how far the
local authorities ought to be trusted with discretionary power, free
from any superintendence or control of the state.

To decide this question, it is essential to consider what is the
comparative position of the central and the local authorities as
capacity for the work, and security against negligence or abuse. In
the first place, the local representative bodies and their officers
are almost certain to be of a much lower grade of intelligence and
knowledge than Parliament and the national executive. Secondly,
besides being themselves of inferior qualifications, they are watched
by, and accountable to an inferior public opinion. The public under
whose eyes they act, and by whom they are criticized, is both more
limited in extent and generally far less enlightened than that which
surrounds and admonishes the highest authorities at the capital, while
the comparative smallness of the interests involved causes even that
inferior public to direct its thoughts to the subject less intently
and with less solicitude. Far less interference is exercised by the
press and by public discussion, and that which is exercised may with
much more impunity be disregarded in the proceedings of local than in
those of national authorities. Thus far, the advantage seems wholly on
the side of management by the central government; but, when we look
more closely, these motives of preference are found to be balanced by
others fully as substantial. If the local authorities and public are
inferior to the central ones in knowledge of the principles of
administration, they have the compensatory advantage of a far more
direct interest in the result. A man's neighbors or his landlord may
be much cleverer than himself, and not without an indirect interest in
his prosperity, but, for all that, his interests will be better
attended to in his own keeping than in theirs. It is further to be
remembered that, even supposing the central government to administer
through its own officers, its officers do not act at the centre, but
in the locality; and however inferior the local public may be to the
central, it is the local public alone which has any opportunity of
watching them, and it is the local opinion alone which either acts
directly upon their own conduct, or calls the attention of the
government to the points in which they may require correction. It is
but in extreme cases that the general opinion of the country is
brought to bear at all upon details of local administration, and still
more rarely has it the means of deciding upon them with any just
appreciation of the case. Now the local opinion necessarily acts far
more forcibly upon purely local administrators. They, in the natural
course of things, are permanent residents, not expecting to be
withdrawn from the place when they cease to exercise authority in it;
and their authority itself depends, by supposition, on the will of the
local public. I need not dwell on the deficiencies of the central
authority in detailed knowledge of local persons and things, and the
too great engrossment of its time and thoughts by other concerns to
admit of its acquiring the quantity and quality of local knowledge
necessary even for deciding on complaints, and enforcing
responsibility from so great a number of local agents. In the details
of management, therefore, the local bodies will generally have the
advantage, but in comprehension of the principles even of purely local
management, the superiority of the central government, when rightly
constituted, ought to be prodigious, not only by reason of the
probably great personal superiority of the individuals composing it,
and the multitude of thinkers and writers who are at all times engaged
in pressing useful ideas upon their notice, but also because the
knowledge and experience of any local authority is but local knowledge
and experience, confined to their own part of the country and its
modes of management, whereas the central government has the means of
knowing all that is to be learned from the united experience of the
whole kingdom, with the addition of easy access to that of foreign
countries.

The practical conclusion from these premises is not difficult to draw.
The authority which is most conversant with principles should be
supreme over principles, while that which is most competent in details
should have the details left to it. The principal business of the
central authority should be to give instruction, of the local
authority to apply it. Power may be localized, but knowledge, to be
most useful, must be centralized; there must be somewhere a focus at
which all its scattered rays are collected, that the broken and
colored lights which exist elsewhere may find there what is necessary
to complete and purify them. To every branch of local administration
which affects the general interest there should be a corresponding
central organ, either a minister, or some specially appointed
functionary under him, even if that functionary does no more than
collect information from all quarters, and bring the experience
acquired in one locality to the knowledge of another where it is
wanted. But there is also something more than this for the central
authority to do. It ought to keep open a perpetual communication with
the localities--informing itself by their experience, and them by its
own; giving advice freely when asked, volunteering it when seen to be
required; compelling publicity and recordation of proceedings, and
enforcing obedience to every general law which the Legislature has
laid down on the subject of local management. That some such laws
ought to be laid down few are likely to deny. The localities may be
allowed to mismanage their own interests, but not to prejudice those
of others, nor violate those principles of justice between one person
and another of which it is the duty of the state to maintain the rigid
observance. If the local majority attempts to oppress the minority, or
one class another, the state is bound to interpose. For example, all
local rates ought to be voted exclusively by the local representative
body; but that body, though elected solely by rate-payers, may raise
its revenues by imposts of such a kind, or assess them in such a
manner, as to throw an unjust share of the burden on the poor, the
rich, or some particular class of the population: it is the duty,
therefore, of the Legislature, while leaving the mere amount of the
local taxes to the discretion of the local body, to lay down
authoritatively the mode of taxation and rules of assessment which
alone the localities shall be permitted to use. Again, in the
administration of public charity, the industry and morality of the
whole laboring population depends, to a most serious extent, upon
adherence to certain fixed principles in awarding relief. Though it
belongs essentially to the local functionaries to determine who,
according to those principles, is entitled to be relieved, the
national Parliament is the proper authority to prescribe the
principles themselves; and it would neglect a most important part of
its duty if it did not, in a matter of such grave national concern,
lay down imperative rules, and make effectual provision that those
rules should not be departed from. What power of actual interference
with the local administrators it may be necessary to retain, for the
due enforcement of the laws, is a question of detail into which it
would be useless to enter. The laws themselves will naturally define
the penalties, and fix the mode of their enforcement. It may be
requisite, to meet extreme cases, that the power of the central
authority should extend to dissolving the local representative council
or dismissing the local executive, but not to making new appointments
or suspending the local institutions. Where Parliament has not
interfered, neither ought any branch of the executive to interfere
with authority; but as an adviser and critic, an enforcer of the laws,
and a denouncer to Parliament or the local constituencies of conduct
which it deems condemnable, the functions of the executive are of the
greatest possible value.

Some may think that, however much the central authority surpasses the
local in knowledge of the principles of administration, the great
object which has been so much insisted on, the social and political
education of the citizens, requires that they should be left to manage
these matters by their own, however imperfect lights. To this it might
be answered that the education of the citizens is not the only thing
to be considered; government and administration do not exist for that
alone, great as its importance is. But the objection shows a very
imperfect understanding of the function of popular institutions as a
means of political instruction. It is but a poor education that
associates ignorance with ignorance, and leaves them, if they care for
knowledge, to grope their way to it without help, and to do without it
if they do not. What is wanted is the means of making ignorance aware
of itself, and able to profit by knowledge; accustoming minds which
know only routine to act upon, and feel the value of principles;
teaching them to compare different modes of action, and learn, by the
use of their reason, to distinguish the best. When we desire to have a
good school, we do not eliminate the teacher. The old remark, "As the
schoolmaster is, so will be the school," is as true of the indirect
schooling of grown people by public business as of the schooling of
youth in academies and colleges. A government which attempts to do
every thing is aptly compared by M. Charles de Rémusat to a
schoolmaster who does all the pupils' tasks for them; he may be very
popular with the pupils, but he will teach them little. A government,
on the other hand, which neither does any thing itself that can
possibly be done by any one else, nor shows any one else how to do any
thing, is like a school in which there is no schoolmaster, but only
pupil-teachers who have never themselves been taught.



Chapter XVI

Of Nationality, as connected with Representative Government.


A portion of mankind may be said to constitute a nationality if they
are united among themselves by common sympathies which do not exist
between them and any others--which make them co-operate with each
other more willingly than with other people, desire to be under the
same government, and desire that it should be government by
themselves, or a portion of themselves, exclusively. This feeling of
nationality may have been generated by various causes. Sometimes it is
the effect of identity of race and descent. Community of language and
community of religion greatly contribute to it. Geographical limits
are one of its causes. But the strongest of all is identity of
political antecedents; the possession of a national history, and
consequent community of recollections; collective pride and
humiliation, pleasure and regret, connected with the same incidents in
the past. None of these circumstances, however, are either
indispensable or necessarily sufficient by themselves. Switzerland has
a strong sentiment of nationality, though the cantons are of different
races, different languages, and different religions. Sicily has
hitherto felt itself quite distinct in nationality from Naples,
notwithstanding identity of religion, almost identity of language, and
a considerable amount of common historical antecedents. The Flemish
and the Walloon provinces of Belgium, notwithstanding diversity of
race and language, have a much greater feeling of common nationality
than the former have with Holland, or the latter with France. Yet in
general the national feeling is proportionally weakened by the failure
of any of the causes which contribute to it. Identity of language,
literature, and, to some extent, of race and recollections, have
maintained the feeling of nationality in considerable strength among
the different portions of the German name, though they have at no time
been really united under the same government; but the feeling has
never reached to making the separate states desire to get rid of their
autonomy. Among Italians, an identity far from complete of language
and literature, combined with a geographical position which separates
them by a distinct line from other countries, and, perhaps more than
every thing else, the possession of a common name, which makes them
all glory in the past achievements in arts, arms, politics, religious
primacy, science, and literature, of any who share the same
designation, give rise to an amount of national feeling in the
population which, though still imperfect, has been sufficient to
produce the great events now passing before us, notwithstanding a
great mixture of races, and although they have never, in either
ancient or modern history, been under the same government, except
while that government extended or was extending itself over the
greater part of the known world.

Where the sentiment of nationality exists in any force, there is a
_primâ facie_ case for uniting all the members of the nationality
under the same government, and a government to themselves apart. This
is merely saying that the question of government ought to be decided
by the governed. One hardly knows what any division of the human race
should be free to do if not to determine with which of the various
collective bodies of human beings they choose to associate themselves.
But, when a people are ripe for free institutions, there is a still
more vital consideration. Free institutions are next to impossible in
a country made up of different nationalities. Among a people without
fellow-feeling, especially if they read and speak different languages,
the united public opinion necessary to the working of representative
government can not exist. The influences which form opinions and
decide political acts are different in the different sections of the
country. An altogether different set of leaders have the confidence of
one part of the country and of another. The same books, newspapers,
pamphlets, speeches, do not reach them. One section does not know what
opinions or what instigations are circulating in another. The same
incidents, the same acts, the same system of government, affect them
in different ways, and each fears more injury to itself from the other
nationalities than from the common arbiter, the state. Their mutual
antipathies are generally much stronger than jealousy of the
government. That any one of them feels aggrieved by the policy of the
common ruler is sufficient to determine another to support that
policy. Even if all are aggrieved, none feel that they can rely on the
others for fidelity in a joint resistance; the strength of none is
sufficient to resist alone, and each may reasonably think that it
consults its own advantage most by bidding for the favor of the
government against the rest. Above all, the grand and only reliable
security in the last resort against the despotism of the government is
in that case wanting--the sympathy of the army with the people. The
military are the part of every community in whom, from the nature of
the case, the distinction between their fellow-countrymen and
foreigners is the deepest and strongest. To the rest of the people
foreigners are merely strangers; to the soldier, they are men against
whom he may be called, at a week's notice, to fight for life or death.
The difference to him is that between friends and enemies--we may
almost say between fellow-men and another kind of animals; for, as
respects the enemy, the only law is that of force, and the only
mitigation the same as in the case of other animals--that of simple
humanity. Soldiers to whose feelings half or three fourths of the
subjects of the same government are foreigners will have no more
scruple in mowing them down, and no more desire to ask the reason why,
than they would have in doing the same thing against declared enemies.
An army composed of various nationalities has no other patriotism than
devotion to the flag. Such armies have been the executioners of
liberty through the whole duration of modern history. The sole bond
which holds them together is their officers and the government which
they serve, and their only idea, if they have any, of public duty, is
obedience to orders. A government thus supported, by keeping its
Hungarian regiments in Italy and its Italian in Hungary, can long
continue to rule in both places with the iron rod of foreign
conquerors.

If it be said that so broadly-marked a distinction between what is due
to a fellow-countryman and what is due merely to a human creature is
more worthy of savages than of civilized beings, and ought, with the
utmost energy, to be contended against, no one holds that opinion more
strongly than myself. But this object, one of the worthiest to which
human endeavour can be directed, can never, in the present state of
civilization, be promoted by keeping different nationalities of any
thing like equivalent strength under the same government. In a
barbarous state of society the case is sometimes different. The
government may then be interested in softening the antipathies of the
races, that peace may be preserved and the country more easily
governed. But when there are either free institutions, or a desire for
them, in any of the peoples artificially tied together, the interest
of the government lies in an exactly opposite direction. It is then
interested in keeping up and envenoming their antipathies, that they
may be prevented from coalescing, and it may be enabled to use some of
them as tools for the enslavement of others. The Austrian court has
now for a whole generation made these tactics its principal means of
government, with what fatal success, at the time of the Vienna
insurrection and the Hungarian contest the world knows too well.
Happily there are now signs that improvement is too far advanced to
permit this policy to be any longer successful.

For the preceding reasons, it is in general a necessary condition of
free institutions that the boundaries of governments should coincide
in the main with those of nationalities. But several considerations
are liable to conflict in practice with this general principle. In the
first place, its application is often precluded by geographical
hindrances. There are parts even of Europe in which different
nationalities are so locally intermingled that it is not practicable
for them to be under separate governments. The population of Hungary
is composed of Magyars, Slovaks, Croats, Serbs, Roumans, and in some
districts Germans, so mixed up as to be incapable of local separation;
and there is no course open to them but to make a virtue of necessity,
and reconcile themselves to living together under equal rights and
laws. Their community of servitude, which dates only from the
destruction of Hungarian independence in 1849, seems to be ripening
and disposing them for such an equal union. The German colony of East
Prussia is cut off from Germany by part of the ancient Poland, and
being too weak to maintain separate independence, must, if
geographical continuity is to be maintained, be either under a
non-German government, or the intervening Polish territory must be
under a German one. Another considerable region in which the dominant
element of the population is German, the provinces of Courland,
Esthonia, and Livonia, is condemned by its local situation to form
part of a Slavonian state. In Eastern Germany itself there is a large
Slavonic population; Bohemia is principally Slavonic, Silesia and
other districts partially so. The most united country in Europe,
France, is far from being homogeneous: independently of the fragments
of foreign nationalities at its remote extremities, it consists, as
language and history prove, of two portions, one occupied almost
exclusively by a Gallo-Roman population, while in the other the
Frankish, Burgundian, and other Teutonic races form a considerable
ingredient.

When proper allowance has been made for geographical exigencies,
another more purely moral and social consideration offers itself.
Experience proves that it is possible for one nationality to merge and
be absorbed in another; and when it was originally an inferior and
more backward portion of the human race, the absorption is greatly to
its advantage. Nobody can suppose that it is not more beneficial to a
Breton, or a Basque of French Navarre, to be brought into the current
of the ideas and feelings of a highly civilized and cultivated
people--to be a member of the French nationality, admitted on equal
terms to all the privileges of French citizenship, sharing the
advantages of French protection, and the dignity and _prestige_ of
French power--than to sulk on his own rocks, the half-savage relic of
past times, revolving in his own little mental orbit, without
participation or interest in the general movement of the world. The
same remark applies to the Welshman or the Scottish Highlander as
members of the British nation.

Whatever really tends to the admixture of nationalities, and the
blending of their attributes and peculiarities in a common union, is a
benefit to the human race. Not by extinguishing types, of which, in
these cases, sufficient examples are sure to remain, but by softening
their extreme forms, and filling up the intervals between them. The
united people, like a crossed breed of animals (but in a still greater
degree, because the influences in operation are moral as well as
physical), inherits the special aptitudes and excellences of all its
progenitors, protected by the admixture from being exaggerated into
the neighboring vices. But, to render this admixture possible, there
must be peculiar conditions. The combinations of circumstances which
occur, and which effect the result, are various.

The nationalities brought together under the same government may be
about equal in numbers and strength, or they may be very unequal. If
unequal, the least numerous of the two may either be the superior in
civilization, or the inferior. Supposing it to be superior, it may
either, through that superiority, be able to acquire ascendancy over
the other, or it may be overcome by brute strength and reduced to
subjection. This last is a sheer mischief to the human race, and one
which civilized humanity with one accord should rise in arms to
prevent. The absorption of Greece by Macedonia was one of the greatest
misfortunes which ever happened to the world; that of any of the
principal countries of Europe by Russia would be a similar one.

If the smaller nationality, supposed to be the more advanced in
improvement, is able to overcome the greater, as the Macedonians,
re-enforced by the Greeks, did Asia, and the English India, there is
often a gain to civilization, but the conquerors and the conquered can
not in this case live together under the same free institutions. The
absorption of the conquerors in the less advanced people would be an
evil: these must be governed as subjects, and the state of things is
either a benefit or a misfortune, according as the subjugated people
have or have not reached the state in which it is an injury not to be
under a free government, and according as the conquerors do or do not
use their superiority in a manner calculated to fit the conquered for
a higher stage of improvement. This topic will be particularly treated
of in a subsequent chapter.

When the nationality which succeeds in overpowering the other is both
the most numerous and the most improved, and especially if the subdued
nationality is small, and has no hope of reasserting its independence,
then, if it is governed with any tolerable justice, and if the members
of the more powerful nationality are not made odious by being invested
with exclusive privileges, the smaller nationality is gradually
reconciled to its position, and becomes amalgamated with the larger.
No Bas-Breton, nor even any Alsatian, has the smallest wish at the
present day to be separated from France. If all Irishmen have not yet
arrived at the same disposition towards England, it is partly because
they are sufficiently numerous to be capable of constituting a
respectable nationality by themselves, but principally because, until
of late years, they had been so atrociously governed that all their
best feelings combined with their bad ones in rousing bitter
resentment against the Saxon rule. This disgrace to England and
calamity to the whole empire has, it may be truly said, completely
ceased for nearly a generation. No Irishman is now less free than an
Anglo-Saxon, nor has a less share of every benefit either to his
country or to his individual fortunes than if he were sprung from any
other portion of the British dominions. The only remaining real
grievance of Ireland, that of the State Church, is one which half, or
nearly half the people of the larger island have in common with them.
There is now next to nothing, except the memory of the past, and the
difference in the predominant religion, to keep apart two races
perhaps the most fitted of any two in the world to be the completing
counterpart of one another. The consciousness of being at last treated
not only with equal justice, but with equal consideration, is making
such rapid way in the Irish nation as to be wearing off all feelings
that could make them insensible to the benefits which the less
numerous and less wealthy people must necessarily derive from being
fellow-citizens instead of foreigners to those who are not only their
nearest neighbors, but the wealthiest, and one of the freest, as well
as most civilized and powerful nations of the earth.

The cases in which the greatest practical obstacles exist to the
blending of nationalities are when the nationalities which have been
bound together are nearly equal in numbers and in the other elements
of power. In such cases, each, confiding in its strength, and feeling
itself capable of maintaining an equal struggle with any of the
others, is unwilling to be merged in it; each cultivates with party
obstinacy its distinctive peculiarities; obsolete customs, and even
declining languages, are revived, to deepen the separation; each deems
itself tyrannized over if any authority is exercised within itself by
functionaries of a rival race; and whatever is given to one of the
conflicting nationalities is considered to be taken from all the rest.
When nations thus divided are under a despotic government which is a
stranger to all of them, or which, though sprung from one, yet feeling
greater interest in its own power than in any sympathies of
nationality, assigns no privilege to either nation, and chooses its
instruments indifferently from all, in the course of a few generations
identity of situation often produces harmony of feeling, and the
different races come to feel towards each other as fellow-countrymen,
particularly if they are dispersed over the same tract of country. But
if the era of aspiration to free government arrives before this fusion
has been effected, the opportunity has gone by for effecting it. From
that time, if the unreconciled nationalities are geographically
separate, and especially if their local position is such that there is
no natural fitness or convenience in their being under the same
government (as in the case of an Italian province under a French or
German yoke), there is not only an obvious propriety, but, if either
freedom or concord is cared for, a necessity for breaking the
connection altogether. There may be cases in which the provinces,
after separation, might usefully remain united by a federal tie; but
it generally happens that if they are willing to forego complete
independence, and become members of a federation, each of them has
other neighbors with whom it would prefer to connect itself, having
more sympathies in common, if not also greater community of interest.



Chapter XVII

Of Federal Representative Governments.


Portions of mankind who are not fitted or not disposed to live under
the same internal government may often, with advantage, be federally
united as to their relations with foreigners, both to prevent wars
among themselves, and for the sake of more effectual protection
against the aggression of powerful states.

To render a federation advisable several conditions are necessary. The
first is that there should be a sufficient amount of mutual sympathy
among the populations. The federation binds them always to fight on
the same side; and if they have such feelings toward one another, or
such diversity of feeling toward their neighbors that they would
generally prefer to fight on opposite sides, the federal tie is
neither likely to be of long duration, nor to be well observed while
it subsists. The sympathies available for the purpose are those of
race, language, religion, and, above all, of political institutions,
as conducing most to a feeling of identity of political interest. When
a few free states, separately insufficient for their own defense, are
hemmed in on all sides by military or feudal monarchs, who hate and
despise freedom even in a neighbor, those states have no chance for
preserving liberty and its blessings but by a federal union. The
common interest arising from this cause has in Switzerland, for
several centuries, been found adequate to maintain efficiently the
federal bond, in spite not only of difference of religion when
religion was the grand source of irreconcilable political enmity
throughout Europe, but also in spite of great weakness in the
constitution of the federation itself. In America, where all the
conditions for the maintenance of union existed at the highest point,
with the sole drawback of difference of institutions in the single but
most important article of slavery, this one difference goes so far in
alienating from each other's sympathies the two divisions of the Union
as to be now actually effecting the disruption of a tie of so much
value to them both.

A second condition of the stability of a federal government is that
the separate states be not so powerful as to be able to rely for
protection against foreign encroachment on their individual strength.
If they are, they will be apt to think that they do not gain, by union
with others, the equivalent of what they sacrifice in their own
liberty of action; and consequently, whenever the policy of the
confederation, in things reserved to its cognizance, is different from
that which any one of its members would separately pursue, the
internal and sectional breach will, through absence of sufficient
anxiety to preserve the Union, be in danger of going so far as to
dissolve it.

A third condition, not less important than the two others, is that
there be not a very marked inequality of strength among the several
contracting states. They can not, indeed, be exactly equal in
resources; in all federations there will be a gradation of power among
the members; some will be more populous, rich, and civilized than
others. There is a wide difference in wealth and population between
New York and Rhode Island; between Berne, and Zug or Glaris. The
essential is, that there should not be any one state so much more
powerful than the rest as to be capable of vying in strength with many
of them combined. If there be such a one, and only one, it will insist
on being master of the joint deliberations; if there be two, they will
be irresistible when they agree; and whenever they differ, every thing
will be decided by a struggle for ascendancy between the rivals. This
cause is alone enough to reduce the German Bund to almost a nullity,
independently of its wretched internal constitution. It effects none
of the real purposes of a confederation. It has never bestowed on
Germany a uniform system of customs, nor so much as a uniform coinage,
and has served only to give Austria and Prussia a legal right of
pouring in their troops to assist the local sovereigns in keeping
their subjects obedient to despotism, while, in regard to external
concerns, the Bund would make all Germany a dependency of Prussia if
there were no Austria, and of Austria if there were no Prussia; and,
in the mean time, each petty prince has little choice but to be a
partisan of one or the other, or to intrigue with foreign governments
against both.

There are two different modes of organizing a federal union. The
federal authorities may represent the governments solely, and their
acts may be obligatory only on the governments as such, or they may
have the power of enacting laws and issuing orders which are binding
directly on individual citizens. The former is the plan of the German
so-called Confederation, and of the Swiss Constitution previous to
1847. It was tried in America for a few years immediately following
the War of Independence. The other principle is that of the existing
Constitution of the United States, and has been adopted within the
last dozen years by the Swiss Confederacy. The Federal Congress of the
American Union is a substantive part of the government of every
individual state. Within the limits of its attributions, it makes laws
which are obeyed by every citizen individually, executes them through
its own officers, and enforces them by its own tribunals. This is the
only principle which has been found, or which is ever likely to
produce an effective federal government. A union between the
governments only is a mere alliance, and subject to all the
contingencies which render alliances precarious. If the acts of the
President and of Congress were binding solely on the governments of
New York, Virginia, or Pennsylvania, and could only be carried into
effect through orders issued by those governments to officers
appointed by them, under responsibility to their own courts of
justice, no mandates of the federal government which were disagreeable
to a local majority would ever be executed. Requisitions issued to a
government have no other sanction or means of enforcement than war,
and a federal army would have to be always in readiness to enforce the
decrees of the federation against any recalcitrant state, subject to
the probability that other states, sympathizing with the recusant, and
perhaps sharing its sentiments on the particular point in dispute,
would withhold their contingents, if not send them to fight in the
ranks of the disobedient State. Such a federation is more likely to be
a cause than a preventive of internal wars; and if such was not its
effect in Switzerland until the events of the years immediately
preceding 1847, it was only because the federal government felt its
weakness so strongly that it hardly ever attempted to exercise any
real authority. In America, the experiment of a federation on this
principle broke down in the first few years of its existence, happily
while the men of enlarged knowledge and acquired ascendancy who
founded the independence of the Republic were still alive to guide it
through the difficult transition. The "Federalist," a collection of
papers by three of these eminent men, written in explanation and
defense of the new federal Constitution while still awaiting the
national acceptance, is even now the most instructive treatise we
possess on federal government. In Germany, the more imperfect kind of
federation, as all know, has not even answered the purpose of
maintaining an alliance. It has never, in any European war, prevented
single members of the confederation from allying themselves with
foreign powers against the rest. Yet this is the only federation which
seems possible among monarchical states. A king, who holds his power
by inheritance, not by delegation, and who can not be deprived of it,
nor made responsible to any one for its use, is not likely to renounce
having a separate army, or to brook the exercise of sovereign
authority over his own subjects, not through him, but directly by
another power. To enable two or more countries under kingly government
to be joined together in an effectual confederation, it seems
necessary that they should all be under the same king. England and
Scotland were a federation of this description during the interval of
about a century between the union of the crowns and that of the
Parliaments. Even this was effective, not through federal
institutions, for none existed, but because the regal power in both
Constitutions was so nearly absolute as to enable the foreign policy
of both to be shaped according to a single will.

Under the more perfect mode of federation, where every citizen of each
particular state owes obedience to two governments, that of his own
state and that of the federation, it is evidently necessary not only
that the constitutional limits of the authority of each should be
precisely and clearly defined, but that the power to decide between
them in any case of dispute should not reside in either of the
governments, or in any functionary subject to it, but in an umpire
independent of both. There must be a Supreme Court of Justice, and a
system of subordinate courts in every state of the Union, before whom
such questions shall be carried, and whose judgment on them, in the
last stage of appeal, shall be final. Every state of the Union, and
the federal government itself, as well as every functionary of each,
must be liable to be sued in those courts for exceeding their powers,
or for non-performance of their federal duties, and must in general be
obliged to employ those courts as the instrument for enforcing their
federal rights. This involves the remarkable consequence, actually
realized in the United States, that a court of justice, the highest
federal tribunal, is supreme over the various governments, both state
and federal, having the right to declare that any law made, or act
done by them, exceeds the powers assigned to them by the federal
Constitution, and, in consequence, has no legal validity. It was
natural to feel strong doubts, before trial had been made, how such a
provision would work; whether the tribunal would have the courage to
exercise its constitutional power; if it did, whether it would
exercise it wisely, and whether the governments would consent to
submit peaceably to its decision. The discussions on the American
Constitution, before its final adoption, give evidence that these
natural apprehensions were strongly felt; but they are now entirely
quieted, since, during the two generations and more which have
subsequently elapsed, nothing has occurred to verify them, though
there have at times been disputes of considerable acrimony, and which
became the badges of parties, respecting the limits of the authority
of the federal and state governments. The eminently beneficial working
of so singular a provision is probably, as M. de Tocqueville remarks,
in a great measure attributable to the peculiarity inherent in a court
of justice acting as such--namely, that it does not declare the law
_eo nomine_ and in the abstract, but waits until a case between man
and man is brought before it judicially, involving the point in
dispute; from which arises the happy effect that its declarations are
not made in a very early stage of the controversy; that much popular
discussion usually precedes them; that the Court decides after hearing
the point fully argued on both sides by lawyers of reputation; decides
only as much of the question at a time as is required by the case
before it, and its decision, instead of being volunteered for
political purposes, is drawn from it by the duty which it can not
refuse to fulfil, of dispensing justice impartially between adverse
litigants. Even these grounds of confidence would not have sufficed to
produce the respectful submission with which all authorities have
yielded to the decisions of the Supreme Court on the interpretation of
the Constitution, were it not that complete reliance has been felt,
not only on the intellectual pre-eminence of the judges composing that
exalted tribunal, but on their entire superiority over either private
or sectional partialities. This reliance has been in the main
justified; but there is nothing which more vitally imports the
American people than to guard with the most watchful solicitude
against every thing which has the remotest tendency to produce
deterioration in the quality of this great national institution. The
confidence on which depends the stability of federal institutions has
been for the first time impaired by the judgment declaring slavery to
be of common right, and consequently lawful in the Territories while
not yet constituted as states, even against the will of a majority of
their inhabitants. The main pillar of the American Constitution is
scarcely strong enough to bear many more such shocks.

The tribunals which act as umpires between the federal and the state
governments naturally also decide all disputes between two states, or
between a citizen of one state and the government of another. The
usual remedies between nations, war and diplomacy, being precluded by
the federal union, it is necessary that a judicial remedy should
supply their place. The Supreme Court of the federation dispenses
international law, and is the first great example of what is now one
of the most prominent wants of civilized society, a real international
tribunal.

The powers of a federal government naturally extend not only to peace
and war, and all questions which arise between the country and foreign
governments, but to making any other arrangements which are, in the
opinion of the states, necessary to their enjoyment of the full
benefits of union. For example, it is a great advantage to them that
their mutual commerce should be free, without the impediment of
frontier duties and custom-houses. But this internal freedom can not
exist if each state has the power of fixing the duties on interchange
of commodities between itself and foreign countries, since every
foreign product let in by one state would be let into all the rest;
and hence all custom duties and trade regulations in the United States
are made or repealed by the federal government exclusively. Again, it
is a great convenience to the states to have but one coinage, and but
one system of weights and measures, which can only be insured if the
regulation of these matters is intrusted to the federal government.
The certainty and celerity of post-office communication is impeded,
and its expense increased, if a letter has to pass through half a
dozen sets of public offices, subject to different supreme
authorities: it is convenient, therefore, that all post-offices should
be under the federal government; but on such questions the feelings of
different communities are liable to be different. One of the American
states, under the guidance of a man who has displayed powers as a
speculative political thinker superior to any who has appeared in
American politics since the authors of the "Federalist," [10]
claimed a veto for each state on the custom laws of the federal
Congress; and that statesman, in a posthumous work of great ability,
which has been printed and widely circulated by the Legislature of
South Carolina, vindicated this pretension on the general principle of
limiting the tyranny of the majority, and protecting minorities by
admitting them to a substantial participation in political power. One
of the most disputed topics in American politics during the early part
of this century was whether the power of the federal government ought
to extend, and whether by the Constitution it did extend, to making
roads and canals at the cost of the Union. It is only in transactions
with foreign powers that the authority of the federal government is of
necessity complete. On every other subject the question depends on how
closely the people in general wish to draw the federal tie; what
portion of their local freedom of action they are willing to
surrender, in order to enjoy more fully the benefit of being one
nation.

Respecting the fitting constitution of a federal government within
itself, much need not be said. It of course consists of a legislative
branch and an executive, and the constitution of each is amenable to
the same principles as that of representative governments generally.
As regards the mode of adapting these general principles to a federal
government, the provision of the American Constitution seems
exceedingly judicious, that Congress should consist of two houses, and
that while one of them is constituted according to population, each
state being entitled to representatives in the ratio of the number of
its inhabitants, the other should represent not the citizens, but the
state governments, and every state, whether large or small, should be
represented in it by the same number of members. This provision
precludes any undue power from being exercised by the more powerful
states over the rest, and guarantees the reserved rights of the state
governments by making it impossible, as far as the mode of
representation can prevent, that any measure should pass Congress
unless approved not only by a majority of the citizens, but by a
majority of the states. I have before adverted to the further
incidental advantage obtained of raising the standard of
qualifications in one of the houses. Being nominated by select bodies,
the Legislatures of the various states, whose choice, for reasons
already indicated, is more likely to fall on eminent men than any
popular election--who have not only the power of electing such, but a
strong motive to do so, because the influence of their state in the
general deliberations must be materially affected by the personal
weight and abilities of its representatives--the Senate of the United
States, thus chosen, has always contained nearly all the political men
of established and high reputation in the Union; while the Lower House
of Congress has, in the opinion of competent observers, been generally
as remarkable for the absence of conspicuous personal merit, as the
Upper House for its presence.

When the conditions exist for the formation of efficient and durable
federal unions, the multiplication of them is always a benefit to the
world. It has the same salutary effect as any other extension of the
practice of co-operation, through which the weak, by uniting, can meet
on equal terms with the strong. By diminishing the number of those
petty states which are not equal to their own defense, it weakens the
temptations to an aggressive policy, whether working directly by arms,
or through the _prestige_ of superior power. It of course puts an end
to war and diplomatic quarrels, and usually also to restrictions on
commerce, between the states composing the Union; while, in reference
to neighboring nations, the increased military strength conferred by
it is of a kind to be almost exclusively available for defensive,
scarcely at all for aggressive purposes. A federal government has not
a sufficiently concentrated authority to conduct with much efficiency
any war but one of self-defense, in which it can rely on the voluntary
co-operation of every citizen; nor is there any thing very flattering
to national vanity or ambition in acquiring, by a successful war, not
subjects, nor even fellow-citizens, but only new, and perhaps
troublesome independent members of the confederation. The warlike
proceedings of the Americans in Mexico was purely exceptional, having
been carried on principally by volunteers, under the influence of the
migratory propensity which prompts individual Americans to possess
themselves of unoccupied land, and stimulated, if by any public
motive, not by that of national aggrandizement, but by the purely
sectional purpose of extending slavery. There are few signs in the
proceedings of Americans, nationally or individually, that the desire
of territorial acquisition for their country as such has any
considerable power over them. Their hankering after Cuba is, in the
same manner, merely sectional, and the Northern States, those opposed
to slavery, have never in any way favored it.

The question may present itself (as in Italy at its present uprising)
whether a country which is determined to be united should form a
complete or a merely federal union. The point is sometimes necessarily
decided by the mere territorial magnitude of the united whole. There
is a limit to the extent of country which can advantageously be
governed, or even whose government can be conveniently superintended
from a single centre. There are vast countries so governed; but they,
or at least their distant provinces, are in general deplorably ill
administered, and it is only when the inhabitants are almost savages
that they could not manage their affairs better separately. This
obstacle does not exist in the case of Italy, the size of which does
not come up to that of several very efficiently governed single states
in past and present times. The question then is, whether the different
parts of the nation require to be governed in a way so essentially
different that it is not probable the same Legislature, and the same
ministry or administrative body, will give satisfaction to them all.
Unless this be the case, which is a question of fact, it is better for
them to be completely united. That a totally different system of laws
and very different administrative institutions may exist in two
portions of a country without being any obstacle to legislative unity,
is proved by the case of England and Scotland. Perhaps, however, this
undisturbed coexistence of two legal systems under one united
Legislature, making different laws for the two sections of the country
in adaptation to the previous differences, might not be so well
preserved, or the same confidence might not be felt in its
preservation, in a country whose legislators are more possessed (as is
apt to be the case on the Continent) with the mania for uniformity. A
people having that unbounded toleration which is characteristic of
this country for every description of anomaly, so long as those whose
interests it concerns do not feel aggrieved by it, afforded an
exceptionally advantageous field for trying this difficult experiment.
In most countries, if it was an object to retain different systems of
law, it might probably be necessary to retain distinct legislatures as
guardians of them, which is perfectly compatible with a national
Parliament and king, or a national Parliament without a king, supreme
over the external relations of all the members of the body.

Whenever it is not deemed necessary to maintain permanently, in the
different provinces, different systems of jurisprudence, and
fundamental institutions grounded on different principles, it is
always practicable to reconcile minor diversities with the maintenance
of unity of government. All that is needful is to give a sufficiently
large sphere of action to the local authorities. Under one and the
same central government there may be local governors, and provincial
assemblies for local purposes. It may happen, for instance, that the
people of different provinces may have preferences in favor of
different modes of taxation. If the general Legislature could not be
depended on for being guided by the members for each province in
modifying the general system of taxation to suit that province, the
Constitution might provide that as many of the expenses of the
government as could by any possibility be made local should be
defrayed by local rates imposed by the provincial assemblies, and that
those which must of necessity be general, such as the support of an
army and navy, should, in the estimates for the year, be apportioned
among the different provinces according to some general estimate of
their resources, the amount assigned to each being levied by the local
assembly on the principles most acceptable to the locality, and paid
_en bloc_ into the national treasury. A practice approaching to this
existed even in the old French monarchy, so far as regarded the _pays
d'états_, each of which, having consented or been required to
furnish a fixed sum, was left to assess it upon the inhabitants by its
own officers, thus escaping the grinding despotism of the royal
_intendants_ and _subdélégués;_ and this privilege is always mentioned
as one of the advantages which mainly contributed to render them, as
some of them were, the most flourishing provinces of France.

Identity of central government is compatible with many different
degrees of centralisation, not only administrative, but even
legislative. A people may have the desire and the capacity for a
closer union than one merely federal, while yet their local
peculiarities and antecedents render considerable diversities
desirable in the details of their government. But if there is a real
desire on all hands to make the experiment successful, there needs
seldom be any difficulty in not only preserving these diversities, but
giving them the guaranty of a constitutional provision against any
attempt at assimilation except by the voluntary act of those who would
be affected by the change.



Chapter XVIII

Of the Government of Dependencies by a Free State.


Free states, like all others, may possess dependencies, acquired
either by conquest or by colonization, and our own is the greatest
instance of the kind in modern history.  It is a most important
question how such dependencies ought to be governed.

It is unnecessary to discuss the case of small posts, like
Gibraltar, Aden, or Heligoland, which are held only as naval or
military positions. The military or naval object is in this case
paramount, and the inhabitants can not, consistently with it, be
admitted to the government of the place, though they ought to be
allowed all liberties and privileges compatible with that restriction,
including the free management of municipal affairs, and, as a
compensation for being locally sacrificed to the convenience of the
governing state, should be admitted to equal rights with its native
subjects in all other parts of the empire.

Outlying territories of some size and population, which are held as
dependencies, that is, which are subject, more or less, to acts of
sovereign power on the part of the paramount country, without being
equally represented (if represented at all) in its Legislature, may be
divided into two classes. Some are composed of people of similar
civilization to the ruling country, capable of, and ripe for,
representative government, such as the British possessions in America
and Australia. Others, like India, are still at a great distance from
that state.

In the case of dependencies of the former class, this country has at
length realized, in rare completeness, the true principle of
government. England has always felt under a certain degree of
obligation to bestow on such of her outlying populations as were of
her own blood and language, and on some who were not, representative
institutions formed in imitation of her own; but, until the present
generation, she has been on the same bad level with other countries as
to the amount of self-government which she allowed them to exercise
through the representative institutions that she conceded to them. She
claimed to be the supreme arbiter even of their purely internal
concerns, according to her own, not their ideas of how those concerns
could be best regulated. This practice was a natural corollary from
the vicious theory of colonial policy--once common to all Europe, and
not yet completely relinquished by any other people--which regarded
colonies as valuable by affording markets for our commodities that
could be kept entirely to ourselves; a privilege we valued so highly
that we thought it worth purchasing by allowing to the colonies the
same monopoly of our market for their own productions which we claimed
for our commodities in theirs. This notable plan for enriching them
and ourselves by making each pay enormous sums to the other, dropping
the greatest part by the way, has been for some time abandoned. But
the bad habit of meddling in the internal government of the colonies
did not at once die out when we relinquished the idea of making any
profit by it. We continued to torment them, not for any benefit to
ourselves, but for that of a section or faction among the colonists;
and this persistence in domineering cost us a Canadian rebellion
before we had the happy thought of giving it up. England was like an
ill brought-up elder brother, who persists in tyrannizing over the
younger ones from mere habit, till one of them, by a spirited
resistance, though with unequal strength, gives him notice to desist.
We were wise enough not to require a second warning. A new era in the
colonial policy of nations began with Lord Durham's Report; the
imperishable memorial of that nobleman's courage, patriotism, and
enlightened liberality, and of the intellect and practical sagacity of
its joint authors, Mr. Wakefield and the lamented Charles Buller.
[11]

It is now a fixed principle of the policy of Great Britain, professed
in theory and faithfully adhered to in practice, that her colonies of
European race, equally with the parent country, possess the fullest
measure of internal self-government. They have been allowed to make
their own free representative constitutions by altering in any manner
they thought fit the already very popular constitutions which we had
given them. Each is governed by its own Legislature and executive,
constituted on highly democratic principles. The veto of the crown and
of Parliament, though nominally reserved, is only exercised (and that
very rarely) on questions which concern the empire, and not solely the
particular colony. How liberal a construction has been given to the
distinction between imperial and colonial questions is shown by the
fact that the whole of the unappropriated lands in the regions behind
our American and Australian colonies have been given up to the
uncontrolled disposal of the colonial communities, though they might,
without injustice, have been kept in the hands of the imperial
government, to be administered for the greatest advantage of future
emigrants from all parts of the empire. Every colony has thus as full
power over its own affairs as it could have if it were a member of
even the loosest federation, and much fuller than would belong to it
under the Constitution of the United States, being free even to tax at
its pleasure the commodities imported from the mother country. Their
union with Great Britain is the slightest kind of federal union; but
not a strictly equal federation, the mother country retaining to
itself the powers of a federal government, though reduced in practice
to their very narrowest limits. This inequality is, of course, as far
as it goes, a disadvantage to the dependencies, which have no voice in
foreign policy, but are bound by the decisions of the superior
country. They are compelled to join England in war without being in
any way consulted previous to engaging in it.

Those (now happily not a few) who think that justice is as binding on
communities as it is on individuals, and that men are not warranted in
doing to other countries, for the supposed benefit of their own
country, what they would not be justified in doing to other men for
their own benefit, feel even this limited amount of constitutional
subordination on the part of the colonies to be a violation of
principle, and have often occupied themselves in looking out for means
by which it may be avoided. With this view it has been proposed by
some that the colonies should return representatives to the British
Legislature, and by others that the powers of our own, as well as of
their Parliaments, should be confined to internal policy, and that
there should be another representative body for foreign and imperial
concerns, in which last the dependencies of Great Britain should be
represented in the same manner, and with the same completeness as
Great Britain itself. On this system there would be a perfectly equal
federation between the mother country and her colonies, then no longer
dependencies.

The feelings of equity and conceptions of public morality from which
these suggestions emanate are worthy of all praise, but the
suggestions themselves are so inconsistent with rational principles of
government that it is doubtful if they have been seriously accepted as
a possibility by any reasonable thinker. Countries separated by half
the globe do not present the natural conditions for being under one
government, or even members of one federation. If they had
sufficiently the same interests, they have not, and never can have, a
sufficient habit of taking council together. They are not part of the
same public; they do not discuss and deliberate in the same arena, but
apart, and have only a most imperfect knowledge of what passes in the
minds of one another. They neither know each other's objects, nor have
confidence in each other's principles of conduct. Let any Englishman
ask himself how he should like his destinies to depend on an assembly
of which one third was British American, and another third South
African and Australian. Yet to this it must come if there were any
thing like fair or equal representation; and would not every one feel
that the representatives of Canada and Australia, even in matters of
an imperial character, could not know or feel any sufficient concern
for the interests, opinions, or wishes of English, Irish, and Scotch?
Even for strictly federative purposes the conditions do not exist
which we have seen to be essential to a federation. England is
sufficient for her own protection without the colonies, and would be
in a much stronger, as well as more dignified position, if separated
from them, than when reduced to be a single member of an American,
African, and Australian confederation. Over and above the commerce
which she might equally enjoy after separation, England derives little
advantage, except in _prestige_, from her dependencies, and the little
she does derive is quite outweighed by the expense they cost her, and
the dissemination they necessitate of her naval and military force,
which, in case of war, or any real apprehension of it, requires to be
double or treble what would be needed for the defense of this country
alone.

But, though Great Britain could do perfectly well without her
colonies, and though, on every principle of morality and justice, she
ought to consent to their separation, should the time come when, after
full trial of the best form of union, they deliberately desire to be
dissevered, there are strong reasons for maintaining the present
slight bond of connection so long as not disagreeable to the feelings
of either party. It is a step, as far as it goes, towards universal
peace and general friendly co-operation among nations. It renders war
impossible among a large number of otherwise independent communities,
and, moreover, hinders any of them from being absorbed into a foreign
state, and becoming a source of additional aggressive strength to some
rival power, either more despotic or closer at hand, which might not
always be so unambitious or so pacific as Great Britain. It at least
keeps the markets of the different countries open to one another, and
prevents that mutual exclusion by hostile tariffs which none of the
great communities of mankind except England have yet outgrown. And in
the case of the British possessions it has the advantage, especially
valuable at the present time, of adding to the moral influence and
weight in the councils of the world of the power which, of all in
existence, best understands liberty--and, whatever may have been its
errors in the past, has attained to more of conscience and moral
principle in its dealings with foreigners than any other great nation
seems either to conceive as possible or recognize as desirable. Since,
then, the union can only continue, while it does continue, on the
footing of an unequal federation, it is important to consider by what
means this small amount of inequality can be prevented from being
either onerous or humiliating to the communities occupying the less
exalted position.

The only inferiority necessarily inherent in the case is that the
mother country decides, both for the colonies and for herself, on
questions of peace and war. They gain, in return, the obligation on
the mother country to repel aggressions directed against them; but,
except when the minor community is so weak that the protection of a
stronger power is indispensable to it, reciprocity of obligation is
not a full equivalent for non-admission to a voice in the
deliberations. It is essential, therefore, that in all wars, save
those which, like the Caffre or New Zealand wars, are incurred for the
sake of the particular colony, the colonists should not (without their
own voluntary request) be called on to contribute any thing to the
expense except what may be required for the specific local defense of
their ports, shores, and frontiers against invasion. Moreover, as the
mother country claims the privilege, at her sole discretion, of taking
measures or pursuing a policy which may expose them to attack, it is
just that she should undertake a considerable portion of the cost of
their military defense even in time of peace; the whole of it, so far
as it depends upon a standing army.

But there is a means, still more effectual than these, by which, and
in general by which alone, a full equivalent can be given to a smaller
community for sinking its individuality, as a substantive power among
nations, in the greater individuality of a wide and powerful empire.
This one indispensable, and, at the same time, sufficient expedient,
which meets at once the demands of justice and the growing exigencies
of policy, is to open the service of government in all its
departments, and in every part of the empire, on perfectly equal
terms, to the inhabitants of the colonies. Why does no one ever hear a
breath of disloyalty from the Islands in the British Channel? By race,
religion, and geographical position they belong less to England than
to France; but, while they enjoy, like Canada and New South Wales,
complete control over their internal affairs and their taxation, every
office or dignity in the gift of the crown is freely open to the
native of Guernsey or Jersey. Generals, admirals, peers of the United
Kingdom are made, and there is nothing which hinders prime ministers
to be made from those insignificant islands. The same system was
commenced in reference to the colonies generally by an enlightened
colonial secretary, too early lost, Sir William Molesworth, when he
appointed Mr. Hinckes, a leading Canadian politician, to a West Indian
government. It is a very shallow view of the springs of political
action in a community which thinks such things unimportant because the
number of those in a position actually to profit by the concession
might not be very considerable. That limited number would be composed
precisely of those who have most moral power over the rest; and men
are not so destitute of the sense of collective degradation as not to
feel the withholding of an advantage from even one person, because of
a circumstance which they all have in common with him, an affront to
all. If we prevent the leading men of a community from standing forth
to the world as its chiefs and representatives in the general councils
of mankind, we owe it both to their legitimate ambition and to the
just pride of the community to give them in return an equal chance of
occupying the same prominent position in a nation of greater power and
importance. Were the whole service of the British crown opened to the
natives of the Ionian Islands, we should hear no more of the desire
for union with Greece. Such a union is not desirable for the people,
to whom it would be a step backward in civilization; but it is no
wonder if Corfu, which has given a minister of European reputation to
the Russian Empire, and a president to Greece itself before the
arrival of the Bavarians, should feel it a grievance that its people
are not admissable to the highest posts in some government or other.

Thus far of the dependencies whose population is in a sufficiently
advanced state to be fitted for representative government; but there
are others which have not attained that state, and which, if held at
all, must be governed by the dominant country, or by persons delegated
for that purpose by it. This mode of government is as legitimate as
any other, if it is the one which in the existing state of
civilization of the subject people most facilitates their transition
to a higher stage of improvement. There are, as we have already seen,
conditions of society in which a vigorous despotism is in itself the
best mode of government for training the people in what is
specifically wanting to render them capable of a higher civilization.
There are others, in which the mere fact of despotism has indeed no
beneficial effect, the lessons which it teaches having already been
only too completely learned, but in which, there being no spring of
spontaneous improvement in the people themselves, their almost only
hope of making any steps in advance depends on the chances of a good
despot. Under a native despotism, a good despot is a rare and
transitory accident; but when the dominion they are under is that of a
more civilized people, that people ought to be able to supply it
constantly. The ruling country ought to be able to do for its subjects
all that could be done by a succession of absolute monarchs,
guaranteed by irresistible force against the precariousness of tenure
attendant on barbarous despotisms, and qualified by their genius to
anticipate all that experience has taught to the more advanced nation.
Such is the ideal rule of a free people over a barbarous or
semi-barbarous one. We need not expect to see that ideal realized;
but, unless some approach to it is, the rulers are guilty of a
dereliction of the highest moral trust which can devolve upon a
nation; and if they do not even aim at it, they are selfish usurpers,
on a par in criminality with any of those whose ambition and rapacity
have sported from age to age with the destiny of masses of mankind.

As it is already a common, and is rapidly tending to become the
universal condition of the more backward populations to be either held
in direct subjection by the more advanced, or to be under their
complete political ascendancy, there are in this age of the world few
more important problems than how to organize this rule, so as to make
it a good instead of an evil to the subject people, providing them
with the best attainable present government, and with the conditions
most favorable to future permanent improvement. But the mode of
fitting the government for this purpose is by no means so well
understood as the conditions of good government in a people capable of
governing themselves. We may even say that it is not understood at
all.

The thing appears perfectly easy to superficial observers. If India
(for example) is not fit to govern itself, all that seems to them
required is that there should be a minister to govern it, and that
this minister, like all other British ministers, should be responsible
to the British Parliament. Unfortunately this, though the simplest
mode of attempting to govern a dependency, is about the worst, and
betrays in its advocates a total want of comprehension of the
conditions of good government. To govern a country under
responsibility to the people of that country, and to govern one
country under responsibility to the people of another, are two very
different things. What makes the excellence of the first is, that
freedom is preferable to despotism: but the last _is_ despotism. The
only choice the case admits is a choice of despotisms, and it is not
certain that the despotism of twenty millions is necessarily better
than that of a few or of one; but it is quite certain that the
despotism of those who neither hear, nor see, nor know any thing about
their subjects, has many chances of being worse than that of those who
do. It is not usually thought that the immediate agents of authority
govern better because they govern in the name of an absent master, and
of one who has a thousand more pressing interests to attend to. The
master may hold them to a strict responsibility, enforced by heavy
penalties, but it is very questionable if those penalties will often
fall in the right place.

It is always under great difficulties, and very imperfectly, that a
country can be governed by foreigners, even when there is no extreme
disparity in habits and ideas between the rulers and the ruled.
Foreigners do not feel with the people. They can not judge, by the
light in which a thing appears to their own minds, or the manner in
which it affects their feelings, how it will affect the feelings or
appear to the minds of the subject population. What a native of the
country, of average practical ability, knows as it were by instinct,
they have to learn slowly, and, after all, imperfectly, by study and
experience. The laws, the customs, the social relations for which they
have to legislate, instead of being familiar to them from childhood,
are all strange to them. For most of their detailed knowledge they
must depend on the information of natives, and it is difficult for
them to know whom to trust. They are feared, suspected, probably
disliked by the population; seldom sought by them except for
interested purposes; and they are prone to think that the servilely
submissive are the trustworthy. Their danger is of despising the
natives; that of the natives is, of disbelieving that any thing the
strangers do can be intended for their good. These are but a part of
the difficulties that any rulers have to struggle with, who honestly
attempt to govern well a country in which they are foreigners. To
overcome these difficulties in any degree will always be a work of
much labor, requiring a very superior degree of capacity in the chief
administrators, and a high average among the subordinates; and the
best organization of such a government is that which will best insure
the labor, develop the capacity, and place the highest specimens of it
in the situations of greatest trust. Responsibility to an authority
which has gone through none of the labor, acquired none of the
capacity, and for the most part is not even aware that either, in any
peculiar degree, is required, can not be regarded as a very effectual
expedient for accomplishing these ends.

The government of a people by itself has a meaning and a reality, but
such a thing as government of one people by another does not and can
not exist. One people may keep another as a warren or preserve for its
own use, a place to make money in, a human-cattle farm to be worked
for the profit of its own inhabitants; but if the good of the governed
is the proper business of a government, it is utterly impossible that
a people should directly attend to it. The utmost they can do is to
give some of their best men a commission to look after it, to whom the
opinion of their own country can neither be much of a guide in the
performance of their duty, nor a competent judge of the mode in which
it has been performed. Let any one consider how the English themselves
would be governed if they knew and cared no more about their own
affairs than they know and care about the affairs of the Hindoos. Even
this comparison gives no adequate idea of the state of the case; for a
people thus indifferent to politics altogether would probably be
simply acquiescent, and let the government alone; whereas in the case
of India, a politically active people like the English, amid habitual
acquiescence, are every now and then interfering, and almost always in
the wrong place. The real causes which determine the prosperity or
wretchedness, the improvement or deterioration of the Hindoos, are too
far off to be within their ken. They have not the knowledge necessary
for suspecting the existence of those causes, much less for judging of
their operation. The most essential interests of the country may be
well administered without obtaining any of their approbation, or
mismanaged to almost any excess without attracting their notice. The
purposes for which they are principally tempted to interfere, and
control the proceedings of their delegates, are of two kinds. One is
to force English ideas down the throats of the natives; for instance,
by measures of proselytism, or acts intentionally or unintentionally
offensive to the religious feelings of the people. This misdirection
of opinion in the ruling country is instructively exemplified (the
more so, because nothing is meant but justice and fairness, and as
much impartiality as can be expected from persons really convinced) by
the demand now so general in England for having the Bible taught, at
the option of pupils or of their parents, in the government schools.
From the European point of view nothing can wear a fairer aspect, or
seem less open to objection on the score of religious freedom. To
Asiatic eyes it is quite another thing. No Asiatic people ever
believes that a government puts its paid officers and official
machinery into motion unless it is bent upon an object; and when bent
on an object, no Asiatic believes that any government, except a feeble
and contemptible one, pursues it by halves. If government schools and
schoolmasters taught Christianity, whatever pledges might be given of
teaching it only to those who spontaneously sought it, no amount of
evidence would ever persuade the parents that improper means were not
used to make their children Christians, or, at all events, outcasts
from Hindooism. If they could, in the end, be convinced of the
contrary, it would only be by the entire failure of the schools, so
conducted, to make any converts. If the teaching had the smallest
effect in promoting its object, it would compromise not only the
utility and even existence of the government education, but perhaps
the safety of the government itself. An English Protestant would not
be easily induced, by disclaimers of proselytism, to place his
children in a Roman Catholic seminary; Irish Catholics will not send
their children to schools in which they can be made Protestants; and
we expect that Hindoos, who believe that the privileges of Hindooism
can be forfeited by a merely physical act, will expose theirs to the
danger of being made Christians!

Such is one of the modes in which the opinion of the dominant country
tends to act more injuriously than beneficially on the conduct of its
deputed governors. In other respects, its interference is likely to be
oftenest exercised where it will be most pertinaciously demanded, and
that is, on behalf of some interest of the English settlers. English
settlers have friends at home, have organs, have access to the public;
they have a common language, and common ideas with their countrymen;
any complaint by an Englishman is more sympathetically heard, even if
no unjust preference is intentionally accorded to it. Now if there be
a fact to which all experience testifies, it is that, when a country
holds another in subjection, the individuals of the ruling people who
resort to the foreign country to make their fortunes are of all others
those who most need to be held under powerful restraint. They are
always one of the chief difficulties of the government. Armed with the
_prestige_ and filled with the scornful overbearingness of the
conquering nation, they have the feelings inspired by absolute power
without its sense of responsibility. Among a people like that of
India, the utmost efforts of the public authorities are not enough for
the effectual protection of the weak against the strong; and of all
the strong, the European settlers are the strongest. Wherever the
demoralizing effect of the situation is not in a most remarkable
degree corrected by the personal character of the individual, they
think the people of the country mere dirt under their feet: it seems
to them monstrous that any rights of the natives should stand in the
way of their smallest pretensions; the simplest act of protection to
the inhabitants against any act of power on their part which they may
consider useful to their commercial objects they denounce, and
sincerely regard as an injury. So natural is this state of feeling in
a situation like theirs, that, even under the discouragement which it
has hitherto met with from the ruling authorities, it is impossible
that more or less of the spirit should not perpetually break out. The
government, itself free from this spirit, is never able sufficiently
to keep it down in the young and raw even of its own civil and
military officers, over whom it has so much more control than over the
independent residents. As it is with the English in India, so,
according to trustworthy testimony, it is with the French in Algiers;
so with the Americans in the countries conquered from Mexico; so it
seems to be with the Europeans in China, and already even in Japan:
there is no necessity to recall how it was with the Spaniards in South
America. In all these cases, the government to which these private
adventurers are subject is better than they, and does the most it can
to protect the natives against them. Even the Spanish government did
this, sincerely and earnestly, though ineffectually, as is known to
every reader of Mr. Helps' instructive history. Had the Spanish
government been directly accountable to Spanish opinion, we may
question if it would have made the attempt, for the Spaniards,
doubtless, would have taken part with their Christian friends and
relations rather than with pagans. The settlers, not the natives, have
the ear of the public at home; it is they whose representations are
likely to pass for truth, because they alone have both the means and
the motive to press them perseveringly upon the inattentive and
uninterested public mind. The distrustful criticism with which
Englishmen, more than any other people, are in the habit of scanning
the conduct of their country towards foreigners, they usually reserve
for the proceedings of the public authorities. In all questions
between a government and an individual, the presumption in every
Englishman's mind is that the government is in the wrong. And when the
resident English bring the batteries of English political action to
bear upon any of the bulwarks erected to protect the natives against
their encroachments, the executive, with their real but faint
velleities of something better, generally find it safer to their
Parliamentary interest, and, at any rate, less troublesome, to give up
the disputed position than to defend it.

What makes matters worse is that, when the public mind is invoked (as,
to its credit, the English mind is extremely open to be) in the name
of justice and philanthropy in behalf of the subject community or
race, there is the same probability of its missing the mark; for in
the subject community also there are oppressors and
oppressed--powerful individuals or classes, and slaves prostrate
before them; and it is the former, not the latter, who have the means
of access to the English public. A tyrant or sensualist who has been
deprived of the power he had abused, and, instead of punishment, is
supported in as great wealth and splendor as he ever enjoyed; a knot
of privileged landholders, who demand that the state should relinquish
to them its reserved right to a rent from their lands, or who resent
as a wrong any attempt to protect the masses from their
extortion--these have no difficulty in procuring interested or
sentimental advocacy in the British Parliament and press. The silent
myriads obtain none.

The preceding observations exemplify the operation of a
principle--which might be called an obvious one, were it not that
scarcely anybody seems to be aware of it--that, while responsibility
to the governed is the greatest of all securities for good government,
responsibility to somebody else not only has no such tendency, but is
as likely to produce evil as good. The responsibility of the British
rulers of India to the British nation is chiefly useful because, when
any acts of the government are called in question, it insures
publicity and discussion; the utility of which does not require that
the public at large should comprehend the point at issue, provided
there are any individuals among them who do; for a merely moral
responsibility not being responsibility to the collective people, but
to every separate person among them who forms a judgment, opinions may
be weighed as well as counted, and the approbation or disapprobation
of one person well versed in the subject may outweigh that of
thousands who know nothing about it at all. It is doubtless a useful
restraint upon the immediate rulers that they can be put upon their
defense, and that one or two of the jury will form an opinion worth
having about their conduct, though that of the remainder will probably
be several degrees worse than none. Such as it is, this is the amount
of benefit to India from the control exercised over the Indian
government by the British Parliament and people.

It is not by attempting to rule directly a country like India, but by
giving it good rulers, that the English people can do their duty to
that country; and they can scarcely give it a worse one than an
English cabinet minister, who is thinking of English, not Indian
politics; who does not remains long enough in office to acquire an
intelligent interest in so complicated a subject; upon whom the
factitious public opinion got up in Parliament, consisting of two or
three fluent speakers, acts with as much force as if it were genuine;
while he is under none of the influences of training and position
which would lead or qualify him to form an honest opinion of his own.
A free country which attempts to govern a distant dependency,
inhabited by a dissimilar people, by means of a branch of its own
executive, will almost inevitably fail. The only mode which has any
chance of tolerable success is to govern through a delegated body of a
comparatively permanent character, allowing only a right of inspection
and a negative voice to the changeable administration of the state.
Such a body did exist in the case of India; and I fear that both India
and England will pay a severe penalty for the shortsighted policy by
which this intermediate instrument of government was done away with.

It is of no avail to say that such a delegated body can not have all
the requisites of good government; above all, can not have that
complete and over-operative identity of interest with the governed
which it is so difficult to obtain even where the people to be ruled
are in some degree qualified to look after their own affairs. Real
good government is not compatible with the conditions of the case.
There is but a choice of imperfections. The problem is, so to
construct the governing body that, under the difficulties of the
position, it shall have as much interest as possible in good
government, and as little in bad. Now these conditions are best found
in an intermediate body. A delegated administration has always this
advantage over a direct one, that it has, at all events, no duty to
perform except to the governed. It has no interests to consider except
theirs. Its own power of deriving profit from misgovernment may be
reduced--in the latest Constitution of the East India Company it was
reduced--to a singularly small amount; and it can be kept entirely
clear of bias from the individual or class interests of any one else.
When the home government and Parliament are swayed by such partial
influences in the exercise of the power reserved to them in the last
resort, the intermediate body is the certain advocate and champion of
the dependency before the imperial tribunal. The intermediate body,
moreover, is, in the natural course of things, chiefly composed of
persons who have acquired professional knowledge of this part of their
country's concerns; who have been trained to it in the place itself,
and have made its administration the main occupation of their lives.
Furnished with these qualifications, and not being liable to lose
their office from the accidents of home politics, they identify their
character and consideration with their special trust, and have a much
more permanent interest in the success of their administration, and in
the prosperity of the country which they administer, than a member of
a cabinet under a representative constitution can possibly have in the
good government of any country except the one which he serves. So far
as the choice of those who carry on the management on the spot
devolves upon this body, their appointment is kept out of the vortex
of party and Parliamentary jobbing, and freed from the influence of
those motives to the abuse of patronage for the reward of adherents,
or to buy off those who would otherwise be opponents, which are always
stronger with statesmen of average honesty than a conscientious sense
of the duty of appointing the fittest man. To put this one class of
appointments as far as possible out of harm's way is of more
consequence than the worst which can happen to all other offices in
the state; for, in every other department, if the officer is
unqualified, the general opinion of the community directs him in a
certain degree what to do; but in the position of the administrators
of a dependency where the people are not fit to have the control in
their own hands, the character of the government entirely depends on
the qualifications, moral and intellectual, of the individual
functionaries.

It can not be too often repeated that, in a country like India, every
thing depends on the personal qualities and capacities of the agents
of government. This truth is the cardinal principle of Indian
administration. The day when it comes to be thought that the
appointment of persons to situations of trust from motives of
convenience, already so criminal in England, can be practiced with
impunity in India, will be the beginning of the decline and fall of
our empire there. Even with a sincere intention of preferring the best
candidate, it will not do to rely on chance for supplying fit persons.
The system must be calculated to form them. It has done this hitherto;
and because it has done so, our rule in India has lasted, and been one
of constant, if not very rapid improvement in prosperity and good
administration. As much bitterness is now manifested against this
system, and as much eagerness displayed to overthrow it, as if
educating and training the officers of government for their work were
a thing utterly unreasonable and indefensible, an unjustifiable
interference with the rights of ignorance and inexperience. There is a
tacit conspiracy between those who would like to job in first-rate
Indian offices for their connections here, and those who, being
already in India, claim to be promoted from the indigo factory or the
attorney's office to administer justice or fix the payments due to
government from millions of people. The "monopoly" of the civil
service, so much inveighed against, is like the monopoly of judicial
offices by the bar; and its abolition would be like opening the bench
in Westminster Hall to the first comer whose friends certify that he
has now and then looked into Blackstone. Were the course ever adopted
of sending men from this country, or encouraging them in going out, to
get themselves put into high appointments without having learned their
business by passing through the lower ones, the most important offices
would be thrown to Scotch cousins and adventurers, connected by no
professional feeling with the country or the work, held to no previous
knowledge, and eager only to make money rapidly and return home. The
safety of the country is, that those by whom it is administered be
sent out in youth, as candidates only, to begin at the bottom of the
ladder, and ascend higher or not, as, after a proper interval, they
are proved qualified. The defect of the East India Company's system
was that, though the best men were carefully sought out for the most
important posts, yet, if an officer remained in the service,
promotion, though it might be delayed, came at last in some shape or
other, to the least as well as to the most competent. Even the
inferior in qualifications among such a corps of functionaries
consisted, it must be remembered, of men who had been brought up to
their duties, and had fulfilled them for many years, at lowest without
disgrace, under the eye and authority of a superior. But, though this
diminished the evil, it was nevertheless considerable. A man who never
becomes fit for more than an assistant's duty should remain an
assistant all his life, and his juniors should be promoted over him.
With this exception, I am not aware of any real defect in the old
system of Indian appointments. It had already received the greatest
other improvement it was susceptible of, the choice of the original
candidates by competitive examination, which, besides the advantage of
recruiting from a higher grade of industry and capacity, has the
recommendation that under it, unless by accident, there are no
personal ties between the candidates for offices and those who have a
voice in conferring them.

It is in no way unjust that public officers thus selected and trained
should be exclusively eligible to offices which require specially
Indian knowledge and experience. If any door to the higher
appointments, without passing through the lower, be opened even for
occasional use, there will be such incessant knocking at it by persons
of influence that it will be impossible ever to keep it closed. The
only excepted appointment should be the highest one of all. The
Viceroy of British India should be a person selected from all
Englishmen for his great general capacity for government. If he have
this, he will be able to distinguish in others, and turn to his own
use, that special knowledge and judgment in local affairs which he has
not himself had the opportunity of acquiring. There are good reasons
why the viceroy should not be a member of the regular service. All
services have, more or less, their class prejudices, from which the
supreme ruler ought to be exempt. Neither are men, however able and
experienced, who have passed their lives in Asia, so likely to possess
the most advanced European ideas in general statesmanship, which the
chief ruler should carry out with him, and blend with the results of
Indian experience. Again, being of a different class, and especially
if chosen by a different authority, he will seldom have any personal
partialities to warp his appointments to office. This great security
for honest bestowal of patronage existed in rare perfection under the
mixed government of the crown and the East India Company. The supreme
dispensers of office--the governor general and governors--were
appointed, in fact though not formally, by the crown, that is, by the
general government, not by the intermediate body, and a great officer
of the crown probably had not a single personal or political
connection in the local service, while the delegated body, most of
whom had themselves served in the country, had, and were likely to
have, such connections. This guaranty for impartiality would be much
impaired if the civil servants of government, even though sent out in
boyhood as mere candidates for employment, should come to be
furnished, in any considerable proportion, by the class of society
which supplies viceroys and governors. Even the initiatory competitive
examination would then be an insufficient security. It would exclude
mere ignorance and incapacity; it would compel youths of family to
start in the race with the same amount of instruction and ability as
other people; the stupidest son could not be put into the Indian
service, as he can be into the Church; but there would be nothing to
prevent undue preference afterwards. No longer, all equally unknown
and unheard of by the arbiter of their lot, a portion of the service
would be personally, and a still greater number politically, in close
relation with him. Members of certain families, and of the higher
classes and influential connections generally, would rise more rapidly
than their competitors, and be often kept in situations for which they
were unfit, or placed in those for which others were fitter. The same
influences would be brought into play which affect promotions in the
army; and those alone, if such miracles of simplicity there be, who
believe that these are impartial, would expect impartiality in those
of India. This evil is, I fear, irremediable by any general measures
which can be taken under the present system. No such will afford a
degree of security comparable to that which once flowed spontaneously
from the so-called double government.

What is accounted so great an advantage in the case of the English
system of government at home has been its misfortune in India--that it
grew up of itself, not from preconceived design, but by successive
expedients, and by the adaptation of machinery originally created for
a different purpose. As the country on which its maintenance depended
was not the one out of whose necessities it grew, its practical
benefits did not come home to the mind of that country, and it would
have required theoretic recommendations to render it acceptable.
Unfortunately, these were exactly what it seemed to be destitute of;
and undoubtedly the common theories of government did not furnish it
with such, framed as those theories have been for states of
circumstances differing in all the most important features from the
case concerned. But in government as in other departments of human
agency, almost all principles which have been durable were first
suggested by observation of some particular case, in which the general
laws of nature acted in some new or previously unnoticed combination
of circumstances. The institutions of Great Britain, and those of the
United States, have the distinction of suggesting most of the theories
of government which, through good and evil fortune, are now, in the
course of generations, reawakening political life in the nations of
Europe. It has been the destiny of the government of the East India
Company to suggest the true theory of the government of a
semi-barbarous dependency by a civilized country, and after having
done this, to perish. It would be a singular fortune if, at the end of
two or three more generations, this speculative result should be the
only remaining fruit of our ascendancy in India; if posterity should
say of us that, having stumbled accidentally upon better arrangements
than our wisdom would ever have devised, the first use we made of our
awakened reason was to destroy them, and allow the good which had been
in course of being realized to fall through and be lost from ignorance
of the principles on which it depended. _Dî meliora;_ but if a fate so
disgraceful to England and to civilization can be averted, it must be
through far wider political conceptions than merely English or
European practice can supply, and through a much more profound study
of Indian experience and of the conditions of Indian government than
either English politicians, or those who supply the English public
with opinions, have hitherto shown any willingness to undertake.

                               The End


-------------------------------------------------------------------


                              Footnotes


1. I limit the expression to past time, because I would say nothing
derogatory of a great, and now at last a free, people, who are
entering into the general movement of European progress with a vigor
which bids fair to make up rapidly the ground they have lost. No one
can doubt what Spanish intellect and energy are capable of; and their
faults as a people are chiefly those for which freedom and industrial
ardor are a real specific.

2. Italy, which alone can be quoted as an exception, is only so in
regard to the final stage of its transformation. The more difficult
previous advance from the city isolation of Florence, Pisa, or Milan,
to the provincial unity of Tuscany or Lombardy, took place in the
usual manner.

3. This blunder of Mr. Disraeli (from which, greatly to his credit,
Sir John Pakington took an opportunity soon after of separating
himself) is a speaking instance, among many, how little the
Conservative leaders understand Conservative principles. Without
presuming to require from political parties such an amount of virtue
and discernment as that they should comprehend, and know when to
apply, the principles of their opponents, we may yet say that it would
be a great improvement if each party understood and acted upon its
own. Well would it be for England if Conservatives voted consistently
for every thing conservative, and Liberals for every thing liberal. We
should not then have to wait long for things which, like the present
and many other great measures, are eminently both the one and the
other. The Conservatives, as being by the law of their existence the
stupidest party, have much the greatest sins of this description to
answer for; and it is a melancholy truth, that if any measure were
proposed on any subject truly, largely, and far-sightedly
conservative, even if Liberals were willing to vote for it, the great
bulk of the Conservative party would rush blindly in and prevent it
from being carried.

4. "Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform," 2nd ed. p. 32-36.

5. "This expedient has been recommended both on the score of saving
expense and on that of obtaining the votes of many electors who
otherwise would not vote, and who are regarded by the advocates of the
plan as a particularly desirable class of voters. The scheme has been
carried into practice in the election of poor-law guardians, and its
success in that instance is appealed to in favor of adopting it in the
more important case of voting for a member of the Legislature. But the
two cases appear to me to differ in the point on which the benefits of
the expedient depend. In a local election for a special kind of
administrative business, which consists mainly in the dispensation of
a public fund, it is an object to prevent the choice from being
exclusively in the hands of those who actively concern themselves
about it; for the public interest which attaches to the election being
of a limited kind, and in most cases not very great in degree, the
disposition to make themselves busy in the matter is apt to be in a
great measure confined to persons who hope to turn their activity to
their own private advantage; and it may be very desirable to render
the intervention of other people as little onerous to them as
possible, if only for the purpose of swamping these private interests.
But when the matter in hand is the great business of national
government, in which every one must take an interest who cares for any
thing out of himself, or who cares even for himself intelligently, it
is much rather an object to prevent those from voting who are
indifferent to the subject, than to induce them to vote by any other
means than that of awakening their dormant minds. The voter who does
not care enough about the election to go to the poll is the very man
who, if he can vote without that small trouble, will give his vote to
the first person who asks for it, or on the most trifling or frivolous
inducement. A man who does not care whether he votes is not likely to
care much which way he votes; and he who is in that state of mind has
no moral right to vote at all; since, if he does so, a vote which is
not the expression of a conviction, counts for as much, and goes as
far in determining the result as one which represents the thoughts and
purposes of a life."--_Thoughts_, etc., p. 39.

6. Several of the witnesses before the Committee of the House of
Commons in 1860, on the operation of the Corrupt Practices Prevention
Act, some of them of great practical experience in election matters,
were favorable (either absolutely or as a last resort) to the
principle of requiring a declaration from members of Parliament, and
were of opinion that, if supported by penalties, it would be, to a
great degree, effectual. (_Evidence_, pp. 46, 54-7, 67, 123, 198-202,
208.) The chief commissioner of the Wakefield Inquiry said (in
reference certainly to a different proposal), "If they see that the
Legislature is earnest upon the subject, the machinery will work.... I
am quite sure that if some personal stigma were applied upon
conviction of bribery, it would change the current of public opinion"
(pp. 26 and 32). A distinguished member of the committee (and of the
present cabinet) seemed to think it very objectionable to attach the
penalties of perjury to a merely promissory as distinguished from an
assertory oath; but he was reminded that the oath taken by a witness
in a court of justice is a promissory oath; and the rejoinder (that
the witness's promise relates to an act to be done at once, while the
member's would be a promise for all future time) would only be to the
purpose if it could be supposed that the swearer might forget the
obligation he had entered into, or could possibly violate it unawares:
contingencies which, in a case like the present, are out of the
question.

A more substantial difficulty is, that one of the forms most
frequently assumed by election expenditure is that of subscriptions to
local charities or other local objects; and it would be a strong
measure to enact that money should not be given in charity within a
place by the member for it. When such subscriptions are _bonâ fide_,
the popularity which may be derived from them is an advantage which it
seems hardly possible to deny to superior riches. But the greatest
part of the mischief consists in the fact that money so contributed is
employed in bribery, under the euphonious name of keeping up the
member's interest. To guard against this, it should be part of the
member's promissory declaration that all sums expended by him in the
place, or for any purpose connected with it or with any of its
inhabitants (with the exception perhaps of his own hotel expenses)
should pass through the hands of the election auditor, and be by him
(and not by the member himself or his friends) applied to its declared
purpose.

The principle of making all lawful expenses of a charge, not upon the
candidate, but upon the locality, was upheld by two of the best
witnesses (pp. 20, 65-70, 277).

7. "As Mr. Lorimer remarks, by creating a pecuniary inducement to
persons of the lowest class to devote themselves to public affairs,
the calling of the demagogue would be formally inaugurated. Nothing is
more to be deprecated than making it the private interest of a number
of active persons to urge the form of government in the direction of
its natural perversion. The indications which either a multitude or an
individual can give when merely left to their own weaknesses, afford
but a faint idea of what those weaknesses would become when played
upon by a thousand flatterers. If there were 658 places of certain,
however moderate emolument, to be gained by persuading the multitude
that ignorance is as good as knowledge, and better, it is terrible
odds that they would believe and act upon the lesson."--(Article in
_Fraser's Magazine_ for April, 1859, headed "Recent Writers on
Reform.")

8. Not always, however, the most recondite; for one of the latest
denouncers of competitive examination in the House of Commons had the
_näiveté_ to produce a set of almost elementary questions in algebra,
history, and geography, as a proof of the exorbitant amount of high
scientific attainment which the Commissioners were so wild as to
exact.

9. On Liberty, concluding chapter; and, at greater length, in the
final chapter of "Principles of Political Economy."

10. Mr. Calhoun.

11. I am speaking here of the _adoption_ of this improved policy, not,
of course, of its original suggestion. The honor of having been its
earliest champion belongs unquestionably to Mr. Roebuck.




ESSAYS ON SOME UNSETTLED QUESTIONS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

by

JOHN STUART MILL


1844




PREFACE.


Of these Essays, which were written in 1829 and 1830, the fifth alone
has been previously printed. The other four have hitherto remained in
manuscript, because, during the temporary suspension of public interest
in the species of discussion to which they belong, there was no
inducement to their publication.

They are now published (with a few merely verbal alterations) under the
impression, that the controversies excited by Colonel Torrens' _Budget_
have again called the attention of political economists to the
discussions of the abstract science: and from the additional
consideration, that the first paper relates expressly to the point upon
which the question at issue between Colonel Torrens and his antagonists
has principally turned.

From that paper it will be seen that opinions identical in principle
with those promulgated by Colonel Torrens (there would probably be
considerable difference as to the extent of their practical application)
have been held by the writer for more than fifteen years: although he
cannot claim to himself the original conception, but only the
elaboration, of the fundamental doctrine of the Essay.

A prejudice appears to exist in many quarters against the theory in
question, on the supposition of its being opposed to one of the most
valuable results of modern political philosophy, the doctrine of Freedom
of Trade between nation and nation. The opinions now laid before the
reader are presented as corollaries necessarily following from the
principles upon which Free Trade itself rests. The writer has also been
careful to point out, that from these opinions no justification can be
derived for any _protecting_ duty, or other preference given to domestic
over foreign industry. But in regard to those duties on foreign
commodities which do not operate as protection, but are maintained
solely for revenue, and which do not touch either the necessaries of
life or the materials and instruments of production, it is his opinion
that any relaxation of such duties, beyond what may be required by the
interest of the revenue itself, should in general be made contingent
upon the adoption of some corresponding degree of freedom of trade with
this country, by the nation from which the commodities are imported.




CONTENTS.


ESSAY I.

Of the Laws of Interchange between Nations; and the Distribution of the
Gains of Commerce among the Countries of the Commercial World

ESSAY II.

Of the Influence of Consumption upon Production

ESSAY III.

On the Words Productive and Unproductive

ESSAY IV.

On Profits, and Interest

ESSAY V.

On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of
Investigation proper to it




ESSAY I.

OF THE LAWS OF INTERCHANGE BETWEEN NATIONS; AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE
GAINS OF COMMERCE AMONG THE COUNTRIES OF THE COMMERCIAL WORLD.


Of the truths with which political economy has been enriched by Mr.
Ricardo, none has contributed more to give to that branch of knowledge
the comparatively precise and scientific character which it at present
bears, than the more accurate analysis which he performed of the nature
of the advantage which nations derive from a mutual interchange of their
productions. Previously to his time, the benefits of foreign trade were
deemed, even by the most philosophical enquirers, to consist in
affording a vent for surplus produce, or in enabling a portion of the
national capital to replace itself with a profit. The futility of the
theory implied in these and similar phrases, was an obvious consequence
from the speculations of writers even anterior to Mr. Ricardo. But it
was he who first, in the chapter on Foreign Trade, of his immortal
_Principles of Political Economy and Taxation_, substituted for the
former vague and unscientific, if not positively false, conceptions with
regard to the advantage of trade, a philosophical exposition which
explains, with strict precision, the nature of that advantage, and
affords an accurate measure of its amount.

He shewed, that the advantage of an interchange of commodities between
nations consists simply and solely in this, that it enables each to
obtain, with a given amount of labour and capital, a greater quantity of
all commodities taken together. This it accomplishes by enabling each,
with a quantity of one commodity which has cost it so much labour and
capital, to purchase a quantity of another commodity which, if produced
at home, would have required labour and capital to a greater amount.
To render the importation of an article more advantageous than its
production, it is not necessary that the foreign country should be able
to produce it with less labour and capital than ourselves. We may even
have a positive advantage in its production: but, if we are so far
favoured by circumstances as to have a still greater positive advantage
in the production of some other article which is in demand in the
foreign country, we may be able to obtain a greater return to our labour
and capital by employing none of it in producing the article in which
our advantage is least, but devoting it all to the production of that in
which our advantage is greatest, and giving this to the foreign country
in exchange for the other. It is not a difference in the _absolute_ cost
of production, which determines the interchange, but a difference in the
_comparative_ cost. It may be to our advantage to procure iron from
Sweden in exchange for cottons, even although the mines of England as
well as her manufactories should be more productive than those of
Sweden; for if we have an advantage of one-half in cottons, and only an
advantage of a quarter in iron, and could sell our cottons to Sweden at
the price which Sweden must pay for them if she produced them herself,
we should obtain our iron with an advantage of one-half, as well as our
cottons. We may often, by trading with foreigners, obtain their
commodities at a smaller expense of labour and capital than they cost
to the foreigners themselves. The bargain is still advantageous to the
foreigner, because the commodity which he receives in exchange, though
it has cost us less, would have cost him more. As often as a country
possesses two commodities, one of which it can produce with less labour,
comparatively to what it would cost in a foreign country, than the
other; so often it is the interest of the country to export the first
mentioned commodity and to import the second; even though it might be
able to produce both the one and the other at a less expense of labour
than the foreign country can produce them, but not less in the same
degree; or might be unable to produce either except at a greater
expense, but not greater in the same degree.

On the contrary, if it produces both commodities with greater facility,
or both with greater difficulty, and greater in exactly the same degree,
there will be no motive to interchange.

"If the cloth and the corn, each of which required 100 days' labour in
Poland, required each 150 days' labour in England; it would follow, that
the cloth of 150 days' labour in England, if sent to Poland, would be
equal to the cloth of 100 days' labour in Poland: if exchanged for corn,
therefore, it would exchange for the corn of only 100 days' labour. But
the corn of 100 days' labour in Poland, was supposed to be the same
quantity with that of 150 days' labour in England. With 150 days' labour
in cloth, therefore, England would only get as much corn in Poland as
she could raise with 150 days' labour at home; and she would, in
importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. In these circumstances
no exchange would take place.

"If, on the other hand, while the cloth produced with 100 days' labour
in Poland was produced with 150 days' labour in England, the corn which
was produced in Poland with 100 days' labour could not be produced in
England with less than 200 days' labour; an adequate motive to exchange
would immediately arise. With a quantity of cloth which England produced
with 150 days' labour, she would be able to purchase as much corn in
Poland as was there produced with 100 days' labour; but the quantity,
which was there produced with 100 days' labour, would be as great as the
quantity produced in England with 200 days' labour.

"The power of Poland would be reciprocal. With a quantity of corn which
cost her 100 days' labour, equal to the quantity produced in England by
200 days' labour, she could in the supposed case purchase in England the
produce of 200 days' labour in cloth." But "the produce of 150 days'
labour in England in the article of cloth would be equal to the produce
of 100 days' labour in Poland [1]."

The remainder of what Mr. Ricardo has done for the philosophical
exposition of the principles of foreign trade, is to shew, that the
truth of the propositions now recapitulated is not affected by the
introduction of money as a medium of exchange; the precious metals
always tending to distribute themselves in such a manner throughout the
commercial world, that every country shall import all that it would have
imported, and export all that it would have exported, if exchanges had
taken place, as in the example above supposed, by barter.

To this branch of the subject we shall, in the sequel of this essay,
return. At present it will be more convenient that we should continue to
suppose, that exchanges take place by the direct trucking of one
commodity against another.

It is established, that the advantage which two countries derive from
trading with each other, results from the more advantageous employment
which thence arises, of the labour and capital--for shortness let us say
the labour--of both jointly. The circumstances are such, that if each
country confines itself to the production of one commodity, there is a
greater total return to the labour of both together; and this increase
of produce forms the whole of what the two countries taken together gain
by the trade.

It is the purpose of the present essay to inquire, in what proportion
the increase of produce, arising from the saving of labour, is divided
between the two countries.

This question was not entered into by Mr. Ricardo, whose attention was
engrossed by far more important questions, and who, having a science to
create, had not time, or room, to occupy himself with much more than the
leading principles. When he had done enough to enable any one who came
after him, and who took the necessary pains, to do all the rest, he was
satisfied. He very rarely followed out the principles of the science
into the ramifications of their consequences. But we believe that to no
one, who has thoroughly entered into the spirit of his discoveries, will
even the minutiae of the science offer any difficulty but that which is
constituted by the necessity of patience and circumspection in tracing
principles to their results.

Mr. Ricardo, while intending to go no further into the question of the
advantage of foreign trade than to show what it consisted of, and under
what circumstances it arose, unguardedly expressed himself as if each of
the two countries making the exchange separately gained the whole of the
difference between the comparative costs of the two commodities in one
country and in the other. But, the whole gain of both countries
together, consisting in the saving of labour; and the saving of labour
being exactly equal to the difference between the costs, in the two
countries, of the one commodity as compared with the other; the two
countries taken together gain no more than this difference: and if
either country gains the whole of it, the other country derives no
advantage from the trade.

Suppose, for example, that 10 yards of broad cloth cost in England as
much labour as 15 yards of linen, and in Germany as much as 20. If
England sends 10 yards of broad cloth to Germany, and is able to
exchange them for linen according to the German cost of production, she
will get 20 yards of linen, with a quantity of labour with which she
could not have produced more than 15; and will gain, therefore, 5 yards
on every 15, or 33-1/3 per cent. But in this case Germany would obtain
only 10 yards of cloth for 20 of linen. Now, 10 yards of cloth cost
exactly the same quantity of labour in Germany as 20 of linen; Germany,
therefore, derives no advantage from the trade, more than she would
possess if it did not exist.

So, on the other hand, if Germany sends 15 yards of linen to England,
and finding the relative value of the two articles in that country
determined by the English costs of production, is enabled to purchase
with 35 yards of linen 10 yards of cloth; Germany now gains 5 yards,
just as England did before,--for with 15 yards of linen she purchases 10
yards of cloth, when to produce these 10 yards she must have employed as
much labour as would have enabled her to produce 20 yards of linen. But
in this case England would gain nothing: she would only obtain, for her
10 yards of cloth, 15 yards of linen, which is exactly the comparative
cost at which she could have produced them.

This, which was not an error, but a mere oversight of Mr. Ricardo,
arising from his having left the question of the division of the
advantage entirely unnoticed, was first corrected in the third edition
of Mr. Mill's _Elements of Political Economy_. It can hardly, however,
be said that Mr. Mill has prosecuted the inquiry any further; which,
indeed, would have been quite as inconsistent with the nature of his
plan as of Mr. Ricardo's.

1. When the trade is established between the two countries, the two
commodities will exchange for each other at the same rate of interchange
in both countries--bating the cost of carriage, of which, for the present,
it will be more convenient to omit the consideration. Supposing, therefore,
for the sake of argument, that the carriage of the commodities from one
country to another could be effected without labour and without cost, no
sooner would the trade be opened than, it is self-evident, the value of
the two commodities, estimated in each other, would come to a level in
both countries.

If we knew what this level would be, we should know in what proportion
the two countries would share the advantage of the trade.

When each country produced both commodities for itself, 10 yards of
broad cloth exchanged for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in
Germany. They will now exchange for the same number of yards of linen in
both. For what number? If for 15 yards, England will be just as she was,
and Germany will gain all. If for 20 yards, Germany will be as before,
and England will derive the whole of the benefit. If for any number
intermediate between 15 and 20, the advantage will be shared between the
two countries. If, for example, 10 yards of cloth exchange for 18 of
linen, England will gain an advantage of 3 yards on every 15, Germany
will save 2 out of every 20.

The problem is, what are the causes which determine the proportion in
which the cloth of England and the linen of Germany will exchange for
each other?

This, therefore, is a question concerning exchangeable value. There must
be something which determines how much of one commodity another
commodity will purchase; and there is no reason to suppose that the law
of exchangeable value is more difficult of ascertainment in this case
than in other cases.

The law, however, cannot be precisely the same as in the common cases.
When two articles are produced in the immediate vicinity of one another,
so that, without expatriating himself, or moving to a distance, a
capitalist has the choice of producing one or the other, the quantities
of the two articles which will exchange for each other will be, on the
average, those which are produced by equal quantities of labour. But
this cannot be applied to the case where the two articles are produced
in two different countries; because men do not usually leave their
country, or even send their capital abroad, for the sake of those small
differences of profit which are sufficient to determine their choice of
a business, or of an investment, in their own country and neighbourhood.

The principle, that value is proportional to cost of production, being
consequently inapplicable, we must revert to a principle anterior to
that of cost of production, and from which this last flows as a
consequence,--namely, the principle of demand and supply.

In order to apply this principle, with any advantage, to the solution of
the question which now occupies us, the principle itself, and the idea
attached to the term demand, must be conceived with a precision, which
the loose manner in which the words are used generally prevents.

It is well known that the quantity of any commodity which can be
disposed of, varies with the price. The higher the price, the fewer will
be the purchasers, and the smaller the quantity sold. The lower the
price, the greater will in general be the number of purchasers, and the
greater the quantity disposed of. This is true of almost all commodities
whatever: though of some commodities, to diminish the consumption in any
given degree would require a much greater rise of price than of others.

Whatever be the commodity--the supply in any market being given, there
is some price at which the whole of the supply exactly will find
purchasers, and no more. That, whatever it be, is the price at which, by
the effect of competition, the commodity will be sold. If the price be
higher, the whole of the supply will not be disposed of, and the
sellers, by their competition, will bring down the price. If the price
be lower, there will be found purchasers for a larger supply, and the
competition of these purchasers will raise the price.

This, then, is what we mean, when we say that price, or exchangeable
value, depends on demand and supply. We should express the principle
more accurately, if we were to say, the price so regulates itself that
the demand shall be exactly sufficient to carry off the supply.

Let us now apply the principle of demand and supply, thus understood, to
the interchange of broadcloth and linen between England and Germany.

As exchangeable value in this case, as in every other, is proverbially
fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it to be when we begin;
we shall soon see whether there be any fixed point about which it
oscillates--which it has a tendency always to approach to, and to remain
at.

Let us suppose, then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls the
higgling of the market, 10 yards of cloth, in both countries, exchange
for 17 yards of linen.

The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of it which can find a
purchaser, varies, as we have before remarked, according to the price.
In Germany, the price of 10 yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen; or
whatever quantity of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of
linen. Now, that being the price, there is some particular number of
yards of cloth, which will be in demand, or will find purchasers, at
that price. There is some given quantity of cloth, more than which could
not be disposed of at that price,--less than which, at that price, would
not fully satisfy the demand. Let us suppose this quantity to be, 1000
times 10 yards.

Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the price of 17 yards
of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever quantity of money is
equivalent in England to 10 yards of cloth. There is some particular
number of yards of linen, which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the
demand, and no more. Let us suppose that this number is 1000 times 17
yards.

As 17 yards of linen are to 30 yards of cloth, so are 1000 times 17
yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the existing exchangeable value, the
linen which England requires, will exactly pay for the quantity of cloth
which, on the same terms of interchange, Germany requires. The demand on
each side is precisely sufficient to carry off the supply on the other.
The conditions required by the principle of demand and supply are
fulfilled, and the two commodities will continue to be interchanged, as
we supposed them to be, in the ratio of 17 yards of linen for 10 yards
of cloth.

But our supposition might have been different. Suppose that, at the
assumed rate of interchange, England had been disposed to consume no
greater quantity of linen than 800 times 17 yards; it is evident that,
at the rate supposed, this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1000
times 10 yards of cloth, which we have supposed Germany to require at
the assumed value. Germany would be able to procure no more than 800
times 10 yards, at that price. To procure the remaining 200, which she
would have no means of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would
offer more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of cloth; let
us suppose her to offer 18. At that price, perhaps, England would be
inclined to purchase a greater quantity of linen. She could consume,
possibly, at that price, 900 times 18 yards. On the other hand, cloth
having risen in price, the demand of Germany for it would, probably,
have diminished. If, instead of 1000 times 10 yards, she is now
contented with 900 times ten yards, these will exactly pay for the 900
times 18 yards of linen which England is willing to take at the altered
price: the demand on each side will again exactly suffice to take off
the corresponding supply; and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which,
in both countries, cloth will exchange for linen.

The converse of all this would have happened if instead of 800 times 17
yards, we had supposed that England, at the rate of 10 for 17, would
have taken 1200 times 17 yards of linen. In this case, it is England
whose demand is not fully supplied; it is England who, by bidding for
more linen, will alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage;
and 10 yards of cloth will fall, in both countries, below the value of
17 yards of linen. By this fall of cloth, or what is the same thing,
this rise of linen, the demand of Germany for cloth will increase, and
the demand of England for linen will diminish, till the rate of
interchange has so adjusted itself that the cloth and the linen will
exactly pay for another; and when once this point is attained, values
will remain as they are.

It may be considered, therefore, as established, that when two countries
trade together in two commodities, the exchangeable value of these
commodities relatively to each other will adjust itself to the
inclinations and circumstances of the consumers on both sides, in such
manner that the quantities required by each country, of the article
which it imports from its neighbour, shall be exactly sufficient to pay
for one another. As the inclinations and circumstances of consumers
cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither can the proportions in which
the two commodities will be interchanged. We know that the limits within
which the variation is confined are the ratio between their costs of
production in the one country, and the ratio between their costs of
production in the other. Ten yards of cloth cannot exchange for more
than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15. But they may exchange for
any intermediate number. The ratios, therefore, in which the advantage
of the trade may be divided between the two nations, are various. The
circumstances on which the proportionate share of each country more
remotely depends, admit only of a very general indication.

It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which the whole of
the advantage resulting from the interchange would be reaped by one
party, the other country gaining nothing at all. There is no absurdity
in the hypothesis, that of some given commodity a certain quantity is
all that is wanted at any price, and that when that quantity is
obtained, no fall in the exchangeable value would induce other consumers
to come forward, or those who are already supplied to take more. Let us
suppose that this is the case in Germany with cloth. Before her trade
with England commenced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as much labour
as 20 yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much cloth as she
wanted under any circumstances, and if she could obtain it at the rate
of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she would not consume more. Let
this fixed quantity be 1000 times 10 yards. At the rate, however, of 10
for 20, England would want more linen than would be equivalent to this
quantity of cloth. She would consequently offer a higher value for
linen; or, what is the same thing, she would offer her cloth at a
cheaper rate. But as by no lowering of the value could she prevail on
Germany to take a greater quantity of cloth, there would be no limit to
the rise of linen, or fall of cloth, until the demand of England for
linen was reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity which one
thousand times ten yards of cloth would purchase. It might be, that to
produce this diminution of the demand, a less fall would not suffice,
than one which would make 10 yards of cloth exchange for 15 of linen.
Germany would then gain the whole of the advantage, and England would be
exactly as she was before the trade commenced. It would be for the
interest, however, of Germany herself, to keep her linen a little below
the value at which it could be produced in England, in order to keep
herself from being supplanted by the home producer. England, therefore,
would always benefit in some degree by the existence of the trade,
though it might be in a very trifling one.

But in general there will not be this extreme inequality in the degree
in which the demand in the two countries varies with variations in the
price. The advantage will probably be divided equally, oftener than in
any one unequal ratio that can be named; though the division will be
much oftener, on the whole, unequal than equal.

2. We shall now examine whether the same law of interchange, which we
have shown to apply upon the supposition of barter, holds good after the
introduction of money. Mr. Ricardo found that his more general
proposition stood this test; and as the proposition which we have just
demonstrated is only a further developement of his principle, we shall
probably find that it suffers a little, by a mere change in the mode
(for it is no more) in which one commodity is exchanged against another.

We may at first make whatever supposition we will with respect to the
value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that before the opening of
the trade, the price of cloth is the same in both countries, namely, six
shillings per yard [2]. As 10 yards of cloth were supposed to exchange in
England for 5 yards of linen, in Germany for 20, we must suppose that
linen is sold in England at four shillings per yard, in Germany at
three. Cost of carriage and importer's profit are left as before, out of
consideration.

In this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, cannot yet be exported
from England into Germany. But linen can be imported from Germany into
England. It will be so, and, in the first instance, the linen will be
paid for in money.

The efflux of money from England, and its influx into Germany, will
raise money prices in the latter country, and lower them in the former.
Linen will rise in Germany above three shillings per yard, and cloth
above six shillings. Linen in England being imported from Germany, will
(since cost of carriage is not reckoned) sink to the same price as in
that country, while cloth will fall below six shillings. As soon as the
price of cloth is lower in England than in Germany, it will begin to be
exported, and the price of cloth in Germany will fall to what it is in
England. As long As the cloth exported does not suffice to pay for the
linen imported, money will continue to flow from England into Germany,
and prices generally will continue to fall in England, and rise in
Germany. By the fall, however, of cloth in England, cloth will fall in
Germany also, and the demand for it will increase. By the rise of linen
in Germany, linen must rise in England also, and the demand for it will
diminish. Although the increased exportation of cloth takes place at a
lower price, and the diminished importation of linen at a higher, yet
the total money value of the exportation would probably increase, that
of the importation diminish. As cloth fell in price and linen rose,
there would be some particular price of both articles at-which the cloth
exported, and the linen imported, would exactly pay for each other. At
this point prices would remain, because money would then cease to move
out of England into Germany. What this point might be, would entirely
depend upon the circumstances and inclinations of the purchasers on both
sides. If the fall of cloth did not much increase the demand for it in
Germany, and the rise of linen did not diminish very rapidly the demand
for it in England, much money must pass before the equilibrium is
restored; cloth would fall very much, and linen would rise, until
England, perhaps, had to pay nearly as much for it as when she produced
it for herself. But if, on the contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very
rapid increase of the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen in
Germany reduced very rapidly the demand in England from what it was
under the influence of the first cheapness produced by the opening of
the trade; the cloth would very soon suffice to pay for the linen,
little money would pass between the two countries, and England would
derive a large portion of the benefit of the trade. We have thus arrived
at precisely the same conclusion, in supposing the employment of money,
which we found to hold under the supposition of barter.

In what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from the trade, is
clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of the trade, paid six
shillings per yard for broad-cloth. She now obtains it at a lower price.
This, however, is not the whole of her advantage. As the money prices of
all her other commodities have risen, the money incomes of all her
producers have increased. This is no advantage to them in buying from
each other; because the price of what they buy has risen in the same
ratio with their means of paying for it: but it is an advantage to them
in buying any thing which has not risen; and still more, any thing which
has fallen. They therefore benefit as consumers of cloth, not merely to
the extent to which cloth has fallen, but also to the extent to which
other prices have risen. Suppose that this is one-tenth. The same
proportion of their money incomes as before, will suffice to supply
their other wants, and the remainder, being increased one-tenth in
amount, will enable them to purchase one-tenth more cloth than before,
even though cloth had not fallen. But it has fallen: so that they are
doubly gainers. If they do not choose to increase their consumption of
cloth, this does not prevent them from being gainers. They purchase the
same quantity with less money, and have more to expend upon their other
wants.

In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have fallen. Linen,
however, has fallen more than the rest; having been lowered in price, by
importation from a country where it was cheaper, whereas the others have
fallen only from the consequent efflux of money. Notwithstanding,
therefore, the general fall of money-prices, the English producers will
be exactly as they were in all other respects, while they will gain as
purchasers of linen.

The greater the efflux of money required to restore the equilibrium, the
greater will be the gain of Germany; both by the fall of cloth, and by
the rise of her general prices. The less the efflux of money requisite,
the greater will be the gain of England; because the price of linen will
continue lower, and her general prices will not be reduced so much. It
must not, however, be imagined that high money-prices are a good, and
low money-prices an evil, in themselves. But the higher the general
money-prices in any country, the greater will be that country's means
of purchasing those commodities which, being imported from abroad, are
independent of the causes which keep prices high at home.

3. We have hitherto supposed the carriage to be performed without labour
or expense. If we abandon this supposition, we must correct the
statement of the case in a slight degree. The prices of the two articles
will no longer, when the trade is opened, be the same in both countries,
nor will the articles exchange for one another at the same rate in both.
Ten yards of cloth will purchase in Germany a quantity of linen greater
than in England by a per-centage equal to the entire cost of conveyance
both of the cloth to Germany and of the linen to England. The
money-price of linen will be higher in England than in Germany, by the
cost of carriage of the linen. The money-price of cloth will be higher
in Germany than in England, by the cost of carriage of the cloth.

The expense of the carriage is evidently a deduction _pro tanto_ from
the saving of labour produced by the establishment of the trade. The two
countries together, therefore, have their gains by the trade diminished,
by the amount of the cost of carriage of both commodities. But here the
question arises, which of the two countries bears this deduction, or in
what proportion it is divided between them.

At the first inspection it would appear that each country bears its own
cost of carriage, that is, that each country pays the carriage of the
commodity which it imports. Upon this supposition, each country would
gain whatever share of the joint saving of labour would otherwise fall
to its lot, _minus_ the cost of bringing from the other country the
commodity which it imports. This solution is rendered plausible by the
circumstance just now mentioned, that the price of the commodity will be
higher in the country which imports it, than in the country which
exports it, by the amount of the cost of carriage. If linen is sold in
England at a higher price than in Germany, by a per-centage equal to the
cost of carriage of the linen, it appears obvious that England pays for
the carriage of the linen, and Germany, by parity of reason, for that of
the cloth.

But if we apply to these questions the principles already explained, we
shall see that this is not by any means a universal law: the fact may
correspond with it, or it may not.

For suppose that the prices have adjusted themselves, no matter how, and
that the imports and exports balance one another, each commodity, of
course, being dearer by the cost of carriage, in the country which
imports than in that which exports it: and suppose now that the cost of
carriage, both of the one and of the other, were suddenly and
miraculously annihilated, and that the commodities could pass from
country to country without expense. If each country bore its own cost of
carriage before, each country will save its own cost of carriage now.
Cloth, in Germany, will in that case fall exactly to what it is in
England; linen in England, to what it is in Germany.

Now this fall of price, supposing it to happen, will probably affect the
demand on both sides; and it will either affect it alike in both
countries, or it will affect it unequally. It will affect it alike, if
the fall of price does not affect the demand at all, or if it affects it
equally in both countries. If either of these results should take place,
the cloth and the linen would continue to balance each other as before:
no money would pass from one country to the other; prices in both would
continue at the point to which they had fallen, and each country would
exactly save the cost of carriage on the commodity which it imports from
the other.

But the result might be, that the fall of price might not have an effect
exactly equal, on the demand in the two countries. Suppose, for
instance, that the fall of cloth in Germany owing to the saving of the
cost of carriage, did not increase the demand for cloth in Germany; but
that the fall of linen in England from a like cause, did increase the
demand for linen in England. The linen imported would be more than could
be paid for by the cloth exported: the difference must be paid in money:
the change in the distribution of the precious metals between the two
countries would lower the price of cloth in England, (and consequently
in Germany), while it would raise the price of linen in Germany, (and
consequently in England). Germany, therefore, by the annihilation of
cost of carriage, would save in price more than the cost of carriage of
the cloth; England would save less in price than the cost of carriage of
the linen. But if by the miraculous annihilation of cost of carriage,
England would not _save_ the whole of the carriage of her imports, it
follows that England did not previously _pay_ the whole of that cost of
carriage.

Thus, the division of the cost of trade, and the division of the
advantage of trade, are governed by precisely the same principles; and
the only general proposition which can be affirmed respecting the cost
is, that it is _pro tanto_ a deduction from the advantage. It cannot
even be maintained that the cost is shared in the same proportion as the
advantage is; because the increase of the demand for a commodity as its
price falls, is not governed by any fixed law. Suppose, for instance,
that the advantage happened to be divided equally: this must be because
the greater cheapness arising from the establishment of the trade,
either did not affect the demand at all, or affected it in an equal
proportion on both sides. Now, because such is the effect of the degree
of increased cheapness resulting from importation burthened with cost of
carriage, it would not follow that the still greater degree of
cheapness, produced by the additional saving of the cost of carriage
itself, would also affect the demand of both countries in precisely an
equal degree. But we cannot be said to bear an expense, which, if saved,
would be saved to somebody else, and not to us. Two countries may have
equal shares of the clear benefit of the trade, while, if the cost of
carriage were saved, they would divide that saving unequally. If so,
they divide the gross gain in one unequal ratio, the cost in another
unequal ratio, though their shares of the cost being deducted from their
shares of the gain leave equal remainders.

4. The question naturally suggests itself, whether any country, by its
own legislative policy, can engross to itself a larger share of the
benefits of foreign commerce, than would fall to it in the natural or
spontaneous course of trade.

The answer is, it can. By taxing exports, for instance, we may, under
certain circumstances, produce a division of the advantage of the trade
more favourable to ourselves. In some cases, we may draw into our
coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not only the whole tax, but more
than the tax: in other cases, we should gain exactly the tax,--in
others, less than the tax. In this last case, a part of the tax is borne
by ourselves: possibly the whole, possibly even, as we shall show, more
than the whole.

Suppose that England taxes her export of cloth: the tax not being
supposed high enough to induce Germany to produce cloth for herself. The
price at which cloth can be sold in Germany is augmented by the tax.
This will probably diminish the quantity consumed. It may diminish it so
much, that even at the increased price, there will not be required so
great a money value as before. It may diminish it in such a ratio, that
the money value of the quantity consumed will be exactly the same as
before. Or it may not diminish it at all, or so little, that, in
consequence of the higher price, a greater money value will be purchased
than before. In this last case, England will gain, at the expense of
Germany, not only the whole amount of the duty, but more. For the money
value of her exports to Germany being increased, while her imports
remain the same, money will flow into England from Germany. The price of
cloth will rise in England, and consequently in Germany; but the price
of linen will fall in Germany, and consequently in England, We shall
export less cloth, and import more linen, till the equilibrium is
restored. It thus appears, what is at first sight somewhat remarkable,
that, by taxing her exports, England would, under some conceivable
circumstances, not only gain from her foreign customers the whole amount
of the tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She would get them
cheaper in two ways,--for she would obtain them for less money, and
would have more money to purchase them with. Germany, on the other hand,
would suffer doubly: she would have to pay for her cloth a price
increased not only by the duty, but by the influx of money into England,
while the same change in the distribution of the circulating medium
would leave her less money to purchase it with.

This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If, after the
imposition of the duty, Germany requires so diminished a quantity of
cloth, that its total money value is exactly the same as before, the
balance of trade will be undisturbed; England will gain the duty,
Germany will lose it, and nothing more. If, again, the imposition of the
duty occasions such a falling off in the demand, that Germany requires a
less pecuniary value than before, our exports will no longer pay for our
imports, money must pass from England into Germany, and Germany's share
of the advantage of the trade will be increased. By the change in the
distribution of money, cloth will fall in England; and therefore it
will, of course, fall in Germany. Thus Germany will not pay the whole of
the tax. From the same cause, linen will rise in Germany, and
consequently in England. When this alteration of prices has so adjusted
the demand, that the cloth and the linen again pay for one another, the
result is, that Germany has paid only a part of the tax, and the
remainder of what has been received into our treasury has come
indirectly out of the pockets of our own consumers of linen, who pay a
higher price for that imported commodity, in consequence of the tax on
our exports, which at the same time they, in consequence of the efflux
of money and consequent fall of prices, have smaller money incomes
wherewith to pay for the linen at that advanced price.

It is not an impossible supposition that, by taxing our exports, we
might not only gain nothing from the foreigner, the tax being paid out
of our own pockets, but might even compel our own people to pay a second
tax to the foreigner. Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for
cloth falls off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she requires
a smaller money value than before, but that the case is so different
with linen in England, that when the price rises the demand either does
not fall off at all, or so little that the money value required is
greater than before. The first effect of laying on the duty is, as
before, that the cloth exported will no longer pay for the linen
imported. Money will, therefore, flow out of England into Germany. One
effect is to raise the price of linen in Germany, and, consequently, in
England. But this, by the supposition, instead of stopping the efflux of
money, only makes it greater, because the higher the price, the greater
the money value of the linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only
be restored by the other effect, which is going on at the same time,
namely, the fall of cloth in the English, and, consequently, in the
German market. Even when cloth has fallen so low that its price with the
duty is only equal to what its price without the duty was at first, it
is not a necessary consequence that the fall will stop; for the same
amount of exportation as before will not now suffice to pay the
increased money value of the imports; and although the German consumers
have now not only cloth at the old price, but likewise increased money
incomes, it is not certain that they will be inclined to employ the
increase of their incomes in increasing their purchases of cloth. The
price of cloth, therefore, must perhaps fall, to restore the
equilibrium, more than the whole amount of the duty; Germany may be
enabled to import cloth at a lower price when it is taxed, than when it
was untaxed: and this gain she will acquire at the expense of the
English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be the real payers of
the whole of what is received at their own custom-house under the name
of duties on the export of cloth.

Such are the extremely various effects which may result to ourselves,
and to our customers, from the imposition of taxes on our exports [3]:
and the determining circumstances are of a nature so imperfectly
ascertainable, that it must be almost impossible to decide with any
certainty, even after the tax has been imposed, whether we have been
gainers by it or losers. It is certain, however, that whatever we gain,
is lost by somebody else, and there is the expense of the collection
besides: if international morality, therefore, were rightly understood
and acted upon, such taxes, as being contrary to the universal weal,
would not exist. Moreover, the imposition of such a tax frequently will,
and always may, expose a country to lose this branch of its trade
altogether, or to carry it on with diminished advantage, in consequence
of the competition of untaxed exporters from other countries, or of the
domestic producers in the country to which it exports. Even on the most
selfish principles, therefore, the benefit of such a tax is always
extremely precarious.

5. We have had an example of a tax on exports, that is, on foreigners,
falling in part on ourselves. We shall, therefore, not be surprised if
we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly falling upon
foreigners.

Instead of taxing the cloth which we export, suppose that we tax the
linen which we import. The duty which we are now supposing must not be
what is termed a protecting duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to
induce us to produce the article at home. If it had this effect, it
would destroy entirely the trade both in cloth and in linen, and both
countries would lose the whole of the advantage which they previously
gained by exchanging those commodities with one another. We suppose a
duty which might diminish the consumption of the article, but which
would not prevent us from continuing to import, as before, whatever
linen we did consume.

The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition of the tax
diminished in the slightest degree the quantity of linen consumed. For,
as the tax is levied at our own custom-house, the German exporter only
receives the same price as formerly, though the English consumer pays a
higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the quantity
bought, although a larger sum of money may be actually laid out in the
article, a smaller one will be due from England to Germany: this sum
will no longer be an equivalent for the sum due from Germany to England
for cloth, the balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices will fall
in Germany, and rise in England; linen will fall in the German market;
cloth will rise in the English. The Germans will pay higher price for
cloth, and will have smaller money incomes to buy it with; while the
English will obtain linen cheaper, that is, its price will exceed what
it previously was by less than the amount of the duty, while their means
of purchasing it will be increased by the increase of their money
incomes.

If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand, it will leave
the trade exactly as it was before. We shall import as much, and export
as much; the whole of the tax will be paid out of our own pockets.

But the imposition of a tax on a commodity, almost always diminishes the
demand more or less; and it can never, or scarcely ever increase the
demand. It may, therefore, be laid down as a principle, that a tax on
imported commodities, when it really operates as a tax, and not as a
prohibition, either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon
the foreigners who consume our goods: and that this is a mode in which a
nation may be almost sure of appropriating to itself, at the expense of
foreigners, a larger share than would otherwise belong to it of the
increase in the general productiveness of the labour and capital of the
world, which results from the interchange of commodities among nations.

It is scarcely necessary to observe, that no such advantage can result
from the duty, if it operate as a protecting duty; if it induce the
country which imposes it, to produce for herself that which she would
otherwise have imported. The saving of labour--the increase in the
general productiveness of the capital of the world--which is the effect
of commerce, and which a non-protecting duty would enable the country
imposing it to engross, could not be engrossed by a protecting duty,
because such a duty prevents any such increased production from
existing.

With a view to practical legislation, therefore, duties on importation
may be divided into two classes: those which have the effect of
encouraging some particular branch of domestic industry, and those which
have not.

The former are purely mischievous, both to the country imposing them,
and to those with whom it trades. They prevent a saving of labour and
capital, which, if permitted to be made, would be divided in some
proportion or other between the importing country and the countries
which buy what that country does or might export.

The other class of duties are those which do not encourage one mode of
procuring an article at the expense of another, but allow interchange to
take place just as if the duty did not exist--and to produce the saving
of labour which constitutes the motive to international as to all other
commerce. Of this kind, are duties on the importation of any commodity
which could not by any possibility be produced at home; and duties not
sufficiently high to counterbalance the difference of expense between
the production of the article at home, and its importation. Of the money
which is brought into the treasury of any country by taxes of this last
description, a part only is paid by the people of that country; the
remainder by the foreign consumers of their goods.

Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle as ineligible
as the former, although not precisely on the same ground. A protecting
duty can never be a cause of gain, but always and necessarily of loss,
to the country imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end.
A non-protecting duty on the contrary would, in most cases, be a source
of gain to the country imposing it, in so far as throwing part of the
weight of its taxes upon other people is a gain; but it would be a means
of gain which it could seldom be advisable to adopt, being so easily
counteracted by a precisely similar proceeding on the other side.

If England, in the case already supposed, sought to obtain for herself
more than her natural share of the advantage of the trade with Germany,
by imposing a duty upon cloth, Germany would only have to impose a duty
upon linen, sufficient to diminish the demand for that article about as
much as the demand for cloth had been diminished in England by the tax.
Things would then be as before, and each country would pay its own tax.
Unless, indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the entire advantage
of the trade; for in that case the trade, and its advantage, would cease
entirely.

There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing duties of this kind,
with a view to gain by them, in the manner which has been pointed out.
But so long as any other kind of taxes on commodities are retained, as a
source of revenue, these may often be as unobjectionable as the rest. It
is evident, moreover, that considerations of reciprocity, which are
quite unessential when the matter in debate is a protecting duty, are of
material importance when the repeal of duties of this other description
is discussed. A country cannot be expected to renounce the power of
taxing foreigners, unless foreigners will in return practise towards
itself the same forbearance. The only mode in which a country can save
itself from being a loser by the duties imposed by other countries on
its commodities, is to impose corresponding duties on theirs. Only it
must take care that these duties be not so high as to exceed all that
remains of the advantage of the trade, and put an end to importation
altogether; causing the article to be either produced at home, or
imported from another and a dearer market.

It is not necessary to apply the principles which we have stated to the
case of bounties on exportation or importation. The application is easy,
and the conclusions present nothing of particular interest or
importance.

6. Any cause which alters the exports or imports from one country into
another, alters the division of the advantage of interchange between
those two countries. Suppose the discovery of a new process, by which
some article of export, or some article not previously exported, can be
produced so cheap as to occasion a great demand for it in other
countries. This of course produces a great influx of money from other
countries, and lowers the prices of all articles imported from them,
until the increase of importation produced by this cause has restored
the equilibrium. Thus, the country which acquires a new article of
export gets its imports cheaper. This is not a case of mere alteration
in the division of the advantage; it is a new advantage created by the
discovery.

But suppose that the invention, to which the nation is indebted for this
increase of the return to its industry, comes into use also in the other
country, and that the process is one which can be as perfectly and as
cheaply performed in the one country as in the other. The new
exportation will cease; trade will revert to its old channels, the money
which flowed in will again flow out, and the country which invented the
process will lose that increase of its gain by trade, which it had
derived from the discovery.

Now the exportation of machinery comes within the case which we have
just described.

If the fact be, that by allowing to foreigners a participation in our
machinery, we enable them to produce any of our leading articles of
export, at a lower money price than we can sell those articles, it is
certain that unless we possess as great an advantage in the production
of the machinery itself as we have in the production of other articles
by means of machinery, the permitting of its exportation would alter to
our disadvantage the division of the benefit of trade. Our exports being
diminished, we should have to pay a balance in money. This would raise,
in foreign countries, the price of everything which we import from
thence: while our incomes, being reduced in money value, would render
us less able to buy those articles even if they had not risen. The
equilibrium of exports and imports would only be restored, when either
some of the latter became so dear that we could produce them cheaper at
home, or some articles not previously exported became exportable from
the fall of prices. In the one case, we lose the benefit of importation
altogether, and are obliged to produce at home, at a greater cost. In
the other case, we continue to import, but pay dearer for our imports.

Notwithstanding what has now been observed, restrictions on the
exportation of machinery are not, in our opinion, justifiable, either on
the score of international morality or of sound policy. It is evidently
the common interest of all nations that each of them should abstain from
every measure by which the aggregate wealth of the commercial world
would be diminished, although of this smaller sum total it might thereby
be enabled to attract to itself a larger share. And the time will
certainly come when nations in general will feel the importance of this
rule, and will so direct their approbation and disapprobation as to
enforce observance of it. Moreover, a country possessing machines should
consider that if a similar advantage were extended to other countries,
they would employ it above all in the production of those articles, in
which they had already the greatest natural advantages; and if the
former country would be a loser by their improvements in the production
of articles which it sells, it would gain by their improvements in those
which it buys. The exportation of machinery may, however, be a proper
subject for adjustment with other nations, on the principle of
reciprocity. Until, by the common consent of nations, all restrictions
upon trade are done away, a nation cannot be required to abolish those
from which she derives a real advantage, without stipulating for an
equivalent.

7. The case which we have just examined, is an example in how remarkable
a manner every cause which materially influences exports, operates upon
the prices of imports. According to the ancient theory of the balance of
trade, and to the associations of the generality of what are termed
practical men to this day, the sole benefit derived from commerce
consists in the exports, and imports are rather an evil than otherwise.
Political economists, seeing the folly of these views, and clearly
perceiving that the advantage of commerce consists and must consist
solely of the imports, have occasionally suffered themselves to employ
language evincing inattention to the fact, that exports, though
unimportant in themselves, are important by their influence on imports.
So real and extensive is this influence, that every new market which is
opened for any of our goods, and every increase in the demand for our
commodities in foreign countries, enables us to supply ourselves with
foreign commodities at a smaller cost.

Let us revert to our earliest and simplest example, but which displays
the real law of interchange more luminously than any formula into which
money enters; the case of simple barter. We showed, that if at the rate
of 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen, the demand of Germany amounted to
1000 times 10 yards of cloth, the two nations will trade together at
that rate of interchange, provided that the linen required in England be
exactly 1000 times 17 yards, neither more nor less. For the cloth and
the linen will then exactly pay for one another, and nobody on either
side will be obliged to offer what he has to sell at a lower rate, in
order to procure what he wants to buy.

Now if the increase of wealth and population in Germany should greatly
increase the demand in that country for cloth, the demand for linen in
England not increasing in the same ratio,--if, for instance, Germany
became willing, at the above rate, to take 1500 times 10 yards; is it
not evident, that to induce England to take in exchange for this the
only article which Germany by supposition has to give, the latter must
offer it at a rate more advantageous to England--at 18, or perhaps 19
yards, for 10 of cloth? So that the division of the advantage becomes
more and more favourable to a country, in proportion as the demand for
its commodities increases in foreign countries.

It is not even necessary that the country which takes its goods, should
supply it with any commodity whatever. Suppose that a country should be
opened to our merchants, disposed to buy from us in abundance, but which
can sell to us scarcely anything, as every commodity which it affords
could be got cheaper by us from some other quarter. Nevertheless, our
trade with this country will enable us to obtain from all other
countries their commodities at a lower price. At the first opening of
this commerce of mere exportation, we must have received in payment a
large quantity of money; for which our customer will have been
indemnified by other countries, in exchange for her commodities. Prices
must consequently be lower in all other countries, and higher with us,
than before the opening of the new branch of trade; and we therefore
obtain the commodities of other countries at a less cost, both as we pay
less money for them, and as that money is lower in value.

8. Another obvious application of the same principle will enable us to
explain, and to bring within the dominion of strict science, the
rivality of one exporting nation and another, or what is called, in the
language of the mercantile system, _underselling_: a subject which
political economists have taken little trouble to elucidate, from the
habit before alluded to of disregarding almost entirely, in their purely
scientific inquiries, those circumstances which affect the trade of a
country by operating immediately upon the exports.

Let us revert to our old example, and to our old figures. Suppose that
the trade between England and Germany in cloth and linen is established,
and that the rate of interchange is 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen.
Now suppose that there arises in another country, in Flanders, for
example, a linen manufacture; and that the same causes, the working of
which in England and Germany has made 10 yards exchange for 17, would in
England and Flanders, putting Germany out of the question, have made the
rate of interchange 10 for 18. It is evident that Germany also must give
18 yards of linen for 10 of cloth, and so carry on the trade with a
diminished share of the advantage, or lose it altogether. If the play of
demand in England and Flanders had made the rate of interchange not 10
for 18 but 10 for 21, (10 to 20 being in Germany the comparative cost of
production,) it is evident that Germany could not have maintained the
competition, and would have lost, not part of her share of the
advantage, but all advantage, and the trade itself.

It would be no answer to say, that Germany could probably still have
found the means of importing cloth from England, by exporting something
else. If she had purchased cloth with anything else, she would have
purchased it dearer: as is proved by the fact, that having free choice,
she found it most advantageous to purchase it with linen. When she could
get 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen, that was the mode in which she
could get it with least labour. Being pressed by competition, she gave
successively 17, 18, 18; but rather than give 19 yards of linen, she
perhaps would prefer to give, as costing her rather less labour, 10
yards of silk, (which we will suppose to be the quantity which in
England will purchase 10 yards of cloth.) It is obvious that, although
Germany has found the means of supplying herself with cloth, by
exporting a different article from that in which she was undersold, yet
the advantage of the trade between her and England is now shared in a
proportion much less favourable to Germany.

There is no difficulty in showing that the same series of consequences
takes place in exactly the same manner through the agency of money. The
trade in cloth and linen between England and Germany being supposed to
exist as before, Flanders produces linen at a lower price than that at
which Germany has hitherto afforded it. The exportation from Germany is
suspended; and Germany, continuing to import cloth, pays for it in
money. By so doing she lowers her own prices, and raises those in
England: she has to pay more money for cloth, and to pay it in a
currency of higher value. She thus suffers more and more as a consumer
of cloth, until by the fall of her prices she can either afford to sell
linen as cheap as Flanders, or to export some other commodity which she
could not export before. In either case, her trade resumes its course,
but with diminished advantage on her side. [4]

It is in the mode just described, that those countries which formerly
supplied Europe with manufactures, but which owed their power of doing
so not to any natural and permanent advantages, but to their more
advanced state of civilization as compared with other countries, have
lost their pre-eminence as other countries successively attained an
equal degree of civilization. Lombardy and Flanders, in the middle ages,
produced some descriptions of clothing and ornament for all Europe:
Holland, at a much later period, supplied ships, and almost all articles
which came in ships, to most other parts of the world. All these
countries have probably at this moment a much larger amount of capital
than ever they had, but having been undersold by other countries, they
have lost by far the greater part of the share which they had engrossed
to themselves of the benefit which the world derives from commerce; and
their capital yields to them in consequence a smaller proportional
return. We are aware that other causes have contributed to the same
effect, but we cannot doubt that this is a principal one.

As much as is really true of the great returns alleged to have been made
to capital during the last war, must have arisen from a similar cause.
Our exclusive command of the sea excluded from the market all by whom we
should have been undersold.

The adoption by France, Russia, the Netherlands, and the United States,
of a more severely restrictive commercial policy, subsequently to 1815,
has done great injury undoubtedly to those countries; for the duties
which they have established are intended to be, and really are, of the
class termed _protecting_; that is to say, such as force the production
of commodities by more costly processes at home, instead of suffering
them to be imported from abroad. But these duties, though chiefly
injurious to the countries imposing them, have also been highly
injurious to England. By diminishing her exportation, or preventing it
from increasing as it would otherwise have done, they have kept up the
prices of all imported commodities in England, above what those prices
would have fallen to if trade had been left free.

By another obvious application of the same reasoning, it will be seen,
that there is a real foundation for the notion, that a country may be
benefited by receiving from another country the concession of what used
to be termed commercial advantages, or by restraining its colonies from
purchasing goods of any country except itself. In the figured
illustration last used (p. 34) [not available, M.D.], it is evident,
that if England had been bound by a treaty with Germany to buy linen
exclusively from her, Germany would have retained the trade which we
supposed her to lose, and would have continued to purchase cloth at a
comparatively cheap rate from England, instead of producing it by a more
costly process at home. Suppose that England had been a colony of
Germany, and we see that by compelling colonies to deal at her shop, she
may obtain a real advantage, though of a nature which we may hazard the
assertion that the founders of our colonial policy little dreamt of.

Such an advantage, however, being gained at the expense of another
country, is, at the least, simply equivalent to a tax, or tribute. Now,
if a country has just grounds, or deems superiority of power a
sufficient ground, for exacting a tribute from another country, the most
direct mode is the best. First, because it is the most intelligible, and
has least of trick or disguise. Secondly, because it allows the people
of the country paying the tribute, to raise the money in whatever way
they consider least oppressive to themselves. Thirdly, because the
indirect mode of taxing a country, by restrictions on its commerce,
disturbs the distribution of industry most advantageous to the world at
large, and occasions a greater loss to the restricted country, and to
the other countries with which that country would have traded, than gain
to the country in whose favour the restrictions are imposed. And lastly,
because a country never could obtain such privileges from an independent
nation, and has seldom been so undisguised an oppressor as to demand
them even from its colonies, without subjecting itself to restrictions
in some degree equivalent, for the benefit of those whom it has thus
taxed. Each country, therefore, usually pays tribute to the other; and
to produce this fruitless reciprocity of exaction, the industry and
trade of both countries are diverted from the most advantageous
channels, and the return to the labour and capital of both is
diminished, in pure loss.

9. The same principles which have led to the above conclusions, also
suggest a remark of some importance with respect to the probable effect
of a change from a restricted to a comparatively free trade.

There is no doubt that our prohibiting the importation of a particular
article, which, but for the prohibition, would have been imported,
enables us to obtain our other imports at smaller cost. The article for
which we have the greatest demand, and for which our demand is most
increased by cheapness, is that which we should naturally import
preferably to any other; now of this article we should import the
quantity necessary to pay for our exports, on terms of interchange less
advantageous to us than in the case of any other commodity. If our
legislature prohibits this commodity, the other country will be obliged
to offer any other article on easier terms, in order to force a
sufficient demand for it to be an equivalent to what she purchases from
us.

The steps of the process, money being used, would be these:--We prohibit
the importation of linen. The exportation of cloth continues, but is
paid for in money. Our prices rise, those in Germany fall, until silk,
or some other article, can be imported from Germany cheaper than it can
be produced at home, and in sufficient abundance to balance the export
of cloth. Thus by sacrificing the cheapness of one commodity, we gain
the cheapness of another: but we sacrifice a greater cheapness to gain a
less, and we sacrifice cheapness in the article which we most want, and
would import by preference, while our compensation is cheapness in an
article which we either could produce more advantageously at home, or
which we have so little desire for, that it requires a species of bounty
on the article to create a demand.

Restrictions on importation do, however, tend to keep down the value and
price of our remaining imports, and to keep up the nominal or money
prices of all our other commodities, by retaining a greater quantity of
money in the country than would otherwise be there. From this it
obviously follows, that if the restrictions were removed, we should have
to pay rather more for some of the articles which we now import, while
those which we are now prevented from importing would cost us more than
might be inferred from their _present_ price in the foreign market. And
general prices would fall; to the benefit of those who have fixed sums
to receive; to the disadvantage of those who have fixed sums to pay; and
giving rise, as a general fall of prices always does, to an appearance,
though a temporary and fallacious one, of general distress. [5]

It is right to observe that the measures of the British Legislature
which have been falsely characterised as measures of free trade, must,
from their extremely insignificant extent, have produced far too little
effect in increasing our importation, to have actually led, in any
degree worth mentioning, to the results specified above.

It is of greater importance to take notice, that these effects may be
entirely obviated, if foreign countries can be prevailed upon
simultaneously to relax their restrictive systems, so as to create an
immediate increase of demand for our exports at the present prices. It
is true that exports and imports must, in the end, balance one another,
and if we increase our imports, our exports will of necessity increase
too. But it is a forced increase, produced by an efflux of money and
fall of prices; and this fall of prices being permanent, although it
would be no evil at all in a country where credit is unknown, it may be
a very serious one where large classes of persons, and the nation
itself, are under engagements to pay fixed sums of money of large
amount.

10. The only remaining application of the principle set forth in this
essay, which we think it of importance to notice specially, is the
effect produced upon a country by the annual payment of a tribute or
subsidy to a foreign power, or by the annual remittance of rents to
absentee landlords, or of any other kind of income to its absent owners.
Remittances to absentees are often very incorrectly likened in their
general character to the payment of a tribute; from which they differ in
this very material circumstance, that tribute, if not paid to a foreign
country, is not paid at all, whereas rents are paid to the landlord, and
consumed by him, even if he resides at home. The two kinds of payment,
however, have a perfect resemblance to each other in such parts of their
effects as we are about to point out.

The tribute, subsidy, or remittance, is always in goods; for, unless the
country possesses mines of the precious metals, and numbers those metals
among its regular articles of export, it cannot go on, year after year,
parting with them, and never receiving them back. When a nation has
regular payments to make in a foreign country, for which it is not to
receive any return, its exports must annually exceed its imports by the
amount of the payments which it is bound so to make. In order to force a
demand for its exports greater than its imports will suffice to pay for,
it must offer them at a rate of interchange more favourable to the
foreign country, and less so to itself, than if it had no payments to
make beyond the value of its imports. It therefore carries on the trade
with less advantage, in consequence of the obligations to which it is
subject towards persons resident in foreign countries.

The steps of the process are these. The exports and imports being in
equilibrium, suppose a treaty to be concluded, by which the country
binds itself to pay in tribute to another country, a certain sum
annually. It makes, perhaps, the first payment by a remittance of money.
This lowers prices in the paying country, and raises them in the
receiving one: the exports of the tributary country increase, its
imports diminish. When the efflux of money has altered prices in the
requisite degree, the exports exceed the imports annually, by the amount
of the tribute; and the latter, being added to the sum of the payments
due, restores the balance of payments between the two countries. The
result to the tributary country is a diminution of her share in the
advantage of foreign trade. She pays dearer for her imports, in two
ways, because she pays more money, and because that money is of higher
value, the money incomes of her inhabitants being of smaller amount.

Thus the imposition of a tribute is a double burthen to the country
paying it, and a double gain to that which receives it. The tributary
country pays to the other, first, the tax, whatever be its amount, and
next, something more, which the one country loses in the increased cost
of its imports, the other gains in the diminished cost of its own.

Absenteeism, moreover, though not burthensome in the former of these
ways, since the money is paid whether the receiver be an absentee or
not, is yet disadvantageous in the second of the two modes which have
been mentioned. Ireland pays dearer for her imports in consequence of
her absentees; a circumstance which the assailants of Mr. M'Culloch,
whether political economists or not, have not, we believe, hitherto
thought of producing against him.

11. If the question be now asked, which of the countries of the world
gains most by foreign commerce, the following will be the answer.

If by gain be meant advantage, in the most enlarged sense, that country
will generally gain the most, which stands most in need of foreign
commodities.

But if by gain be meant saving of labour and capital in obtaining the
commodities which the country desires to have, whatever they may be; the
country will gain, not in proportion to its own need of foreign
articles, but to the need which foreigners have of the articles which
itself produces.

Let us take, as an illustration of our meaning, the case of France and
England. Those two nations, in consequence of the restrictions with
which they have loaded their commercial intercourse, carry on so little
trade with each other, as may almost, regard being had to the wealth and
population of the two countries, be called none at all. If these fetters
were at once taken off, which of the two countries would be the greatest
gainer? England without doubt. There would instantly arise in France an
immense demand for the cottons, woollens, and iron of England; while
wines, brandies, and silks, the staple articles of France, are less
likely to come into general demand here, nor would the consumption of
such productions, it is probable, be so rapidly increased by the fall of
price. The fall would probably be very great before France could obtain
a vent in England for so much of her exports as would suffice to pay for
the probable amount of her imports. There would be a considerable flow
of the precious metals out of France into England. The English consumer
of French wine would not merely save the amount of the duty which that
wine now pays, but would find the wine itself falling-in prime cost,
while his means of purchasing it would be increased by the augmentation
of his own money income. The French consumer of English cottons, on the
contrary, would not long continue to be able to purchase them at the
price they now sell for in England. He would gain less, as the English
would gain more, than might appear from a mere comparison between the
present prices of commodities in the two countries.

Various consequences would flow from opening the trade between France
and England, which are not expected, either by the friends or by the
opponents of the present restrictive system. The wine-growers of France,
who imagine that free trade would relieve their distress by raising the
price of their wine, might not improbably find that price actually
lowered. On the other hand, our silk manufacturers would be surprised if
they were told that the free admission of our cottons and hardware into
the French market, would endanger _their_ branch of manufacture: yet
such might very possibly be the effect. France, it is likely, could most
advantageously pay us in silks for a portion of the large amount of
cottons and hardware which we should sell to her; and though our silk
manufacturers may now be able to compete advantageously, in some
branches of the manufacture, with their French rivals, it by no means
follows that they could do so when the efflux of money from France, and
its influx into England, had lowered the price of silk goods in the
French market, and increased all the expenses of production here.

On the whole, England probably, of all the countries of Europe, draws to
herself the largest share of the gains of international commerce:
because her exportable articles are in universal demand, and are of such
a kind that the demand increases rapidly as the price falls. Countries
which export food, have the former advantage, but not the latter. But
our own colonies, and the countries which supply us with the materials
of our manufactures, maintain a hard struggle with us for an equal share
of the advantages of their trade; for _their_ exports are also of a kind
for which there exists a most extensive demand here, and a demand
capable of almost indefinite extension by a fall of price. Contrary,
therefore, to common opinion, it is probable that our trade with the
colonies, and with the countries which send us the raw materials of our
national industry, is not more but less advantageous to us, in
proportion to its extent, than our trade with the continent of Europe.
We mean in respect to the mere amount of the return to the labour and
capital of the country; considered abstractedly from the usefulness or
agreeableness of the particular articles on which the receivers may
choose to expend it.


NOTES:

[1] _Elements of Political Economy_, by James Mill, Esq., 3rd
edit., pp. 120-1.

[2] The figures used are of course arbitrary, having no
reference to any existing prices.

[3] We have not deemed it necessary to enter minutely into all
the circumstances which might modify the results mentioned in the text.
For example, let us revert to the first case, that in which the demand
for cloth in Germany is so little affected by the rise of price in
consequence of the tax, that the quantity bought exceeds in pecuniary
value what it was before. As the German consumers lay out more money in
cloth, they have less to lay out in other things; other money prices
will fall; among the rest that of linen; and this may so increase the
demand for linen in England as to restore the equilibrium of exports and
imports without any passage of money. But England's treasury will still
gain from Germany the whole of the tax, and the English people will buy
their linen cheaper besides. Again, in the opposite case, where the tax
so diminishes the demand, that a smaller pecuniary value is required
than before. The German consumers have, therefore, more to expend in
other things; these, and among the rest linen, will rise; and this may
so diminish the demand for linen in England, as to restore the
equilibrium without the transmission of money. But the effect, as
respects the division of the advantage, is still as stated in the text.

[4] The world at large, sellers and buyers taken together, is
always a gainer by underselling. If, in the case supposed, England were
compelled by a commercial treaty to exclude the linen of Flanders from
her market, the total wealth of the world, if affected at all, would be
diminished.

For, what is the cause which enables Flanders to undersell Germany? That
Flanders, if she had the trade, would exchange linen for cloth at a rate
of interchange more advantageous to England. And why can Flanders do so?
It must be either because Flanders can produce the article with a less
comparative quantity of labour than Germany, and therefore the total
advantage to be divided between the two countries is greater in the case
of Flanders than of Germany; or else because, though the total advantage
is not greater, Flanders obtains a less share of it, her demand for
cloth being greater, at the same rate of interchange, than that of
Germany. In the former case, to exclude Flemish linen from England would
be to prevent the world at large from making a greater saving of labour
instead of a less. In the latter, the exclusion would be inefficacious
for the only end it could be intended for, viz., the benefit of Germany,
unless Flemish money were excluded from England as well as Flemish
linen. For Flanders would buy English cloth, paying for it in money,
until the fall of her prices enabled her to pay for it with something
else: and the ultimate result would be that, by the rise of prices in
England, Germany must pay a higher price for her cloth, and so lose a
part of the advantage in spite of the treaty; while England would pay
for German linen the same price indeed, but as the money incomes of her
own people would be increased, the same money price would imply a
smaller sacrifice.

[5] This last possible effect of a sudden introduction of free
trade, was pointed out in an able article on the Silk question, in a
work of too short duration, the _Parliamentary Review_.




ESSAY II.

OF THE INFLUENCE OF CONSUMPTION ON PRODUCTION.


Before the appearance of those great writers whose discoveries have
given to political economy its present comparatively scientific
character, the ideas universally entertained both by theorists and by
practical men, on the causes of national wealth, were grounded upon
certain general views, which almost all who have given any considerable
attention to the subject now justly hold to be completely erroneous.

Among the mistakes which were most pernicious in their direct
consequences, and tended in the greatest degree to prevent a just
conception of the objects of the science, or of the test to be applied
to the solution of the questions which it presents, was the immense
importance attached to consumption. The great end of legislation in
matters of national wealth, according to the prevalent opinion, was to
create consumers. A great and rapid consumption was what the producers,
of all classes and denominations, wanted, to enrich themselves and the
country. This object, under the varying names of an extensive demand, a
brisk circulation, a great expenditure of money, and sometimes _totidem
verbis_ a large consumption, was conceived to be the great condition of
prosperity.

It is not necessary, in the present state of the science, to contest
this doctrine in the most flagrantly absurd of its forms or of its
applications. The utility of a large government expenditure, for the
purpose of encouraging industry, is no longer maintained. Taxes are not
now esteemed to be "like the dews of heaven, which return again in
prolific showers." It is no longer supposed that you benefit the
producer by taking his money, provided you give it to him again in
exchange for his goods. There is nothing which impresses a person of
reflection with a stronger sense of the shallowness of the political
reasonings of the last two centuries, than the general reception so long
given to a doctrine which, if it proves anything, proves that the more
you take from the pockets of the people to spend on your own pleasures,
the richer they grow; that the man who steals money out of a shop,
provided he expends it all again at the same shop, is a benefactor to
the tradesman whom he robs, and that the same operation, repeated
sufficiently often, would make the tradesman's fortune.

In opposition to these palpable absurdities, it was triumphantly
established by political economists, that consumption never needs
encouragement. All which is produced is already consumed, either for the
purpose of reproduction or of enjoyment. The person who saves his income
is no less a consumer than he who spends it: he consumes it in a
different way; it supplies food and clothing to be consumed, tools and
materials to be used, by productive labourers. Consumption, therefore,
already takes place to the greatest extent which the amount of
production admits of; but, of the two kinds of consumption, reproductive
and unproductive, the former alone adds to the national wealth, the
latter impairs it. What is consumed for mere enjoyment, is gone; what is
consumed for reproduction, leaves commodities of equal value, commonly
with the addition of a profit. The usual effect of the attempts of
government to encourage consumption, is merely to prevent saving; that
is, to promote unproductive consumption at the expense of reproductive,
and diminish the national wealth by the very means which were intended
to increase it.

What a country wants to make it richer, is never consumption, but
production. Where there is the latter, we may be sure that there is no
want of the former. To produce, implies that the producer desires to
consume; why else should he give himself useless labour? He may not wish
to consume what he himself produces, but his motive for producing and
selling is the desire to buy. Therefore, if the producers generally
produce and sell more and more, they certainly also buy more and more.
Each may not want more of what he himself produces, but each wants more
of what some other produces; and, by producing what the other wants,
hopes to obtain what the other produces. There will never, therefore, be
a greater quantity produced, of commodities in general, than there are
consumers for. But there may be, and always are, abundance of persons
who have the inclination to become consumers of some commodity, but are
unable to satisfy their wish, because they have not the means of
producing either that, or anything to give in exchange for it. The
legislator, therefore, needs not give himself any concern about
consumption. There will always be consumption for everything which can
be produced, until the wants of all who possess the means of producing
are completely satisfied, and then production will not increase any
farther. The legislator has to look solely to two points: that no
obstacle shall exist to prevent those who have the means of producing,
from employing those means as they find most for their interest; and
that those who have not at present the means of producing, to the extent
of their desire to consume, shall have every facility afforded to their
acquiring the means, that, becoming producers, they may be enabled to
consume.

These general principles are now well understood by almost all who
profess to have studied the subject, and are disputed by few except
those who ostentatiously proclaim their contempt for such studies. We
touch upon the question, not in the hope of rendering these fundamental
truths clearer than they already are, but to perform a task, so useful
and needful, that it is to be wished it were oftener deemed part of the
business of those who direct their assaults against ancient prejudices,
--that of seeing that no scattered particles of important truth are
buried and lost in the ruins of exploded error. Every prejudice, which
has long and extensively prevailed among the educated and intelligent,
must certainly be borne out by some strong appearance of evidence; and
when it is found that the evidence does not prove the received
conclusion, it is of the highest importance to see what it does prove.
If this be thought not worth inquiring into, an error conformable to
appearances is often merely exchanged for an error contrary to
appearances; while, even if the result be truth, it is paradoxical
truth, and will have difficulty in obtaining credence while the false
appearances remain.

Let us therefore inquire into the nature of the appearances, which gave
rise to the belief that a great demand, a brisk circulation, a rapid
consumption (three equivalent expressions), are a cause of national
prosperity.

If every man produced for himself, or with his capital employed others
to produce, everything which he required, customers and their wants
would be a matter of profound indifference to him. He would be rich, if
he had produced and stored up a large supply of the articles which he
was likely to require; and poor, if he had stored up none at all, or not
enough to last until he could produce more.

The case, however, is different after the separation of employments. In
civilized society, a single producer confines himself to the production
of one commodity, or a small number of commodities; and his affluence
depends, not solely upon the quantity of his commodity which he has
produced and laid in store, but upon his success in finding purchasers
for that commodity.

It is true, therefore, of every particular producer or dealer, that
a great demand, a brisk circulation, a rapid consumption, of the
commodities which he sells at his shop or produces in his manufactory,
is important to him. The dealer whose shop is crowded with customers,
who can dispose of a product almost the very moment it is completed,
makes large profits, while his next neighbour, with an equal capital
but fewer customers, gains comparatively little.

It was natural that, in this case, as in a hundred others, the analogy
of an individual should be unduly applied to a nation: as it has been
concluded that a nation generally gains in wealth by the conquest of a
province, because an individual frequently does so by the acquisition of
an estate; and as, because an individual estimates his riches by the
quantity of money which he can command, it was long deemed an excellent
contrivance for enriching a country, to heap up artificially the
greatest possible quantity of the precious metals within it.

Let us examine, then, more closely than has usually been done, the case
from which the misleading analogy is drawn. Let us ascertain to what
extent the two cases actually resemble; what is the explanation of the
false appearance, and the real nature of the phenomenon which, being
seen indistinctly, has led to a false conclusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall propose for examination a very simple case, but the explanation
of which will suffice to clear up all other cases which fall within the
same principle. Suppose that a number of foreigners with large incomes
arrive in a country, and there expend those incomes: will this operation
be beneficial, as respects the national wealth, to the country which
receives these immigrants? Yes, say many political economists, if they
save any part of their incomes, and employ them reproductively; because
then an addition is made to the national capital, and the produce is a
clear increase of the national wealth. But if the foreigner expends all
his income unproductively, it is no benefit to the country, say they,
and for the following reason.

If the foreigner had his income remitted to him in bread and beef, coats
and shoes, and all the other articles which he was desirous to consume,
it would not be pretended that his eating, drinking, and wearing them,
on our shores rather than on his own, could be of any advantage to us in
point of wealth. Now, the case is not different if his income is
remitted to him in some one commodity, as, for instance, in money. For
whatever takes place afterwards, with a view to the supply of his wants,
is a mere exchange of equivalents; and it is impossible that a person
should ever be enriched by merely receiving an equal value in exchange
for an equal value.

When it is said that the purchases of the foreign consumer give
employment to capital which would otherwise yield no profit to its
owner, the same political economists reject this proposition as
involving the fallacy of what has been called a "general glut." They
say, that the capital, which any person has chosen to produce and to
accumulate, can always find employment, since the fact that he has
accumulated it proves that he had an unsatisfied desire; and if he
cannot find anything to produce for the wants of other consumers, he can
for his own.

It is impossible to contest these propositions as thus stated. But there
is one consideration which clearly shews, that there is something more
in the matter than is here taken into the account; and this is, that the
above reasoning tends distinctly to prove, that it does a tradesman no
good to go into his shop and buy his goods. How can he be enriched? it
might be asked. He merely receives a certain value in money, for an
equivalent value in goods. Neither does this give employment to his
capital; for there never exists more capital than can find employment,
and if one person does not buy his goods another will; or if nobody
does, there is over-production in that business, he can remove his
capital, and find employment for it in another trade.

Every one sees the fallacy of this reasoning as applied to individual
producers. Every one knows that as applied to them it has not even the
semblance of plausibility; that the wealth of a producer does in a great
measure depend upon the number of his customers, and that in general
every additional purchaser does really add to his profits. If the
reasoning, which would be so absurd if applied to individuals, be
applicable to nations, the principle on which it rests must require much
explanation and elucidation.

Let us endeavour to analyse with precision the real nature of the
advantage which a producer derives from an addition to the number of his
customers.

For this purpose, it is necessary that we should premise a single
observation on the meaning of the word capital. It is usually defined,
the food, clothing, and other articles set aside for the consumption of
the labourer, together with the materials and instruments of production.
This definition appears to us peculiarly liable to misapprehension; and
much vagueness and some narrow views have, we conceive, occasionally
resulted from its being interpreted with too mechanical an adherence to
the literal meaning of the words.

The capital, whether of an individual or of a nation, consists, we
apprehend, of all matters possessing exchangeable value, which the
individual or the nation has in his or in its possession for the purpose
of reproduction, and not for the purpose of the owner's unproductive
enjoyment. All unsold goods, therefore, constitute a part of the
national capital, and of the capital of the producer or dealer to whom
they belong. It is true that tools, materials, and the articles on which
the labourer is supported, are the only articles which are directly
subservient to production: and if I have a capital consisting of money,
or of goods in a warehouse, I can only employ them as means of
production in so far as they are capable of being exchanged for the
articles which conduce directly to that end. But the food, machinery,
&c, which will ultimately be purchased with the goods in my warehouse,
may at this moment not be in the country, may not be even in existence.
If, after having sold the goods, I hire labourers with the money, and
set them to work, I am surely employing capital, though the corn, which
in the form of bread those labourers may buy with the money, may be now
in warehouse at Dantzic, or perhaps not yet above ground.

Whatever, therefore, is destined to be employed reproductively, either
in its existing shape, or indirectly by a previous (or even subsequent)
exchange, is capital. Suppose that I have laid out all the money I
possess in wages and tools, and that the article I produce is just
completed: in the interval which elapses before I can sell the article,
realize the proceeds, and lay them out again in wages and tools, will it
be said that I have no capital? Certainly not: I have the same capital
as before, perhaps a greater, but it is locked up, as the expression is,
and not disposable.

When we have thus seen accurately what really constitutes capital, it
becomes obvious, that of the capital of a country, there is at all times
a very large proportion lying idle. The annual produce of a country is
never any thing approaching in magnitude to what it might be if all the
resources devoted to reproduction, if all the capital, in short, of the
country, were in full employment.

If every commodity on an average remained unsold for a length of time
equal to that required for its production, it is obvious that, at any
one time, no more than half the productive capital of the country would
be really performing the functions of capital. The two halves would
relieve one another, like the semichori in a Greek tragedy; or rather
the half which was in employment would be a fluctuating portion,
composed of varying parts; but the result would be, that each producer
would be able to produce every year only half as large a supply of
commodities, as he could produce if he were sure of selling them the
moment the production was completed.

This, or something like it, is however the habitual state, at every
instant, of a very large proportion of all the capitalists in the world.

The number of producers, or dealers, who turn over their capital, as the
expression is, in the shortest possible time, is very small. There are
few who have so rapid a sale for their wares, that all the goods which
their own capital, or the capital which they can borrow, enables them to
supply, are carried off as fast as they can be supplied. The majority
have not an _extent of business_, at all adequate to the amount of the
capital they dispose of. It is true that, in the communities in which
industry and commerce are practised with greatest success, the
contrivances of banking enable the possessor of a larger capital than he
can employ in his own business, to employ it productively and derive a
revenue from it notwithstanding. Yet even then, there is, of necessity,
a great quantity of capital which remains fixed in the shape of
implements, machinery, buildings, &c, whether it is only half employed,
or in complete employment: and every dealer keeps a stock in trade, to
be ready for a possible sudden demand, though he probably may not be
able to dispose of it for an indefinite period.

This perpetual non-employment of a large proportion of capital, is the
price we pay for the division of labour. The purchase is worth what it
costs; but the price is considerable.

Of the importance of the fact which has just been noticed there are
three signal proofs. One is, the large sum often given for the goodwill
of a particular business. Another is, the large rent which is paid for
shops in certain situations, near a great thoroughfare for example,
which have no advantage except that the occupier may expect a larger
body of customers, and be enabled to turn over his capital more quickly.
Another is, that in many trades, there are some dealers who sell
articles of an equal quality at a lower price than other dealers. Of
course, this is not a voluntary sacrifice of profits: they expect by the
consequent overflow of customers to turn over their capital more
quickly, and to be gainers by keeping the whole of their capital in more
constant employment, though on any given operation their gains are less.

The reasoning cited in the earlier part of this paper, to show the
uselessness of a mere purchaser or customer, for enriching a nation or
an individual, applies only to the case of dealers who have already as
much business as their capital admits of, and as rapid a sale for their
commodities as is possible. To such dealers an additional purchaser is
really of no use; for, if they are sure of selling all their commodities
the moment those commodities are on sale, it is of no consequence whether
they sell them to one person or to another. But it is questionable
whether there be any dealers in whose case this hypothesis is exactly
verified; and to the great majority it is not applicable at all. An
additional customer, to most dealers, is equivalent to an increase of
their productive capital. He enables them to convert a portion of their
capital which was lying idle (and which could never have become
productive in their hands until a customer was found) into wages and
instruments of production; and if we suppose that the commodity, unless
bought by him, would not have found a purchaser for a year after, then
all which a capital of that value can enable men to produce during a
year, is clear gain--gain to the dealer, or producer, and to the
labourers whom he will employ, and thus (if no one sustains any
corresponding loss) gain to the nation. The aggregate produce of the
country for the succeeding year is, therefore, increased; not by the
mere exchange, but by calling into activity a portion of the national
capital, which, had it not been for the exchange, would have remained
for some time longer unemployed.

Thus there are actually at all times producers and dealers, of all, or
nearly all classes, whose capital is lying partially idle, because they
have not found the means of fulfilling the condition which the division
of labour renders indispensable to the full employment of capital,--viz.,
that of exchanging their products with each other. If these persons
could find one another out, they could mutually relieve each other from
this disadvantage. Any two shopkeepers, in insufficient employment, who
agreed to deal at each other's shops so long as they could there
purchase articles of as good a quality as elsewhere, and at as low a
price, would render the nation a service. It may be said that they must
previously have dealt, to the same amount, with some other dealers; but
this is erroneous, since they could only have obtained the means of
purchasing by being previously enabled to sell. By their compact, each
would gain a customer, who would call his capital into fuller employment;
each therefore would obtain an increased produce; and they would thus be
enabled to become better customers to each other than they could be to
third parties.

It is obvious that every dealer who has not business sufficient fully to
employ his capital (which is the case with all dealers when they commence
business, and with many to the end of their lives), is in this
predicament simply for want of some one with whom to exchange his
commodities; and as there are such persons to about the same degree
probably in all trades, it is evident that if these persons sought one
another out, they have their remedy in their own hands, and by each
other's assistance might bring their capital into more full employment.

We are now qualified to define the exact nature of the benefit which a
producer or dealer derives from the acquisition of a new customer. It is
as follows:--

1. If any part of his own capital was locked up in the form of unsold
goods, producing (for a longer period or a shorter) nothing at all;
a portion of this is called into greater activity, and becomes more
constantly productive. But to this we must add some further advantages.

2. If the additional demand exceeds what can be supplied by setting at
liberty the capital which exists in the state of unsold goods; and if
the dealer has additional resources, which were productively invested
(in the public funds, for instance), but not in his own trade; he is
enabled to obtain, on a portion of these, not mere interest, but profit,
and so to gain that difference between the rate of profit and the rate
of interest, which may be considered as "wages of superintendance."

3. If all the dealer's capital is employed in his own trade, and no part
of it locked up as unsold goods, the new demand affords him additional
encouragement to save, by enabling his savings to yield him not merely
interest, but profit; and if he does not choose to save (or until he
shall have saved), it enables him to carry on an additional business
with borrowed capital, and so gain the difference between interest and
profit, or, in other words, to receive wages of superintendance on a
larger amount of capital.

This, it will be found, is a complete account of all the gains which a
dealer in any commodity can derive from an accession to the number of
those who deal with him: and it is evident to every one, that these
advantages are real and important, and that they are the cause which
induces a dealer of any kind to desire an increase of his business.

It follows from these premises, that the arrival of a new unproductive
consumer (living on his own means) in any place, be that place a
village, a town, or an entire country, is beneficial to that place, if
it causes to any of the dealers of the place any of the advantages above
enumerated, without withdrawing an equal advantage of the same kind from
any other dealer of the same place.

This accordingly is the test by which we must try all such questions,
and by which the propriety of the analogical argument, from dealing with
a tradesman to dealing with a nation, must be decided.

Let us take, for instance, as our example, Paris, which is much
frequented by strangers from various parts of the world, who, as
sojourners there, live unproductively upon their means. Let us consider
whether the presence of these persons is beneficial, in an _industrial_
point of view, to Paris.

We exclude from the consideration that portion of the strangers' incomes
which they pay to natives as direct remuneration for service, or labour
of any description. This is obviously beneficial to the country. An
increase in the funds expended in employing labour, whether that labour
be productive or unproductive, tends equally to raise wages. The
condition of the whole labouring class is, so far, benefited. It is true
that the labourers thus employed by sojourners are probably, in part or
altogether, withdrawn from productive employment. But this is far from
being an evil; for either the situation of the labouring classes is
improved, which is far more than an equivalent for a diminution in mere
production, or the rise of wages acts as a stimulus to population, and
then the number of productive labourers becomes as great as before.

To this we may add, that what the sojourners pay as wages of labour or
service (whether constant or casual), though expended unproductively by
the first possessor, may, when it passes into the hands of the receivers,
be by them saved, and invested in a productive employment. If so, a direct
addition is made to the national capital.

All this is obvious, and is sufficiently allowed by political economists;
who have invariably set apart the gains of all persons coming under the
class of domestic servants, as real advantages arising to a place from
the residence there of an increased number of unproductive consumers.

We have only to examine whether the purchases of commodities by these
unproductive consumers, confer the same kind of benefit upon the
village, town, or nation, which is bestowed upon a particular tradesman
by dealing at his shop.

Now it is obvious that the sojourners, on their arrival, confer the
benefit in question upon some dealers, who did not enjoy it before. They
purchase their food, and many other articles, from the dealers in the
place. They, therefore, call the capital of some dealers, which was
locked up in unsold goods, into more active employment. They encourage
them to save, and enable them to receive wages of superintendance upon a
larger amount of capital. These effects being undeniable, the question
is, whether the presence of the sojourners deprives any others of the
Paris dealers of a similar advantage.

It will be seen that it does; and nothing will then remain but a
comparison of the amounts.

It is obvious to all who reflect (and was shown in the paper which
precedes this) that the remittances to persons who expend their incomes
in foreign countries are, after a slight passage of the precious metals,
defrayed in commodities: and that the result commonly is, an increase of
exports and a diminution of imports, until the latter fall short of the
former by the amount of the remittances.

The arrival, therefore, of the strangers (say from England), while it
creates at Paris a market for commodities equivalent in value to their
funds, displaces in the market other commodities to an equal value. To
the extent of the increase of exports from England into France in the
way of remittance, it introduces additional commodities which, by their
cheapness, displace others formerly produced in that country. To the
extent of the diminution of imports into England from France,
commodities which existed or which were habitually produced in that
country are deprived of a market, or can only find one at a price not
sufficient to defray the cost.

It must, therefore, be a matter of mere accident, if by arriving in a
place, the new unproductive consumer causes any net advantage to its
industry, of the kind which we are now examining. Not to mention that
this, like any other change in the channels of trade, may render useless
a portion of fixed capital, and so far injure the national wealth.

A distinction, however, must here be made.

The place to which the new unproductive consumers have come, may be a
town or village, as well as a country. If a town or village, it may
either be or not be a place having an export trade.

If the place had no previous trade except with the immediate
neighbourhood, there are no exports and imports, by the new arrangement
of which, the remittance can be made. There is no capital, formerly
employed in manufacturing for the foreign market, which is now brought
into less full employment.

Yet the remittance evidently is still made in commodities, but in this
case without displacing any which were produced before. To shew this, it
is necessary to make the following remarks.

The reason why towns exist, is that _ceteris paribus_ it is convenient,
in order to save cost of carriage, that the production of commodities
should take place as far as practicable in the immediate vicinity of the
consumer. Capital finds its way so easily from town to country and from
country to town, that the amount of capital in the town will be regulated
wholly by the amount which can be employed there more conveniently than
elsewhere. Consequently the capital of a place will be such as is
sufficient

1st. To produce all commodities which from local circumstances can be
produced there at less cost than elsewhere: and if this be the case to
any great extent, it will be an exporting town. When we say _produced_,
we may add, or _stored_.

2nd. To produce and retail the commodities which are consumed by the
inhabitants of the town, and the place of whose production is in other
respects a matter of indifference. To the inhabitants of the town must
be added such dwellers in the adjoining country, as are nearer to that
place than to any other equally well furnished market.

Now, if new unproductive consumers resort to the place, it is clear that
for the latter of these two purposes, more capital will be required than
before. Consequently, if less is not required for the former purpose,
more capital will establish itself at the place.

Until this additional capital has arrived, the producers and dealers
already on the spot will enjoy great advantages. Every particle of their
own capital will be called into the most active employment. What their
capital does not enable them to supply, will be got from others at a
distance, who cannot supply it on such favourable terms; consequently
they will be in the predicament of possessing a partial monopoly
--receiving for every thing a price regulated by a higher cost of
production than they are compelled to pay. They also, being in possession
of the market, will be enabled to make a large portion of the new capital
pass through their hands, and thus to earn wages of superintendance upon
it.

If, indeed, the place from whence the strangers came, previously traded
with that where they have taken up their abode, the effect of their
arrival is, that the exports of the town will diminish, and that it will
be supplied from abroad with something which it previously produced at
home. In this way an amount of capital will be set free equal to that
required, and there will be no increase on the whole. The removal of the
court from London to Birmingham would not necessarily, though it would
probably [6], increase the amount of capital in the latter place. The
afflux of money to Birmingham, and its efflux from London, would render
it cheaper to make some articles in London for Birmingham consumption;
and to make others in London for home consumption, which were formerly
brought from Birmingham.

But instead of Birmingham, an exporting town, suppose a village, or a
town which only produced and retailed for itself and its immediate
vicinity. The remittances must come thither in the shape of money; and
though the money would not remain, but would be sent away in exchange
for commodities, it would, however, first pass through the hands of the
producers and dealers in the place, and would by them be exported in
exchange for the articles which they require--viz. the materials, tools,
and subsistence necessary for the increased production now required of
them, and articles of foreign luxury for their own increased unproductive
consumption. These articles would not displace any formerly made in the
place, but on the contrary, would forward the production of more.

Hence we may consider the following propositions as established:

1. The expenditure of absentees (the case of domestic servants excepted,)
is not necessarily any loss to the _country_ which they leave, or gain to
the _country_ which they resort to (save in the manner shown in Essay I.):
for almost every _country_ habitually exports and imports to a much
greater value than the incomes of its absentees, or of the foreign
sojourners within it.

2. But sojourners often do much good to the _town_ or village which they
resort to, and absentees harm to that which they leave. The capital of
the petty tradesman in a small town near an absentee's estate, is
deprived of the market for which it is conveniently situated, and must
resort to another to which other capitals lie nearer, and where it is
consequently outbid, and gains less; obtaining only the same price, with
greater expenses. But this evil would be equally occasioned, if, instead
of going abroad, the absentee had removed to his own capital city.

If the tradesman could, in the latter case, remove to the metropolis, or
in the former, employ himself in producing increased exports, or in
producing for home consumption articles now no longer imported, each in
the place most convenient for that operation; he would not be a loser,
though the place which he was obliged to leave might be said to lose.

Paris undoubtedly gains much by the sojourn of foreigners, while the
counteracting loss by diminution of exports from France is suffered by
the great trading and manufacturing towns, Rouen, Bordeaux, Lyons, &c,
which also suffer the principal part of the loss by importation of
articles previously produced at home. The capital thus set free, finds
its most convenient seat to be Paris, since the business to which it
must turn is the production of articles to be unproductively consumed by
the sojourners.

The great trading towns of France would undoubtedly be more flourishing,
if France were not frequented by foreigners.

Rome and Naples are perhaps purely benefited by the foreigners
sojourning there: for they have so little external trade, that their
case may resemble that of the village in our hypothesis.

Absenteeism, therefore, (except as shown in the first Essay,) is a
local, not a national evil; and the resort of foreigners, in so far as
they purchase for unproductive consumption, is not, in any commercial
country, a national, though it may be a local good.

From the considerations which we have now adduced, it is obvious what
is meant by such phrases as a _brisk demand_, and a rapid circulation.
There is a brisk demand and a rapid circulation, when goods, generally
speaking, are sold as fast as they can be produced. There is slackness,
on the contrary, and stagnation, when goods, which have been produced,
remain for a long time unsold. In the former case, the capital which has
been locked up in production is disengaged as soon as the production is
completed; and can be immediately employed in further production. In the
latter case, a large portion of the productive capital of the country is
lying in temporary inactivity.

From what has been already said, it is obvious that periods of "brisk
demand" are also the periods of greatest production: the national
capital is never called into full employment but at those periods. This,
however, is no reason for desiring such times; it is not desirable that
the whole capital of the country should be in full employment. For, the
calculations of producers and traders being of necessity imperfect,
there are always some commodities which are more or less in excess, as
there are always some which are in deficiency. If, therefore, the whole
truth were known, there would always be some classes of producers
contracting, not extending, their operations. If _all_ are endeavouring
to extend them, it is a certain proof that some general delusion is
afloat. The commonest cause of such delusion is some general, or very
extensive, rise of prices (whether caused by speculation or by the
currency) which persuades all dealers that they are growing rich. And
hence, an increase of production really takes place during the progress
of depreciation, as long as the existence of depreciation is not
suspected; and it is this which gives to the fallacies of the currency
school, principally represented by Mr. Attwood, all the little
plausibility they possess. But when the delusion vanishes and the truth
is disclosed, those whose commodities are relatively in excess must
diminish their production or be ruined: and if during the high prices
they have built mills and erected machinery, they will be likely to
repent at leisure.

In the present state of the commercial world, mercantile transactions
being carried on upon an immense scale, but the remote causes of
fluctuations in prices being very little understood, so that
unreasonable hopes and unreasonable fears alternately rule with
tyrannical sway over the minds of a majority of the mercantile public;
general eagerness to buy and general reluctance to buy, succeed one
another in a manner more or less marked, at brief intervals. Except
during short periods of transition, there is almost always either great
briskness of business or great stagnation; either the principal
producers of almost all the leading articles of industry have as many
orders as they can possibly execute, or the dealers in almost all
commodities have their warehouses full of unsold goods.

In this last ease, it is commonly said that there is a general
superabundance; and as those economists who have contested the
possibility of general superabundance, would none of them deny the
possibility or even the frequent occurrence of the phenomenon which we
have just noticed, it would seem incumbent on them to show, that the
expression to which they object is not applicable to a state of things
in which all or most commodities remain unsold, in the same sense in
which there is said to be a superabundance of any one commodity when it
remains in the warehouses of dealers for want of a market.

This is merely a question of naming, but an important one, as it seems
to us that much apparent difference of opinion has been produced by a
mere difference in the mode of describing the same facts, and that
persons who at bottom were perfectly agreed, have considered each other
as guilty of gross error, and sometimes oven misrepresentation, on this
subject.

In order to afford the explanations, with which it is necessary to take
the doctrine of the impossibility of an excess of all commodities, we
must advert for a moment to the argument by which this impossibility is
commonly maintained.

There can never, it is said, be a want of buyers for all commodities;
because whoever offers a commodity for sale, desires to obtain a
commodity in exchange for it, and is therefore a buyer by the mere fact
of his being a seller. The sellers and the buyers, for all commodities
taken together, must, by the metaphysical necessity of the case, be an
exact equipoise to each other; and if there be more sellers than buyers
of one thing, there must be more buyers than sellers for another.

This argument is evidently founded on the supposition of a state of
barter; and, on that supposition, it is perfectly incontestable. When
two persons perform an act of barter, each of them is at once a seller
and a buyer. He cannot sell without buying. Unless he chooses to buy
some other person's commodity, he does not sell his own.

If, however, we suppose that money is used, these propositions cease to
be exactly true. It must be admitted that no person desires money for
its own sake, (unless some very rare cases of misers be an exception,)
and that he who sells his commodity, receiving money in exchange, does
so with the intention of buying with that same money some other commodity.
Interchange by means of money is therefore, as has been often observed,
ultimately nothing but barter. But there is this difference--that in the
case of barter, the selling and the buying are simultaneously confounded
in one operation; you sell what you have, and buy what you want, by one
indivisible act, and you cannot do the one without doing the other. Now
the effect of the employment of money, and even the utility of it, is,
that it enables this one act of interchange to be divided into two
separate acts or operations; one of which may be performed now, and the
other a year hence, or whenever it shall be most convenient. Although he
who sells, really sells only to buy, he needs not buy at the same moment
when he sells; and he does not therefore necessarily add to the
_immediate_ demand for one commodity when he adds to the supply of
another. The buying and selling being now separated, it may very well
occur, that there may be, at some given time, a very general inclination
to sell with as little delay as possible, accompanied with an equally
general inclination to defer all purchases as long as possible. This is
always actually the case, in those periods which are described as
periods of general excess. And no one, after sufficient explanation,
will contest the possibility of general excess, in this sense of the
word. The state of things which we have just described, and which is of
no uncommon occurrence, amounts to it.

For when there is a general anxiety to sell, and a general
disinclination to buy, commodities of all kinds remain for a long time
unsold, and those which find an immediate market, do so at a very low
price. If it be said that when all commodities fall in price, the fall
is of no consequence, since mere money price is not material while the
relative value of all commodities remains the same, we answer that this
would be true if the low prices were to last for ever. But as it is
certain that prices will rise again sooner or later, the person who is
obliged by necessity to sell his commodity at a low money price is
really a sufferer, the money he receives sinking shortly to its ordinary
value. Every person, therefore, delays selling if he can, keeping his
capital unproductive in the mean time, and sustaining the consequent
loss of interest. There is stagnation to those who are not obliged to
sell, and distress to those who are.

It is true that this state can be only temporary, and must even be
succeeded by a reaction of corresponding violence, since those who have
sold without buying will certainly buy at last, and there will then be
more buyers than sellers. But although the general over-supply is of
necessity only temporary, this is no more than may be said of every
partial over-supply. An overstocked state of the market is always
temporary, and is generally followed by a more than common briskness of
demand.

In order to render the argument for the impossibility of an excess of
all commodities applicable to the case in which a circulating medium is
employed, money must itself be considered as a commodity. It must,
undoubtedly, be admitted that there cannot be an excess of all other
commodities, and an excess of money at the same time.

But those who have, at periods such as we have described, affirmed that
there was an excess of all commodities, never pretended that money was
one of these commodities; they held that there was not an excess, but
a deficiency of the circulating medium. What they called a general
superabundance, was not a superabundance of commodities relatively to
commodities, but a superabundance of all commodities relatively to
money. What it amounted to was, that persons in general, at that
particular time, from a general expectation of being called upon to meet
sudden demands, liked better to possess money than any other commodity.
Money, consequently, was in request, and all other commodities were in
comparative disrepute. In extreme cases, money is collected in masses,
and hoarded; in the milder cases, people merely defer parting with their
money, or coming under any new engagements to part with it. But the
result is, that all commodities fall in price, or become unsaleable.
When this happens to one single commodity, there is said to be a
superabundance of that commodity; and if that be a proper expression,
there would seem to be in the nature of the case no particular
impropriety in saying that there is a superabundance of all or most
commodities, when all or most of them are in this same predicament.

It is, however, of the utmost importance to observe that excess of all
commodities, in the only sense in which it is possible, means only a
temporary fall in their value relatively to money. To suppose that the
markets for all commodities could, in any other sense than this, be
overstocked, involves the absurdity that commodities may fall in value
relatively to themselves; or that, of two commodities, each can fall
relatively to the other, A becoming equivalent to B-_x_, and B to A-_x_,
at the same time. And it is, perhaps, a sufficient reason for not using
phrases of this description, that they suggest the idea of excessive
production. A want of market for one article may arise from excessive
production of that article; but when commodities in general become
unsaleable, it is from a very different cause; there cannot be excessive
production of commodities in general.

The argument against the possibility of general over-production is quite
conclusive, so far as it applies to the doctrine that a country may
accumulate capital too fast; that produce in general may, by increasing
faster than the demand for it, reduce all producers to distress. This
proposition, strange to say, was almost a received doctrine as lately as
thirty years ago; and the merit of those who have exploded it is much
greater than might be inferred from the extreme obviousness of its
absurdity when it is stated in its native simplicity. It is true that if
all the wants of all the inhabitants of a country were fully satisfied,
no further capital could find useful employment; but, in that case, none
would be accumulated. So long as there remain any persons not possessed,
we do not say of subsistence, but of the most refined luxuries, and who
would work to possess them, there is employment for capital; and if the
commodities which these persons want are not produced and placed at
their disposal, it can only be because capital does not exist, disposable
for the purpose of employing, if not any other labourers, those very
labourers themselves, in producing the articles for their own consumption.
Nothing can be more chimerical than the fear that the accumulation of
capital should produce poverty and not wealth, or that it will ever take
place too fast for its own end. Nothing is more true than that it is
produce which constitutes the market for produce, and that every increase
of production, if distributed without miscalculation among all kinds of
produce in the proportion which private interest would dictate, creates,
or rather constitutes, its own demand.

This is the truth which the deniers of general over-production have
seized and enforced; nor is it pretended that anything has been added
to it, or subtracted from it, in the present disquisition. But it is
thought that those who receive the doctrine accompanied with the
explanations which we have given, will understand, more clearly than
before, what is, and what is not, implied in it; and will see that, when
properly understood, it in no way contradicts those obvious facts which
are universally known and admitted to be not only of possible, but of
actual and even frequent occurrence. The doctrine in question only
appears a paradox, because it has usually been so expressed as
apparently to contradict these well-known facts; which, however, were
equally well known to the authors of the doctrine, who, therefore, can
only have adopted from inadvertence any form of expression which could
to a candid person appear inconsistent with it. The essentials of the
doctrine are preserved when it is allowed that there cannot be permanent
excess of production, or of accumulation; though it be at the same time
admitted, that as there may be a temporary excess of any one article
considered separately, so may there of commodities generally, not in
consequence of over-production, but of a want of commercial confidence.


NOTE:

[6] Probably; because most articles of an ornamental description being
still required from the same makers, these makers, with their capital,
would probably follow their customers, Besides, from place to place
within the same country, most persons will lather change their
habitation than their employment. But the moving on this score would be
reciprocal.




ESSAY III.

ON THE WORDS PRODUCTIVE AND UNPRODUCTIVE.


It would probably be difficult to point out any two words, respecting
the proper use of which political economists have been more divided,
than they have been concerning the two words _productive_ and
_unproductive_; whether considered as applied to _labour_, to
_consumption_, or to _expenditure_.

Although this is a question solely of nomenclature, it is one of
sufficient importance to be worth another attempt to settle it
satisfactorily. For, although writers on political economy have not
agreed in the ideas which they were accustomed to annex to these terms,
the terms have generally been employed to denote ideas of very great
importance, and it is impossible that some vagueness should not have
been thrown upon the ideas themselves by looseness in the use of the
words by which they are habitually designated. Further, so long as the
pedantic objection to the introduction of new technical terms continues,
accurate thinkers on moral and political subjects are limited to a very
scanty vocabulary for the expression of their ideas. It therefore is of
great importance that the words with which mankind are familiar, should
be turned to the greatest possible advantage as instruments of thought;
that one word should not be used as the sign of an idea which is already
sufficiently expressed by another word; and that words which are
required to denote ideas of great importance, should not be usurped for
the expression of such as are comparatively insignificant.

The phrases _productive labour_, and _productive consumption_, have been
employed by some writers on political economy with very great latitude.
They have considered, and classed, as productive labour and productive
consumption, all labour which serves any _useful_ purpose--all
consumption which is not _waste_. Mr. M'Culloch has asserted, _totidem
verbis_, that the labour of Madame Pasta was as well entitled to be
called productive labour as that of a cotton spinner.

Employed in this sense, the words _productive_ and _unproductive_ are
superfluous, since the words _useful_ and _agreeable_ on the one hand,
_useless_ and _worthless_ on the other, are quite sufficient to express
all the ideas to which the words _productive_ and _unproductive_ are
here applied.

This use of the terms, therefore, is subversive of the ends of language.

Those writers who have employed the words in a more limited sense, have
usually understood by productive or unproductive labour, labour which is
productive of wealth, or unproductive of wealth. But what is wealth? And
here the words productive and unproductive have been affected with
additional ambiguities, corresponding to the different extension which
different writers have given to the term wealth.

Some have given the name of wealth to _all things_ which tend to the use
or enjoyment of mankind, and which possess exchangeable value. This last
clause is added to exclude air, the light of the sun, and any other
things which can be obtained in unlimited quantity without labour or
sacrifice; together with all such things as, though produced by labour,
are not held in sufficient general estimation to command any price in
the market.

But when this definition came to be explained, many persons were
disposed to interpret "_all things_ which tend to the use or enjoyment
of man," as implying only all _material_ things. _Immaterial_ products
they refused to consider as wealth; and labour or expenditure which
yielded nothing but immaterial products, they characterised as
unproductive labour and unproductive expenditure.

To this it was, or might have been, answered, that according to this
classification, a carpenter's labour at his trade is productive labour,
but the same individual's labour in learning his trade was unproductive
labour. Yet it is obvious that, on both occasions, his labour tended
exclusively to what is allowed to be production: the one was equally
indispensable with the other, to the ultimate result. Further, if we
adopted the above definition, we should be obliged to say that a nation
whose artisans were twice as skilful as those of another nation, was
not, _ceteris paribus_, more wealthy; although it is evident that every
one of the results of wealth, and everything for the sake of which
wealth is desired, would be possessed by the former country in a higher
degree than by the latter.

Every classification according to which a basket of cherries, gathered
and eaten the next minute, are called wealth, while that title is denied
to the acquired skill of those who are acknowledged to be productive
labourers, is a purely arbitrary division, and does not conduce to the
ends for which classification and nomenclature are designed.

In order to get over all difficulties, some political economists seem
disposed to make the terms express a distinction sufficiently definite
indeed, but more completely arbitrary, and having less foundation in
nature, than any of the former. They will not allow to any labour or to
any expenditure the name of productive, unless the produce which it
yields returns into the hands of the very person who made the outlay.
Hedging and ditching they term productive labour, though those
operations conduce to production only indirectly, by protecting the
produce from destruction; but the necessary expenses incurred by a
government for the protection of property are, they insist upon it,
consumed unproductively: though, as has been well pointed out by Mr.
M'Culloch, these expenses, in their relation to the national wealth, are
exactly analogous to the wages of a hedger or a ditcher. The only
difference is, that the farmer, who pays for the hedging and ditching,
is the person to whom the consequent increase of production accrues,
while the government, which is at the expense of police officers and
courts of justice, does not, as a necessary consequence, get back into
its own coffers the increase of the national wealth resulting from the
security of property.

It would be endless to point out the oddities and incongruities which
result from this classification. Whether we take the words wealth and
production in the largest, or in the most restricted sense in which they
have ever yet been employed, nobody will dispute that roads, bridges,
and canals, contribute in an eminent degree, and in a very direct
manner, to the increase of production and wealth. The labour and
pecuniary resources employed in their construction would, according to
the above theory, be considered productive, if every occupier of land
were compelled by law to construct so much of the road, or canal, as
passes through his own farm. If, instead of this, the government makes
the road, and throws it open to the public toll-free, the labour and
expenditure would be, on the above system, clearly unproductive. But if
the government, or an association of individuals, made the road, and
imposed a toll to defray the expense, we do not see how these writers
could refuse to the outlay the title of productive expenditure. It would
follow, that the very same labour and expense, if given gratuitously,
must be called unproductive, which, if a charge had been made for it,
would have been called productive.

When these consequences of the purely arbitrary classification to which
we allude have been pointed out and complained of, the only answer which
we have ever seen made to the objection is, that the line of demarcation
must be drawn somewhere, and that in every classification there are
intermediate cases, which might have been included, with almost equal
propriety, either in the one class or in the other.

This answer appears to us to indicate the want of a sufficiently
accurate and discriminating perception, what is the kind of inaccuracy
which generally cannot be avoided in a classification, and what is that
other kind of inaccuracy, from which it always may be, and should be,
exempt.

The classes themselves may be, mentally speaking, perfectly definite,
though it may not always be easy to say to which of them a particular
object belongs. When it is uncertain in which of two classes an object
should be placed, if the classification be properly made, and properly
expressed, the uncertainty can turn only upon a matter of fact. It is
uncertain to which class the object belongs, because it is doubtful
whether it possesses in a greater degree the characteristics of the one
class or those of the other. But the characteristics themselves may be
defined and distinguished with the nicest exactness, and always ought to
be so. Especially ought they in a case like the present, because here it
is only the distinction between the ideas which is of any importance.
That we should be able with ease to portion out all employments between
the two classes, does not happen to be of any particular consequence.

It is frequently said that classification is a mere affair of
convenience. This assertion is true in one sense, but not if its meaning
be, that the most proper classification is that in which it is easiest
to say whether an object belongs to one class or to the other. The use
of classification is, to fix attention upon the distinctions which exist
among things; and that is the best classification, which is founded upon
the most important distinctions, whatever be the facilities which it may
afford of ticketing and arranging the different objects which exist in
nature. In fixing, therefore, the meaning of the words productive and
unproductive, we ought to endeavour to render them significative of the
most important distinctions which, without too glaring a violation of
received usage, they can be made to express.

We ought further, when we are restricted to the employment of old words,
to endeavour as far as possible that it shall not be necessary to
struggle against the old associations with those words. We should, if
possible, give the words such a meaning, that the propositions in which
people are accustomed to use them, shall as far as possible still be
true; and that the feelings habitually excited by them, shall be such as
the things to which we mean to appropriate them ought to excite.

We shall endeavour to unite these conditions in the result of the
following enquiry.

In whatever manner political economists may have settled the definition
of productive and unproductive labour or consumption, the consequences
which they have drawn from the definition are nearly the same. In
proportion to the amount of the productive labour and consumption of
a country, the country, they all allow, is enriched: in proportion to
the amount of the unproductive labour and consumption, the country is
impoverished. Productive expenditure they are accustomed to view as
a gain; unproductive expenditure, however useful, as a sacrifice.
Unproductive expenditure of what was destined to be expended
productively, they always characterise as a squandering of resources,
and call it profusion and prodigality. The productive expenditure of
that which might, without encroaching upon capital, be expended
unproductively, is called saving, economy, frugality. Want, misery, and
starvation, are described as the lot of a nation which annually employs
less and less of its labour and resources in production; growing comfort
and opulence as the result of an annual increase in the quantity of
wealth so employed.

Let us then examine what qualities in expenditure, and in the employment
of labour, are those from which all the consequences above mentioned
really flow.

The end to which all labour and all expenditure are directed, is
twofold. Sometimes it is _enjoyment_ immediately; the fulfilment of
those desires, the gratification of which is wished for on its own
account. Whenever labour or expense is not incurred _immediately_ for
the sake of enjoyment, and is yet not absolutely wasted, it must be
incurred for the purpose of enjoyment _indirectly_ or mediately; by
either repairing and perpetuating, or adding, to the _permanent sources_
of enjoyment.

Sources of enjoyment may be accumulated and stored up; enjoyment itself
cannot. The wealth of a country consists of the sum total of the
permanent sources of enjoyment, whether material or immaterial, contained
in it: and labour or expenditure which tends to augment or to keep up
these permanent sources, should, we conceive, be termed productive.

Labour which is employed for the purpose of directly affording
enjoyment, such as the labour of a performer on a musical instrument, we
term unproductive labour. Whatever is consumed by such a performer, we
consider as unproductively consumed: the accumulated total of the
sources of enjoyment which the nation possesses, is diminished by the
amount of what he has consumed: whereas, if it had been given to him in
exchange for his services in producing food or clothing, the total of
the permanent sources of enjoyment in the country might have been not
diminished but increased.

The performer on the musical instrument then is, so far as respects that
act, not a productive, but an unproductive labourer. But what shall we
say of the workman who made the musical instrument? He, most persons
would say, is a productive labourer; and with reason; because the
musical instrument is a permanent source of enjoyment, which does not
begin and end with the enjoying, and therefore admits of being
accumulated.

But the _skill_ of the musician is a permanent source of enjoyment, as
well as the instrument which he plays upon: and although skill is not a
material object, but a quality of an object, viz., of the hands and mind
of the performer; nevertheless skill possesses exchangeable value, is
acquired by labour and capital, and is capable of being stored and
accumulated. Skill, therefore, must be considered as wealth; and the
labour and funds employed in acquiring skill in anything tending to the
advantage or pleasure of mankind, must be considered to be productively
employed and expended.

The skill of a productive labourer is analogous to the machinery he
works with: neither of them is enjoyment, nor conduces directly to it,
but both conduce indirectly to it, and both in the same way. If a
spinning-jenny be wealth, the spinner's skill is also wealth. If the
mechanic who made the spinning-jenny laboured productively, the spinner
also laboured productively when he was learning his trade: and what they
both consumed was consumed productively, that is to say, its consumption
did not tend to diminish, but to increase the sum of the permanent
sources of enjoyment in the country, by effecting a new creation of
those sources, more than equal to the amount of the consumption.

The skill of a tailor, and the implements he employs, contribute in the
same way to the convenience of him who wears the coat, namely, a remote
way: it is the coat itself which contributes immediately. The skill of
Madame Pasta, and the building and decorations which aid the effect of
her performance, contribute in the same way to the enjoyment of the
audience, namely, an immediate way, without any intermediate
instrumentality. The building and decorations are consumed
unproductively, and Madame Pasta labours and consumes unproductively;
for the building is used and worn out, and Madame Pasta performs,
immediately for the spectators' enjoyment, and without leaving, as a
consequence of the performance, any permanent result possessing
exchangeable value: consequently the epithet unproductive must be
equally applied to the gradual wearing out of the bricks and mortar, the
nightly consumption of the more perishable "properties" of the theatre,
the labour of Madame Pasta in acting, and of the orchestra in playing.
But notwithstanding this, the architect who built the theatre was a
productive labourer; so were the producers of the perishable articles;
so were those who constructed the musical instruments; and so, we must
be permitted to add, were those who instructed the musicians, and all
persons who, by the instructions which they may have given to Madame
Pasta, contributed to the formation of her talent. All these persons
contributed to the enjoyment of the audience in the same way, and that
a remote way, viz., by the production of a _permanent source of
enjoyment_.

The difference between this case, and the case of the cotton spinner
already adverted to, is this. The spinning-jenny, and the skill of the
cotton spinner, are not only the result of productive labour, but are
themselves productively consumed. The musical instrument and the skill
of the musician are equally the result of productive labour, but are
themselves unproductively consumed.

Let us now consider what kinds of labour, and of consumption or
expenditure, will be classed as productive, and what as unproductive,
according to this rule.

The following are always productive:

Labour and expenditure, of which the direct object or effect is the
creation of some material product useful or agreeable to mankind.

Labour and expenditure, of which the direct effect and object are, to
endow human or other animated beings with faculties or qualities useful
or agreeable to mankind, and possessing exchangeable value.

Labour and expenditure, which without having for their direct object the
creation of any useful material product or bodily or mental faculty or
quality, yet tend indirectly to promote one or other of those ends, and
are exerted or incurred solely for that purpose.

The following are partly productive and partly unproductive, and cannot
with propriety be ranged decidedly with either class:

Labour or expenditure which does indeed create, or promote the creation
of, some useful material product or bodily or mental faculty or quality,
but which is not incurred or exerted for that sole end; having also for
another, and perhaps its principal end, enjoyment, or the promotion of
enjoyment.

Such are the labour of the judge, the legislator, the police-officer,
the soldier; and the expenditure incurred for their support. These
functionaries protect and secure mankind in the exclusive possession of
such material products or acquired faculties as belong to them; and by
the security which they so confer, they indirectly increase production
in a degree far more than equivalent to the expense which is necessary
for their maintenance. But this is not the only purpose for which they
exist; they protect mankind, not merely in the possession of their
permanent resources, but also in their actual enjoyments; and so far,
although highly useful, they cannot, conformably to the distinction
which we have attempted to lay down, be considered productive labourers.

Such, also, are the labour and the wages of domestic servants. Such
persons are entertained mainly as subservient to mere enjoyment; but
most of them occasionally, and some habitually, render services which
must be considered as of a productive nature; such as that of cookery,
the last stage in the manufacture of food; or gardening, a branch of
agriculture.

The following are wholly unproductive:

Labour exerted, and expenditure incurred, directly and exclusively for
the purpose of enjoyment, and not calling into existence anything,
whether substance or quality, but such as begins and perishes in the
enjoyment.

Labour exerted and expenditure incurred uselessly, or in pure waste, and
yielding neither direct enjoyment nor permanent sources of enjoyment.

It may be objected, that expenditure incurred even for pure enjoyment
promotes production indirectly, by inciting to exertion. Thus the view
of the splendour of a rich establishment is supposed by some writers to
produce upon the mind of an indigent spectator an earnest desire of
enjoying the same luxuries, and a consequent purpose of working with
vigour and diligence, and saving from his earnings, thus increasing the
productive capital of the country.

It is true that mankind are, for the most part, excited to productive
industry solely by the desire of subsequently consuming the result of
their labour and accumulation. The consumption called unproductive,
viz., that of which the direct result is enjoyment, is in reality the
end, to which production is only the means; and a desire for the end,
is what alone impels any one to have recourse to the means.

But, notwithstanding this, it is of the greatest importance to mark the
distinction between the labour and the consumption which have enjoyment
for their immediate end, and the labour and the consumption of which the
immediate end is reproduction. Though the sight of the former may still
further stimulate that desire for the enjoyments afforded by wealth,
which the mere knowledge, without the immediate view, would suffice to
excite (and without dwelling on the consideration that if the example
of a large expenditure excites one individual to accumulation, it
encourages two to prodigal expense); still, if we look only to the
effects which are intended, or to those which immediately follow from
the consumption, and whose connexion with it can be distinctly traced,
it evidently renders a country poorer in the permanent sources of
enjoyment; while reproductive consumption leaves the country richer in
these same sources. Besides, if what is spent for mere pleasure promotes
indirectly the increase of wealth, it can only be by inducing others
_not_ to expend on mere pleasure.

Before quitting the subject, one more observation should be added. It
must not be supposed that what is expended upon unproductive labourers
is necessarily, the whole of it, unproductively consumed. The
unproductive labourers may save part of their wages, and invest them in
a productive employment.

It is not unusual to speak of what is paid in wages to a labourer as
being thereby _consumed_, as if all profit and loss to the nation were
to be seen in the capitalist's account-book. What is paid for productive
labour is said to be productively consumed; what is paid for
unproductive labour is said to be consumed unproductively. It would be
proper to say, not that it is productively or unproductively _consumed_,
but productively or unproductively _expended_; otherwise, we shall be
obliged to say that it is consumed twice over; the first time
unproductively, perhaps, and the second, it may be, productively.

To pronounce in which way the wages of the labourer are consumed, we
must follow them into the labourer's own hands. As much as is necessary
to keep the productive labourer in perfect health and fitness for his
employment, may be said to be consumed productively. To this should be
added what he expends in rearing children to the age at which they
become capable of productive industry. If the state of the market for
labour be such as to afford him more, this he may either save, or, as
the common expression is, he may spend it. If he saves any portion, this
(unless it be merely hoarded) he intends to employ productively, and it
will be productively consumed. If he spends it, the consumption is for
enjoyment immediately, and is therefore unproductive.

This suggests another correction in the established language. Political
economists generally define the "net produce" to be that portion of the
gross annual produce of a country which remains after replacing the
capital annually consumed. This, as they proceed to explain, consists of
profits and rent; wages being included in the other portion of the gross
produce, that which goes to replace capital. After this definition, they
usually proceed to tell us that the net produce, and that alone,
constitutes the fund from which a nation can accumulate, and add to its
capital, as also that which it can, without retrograding in wealth,
expend unproductively, or for enjoyment. Now, it is impossible that both
the above propositions can be true. If the net produce is that which
remains after replacing capital, then net produce is not the only fund
out of which accumulation may be made: for accumulation may be made from
wages; this is in all countries one of the great sources, and in countries
like America perhaps the greatest source of accumulation. If, on the other
hand, it is desirable to reserve the name of net produce to denote the
fund available for accumulation or for unproductive consumption, we must
define net produce differently. The definition which appears the best
adapted to render the ordinary doctrines relating to net produce true,
would be this:

The net produce of a country is whatever is annually produced beyond
what is necessary for maintaining the stock of materials and implements
unimpaired, for keeping all productive labourers alive and in condition
for work, and for just keeping up their numbers without increase. What
is required for these purposes, or, in other words, for keeping up the
productive resources of the country, cannot be diverted from its
destination without rendering the nation as a whole poorer. But all
which is produced beyond this, whether it be in the hands of the
labourer, of the capitalist, or of any of the numerous varieties of
rent-owners, may be taken for immediate enjoyment, without prejudice to
the productive resources of the community; and whatever part of it is
not so taken, constitutes a clear addition to the national capital, or
to the permanent sources of enjoyment.




ESSAY IV.

ON PROFITS, AND INTEREST.


The profits of stock are the surplus which remains to the capitalist
after replacing his capital: and the ratio which that surplus bears to
the capital itself, is the _rate_ of profit.

This being the definition of profits, it might seem natural to adopt, as
a sufficient theory in regard to the rate of profit, that it depends
upon the productive power of capital. Some countries are favoured beyond
others, either by nature or art, in the means of production. If the
powers of the soil, or of machinery, enable capital to produce what is
necessary for replacing itself, and twenty per cent more, profits will
be twenty per cent; and so on.

This, accordingly, is a popular mode of speaking on the subject of
profits; but it has only the semblance, not the reality, of an
explanation. The "productive power of capital," though a common, and,
for some purposes, a convenient expression, is a delusive one. Capital,
strictly speaking, has no productive power. The only productive power is
that of labour; assisted, no doubt, by tools, and acting upon materials.
That portion of capital which consists of tools and materials, may be
said, perhaps, without any great impropriety, to have a productive
power, because they contribute, along with labour, to the accomplishment
of production. But that portion of capital which consists of wages, has
no productive power of its own. Wages have no productive power; they are
the price of a productive power. Wages do not contribute, along with
labour, to the production of commodities, no more than the price of
tools contributes along with the tools themselves. If labour could be
had without purchase, wages might be dispensed with. That portion of
capital which is expended in the wages of labour, is only the means by
which the capitalist procures to himself, in the way of purchase, the
use of that labour in which the power of production really resides.

The proper view of capital is, that anything whatever, which a person
possesses, constitutes his capital, provided he is able, and intends,
to employ it, not in consumption for the purpose of enjoyment, but in
possessing himself of the means of production, with the intention of
employing those means productively. Now the means of production are
labour, implements, and materials. The only productive power which
anywhere exists, is the productive power of labour, implements, and
materials.

We need not, on this account, altogether proscribe the expression,
"productive power of capital;" but we should carefully note, that it can
only mean the quantity of real productive power which the capitalist,
by means of his capital, can command. This may change, though the
productive power of labour remains the same. Wages, for example, may
rise; and then, although all the circumstances of production remain
exactly as they were before, the same capital will yield a less return,
because it will set in motion a less quantity of productive labour.

We may, therefore, consider the capital of a producer as measured by the
means which he has of possessing himself of the different essentials of
production: namely, labour, and the various articles which labour
requires as materials, or of which it avails itself as aids.

The ratio between the price which he has to pay for these means of
production, and the produce which they enable him to raise, is the
_rate_ of his _profit_. If he must give for labour and tools four-fifths
of what they will produce, the remaining fifth will constitute his
profit, and will give him a rate of one in four, or twenty-five per
cent, on his outlay.

It is necessary here to remark, what cannot indeed by any possibility be
misunderstood, but might possibly be overlooked in cases where attention
to it is indispensable, viz., that we are speaking now of the _rate_ of
profit, not the gross profit. If the capital of the country is very
great, a profit of only five per cent upon it may be much more ample,
may support a much larger number of capitalists and their families in
much greater affluence, than a profit of twenty-five per cent on the
comparatively small capital of a poor country. The _gross_ profit of a
country is the actual amount of necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries,
which are divided among its capitalists: but whether this be large or
small, the rate of profit may be just the same. The rate of profit is
the proportion which the profit bears to the capital; which the surplus
produce after replacing the outlay, bears to the outlay. In short, if we
compare the _price paid_ for labour and tools with what that labour and
those tools will _produce_, from this ratio we may calculate the rate of
profit.

As the gross profit may be very different though the rate of profit be
the same; so also may the absolute price paid for labour and tools be
very different, and yet the proportion between the price paid and the
produce obtained may be just the same. For greater clearness, let us
omit, for the present, the consideration of tools, materials, &c, and
conceive production as the result solely of labour. In a certain
country, let us suppose, the wages of each labourer are one quarter of
wheat per year, and 100 men can produce, in one year, 120 quarters. Here
the price paid for labour is to the produce of that labour as 100 to
120, and profits are 20 per cent. Suppose now that, in another country,
wages are just double what they are in the country before supposed;
namely, two quarters of wheat per year, for each labourer. But suppose,
likewise, that the productive power of labour is double what it is in
the first country; that by the greater fertility of the soil, 100 men
can produce 240 quarters, instead of 120 as before. Here it is obvious,
that the real price paid for labour is twice as great in the one country
as in the other; but the produce being also twice as great, the ratio
between the price of labour and the produce of labour is still exactly
the same: an outlay of 200 quarters gives a return of 240 quarters, and
profits, as before, are 20 per cent.

Profits, then (meaning not gross profits, but the rate of profit),
depend (not upon the price of labour, tools, and materials--but) upon
the ratio between the price of labour, tools, and materials, and the
produce of them: upon the proportionate share of the produce of industry
which it is necessary to offer, in order to purchase that industry and
the means of setting it in motion.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have hitherto spoken of tools, buildings, and materials, as
essentials of production, co-ordinate with labour, and equally
indispensable with it. This is true; but it is also true that tools,
buildings, and materials, are themselves the produce of labour; and that
the only cause (cases of monopoly excepted) of their having any value,
is the labour which is required for their production.

If tools, buildings, and materials were the spontaneous gifts of nature,
requiring no labour either in order to produce or to appropriate them;
and if they were thus bestowed upon mankind in indefinite quantity, and
without the possibility of being monopolized; they would still be as
useful, as indispensable as they now are; but since they could, like air
and the light of the sun, be obtained without cost or sacrifice, they
would form no part of the expenses of production, and no portion of the
produce would be required to be set aside in order to replace the outlay
made for these purposes. The whole produce, therefore, after replacing
the wages of labour, would be clear profit to the capitalist.

Labour alone is the primary means of production; "the original
purchase-money which has been paid for everything." Tools and materials,
like other things, have originally cost nothing but labour; and have a
value in the market only because wages have been paid for them. The
labour employed in making the tools and materials being added to the
labour afterwards employed in working up the materials by aid of the
tools, the sum total gives the whole of the labour employed in the
production of the completed commodity. In the ultimate analysis,
therefore, labour appears to be the only essential of production. To
replace capital, is to replace nothing but the wages of the labour
employed. Consequently, the whole of the surplus, after replacing wages,
is profits. From this it seems to follow, that the ratio between the
wages of labour and the produce of that labour gives the rate of profit.
And thus we arrive at Mr. Ricardo's principle, that profits depend upon
wages; rising as wages fall, and falling as wages rise.

To protect this proposition (the most perfect form in which the law of
profits seems to have been yet exhibited) against misapprehension, one
or two explanatory remarks are required.

If by wages, be meant what constitutes the real affluence of the
labourer, the _quantity_ of produce which he receives in exchange for
his labour; the proposition that profits vary inversely as wages, will
be obviously false. The rate of profit (as has been already observed and
exemplified) does not depend upon the price of labour, but upon the
proportion between the price of labour and the produce of it. If the
produce of labour is large, the price of labour may also be large
without any diminution of the rate of profit: and, in fact, the rate of
profit is highest in those countries (as, for instance, North America)
where the labourer is most largely remunerated. For the wages of labour,
though so large, bear a less proportion to the abundant _produce_ of
labour, there than elsewhere.

But this does not affect the truth of Mr. Ricardo's principle as he
himself understood it; because an increase of the labourer's real
comforts was not considered by him as a rise of wages. In his language
wages were only said to rise, when they rose not in mere quantity but in
_value_. To the labourer himself (he would have said) the _quantity_ of
his remuneration is the important circumstance: but its _value_ is the
only thing of importance to the person who purchases his labour.

The rate of profits depends not upon absolute or real wages, but upon
the _value_ of wages.

If, however, by value, Mr. Ricardo had meant _exchangeable_ value, his
proposition would still have been remote from the truth. Profits depend
no more upon the exchangeable value of the labourer's remuneration, than
upon its quantity. The truth is, that by the exchangeable value is meant
the quantity of commodities which the labourer can purchase with his
wages; so that when we say the exchangeable value of wages, we say their
quantity, under another name.

Mr. Ricardo, however, did not use the word value in the sense of
exchangeable value.

Occasionally, in his writings, he could not avoid using the word as
other people use it, to denote value in exchange. But he more frequently
employed it in a sense peculiar to himself, to denote cost of
production; in other words, the _quantity of labour_ required to produce
the article; that being his criterion of cost of production. Thus, if a
hat could be made with ten days' labour in France and with five days'
labour in England, he said that the value of a hat was double in France
of what it was in England. If a quarter of corn could be produced a
century ago with half as much labour as is necessary at present, Mr.
Ricardo said that the value of a quarter of corn had doubled.

Mr. Ricardo, therefore, would not have said that wages had risen,
because a labourer could obtain two pecks of flour instead of one, for a
day's labour; but if last year he received, for a day's labour,
something which required eight hours' labour to produce it, and this
year something which requires nine hours, then Mr. Ricardo would say
that wages had risen. A rise of wages, with Mr. Ricardo, meant an
increase in the cost of production of wages; an increase in the number
of hours' labour which go to produce the wages of a day's labour; an
increase in the _proportion_ of the fruits of labour which the labourer
receives for his own share; an increase in the ratio between the wages
of his labour and the produce of it. This is the theory: the reasoning,
of which it is the result, has been given in the preceding paragraphs.

Some of Mr. Ricardo's followers, or more properly, of those who have
adopted in most particulars the views of political economy which his
genius was the first to open up, have given explanations of Mr.
Ricardo's doctrine to nearly the same effect as the above, but in rather
different terms. They have said that profits depend not on _absolute_,
but on _proportional_ wages: which they expounded to mean the proportion
which the labourers _en masse_ receive of the total produce of the
country.

It seems, however, to be rather an unusual and inconvenient use of
language to speak of anything as depending upon the wages of labour, and
then to explain that by wages of labour you do not mean the wages of an
individual labourer, but of all the labourers in the country
collectively. Mankind will never agree to call anything a rise of wages,
except a rise of the wages of individual labourers, and it is therefore
preferable to employ language tending to fix attention upon the wages of
the individual. The wages, however, on which profits are said to depend,
are undoubtedly _proportional_ wages, namely, the proportional wages of
one labourer: that is, the ratio between the wages of one labourer, and
(not the whole produce of the country, but) the amount of what one
labourer can produce; the amount of that portion of the collective
produce of the industry of the country, which may be considered as
corresponding to the labour of one single labourer. Proportional wages,
thus understood, may be concisely termed the cost of production of
wages; or, more concisely still, the cost of wages, meaning their cost
in the "original purchase money," labour.

We have now arrived at a distinct conception of Mr. Ricardo's theory of
profits in its most perfect state. And this theory we conceive to be the
basis of the true theory of profits. All that remains to do is to clear
it from certain difficulties which still surround it, and which, though
in a greater degree apparent than real, are not to be put aside as
wholly imaginary.

Though it is true that tools, materials, and buildings (it is to be
wished that there were some compact designation for all these essentials
of production taken together,) are themselves the produce of labour, and
are only on that account to be ranked among the expenses of production;
yet the _whole_ of their value is not resolvable into the wages of the
labourers by whom they were produced. The wages of those labourers were
paid by a capitalist, and that capitalist must have the same profit upon
his advances as any other capitalist; when, therefore, he sells the
tools or materials, he must receive from the purchaser not only the
reimbursement of the wages he has paid, but also as much more as will
afford him the ordinary rate of profit. And when the producer, after
buying the tools and employing them in his own occupation, comes to
estimate his gains, he must set aside a portion of the produce to
replace not only the wages paid both by himself and by the tool-maker,
but also the profits of the tool-maker, advanced by himself out of his
own capital.

It is not correct, therefore, to state that all which the capitalist
retains after replacing wages forms his profit. It is true the whole
return to capital is either wages or profits; but profits do not compose
merely the surplus after replacing the outlay; they also enter into the
outlay itself. Capital is expended partly in paying or reimbursing
wages, and partly in paying the profits of other capitalists, whose
concurrence was necessary in order to bring together the means of
production.

If any contrivance, therefore, were devised by which that part of the
outlay which consists of previous profits could be either wholly or
partially dispensed with, it is evident that more would remain as the
profit of the immediate producer; while, as the quantity of _labour_
necessary to produce a given quantity of the commodity would be
unaltered, as well as the quantity of produce paid for that labour, it
seems that the ratio between the price of labour and its produce would
be the same as before; that the cost of production of wages would be the
same, proportional wages the same, and yet profits different.

To illustrate this by a simple instance, let it be supposed that
one-third of the produce is sufficient to replace the wages of the
labourers who have been immediately instrumental in the production; that
another third is necessary to replace the materials used and the fixed
capital worn out in the process; while the remaining third is clear
gain, being a profit of 50 per cent. Suppose, for example, that 60
agricultural labourers, receiving 60 quarters of corn for their wages,
consume fixed capital and seed amounting to the value of 60 quarters
more, and that the result of their operations is a produce of 180
quarters. When we analyse the price of the seed and tools into its
elements, we find that they must have been the produce of the labour of
40 men: for the wages of those 40, together with profit at the rate
previously supposed (50 per cent) make up 60 quarters. The produce,
therefore, consisting of 180 quarters is the result of the labour
altogether of 100 men: namely, the 60 first mentioned, and the 40 by
whose labour the fixed capital and the seed were produced.

Let us now suppose, by way of an extreme case, that some contrivance is
discovered, whereby the purposes to which the second third of the
produce had been devoted, may be dispensed with altogether: that some
means are invented by which the same amount of produce may be procured
without the assistance of any fixed capital, or the consumption of any
seed or material sufficiently valuable to be worth calculating. Let us,
however, suppose that this cannot be done without taking on a number of
additional labourers, equal to those required for producing the seed and
fixed capital; so that the saving shall be only in the profits of the
previous capitalists. Let us, in conformity with this supposition,
assume that in dispensing with the fixed capital and seed, value 60
quarters, it is necessary to take on 40 additional labourers, receiving
a quarter of corn each, as before.

The rate of profit has evidently risen. It has increased from 50 per
cent to 60 per cent. A return of 180 quarters could not before be
obtained but by an outlay of 120 quarters; it can now be obtained by an
outlay of no more than 100.

Here, therefore, is an undeniable rise of profits. Have wages, in the
sense above attached to them, fallen or not? It would seem not.

The produce (180 quarters) is still the result of the same quantity of
labour as before, namely, the labour of 100 men. A quarter of corn,
therefore, is still, as before, the produce of 10/18 of a man's labour
for a year. Each labourer receives, as before, one quarter of corn;
each, therefore, receives the produce of 10\18 of a year's labour of one
man, that is, the same cost of production; each receives 10/18 of the
produce of his own labour, that is, the same proportional wages; and the
labourers collectively still receive the same proportion, namely 10/18,
of the whole produce.

The conclusion, then, cannot be resisted, that Mr. Ricardo's theory is
defective: that the rate of profits does _not_ exclusively depend upon
the value of wages, in his sense, namely, the quantity of labour of
which the wages of a labourer are the produce; that it does _not_
exclusively depend upon proportional wages, that is, upon the proportion
which the labourers collectively receive of the whole produce, or the
ratio which the wages of an individual labourer bear to the produce of
his individual labour.

Those political economists, therefore, who have always dissented from
Mr. Ricardo's doctrine, or who, having at first admitted, ended by
discarding it, were so far in the right; but they committed a serious
error in this, that, with the usual one-sidedness of disputants, they
knew no medium between admitting absolutely and dismissing entirely;
and saw no other course than utterly to reject what it would have been
sufficient to modify.

It is remarkable how very slight a modification will suffice to render
Mr. Ricardo's doctrine completely true. It is even doubtful whether he
himself, if called upon to adapt his expressions to this peculiar case,
would not have so explained his doctrine as to render it entirely
unobjectionable.

It is perfectly true, that, in the example already made use of, a rise
of profits takes place, while wages, considered in respect to the
quantity of labour of which they are the produce, have not varied at
all. But though wages are still the produce of the same _quantity of
labour_ as before, the _cost of production_ of wages has nevertheless
fallen; for into cost of production there enters another element besides
labour.

We have already remarked (and the very example out of which the
difficulty arose presupposes it) that the cost of production of an
article consists generally of two parts,--the _wages_ of the labour
employed, and the _profits_ of those who, in any antecedent stage of
the production, have advanced any portion of those wages. An article,
therefore, may be the produce of the same quantity of labour as before,
and yet, if any portion of the profits which the last producer has to
make good to previous producers can be economized, the cost of
production of the article is diminished.

Now, in our example, a diminution of this sort is supposed to have taken
place in the cost of production of corn. The production of that article
has become less costly, in the ratio of six to five. A quantity of corn,
the means of producing which could not previously have been secured but
at an expense of 120 quarters, can now be produced by means which 100
quarters are sufficient to purchase.

But the labourer is supposed to receive the same quantity of corn as
before. He receives one quarter. The cost of production of wages has,
therefore, fallen one-sixth. A quarter of corn, which is the
remuneration of a single labourer, is indeed the produce of the same
quantity of labour as before; but its cost of production is nevertheless
diminished. It is now the produce of 10/18 of a man's labour, and
nothing else; whereas formerly it required for its production the
conjunction of that quantity of labour with an expenditure, in the form
of reimbursement of profit, amounting to one-fifth more.

If the cost of production of wages had remained the same as before,
profits could not have risen. Each labourer received one quarter of
corn; but one quarter of corn at that time was the result of the same
cost of production, as 1 1/5 quarter now. In order, therefore, that each
labourer should receive the same cost of production, each must now
receive one quarter of corn, _plus_ one-fifth. The labour of 100 men
could not be purchased at this price for less than 120 quarters; and the
produce, 180 quarters, would yield only 50 per cent, as first supposed [7].

It is, therefore, strictly true, that the rate of profits varies
inversely as the cost of production of wages. Profits cannot rise,
unless the cost of production of wages falls exactly as much; nor fall,
unless it rises.

The proof of this position has been stated in figures, and in a
particular case: we shall now state it in general terms, and for all
cases.

We have supposed, for simplicity, that wages are paid in the finished
commodity. The agricultural labourers, in our example, were paid in
corn, and if we had called them weavers, we should have supposed them to
be paid in cloth. This supposition is allowable, for it is obviously of
no consequence, in a question of value, or cost of production, what
precise article we assume as the medium of exchange. The supposition
has, besides, the recommendation of being conformable to the most
ordinary state of the facts; for it is by the sale of his own finished
article that each capitalist obtains the means of hiring labourers to
renew the production; which is virtually the same thing as if, instead
of selling the article for money and giving the money to his labourers,
he gave the article itself to the labourers, and they sold it for their
daily bread.

Assuming, therefore, that the labourer is paid in the very article he
produces, it is evident that, when any saving of expense takes place in
the production of that article, if the labourer still receives the same
cost of production as before, he must receive an increased quantity, in
the very same ratio in which the productive power of capital has been
increased. But, if so, the outlay of the capitalist will bear exactly
the same proportion to the return as it did before; and profits will not
rise.

The variations, therefore, in the rate of profits, and those in the cost
of production of wages, go hand in hand, and are inseparable. Mr.
Ricardo's principle, that profits cannot rise unless wages fall, is
strictly true, if by low wages be meant not merely wages which are the
produce of a smaller quantity of labour, but wages which are produced at
less cost, reckoning labour and previous profits together. But the
interpretation which some economists have put upon Mr. Ricardo's
doctrine, when they explain it to mean that profits depend upon the
proportion which the labourers collectively receive of the aggregate
produce, will not hold at all; for that, in our first example, remained
the same, and yet profits rose.

The only expression of the law of profits, which seems to be correct,
is, that they depend upon the cost of production of wages. This must be
received as the ultimate principle.

From this may be deduced all the corollaries which Mr. Ricardo and
others have drawn from his theory of profits as expounded by himself.
The cost of production of the wages of one labourer for a year, is the
result of two concurrent elements or factors,--viz., 1st, the quantity
of commodities which the state of the labour market affords to him;
2ndly, the cost of production of each of those commodities. It follows,
that the rate of profits can never rise but in conjunction with one or
other of two changes,--1st, a diminished remuneration of the labourer;
or, 2ndly, an improvement in production, or an extension of commerce, by
which any of the articles habitually consumed by the labourer may be
obtained at smaller cost. (If the improvement be in any article which is
not consumed by the labourer, it merely lowers the price of that article,
and thereby benefits capitalists and all other people so far as they are
consumers of that particular article, and may be said to increase gross
profit, but not the rate of profit.)

So, on the other hand, the rate of profit cannot fall, unless
concurrently with one of two events: 1st, an improvement in the
labourer's condition; or, 2ndly, an increased difficulty of producing
or importing some article which the labourer habitually consumes. The
progress of population and cultivation has a tendency to lower profits
through the latter of these two channels, owing to the well known law
of the application of capital to land, that a double capital does not
_caeteris paribus_ yield a double produce. There is, therefore, a
tendency in the rate of profits to fall with the progress of society.
But there is also an antagonist tendency of profits to rise, by the
successive introduction of improvements in agriculture, and in the
production of those manufactured articles which the labourers consume.
Supposing, therefore, that the actual comforts of the labourer remain
the same, profits will fall or rise, according as population, or
improvements in the production of food and other necessaries, advance
fastest.

The rate of profits, therefore, tends to _fall_ from the following
causes:--1. An increase of capital beyond population, producing
increased competition for labour; 2. An increase of population,
occasioning a demand for an increased quantity of food, which must be
produced at a greater cost. The rate of profits tends to _rise_ from
the following causes:--1. An increase of population beyond capital,
producing increased competition for employment; 2. Improvements
producing increased cheapness of necessaries, and other articles
habitually consumed by the labourer.

       *       *       *       *       *

The circumstances which regulate the rate of interest have usually been
treated, even by professed writers on political economy, in a vague,
loose, and unscientific manner. It has, however, been felt that there is
some connexion between the rate of interest and the rate of profit; that
(to use the words of Adam Smith) much will be given for money, when much
can be made of it. It has been felt, also, that the fluctuations in the
market-rate of interest from day to day, are determined, like other
matters of bargain and sale, by demand and supply. It has, therefore,
been considered as an established principle, that the rate of interest
varies from day to day according to the quantity of capital offered or
called for on loan; but conforms on the average of years to a standard
determined by the rate of profits, and bearing some proportion to that
rate--but a proportion which few attempts have been made to define.

In consequence of these views, it has been customary to judge of the
general rate of profits at any time or place, by the rate of interest at
that time and place: it being supposed that the rate of interest, though
liable to temporary fluctuations, can never vary for any long period of
time unless profits vary; a notion which appears to us to be erroneous.

It was observed by Adam Smith, that profits may be considered as divided
into two parts, of which one may properly be considered as the
remuneration for the use of the capital itself, the other as the reward
of the labour of superintending its employment; and that the former of
these will correspond with the rate of interest. The producer who
borrows capital to employ it in his business, will consent to pay, for
the use of it, all that remains of the profits he can make by it, after
reserving what he considers reasonable remuneration for the trouble and
risk which he incurs by borrowing and employing it.

This remark is just; but it seems necessary to give greater precision to
the ideas which it involves.

The difference between the profit which can be made by the use of
capital, and the interest which will be paid for it, is rightly
characterized as wages of superintendance. But to infer from this that
it is regulated by entirely the same principles as other wages, would be
to push the analogy too far. It is wages, but wages paid by a commission
upon the capital employed. If the general rate of profit is 10 per cent,
and the rate of interest 5 per cent, the wages of superintendance will
be 5 per cent; and though one borrower employ a capital of 100,000_l_.,
another no more than 100_l_., the labour of both will be rewarded with
the same per centage, though, in the one ease, this symbol will
represent an income of 5_l_., in the other case, of 5000_l_. Yet it
cannot be pretended that the labour of the two borrowers differs in this
proportion. The rule, therefore, that equal quantities of labour of
equal hardness and skill are equally remunerated, does not hold of this
kind of labour. The wages of any other labour are here an inapplicable
criterion.

The wages of superintendance are distinguished from ordinary wages by
another peculiarity, that they are not paid in advance out of capital,
like the wages of all other labourers, but merge in the profit, and are
not realized until the production is completed. This takes them entirely
out of the ordinary law of wages. The wages of labourers who are paid in
advance, are regulated by the number of competitors compared with the
amount of capital; the labourers can consume no more than what has been
previously accumulated. But there is no such limit to the remuneration
of a kind of labour which is not paid for out of wealth previously
accumulated, but out of that produce which it is itself employed in
calling into existence.

When these circumstances are duly weighed, it will be perceived, that
although profit may be correctly analyzed into interest and wages of
superintendance, we ought not to lay it down as the law of interest,
that it is profits _minus_ the wages of superintendance. Of the two
expressions, it would be decidedly the more correct, that the wages of
superintendance are regulated by the rate of interest, or are equal to
profits _minus_ interest. In strict, propriety, neither expression would
be allowable. Interest, and the wages of superintendance, can scarcely
be said to depend upon one another. They are to one another in the same
relation as wages and profits are. They are like two buckets in a well:
when one rises, the other descends, but neither of the two motions is
the cause of the other; both are simultaneous effects of the same cause,
the turning of the windlass.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are among the capitalists of every country a considerable number
who are habitually, and almost necessarily, lenders; to whom scarcely
any difference between what they could receive for their money and what
could be made by it, would be an equivalent for incurring the risk and
labour of carrying on business. In this predicament is the property of
widows and orphans; of many public bodies; of charitable institutions;
most property which is vested in trustees; and the property of a great
number of persons unused to business, and who have a distaste for it,
or whose other occupations prevent their engaging in it. How large a
proportion of the property lent to the nation comes under this
description, has been pointed out in Mr. Tooke's _Considerations on the
State of the Currency._

There is another large class, consisting of bankers, bill-brokers, and
others, who are money-lenders by profession; who enter into that
profession with the intention of making such gains as it will yield
them, and who would not be induced to change their business by any but
a very strong pecuniary inducement.

There is, therefore, a large class of persons who are habitually
lenders. On the other hand, all persons in business may be considered
as habitually borrowers. Except in times of stagnation, they are all
desirous of extending their business beyond their own capital, and are
never desirous of lending any portion of their capital except for very
short periods, during which they cannot advantageously invest it in
their own trade.

There is, in short, a productive class, and there is, besides, a class
technically styled the monied class, who live upon the interest of their
capital, without engaging personally in the work of production.

The class of borrowers may be considered as unlimited. There is no
quantity of capital that could be offered to be lent, which the
productive classes would not be willing to borrow, at any rate of
interest which would afford them the slightest excess of profit above a
bare equivalent for the additional risk, incurred by that transaction,
of the evils attendant on insolvency. The only assignable limit to the
inclination to borrow, is the power of giving security: the producers
would find it difficult to borrow more than an amount equal to their own
capital. If more than half the capital of the country were in the hands
of persons who preferred lending it to engaging personally in business,
and if the surplus were greater than could be invested in loans to
Government, or in mortgages upon the property of unproductive consumers;
the competition of lenders would force down the rate of interest very
low. A certain portion of the monied class would be obliged either to
sacrifice their predilections by engaging in business, or to lend on
inferior security; and they would accordingly accept, where they could
obtain good security, an abatement of interest equivalent to the
difference of risk.

This is an extreme case. Let us put an extreme case of a contrary kind.
Suppose that the wealthy people of any country, not relishing an idle
life, and having a strong taste for gainful labour, were generally
indisposed to accept of a smaller income in order to be relieved from
the labour and anxiety of business. Every producer in flourishing
circumstances would be eager to borrow, and few willing to lend. Under
these circumstances the rate of interest would differ very little from
the rate of profit. The trouble of managing a business is not
proportionally increased by an increase of the magnitude of the
business; and a very small surplus profit above the rate of interest,
would therefore be a sufficient inducement to capitalists to borrow.

We may even conceive a people whose habits were such, that in order to
induce them to lend, it might be necessary to offer them a rate of
interest fully equal to the ordinary rate of profit. In that case, of
course, the productive classes would scarcely ever borrow. But
government, and the unproductive classes, who do not borrow in order to
make a profit by the loan, but from the pressure of a real or supposed
necessity, might still be ready to borrow at this high rate.

Although the inclination to borrow has no _fixed_ or _necessary_ limit
except the power of giving security, yet it always, in point of fact,
stops short of this; from the uncertainty of the prospects of any
individual producer, which generally indisposes him to involve himself
to the full extent of his means of payment. There is never any permanent
want of market for things in general; but there may be so for the
commodity which any one individual is producing; and even if there is a
demand for the commodity, people may not buy it of him but of some other.
There are, consequently, never more than a portion of the producers, the
state of whose business encourages them to add to their capital by
borrowing; and even these are disposed to borrow only as much as they
see an _immediate_ prospect of profitably employing. There is, therefore,
a practical limit to the demands of borrowers at any given instant; and
when these demands are all satisfied, any additional capital offered on
loan can find an investment only by a reduction of the rate of interest.

The amount of borrowers being given, (and by the amount of borrowers is
here meant the aggregate sum which people are willing to borrow at some
given rate,) the rate of interest will depend upon the quantity of
capital owned by people who are unwilling or unable to engage in trade.
The circumstances which determine this, are, on the one hand, the degree
in which a taste for business, or an aversion to it, happens to be
prevalent among the classes possessed of property; and on the other
hand, the amount of the annual accumulation from the earnings of labour.
Those who accumulate from their wages, fees, or salaries, have, of
course, (speaking generally) no means of investing their savings except
by lending them to others: their occupations prevent them from personally
superintending any employment.

Upon these circumstances, then, the rate of interest depends, the amount
of borrowers being given. And the counter-proposition equally holds,
that, the above circumstances being given, the rate of interest depends
upon the amount of borrowers.

Suppose, for example, that when the rate of interest has adjusted itself
to the existing state of the circumstances which affect the disposition
to borrow and to lend, a war breaks out, which induces government, for
a series of years, to borrow annually a large sum of money. During the
whole of this period, the rate of interest will remain considerably
above what it was before, and what it will be afterwards.

Before the commencement of the supposed war, all persons who were
disposed to lend at the then rate of interest, had found borrowers, and
their capital was invested. This may be assumed; for if any capital had
been seeking for a borrower at the existing rate of interest, and unable
to find one, its owner would have offered it at a rate slightly below
the existing rate. He would, for instance, have bought into the funds,
at a slight advance of price; and thus set at liberty the capital of
some fundholder, who, the funds yielding a lower interest, would have
been obliged to accept a lower interest from individuals.

Since, then, all who were willing to lend their capital at the market
rate, have already lent it, Government will not be able to borrow unless
by offering higher interest. Though, with the existing habits of the
possessors of disposable capital, an increased number cannot be found
who are willing to lend at the existing rate, there are doubtless some
who will be induced to lend by the temptation of a higher rate. The same
temptation will also induce some persons to invest, in the purchase of
the new stock, what they would otherwise have expended unproductively in
increasing their establishments, or productively, in improving their
estates. The rate of interest will rise just sufficiently to call forth
an increase of lenders to the amount required.

This we apprehend to be the cause why the rate of interest in this
country was so high as it is well known to have been during the last
war. It is, therefore, by no means to be inferred, as some have done,
that the general rate of profits was unusually high during the same
period, because interest was so. Supposing the rate of profits to have
been precisely the same during the war, as before or after it, the rate
of interest would nevertheless have risen, from the causes and in the
manner above described.

The practical use of the preceding investigation is, to moderate the
confidence with which inferences are frequently drawn with respect to
the rate of profit from evidence regarding the rate of interest; and to
shew that although the rate of profit is one of the elements which
combine to determine the rate of interest, the latter is also acted upon
by causes peculiar to itself, and may either rise or fall, both
temporarily and permanently, while the general rate of profits remains
unchanged.

       *       *       *       *       *

The introduction of banks, which perform the function of lenders and
loan-brokers, with or without that of issuers of paper-money, produces
some further anomalies in the rate of interest, which have not, so far
as we are aware, been hitherto brought within the pale of exact science.

If bankers were merely a class of middlemen between the lender and the
borrower; if they merely received deposits of capital from those who had
it lying unemployed in their hands, and lent this, together with their
own capital, to the productive classes, receiving interest for it, and
paying interest in their turn to those who had placed capital in their
hands; the effect of the operations of banking on the rate of interest
would be to lower it in some slight degree. The banker receives and
collects together sums of money much too small, when taken individually,
to render it worth while for the owners to look out for an investment,
but which in the aggregate form a considerable amount. This amount may
be considered a clear addition to the productive capital of the country;
at least, to the capital in activity at any moment. And as this addition
to the capital accrues wholly to that part of it which is not employed
by the owners, but lent to other producers, the natural effect is a
diminution of the rate of interest.

The banker, to the extent of his own private capital, (the expenses of
his business being first paid,) is a lender at interest. But, being
subject to risk and trouble fully equal to that which belongs to most
other employments, he cannot be satisfied with the mere interest even
of his whole capital: he must have the ordinary profits of stock, or he
will not engage in the business: the state of banking must be such as to
hold out to him the prospect of adding, to the interest of what remains
of his own capital after paying the expenses of his business, interest
upon capital deposited with him, in sufficient amount to make up, after
paying the expenses, the ordinary profit which could be derived from his
own capital in any productive employment. This will be accomplished in
one of two ways.

1. If the circumstances of society are such as to furnish a ready
investment of disposable capital; (as for instance in London, where the
public funds and other securities, of undoubted stability, and affording
great advantages for receiving the interest without trouble and
realizing the principal without difficulty when required, tempt all
persons who have sums of importance lying idle, to invest them on their
own account without the intervention of any middleman;) the deposits
with bankers consist chiefly of small sums likely to be wanted in a very
short period for current expenses, and the interest on which would
seldom be worth the trouble of calculating it. Bankers, therefore, do
not allow any interest on their deposits. After paying the expenses of
their business, all the rest of the interest they receive is clear gain.
But as the circumstances of banking, as of all other modes of employing
capital, will on the average be such as to afford to a person entering
into the business a prospect of realizing the ordinary, and no more than
the ordinary, profits upon his own capital; the gains of each banker by
the investment of his deposits, will not on the average exceed what is
necessary to make up his gains on his own capital to the ordinary rate.
It is, of course, competition, which brings about this limitation.
Whether competition operates by lowering the rate of interest, or by
dividing the business among a larger number, it is difficult to decide.
Probably it operates in both ways; but it is by no means impossible that
it may operate in the latter way alone: just as an increase in the
number of physicians does not lower the fees, though it diminishes an
average competitor's chance of obtaining them.

It is not impossible that the disposition of the lenders might be such,
that they would cease to lend rather than acquiesce in any reduction of
the rate of interest. If so, the arrival of a new lender, in the person
of a banker of deposit, would not lower the rate of interest in any
considerable degree. A slight fall would take place, and with that
exception things would be as before, except that the capital in the
hands of the banker would have put itself into the place of an equal
portion of capital belonging to other lenders, who would themselves have
engaged in business (e.g., by subscribing to some joint-stock company,
or entering into commandite). Bankers' profits would then be limited to
the ordinary rate chiefly by the division of the business among many
banks, so that each on the average would receive no more interest on his
deposits than would suffice to make up the interest on his own capital
to the ordinary rate of profit after paying all expenses.

2. But if the circumstances of society render it difficult and
inconvenient for persons who wish to live upon the interest of their
money, to seek an investment for themselves, the bankers become agents
for this specific purpose: large as well as small sums are deposited
with them, and they allow interest to their customers. Such is the
practice of the Scotch banks, and of most of the country banks in
England. Their customers, not living at any of the great seats of money
transactions, prefer entrusting their capital to somebody on the spot,
whom they know, and in whom they confide. He invests their money on the
best terms he can, and pays to them such interest as he can afford to
give; retaining a compensation for his own risk and trouble. This
compensation is fixed by the competition of the market. The rate of
interest is no further lowered by this operation, than inasmuch as it
brings together the lender and the borrower in a safe and expeditious
manner. The lender incurs less risk, and a larger proportion, therefore,
of the holders of capital are willing to be lenders.

When a banker, in addition to his other functions, is also an issuer of
paper money, he gains an advantage similar to that which the London
bankers derive from their deposits. To the extent to which he can put
forth his notes, he has so much the more to lend, without himself having
to pay any interest for it.

If the paper is convertible, it cannot get into circulation permanently
without displacing specie, which goes abroad and brings back an
equivalent value. To the extent of this value, there is an increase of
the capital of the country; and the increase accrues solely to that part
of the capital which is employed in loans.

If the paper is inconvertible, and instead of displacing specie
depreciates the currency, the banker by issuing it levies a tax on every
person who has money in his hands or due to him. He thus appropriates to
himself a portion of the capital of other people, and a portion of their
revenue. The capital might have been intended to be lent, or it might
have been intended to be employed by the owner: such part of it as was
intended to be employed by the owner now changes its destination, and is
lent. The revenue was either intended to be accumulated, in which case
it had already become capital, or it was intended to be spent: in this
last case, revenue is converted into capital: and thus, strange as it
may appear, the depreciation of the currency, when effected in this way,
operates to a certain extent as a forced accumulation. This, indeed, is
no palliation of its iniquity. Though A might have spent his property
unproductively, B ought not to be permitted to rob him of it because B
will expend it on productive labour.

In any supposable case, however, the issue of paper money by bankers
increases the proportion of the whole capital of the country which is
destined to be lent. The rate of interest must therefore fall, until
some of the lenders give over lending, or until the increase of
borrowers absorbs the whole.

But a fall of the rate of interest, sufficient to enable the money
market to absorb the whole of the paper-loans, may not be sufficient to
reduce the profits of a lender who lends what costs him nothing, to the
ordinary rate of profit upon his capital. Here, therefore, competition
will operate chiefly by dividing the business. The notes of each bank
will be confined within so narrow a district, or will divide the supply
of a district with so many other banks, that on the average each will
receive no larger amount of interest on his notes than will make up the
interest on his own capital to the ordinary rate of profit.

Even in this way, however, the competition has the effect, to a certain
limited extent, of lowering the rate of interest; for the power of
bankers to receive interest on more than their capital attracts a
greater amount of capital into the banking business than would otherwise
flow into it; and this greater capital being all lent, interest will
fall in consequence.


NOTE:

[7] It would be easy to go over in the same manner any other case. For
instance, we may suppose, that, instead of dispensing with the _whole_
of the fixed capital, material, &c, and taking on labourers in equal
number to those by whom these were produced, _half_ only of the fixed
capital and material is dispensed with; so that, instead of 60 labourers
and a fixed capital worth 6O quarters of corn, we have 80 labourers and
a fixed capital worth 30. The numerical statement of this case is more
intricate than that in the text, but the result is not different.





ESSAY V.

ON THE DEFINITION OF POLITICAL ECONOMY; AND ON THE METHOD OF
INVESTIGATION PROPER TO IT.


It might be imagined, on a superficial view of the nature and objects of
definition, that the definition of a science would occupy the same place
in the chronological which it commonly does in the didactic order. As a
treatise on any science usually commences with an attempt to express, in
a brief formula, what the science is, and wherein it differs from other
sciences, so, it might be supposed, did the framing of such a formula
naturally precede the successful cultivation of the science.

This, however, is far from having been the case. The definition of a
science has almost invariably not preceded, but followed, the creation
of the science itself. Like the wall of a city, it has usually been
erected, not to be a receptacle for such edifices as might afterwards
spring up, but to circumscribe an aggregation already in existence.
Mankind did not measure out the ground for intellectual cultivation
before they began to plant it; they did not divide the field of human
investigation into regular compartments first, and then begin to collect
truths for the purpose of being therein deposited; they proceeded in a
less systematic manner. As discoveries were gathered in, either one by
one, or in groups resulting from the continued prosecution of some
uniform course of inquiry, the truths which were successively brought
into store cohered and became agglomerated according to their individual
affinities. Without any intentional classification, the facts classed
themselves. They became associated in the mind, according to their
general and obvious resemblances; and the aggregates thus formed, having
to be frequently spoken of as aggregates, came to be denoted by a common
name. Any body of truths which had thus acquired a collective
denomination, was called a _science_. It was long before this fortuitous
classification was felt not to be sufficiently precise. It was in a more
advanced stage of the progress of knowledge that mankind became sensible
of the advantage of ascertaining whether the facts which they had thus
grouped together were distinguished from all other facts by any common
properties, and what these were. The first attempts to answer this
question were commonly very unskilful, and the consequent definitions
extremely imperfect.

And, in truth, there is scarcely any investigation in the whole body of
a science requiring so high a degree of analysis and abstraction, as the
inquiry, what the science itself is; in other words, what are the
properties common to all the truths composing it, and distinguishing
them from all other truths. Many persons, accordingly, who are
profoundly conversant with the details of a science, would be very much
at a loss to supply such a definition of the science itself as should
not be liable to well-grounded logical objections. From this remark, we
cannot except the authors of elementary scientific treatises. The
definitions which those works furnish of the sciences, for the most part
either do not fit them--some being too wide, some too narrow--or do not
go deep enough into them, but define a science by its accidents, not its
essentials; by some one of its properties which may, indeed, serve the
purpose of a distinguishing mark, but which is of too little importance
to have ever of itself led mankind to give the science a name and rank
as a separate object of study.

The definition of a science must, indeed, be placed among that class of
truths which Dugald Stewart had in view, when he observed that the first
principles of all sciences belong to the philosophy of the human mind.
The observation is just; and the first principles of all sciences,
including the definitions of them, have consequently participated
hitherto in the vagueness and uncertainty which has pervaded that most
difficult and unsettled of all branches of knowledge. If we open any
book, even of mathematics or natural philosophy, it is impossible not to
be struck with the mistiness of what we find represented as preliminary
and fundamental notions, and the very insufficient manner in which the
propositions which are palmed upon us as first principles seem to be
made out, contrasted with the lucidity of the explanations and the
conclusiveness of the proofs as soon as the writer enters upon the
details of his subject. Whence comes this anomaly? Why is the admitted
certainty of the results of those sciences in no way prejudiced by the
want of solidity in their premises? How happens it that a firm
superstructure has been erected upon an unstable foundation? The
solution of the paradox _is_, that what are called first principles,
are, in truth, _last_ principles. Instead of being the fixed point from
whence the chain of proof which supports all the rest of the science
hangs suspended, they are themselves the remotest link of the chain.
Though presented as if all other truths were to be deduced from them,
they are the truths which are last arrived at; the result of the last
stage of generalization, or of the last and subtlest process of
analysis, to which the particular truths of the science can be
subjected; those particular truths having previously been ascertained
by the evidence proper to their own nature.

Like other sciences, Political Economy has remained destitute of a
definition framed on strictly logical principles, or even of, what is
more easily to be had, a definition exactly co-extensive with the thing
defined. This has not, perhaps, caused the real bounds of the science to
be, in this country at least, practically mistaken or overpassed; but
it has occasioned--perhaps we should rather say it is connected with
--indefinite, and often erroneous, conceptions of the mode in which the
science should be studied.

We proceed to verify these assertions by an examination of the most
generally received definitions of the science.

1. First, as to the vulgar notion of the nature and object of Political
Economy, we shall not be wide of the mark if we state it to be something
to this effect:--That Political Economy is a science which teaches, or
professes to teach, in what manner a nation may be made rich. This
notion of what constitutes the science, is in some degree countenanced
by the title and arrangement which Adam Smith gave to his invaluable
work. A systematic treatise on Political Economy, he chose to call an
_Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations_; and the
topics are introduced in an order suitable to that view of the purpose
of his book.

With respect to the definition in question, if definition it can be
called which is not found in any set form of words, but left to be
arrived at by a process of abstraction from a hundred current modes of
speaking on the subject; it seems liable to the conclusive objection,
that it confounds the essentially distinct, though closely connected,
ideas of _science_ and _art_. These two ideas differ from one another as
the understanding differs from the will, or as the indicative mood in
grammar differs from the imperative. The one deals in facts, the other
in precepts. Science is a collection of _truths_; art, a body of
_rules_, or directions for conduct. The language of science is, This is,
or, This is not; This does, or does not, happen. The language of art is,
Do this; Avoid that. Science takes cognizance of a _phenomenon_, and
endeavours to discover its _law_; art proposes to itself an _end_, and
looks out for _means_ to effect it.

If, therefore, Political Economy be a science, it cannot be a collection
of practical rules; though, unless it be altogether a useless science,
practical rules must be capable of being founded upon it. The science of
mechanics, a branch of natural philosophy, lays down the laws of motion,
and the properties of what are called the mechanical powers. The art of
practical mechanics teaches how we may avail ourselves of those laws and
properties, to increase our command over external nature. An art would
not be an art, unless it were founded upon a scientific knowledge of the
properties of the subject-matter: without this, it would not be
philosophy, but empiricism; [Greek: empeiria,] not [Greek: technae,] in
Plato's sense. Rules, therefore, for making a nation increase in wealth,
are not a science, but they are the results of science. Political
Economy does not of itself instruct how to make a nation rich; but
whoever would be qualified to judge of the means of making a nation
rich, must first be a political economist.

2. The definition most generally received among instructed persons, and
laid down in the commencement of most of the professed treatises on the
subject, is to the following effect:--That Political Economy informs us
of the laws which regulate the production, distribution, and consumption
of wealth. To this definition is frequently appended a familiar
illustration. Political Economy, it is said, is to the state, what
domestic economy is to the family.

This definition is free from the fault which we pointed out in the
former one. It distinctly takes notice that Political Economy is a
science and not an art; that it is conversant with laws of nature,
not with maxims of conduct, and teaches us how things take place of
themselves, not in what manner it is advisable for us to shape them,
in order to attain some particular end.

But though the definition is, with regard to this particular point,
unobjectionable, so much can scarcely be said for the accompanying
illustration; which rather sends back the mind to the current loose
notion of Political Economy already disposed of. Political Economy is
really, and is stated in the definition to be, a science: but domestic
economy, so far as it is capable of being reduced to principles, is an
art. It consists of rules, or maxims of prudence, for keeping the family
regularly supplied with what its wants require, and securing, with any
given amount of means, the greatest possible quantity of physical
comfort and enjoyment. Undoubtedly the beneficial _result_, the great
practical _application_ of Political Economy, would be to accomplish
for a nation something like what the most perfect domestic economy
accomplishes for a single household: but supposing this purpose
realised, there would be the same difference between the rules by which
it might be effected, and Political Economy, which there is between the
art of gunnery and the theory of projectiles, or between the rules of
mathematical land-surveying and the science of trigonometry.

The definition, though not liable to the same objection as the
illustration which is annexed to it, is itself far from unexceptionable.
To neither of them, considered as standing at the head of a treatise,
have we much to object. At a very early stage in the study of the
science, anything more accurate would be useless, and therefore
pedantic. In a merely initiatory definition, scientific precision is not
required: the object is, to insinuate into the learner's mind, it is
scarcely material by what means, some general preconception of what are
the uses of the pursuit, and what the series of topics through which he
is about to travel. As a mere anticipation or _ébauche_ of a definition,
intended to indicate to a learner as much as he is able to understand
before he begins, of the nature of what is about to be taught to him,
we do not quarrel with the received formula. But if it claims to be
admitted as that complete _definitio_ or boundary-line, which results
from a thorough exploring of the whole extent of the subject, and is
intended to mark the exact place of Political Economy among the
sciences, its pretension cannot be allowed.

"The science of the laws which regulate the production, distribution,
and consumption of wealth." The term wealth is surrounded by a haze of
floating and vapoury associations, which will let nothing that is seen
through them be shewn distinctly. Let us supply its place by a
periphrasis. Wealth is defined, all objects useful or agreeable to
mankind, except such as can be obtained in indefinite quantity without
labour. Instead of all objects, some authorities say, all material
objects: the distinction is of no moment for the present purpose.

To confine ourselves to production: If the laws of the production of all
objects, or even of all material objects, which are useful or agreeable
to mankind, were comprised in Political Economy, it would be difficult
to say where the science would end: at the least, all or nearly all
physical knowledge would be included in it. Corn and cattle are material
objects, in a high degree useful to mankind. The laws of the production
of the one include the principles of agriculture; the production of the
other is the subject of the art of cattle-breeding, which, in so far as
really an art, must be built upon the science of physiology. The laws of
the production of manufactured articles involve the whole of chemistry
and the whole of mechanics. The laws of the production of the wealth
which is extracted from the bowels of the earth, cannot be set forth
without taking in a large part of geology.

When a definition so manifestly surpasses in extent what it professes to
define, we must suppose that it is not meant to be interpreted literally,
though the limitations with which it is to be understood are not stated.

Perhaps it will be said, that Political Economy is conversant with such
only of the laws of the production of wealth as are applicable to _all_
kinds of wealth: those which relate to the details of particular trades
or employments forming the subject of other and totally distinct
sciences.

If, however, there were no more in the distinction between Political
Economy and physical science than this, the distinction, we may venture
to affirm, would never have been made. No similar division exists in any
other department of knowledge. We do not break up zoology or mineralogy
into two parts; one treating of the properties common to all animals, or
to all minerals; another conversant with the properties peculiar to each
particular species of animals or minerals. The reason is obvious; there
is no distinction _in kind_ between the general laws of animal or of
mineral nature and the peculiar properties of particular species. There
is as close an analogy between the general laws and the particular ones,
as there is between one of the general laws and another: most commonly,
indeed, the particular laws are but the complex result of a plurality of
general laws modifying each other. A separation, therefore, between the
general laws and the particular ones, merely because the former are
general and the latter particular, would run counter both to the
strongest motives of convenience and to the natural tendencies of the
mind. If the case is different with the laws of the production of
wealth, it must be because, in this case, the general laws differ in
kind from the particular ones. But if so, the difference in kind is the
radical distinction, and we should find out what that is, and found our
definition upon it.

But, further, the recognised boundaries which separate the field of
Political Economy from that of physical science, by no means correspond
with the distinction between the truths which concern all kinds of
wealth and those which relate only to some kinds. The three laws of
motion, and the law of gravitation, are common, as far as human
observation has yet extended, to all matter; and these, therefore, as
being among the laws of the production of all wealth, should form part
of Political Economy. There are hardly any of the processes of industry
which do not partly depend upon the properties of the lever; but it
would be a strange classification which included those properties among
the truths of Political Economy. Again, the latter science has many
inquiries altogether as special, and relating as exclusively to
particular sorts of material objects, as any of the branches of physical
science. The investigation of some of the circumstances which regulate
the price of corn, has as little to do with the laws common to the
production of all wealth, as any part of the knowledge of the
agriculturist. The inquiry into the rent of mines or fisheries, or into
the value of the precious metals, elicits truths which have immediate
reference to the production solely of a peculiar kind of wealth; yet
these are admitted to be correctly placed in the science of Political
Economy.

The real distinction between Political Economy and physical science must
be sought in something deeper than the nature of the subject-matter;
which, indeed, is for the most part common to both. Political Economy,
and the scientific grounds of all the useful arts, have in truth one and
the same subject-matter; namely, the objects which conduce to man's
convenience and enjoyment: but they are, nevertheless, perfectly
distinct branches of knowledge.

3. If we contemplate the whole field of human knowledge, attained or
attainable, we find that it separates itself obviously, and as it were
spontaneously, into two divisions, which stand so strikingly in
opposition and contradistinction to one another, that in all
classifications of our knowledge they have been kept apart. These are,
_physical_ science, and _moral_ or psychological science. The difference
between these two departments of our knowledge does not reside in the
subject-matter with which they are conversant: for although, of the
simplest and most elementary parts of each, it may be said, with an
approach to truth, that they are concerned with different subject-
matters--namely, the one with the human mind, the other with all things
whatever except the mind; this distinction does not hold between the
higher regions of the two. Take the science of politics, for instance,
or that of law: who will say that these are physical sciences? and yet
is it not obvious that they are conversant fully as much with matter as
with mind? Take, again, the theory of music, of painting, of any other
of the fine arts, and who will venture to pronounce that the facts they
are conversant with belong either wholly to the class of matter, or
wholly to that of mind?

The following seems to be the _rationale_ of the distinction between
physical and moral science.

In all the intercourse of man with nature, whether we consider him as
acting upon it, or as receiving impressions from it, the effect or
phenomenon depends upon causes of two kinds: the properties of the
object acting, and those of the object acted upon. Everything which can
possibly happen in which man and external things, are jointly concerned,
results from the joint operation of a law or laws of matter, and a law
or laws of the human mind. Thus the production of corn by human labour
is the result of a law of mind, and many laws of matter. The laws of
matter are those properties of the soil and of vegetable life which
cause the seed to germinate in the ground, and those properties of the
human body which render food necessary to its support. The law of mind
is, that man desires to possess subsistence, and consequently wills the
necessary means of procuring it.

Laws of mind and laws of matter are so dissimilar in their nature, that
it would be contrary to all principles of rational arrangement to mix
them up as part of the same study. In all scientific methods, therefore,
they are placed apart. Any compound effect or phenomenon which depends
both on the properties of matter and on those of mind, may thus become
the subject of two completely distinct sciences, or branches of science;
one, treating of the phenomenon in so far as it depends upon the laws of
matter only; the other treating of it in so far as it depends upon the
laws of mind.

The physical sciences are those which treat of the laws of matter, and
of all complex phenomena in so far as dependent upon the laws of matter.
The mental or moral sciences are those which treat of the laws of mind,
and of all complex phenomena in so far as dependent upon the laws of
mind.

Most of the moral sciences presuppose physical science; but few of the
physical sciences presuppose moral science. The reason is obvious. There
are many phenomena (an earthquake, for example, or the motions of the
planets) which depend upon the laws of matter exclusively; and have
nothing whatever to do with the laws of mind. Many, therefore, of the
physical sciences may be treated of without any reference to mind, and
as if the mind existed as a recipient of knowledge only, not as a cause
producing effects. But there are no phenomena which depend exclusively
upon the laws of mind; even the phenomena of the mind itself being
partially dependent upon the physiological laws of the body. All the
mental sciences, therefore, not excepting the pure science of mind, must
take account of a great variety of physical truths; and (as physical
science is commonly and very properly studied first) may be said to
presuppose them, taking up the complex phenomena where physical science
leaves them.

Now this, it will be found, is a precise statement of the relation in
which Political Economy stands to the various sciences which are
tributary to the arts of production.

The laws of the production of the objects which constitute wealth, are
the subject-matter both of Political Economy and of almost all the
physical sciences. Such, however, of those laws as are purely laws of
matter, belong to physical science, and to that exclusively. Such of
them as are laws of the human mind, and no others, belong to Political
Economy, which finally sums up the result of both combined.

Political Economy, therefore, presupposes all the physical sciences; it
takes for granted all such of the truths of those sciences as are
concerned in the production of the objects demanded by the wants of
mankind; or at least it takes for granted that the physical part of the
process takes place somehow. It then inquires what are the phenomena of
_mind_ which are concerned in the production and distribution [8] of
those same objects; it borrows from the pure science of mind the laws of
those phenomena, and inquires what effects follow from these mental
laws, acting in concurrence with those physical one. [9]

From the above considerations the following seems to come out as the
correct and complete definition of Political Economy:--"The science
which treats of the production and distribution of wealth, so far as
they depend upon the laws of human nature." Or thus--science relating to
the moral or psychological laws of the production and distribution of
wealth."

For popular use this definition is amply sufficient, but it still falls
short of the complete accuracy required for the purposes of the
philosopher. Political Economy does not treat of the production and
distribution of wealth in all states of mankind, but only in what is
termed the social state; nor so far as they depend upon the laws of
human nature, but only so far as they depend upon a certain portion of
those laws. This, at least, is the view which must be taken of Political
Economy, if we mean it to find any place in an encyclopedical division
of the field of science. On any other view, it either is not science at
all, or it is several sciences. This will appear clearly, if, on the one
hand, we take a general survey of the moral sciences, with a view to
assign the exact place of Political Economy among them; while, on the
other, we consider attentively the nature of the methods or processes by
which the truths which are the object of those sciences are arrived at.

Man, who, considered as a being having a moral or mental nature, is the
subject-matter of all the moral sciences, may, with reference to that
part of his nature, form the subject of philosophical inquiry under
several distinct hypotheses. We may inquire what belongs to man
considered individually, and as if no human being existed besides
himself; we may next consider him as coming into contact with other
individuals; and finally, as living in a state of _society_, that is,
forming part of a body or aggregation of human beings, systematically
co-operating for common purposes. Of this last state, political
government, or subjection to a common superior, is an ordinary
ingredient, but forms no necessary part of the conception, and, with
respect to our present purpose, needs not be further adverted to.

Those laws or properties of human nature which appertain to man as a
mere individual, and do not presuppose, as a necessary condition, the
existence of other individuals (except, perhaps, as mere instruments or
means), form a part of the subject of pure mental philosophy. They
comprise all the laws of the mere intellect, and those of the purely
self-regarding desires.

Those laws of human nature which relate to the feelings called forth in
a human being by other individual human or intelligent beings, as such;
namely, the _affections_, the _conscience_, or feeling of duty, and the
love of _approbation_; and to the conduct of man, so far as it depends
upon, or has relation to, these parts of his nature--form the subject of
another portion of pure mental philosophy, namely, that portion of it on
which _morals_, or _ethics_, are founded. For morality itself is not a
science, but an art; not truths, but rules. The truths on which the
rules are founded are drawn (as is the case in all arts) from a variety
of sciences; but the principal of them, and those which are most nearly
peculiar to this particular art, belong to a branch of the science of
mind.

Finally, there are certain principles of human nature which are
peculiarly connected with the ideas and feelings generated in man by
living in a state of _society_, that is, by forming part of a union or
aggregation of human beings for a common purpose or purposes. Few,
indeed, of the elementary laws of the human mind are peculiar to this
state, almost all being called into action in the two other states. But
those simple laws of human nature, operating in that wider field, give
rise to results of a sufficiently universal character, and even (when
compared with the still more complex phenomena of which they are the
determining causes) sufficiently simple, to admit of being called,
though in a somewhat looser sense, _laws_ of society, or laws of human
nature in the social state. These laws, or general truths, form the
subject of a branch of science which may be aptly designated from the
title of _social economy_; somewhat less happily by that of _speculative
politics_, or the _science_ of politics, as contradistinguished from the
art. This science stands in the same relation to the social, as anatomy
and physiology to the physical body. It shows by what principles of his
nature man is induced to enter into a state of society; how this feature
in his position acts upon his interests and feelings, and through them
upon his conduct; how the association tends progressively to become
closer, and the co-operation extends itself to more and more purposes;
what those purposes are, and what the varieties of means most generally
adopted for furthering them; what are the various relations which
establish themselves among human beings as the ordinary consequence of
the social union; what those which are different in different states of
society; in what historical order those states tend to succeed one
another; and what are the effects of each upon the conduct and character
of man.

This branch of science, whether we prefer to call it social economy,
speculative politics, or the natural history of society, presupposes the
whole science of the nature of the individual mind; since all the laws
of which the latter science takes cognizance are brought into play in a
state of society, and the truths of the social science are but
statements of the manner in which those simple laws take effect in
complicated circumstances. Pure mental philosophy, therefore, is an
essential part, or preliminary, of political philosophy. The science of
social economy embraces every part of man's nature, in so far as
influencing the conduct or condition of man in society; and therefore
may it be termed speculative politics, as being the scientific
foundation of practical politics, or the art of government, of which the
art of legislation is a part. [10]

It is to _this_ important division of the field of science that one of
the writers who have most correctly conceived and copiously illustrated
its nature and limits,--we mean M. Say,--has chosen to give the name
Political Economy. And, indeed, this large extension of the
signification of that term is countenanced by its etymology. But the
words "political economy" have long ceased to have so large a meaning.
Every writer is entitled to use the words which are his tools in the
manner which he judges most conducive to the general purposes of the
exposition of truth; but he exercises this discretion under liability to
criticism: and M. Say seems to have done in this instance, what should
never be done without strong reasons; to have altered the meaning of a
name which was appropriated to a particular purpose (and for which,
therefore, a substitute must be provided), in order to transfer it to an
object for which it was easy to find a more characteristic denomination.

What is now commonly understood by the term "Political Economy" is not
the science of speculative politics, but a branch of that science. It
does not treat of the whole of man's nature as modified by the social
state, nor of the whole conduct of man in society. It is concerned with
him solely as a being who desires to possess wealth, and who is capable
of judging of the comparative efficacy of means for obtaining that end.
It predicts only such of the phenomena of the social state as take place
in consequence of the pursuit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of
every other human passion or motive; except those which may be regarded
as perpetually antagonizing principles to the desire of wealth, namely,
aversion to labour, and desire of the present enjoyment of costly
indulgences. These it takes, to a certain extent, into its calculations,
because these do not merely, like other desires, occasionally conflict
with the pursuit of wealth, but accompany it always as a drag, or
impediment, and are therefore inseparably mixed up in the consideration
of it. Political Economy considers mankind as occupied solely in
acquiring and consuming wealth; and aims at showing what is the course
of action into which mankind, living in a state of society, would be
impelled, if that motive, except in the degree in which it is checked by
the two perpetual counter-motives above adverted to, were absolute ruler
of all their actions. Under the influence of this desire, it shows
mankind accumulating wealth, and employing that wealth in the production
of other wealth; sanctioning by mutual agreement the institution of
property; establishing laws to prevent individuals from encroaching upon
the property of others by force or fraud; adopting various contrivances
for increasing the productiveness of their labour; settling the division
of the produce by agreement, under the influence of competition
(competition itself being governed by certain laws, which laws are
therefore the ultimate regulators of the division of the produce); and
employing certain expedients (as money, credit, &c.) to facilitate the
distribution. All these operations, though many of them are really the
result of a plurality of motives, are considered by Political Economy as
flowing solely from the desire of wealth. The science then proceeds to
investigate the laws which govern these several operations, under the
supposition that man is a being who is determined, by the necessity of
his nature, to prefer a greater portion of wealth to a smaller in all
cases, without any other exception than that constituted by the two
counter-motives already specified. Not that any political economist was
ever so absurd as to suppose that mankind are really thus constituted,
but because this is the mode in which science must necessarily proceed.
When an effect depends upon a concurrence of causes, those causes must
be studied one at a time, and their laws separately investigated, if we
wish, through the causes, to obtain the power of either predicting or
controlling the effect; since the law of the effect is compounded of the
laws of all the causes which determine it. The law of the centripetal
and that of the tangential force must have been known before the motions
of the earth and planets could be explained, or many of them predicted.
The same is the case with the conduct of man in society. In order to
judge how he will act under the variety of desires and aversions which
are concurrently operating upon him, we must know how he would act under
the exclusive influence of each one in particular. There is, perhaps, no
action of a man's life in which he is neither under the immediate nor
under the remote influence of any impulse but the mere desire of wealth.
With respect to those parts of human conduct of which wealth is not even
the principal object, to these Political Economy does not pretend that
its conclusions are applicable. But there are also certain departments
of human affairs, in which the acquisition of wealth is the main and
acknowledged end. It is only of these that Political Economy takes
notice. The manner in which it necessarily proceeds is that of treating
the main and acknowledged end as if it were the sole end; which, of all
hypotheses equally simple, is the nearest to the truth. The political
economist inquires, what are the actions which would be produced by this
desire, if, within the departments in question, it were unimpeded by any
other. In this way a nearer approximation is obtained than would
otherwise be practicable, to the real order of human affairs in those
departments. This approximation is then to be corrected by making proper
allowance for the effects of any impulses of a different description,
which can be shown to interfere with the result in any particular case.
Only in a few of the most striking cases (such as the important one of
the principle of population) are these corrections interpolated into the
expositions of Political Economy itself; the strictness of purely
scientific arrangement being thereby somewhat departed from, for the
sake of practical utility. So far as it is known, or may be presumed,
that the conduct of mankind in the pursuit of wealth is under the
collateral influence of any other of the properties of our nature than
the desire of obtaining the greatest quantity of wealth with the least
labour and self-denial, the conclusions of Political Economy will so far
fail of being applicable to the explanation or prediction of real
events, until they are modified by a correct allowance for the degree of
influence exercised by the other cause.

Political Economy, then, may be defined as follows; and the definition
seems to be complete:--

"The science which traces the laws of such of the phenomena of society
as arise from the combined operations of mankind for the production of
wealth, in so far as those phenomena are not modified by the pursuit of
any other object."

But while this is a correct definition of Political Economy as a portion
of the field of science, the didactic writer on the subject will
naturally combine in his exposition, with the truths of the pure
science, as many of the practical modifications as will, in his
estimation, be most conducive to the usefulness of his work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The above attempt to frame a stricter definition of the science than
what are commonly received as such, may be thought to be of little use;
or, at best, to be chiefly useful in a general survey and classification
of the sciences, rather than as conducing to the more successful pursuit
of the particular science in question. We think otherwise, and for this
reason; that, with the consideration of the definition of a science, is
inseparably connected that of the _philosophic method_ of the science;
the nature of the process by which its investigations are to be carried
on, its truths to be arrived at.

Now, in whatever science there are systematic differences of opinion
--which is as much as to say, in all the moral or mental sciences, and
in Political Economy among the rest; in whatever science there exist,
among those who have attended to the subject, what are commonly called
differences of principle, as distinguished from differences of
matter-of-fact or detail,--the cause will be found to be, a difference
in their conceptions of the philosophic method of the science. The
parties who differ are guided, either knowingly or unconsciously, by
different views concerning the nature of the evidence appropriate to the
subject. They differ not solely in what they believe themselves to see,
but in the quarter whence they obtained the light by which they think
they see it.

The most universal of the forms in which this difference of method is
accustomed to present itself, is the ancient feud between what is called
theory, and what is called practice or experience. There are, on social
and political questions, two kinds of reasoners: there is one portion
who term themselves practical men, and call the others theorists; a
title which the latter do not reject, though they by no means recognise
it as peculiar to them. The distinction between the two is a very broad
one, though it is one of which the language employed is a most incorrect
exponent. It has been again and again demonstrated, that those who are
accused of despising facts and disregarding experience build and profess
to build wholly upon facts and experience; while those who disavow
theory cannot make one step without theorizing. But, although both
classes of inquirers do nothing but theorize, and both of them consult
no other guide than experience, there is this difference between them,
and a most important difference it is: that those who are called
practical men require _specific_ experience, and argue wholly _upwards_
from particular facts to a general conclusion; while those who are
called theorists aim at embracing a wider field of experience, and,
having argued upwards from particular facts to a general principle
including a much wider range than that of the question under discussion,
then argue _downwards_ from that general principle to a variety of
specific conclusions.

Suppose, for example, that the question were, whether absolute kings
were likely to employ the powers of government for the welfare or for
the oppression of their subjects. The practicals would endeavour to
determine this question by a direct induction from the conduct of
particular despotic monarchs, as testified by history. The theorists
would refer the question to be decided by the test not solely of our
experience of kings, but of our experience of men. They would contend
that an observation of the tendencies which human nature has manifested
in the variety of situations in which human beings have been placed, and
especially observation of what passes in our own minds, warrants us in
inferring that a human being in the situation of a despotic king will
make a bad use of power; and that this conclusion would lose nothing of
its certainty even if absolute kings had never existed, or if history
furnished us with no information of the manner in which they had
conducted themselves.

The first of these methods is a method of induction, merely; the last a
mixed method of induction and ratiocination. The first may be called the
method _à posteriori;_ the latter, the method _à priori_. We are aware
that this last expression is sometimes used to characterize a supposed
mode of philosophizing, which does not profess to be founded upon
experience at all. But we are not acquainted with any mode of
philosophizing, on political subjects at least, to which such a
description is fairly applicable. By the method _à posteriori_ we mean
that which requires, as the basis of its conclusions, not experience
merely, but specific experience. By the method _à priori_ we mean (what
has commonly been meant) reasoning from an assumed hypothesis; which is
not a practice confined to mathematics, but is of the essence of all
science which admits of general reasoning at all. To verify the
hypothesis itself _à posteriori_, that is, to examine whether the facts
of any actual case are in accordance with it, is no part of the business
of science at all, but of the _application_ of science.

In the definition which we have attempted to frame of the science of
Political Economy, we have characterized it as essentially an _abstract_
science, and its method as the method _à priori_. Such is undoubtedly
its character as it has been understood and taught by all its most
distinguished teachers. It reasons, and, as we contend, must necessarily
reason, from assumptions, not from facts. It is built upon hypotheses,
strictly analogous to those which, under the name of definitions, are
the foundation of the other abstract sciences. Geometry presupposes an
arbitrary definition of a line, "that which has length but not breadth."
Just in the same manner does Political Economy presuppose an arbitrary
definition of man, as a being who invariably does that by which he may
obtain the greatest amount of necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries,
with the smallest quantity of labour and physical self-denial with which
they can be obtained in the existing state of knowledge. It is true that
this definition of man is not formally prefixed to any work on Political
Economy, as the definition of a line is prefixed to Euclid's Elements;
and in proportion as by being so prefixed it would be less in danger of
being forgotten, we may see ground for regret that this is not done. It
is proper that what is assumed in every particular case, should once for
all be brought before the mind in its full extent, by being somewhere
formally stated as a general maxim. Now, no one who is conversant with
systematic treatises on Political Economy will question, that whenever a
political economist has shown that, by acting in a particular manner, a
labourer may obviously obtain higher wages, a capitalist larger profits,
or a landlord higher rent, he concludes, as a matter of course, that
they will certainly act in that manner. Political Economy, therefore,
reasons from _assumed_ premises--from premises which might be totally
without foundation in fact, and which are not pretended to be
universally in accordance with it. The conclusions of Political Economy,
consequently, like those of geometry, are only true, as the common
phrase is, _in the abstract_; that is, they are only true under certain
suppositions, in which none but general causes--causes common to the
_whole class_ of cases under consideration--are taken into the account.

This ought not to be denied by the political economist. If he deny it,
then, and then only, he places himself in the wrong. The _à priori_
method which is laid to his charge, as if his employment of it proved
his whole science to be worthless, is, as we shall presently show, the
only method by which truth can possibly be attained in any department of
the social science. All that is requisite is, that he be on his guard
not to ascribe to conclusions which are grounded upon an hypothesis a
different kind of certainty from that which really belongs to them. They
would be true without qualification, only in a case which is purely
imaginary. In proportion as the actual facts recede from the hypothesis,
he must allow a corresponding deviation from the strict letter of his
conclusion; otherwise it will be true only of things such as he has
arbitrarily supposed, not of such things as really exist. That which is
true in the abstract, is always true in the concrete with proper
_allowances_. When a certain cause really exists, and if left to itself
would infallibly produce a certain effect, that same effect, _modified_
by all the other concurrent causes, will correctly correspond to the
result really produced.

The conclusions of geometry are not strictly true of such lines, angles,
and figures, as human hands can construct. But no one, therefore,
contends that the conclusions of geometry are of no utility, or that it
would be better to shut up Euclid's Elements, and content ourselves with
"practice" and "experience."

No mathematician ever thought that his definition of a line corresponded
to an actual line. As little did any political economist ever imagine
that real men had no object of desire but wealth, or none which would
not give way to the slightest motive of a pecuniary kind. But they were
justified in assuming this, for the purposes of their argument; because
they had to do only with those parts of human conduct which have
pecuniary advantage for their direct and principal object; and because,
as no two individual cases are exactly alike, no _general_ maxims could
ever be laid down unless _some_ of the circumstances of the particular
case were left out of consideration.

But we go farther than to affirm that the method _à priori_ is a
legitimate mode of philosophical investigation in the moral sciences: we
contend that it is the only mode. We affirm that the method _à
posteriori_, or that of specific experience, is altogether inefficacious
in those sciences, as a means of arriving at any considerable body of
valuable truth; though it admits of being usefully applied in aid of the
method _à priori_, and even forms an indispensable supplement to it.

There is a property common to almost all the moral sciences, and by
which they are distinguished from many of the physical; this is, that it
is seldom in our power to make experiments in them. In chemistry and
natural philosophy, we can not only observe what happens under all the
combinations of circumstances which nature brings together, but we may
also try an indefinite number of new combinations. This we can seldom do
in ethical, and scarcely ever in political science. We cannot try forms
of government and systems of national policy on a diminutive scale in
our laboratories, shaping our experiments as we think they may most
conduce to the advancement of knowledge. We therefore study nature under
circumstances of great disadvantage in these sciences; being confined to
the limited number of experiments which take place (if we may so speak)
of their own accord, without any preparation or management of ours; in
circumstances, moreover, of great complexity, and never perfectly known
to us; and with the far greater part of the processes concealed from our
observation.

The consequence of this unavoidable defect in the materials of the
induction is, that we can rarely obtain what Bacon has quaintly, but not
unaptly, termed an _experimentum crucis_.

In any science which admits of an unlimited range of arbitrary
experiments, an _experimentum crucis_ may always be obtained. Being able
to vary all the circumstances, we can always take effectual means of
ascertaining which of them are, and which are not, material. Call the
effect B, and let the question be whether the cause A in any way
contributes to it. We try an experiment in which all the surrounding
circumstances are altered, except A alone: if the effect B is
nevertheless produced, A is the cause of it. Or, instead of leaving A,
and changing the other circumstances, we leave all the other
circumstances and change A: if the effect B in that case does _not_ take
place, then again A is a necessary condition of its existence. Either of
these experiments, if accurately performed, is an _experimentum crucis_;
it converts the presumption we had before of the existence of a
connection between A and B into proof, by negativing every other
hypothesis which would account for the appearances.

But this can seldom be done in the moral sciences, owing to the immense
multitude of the influencing circumstances, and our very scanty means of
varying the experiment. Even in operating upon an individual mind, which
is the case affording greatest room for experimenting, we cannot often
obtain a _crucial_ experiment. The effect, for example, of a particular
circumstance in education, upon the formation of character, may be tried
in a variety of cases, but we can hardly ever be certain that any two of
those cases differ in all their circumstances except the solitary one of
which we wish to estimate the influence. In how much greater a degree
must this difficulty exist in the affairs of states, where even the
_number_ of recorded experiments is so scanty in comparison with the
variety and multitude of the circumstances concerned in each. How, for
example, can we obtain a crucial experiment on the effect of a
restrictive commercial policy upon national wealth? We must find two
nations alike in every other respect, or at least possessed, in a degree
exactly equal, of everything which conduces to national opulence, and
adopting exactly the same policy in all their other affairs, but
differing in this only, that one of them adopts a system of commercial
restrictions, and the other adopts free trade. This would be a decisive
experiment, similar to those which we can almost always obtain in
experimental physics. Doubtless this would be the most conclusive
evidence of all if we could get it. But let any one consider how
infinitely numerous and various are the circumstances which either
directly or indirectly do or may influence the amount of the national
wealth, and then ask himself what are the probabilities that in the
longest revolution of ages two nations will be found, which agree, and
can be shown to agree, in all those circumstances except one?

Since, therefore, it is vain to hope that truth can be arrived at,
either in Political Economy or in any other department of the social
science, while we look at the facts in the concrete, clothed in all the
complexity with which nature has surrounded them, and endeavour to
elicit a general law by a process of induction from a comparison of
details; there remains no other method than the _à priori_ one, or that
of "abstract speculation."

Although sufficiently ample grounds are not afforded in the field of
politics, for a satisfactory induction by a comparison of the effects,
the causes may, in all cases, be made the subject of specific
experiment. These causes are, laws of human nature, and external
circumstances capable of exciting the human will to action. The desires
of man, and the nature of the conduct to which they prompt him, are
within the reach of our observation. We can also observe what are the
objects which excite those desires. The materials of this knowledge
every one can principally collect within himself; with reasonable
consideration of the differences, of which experience discloses to him
the existence, between himself and other people. Knowing therefore
accurately the properties of the substances concerned, we may reason
with as much certainty as in the most demonstrative parts of physics
from any assumed set of circumstances. This will be mere trifling if the
assumed circumstances bear no sort of resemblance to any real ones; but
if the assumption is correct as far as it goes, and differs from the
truth no otherwise than as a part differs from the whole, then the
conclusions which are correctly deduced from the assumption constitute
_abstract_ truth; and when completed by adding or subtracting the effect
of the non-calculated circumstances, they are true in the concrete, and
may be applied to practice.

Of this character is the science of Political Economy in the writings of
its best teachers. To render it perfect as an abstract science, the
combinations of circumstances which it assumes, in order to trace their
effects, should embody all the circumstances that are common to all
cases whatever, and likewise all the circumstances that are common to
any important class of cases. The conclusions correctly deduced from
these assumptions, would be as true in the abstract as those of
mathematics; and would be as near an approximation as abstract truth can
ever be, to truth in the concrete.

When the principles of Political Economy are to be applied to a
particular ease, then it is necessary to take into account all the
individual circumstances of that case; not only examining to which of
the sets of circumstances contemplated by the abstract science the
circumstances of the case in question correspond, but likewise what
other circumstances may exist in that case, which not being common to it
with any large and strongly-marked class of cases, have not fallen under
the cognizance of the science. These circumstances have been called
_disturbing causes_. And here only it is that an element of uncertainty
enters into the process--an uncertainty inherent in the nature of these
complex phenomena, and arising from the impossibility of being quite
sure that all the circumstances of the particular case are known to us
sufficiently in detail, and that our attention is not unduly diverted
from any of them.

This constitutes the only uncertainty of Political Economy; and not of
it alone, but of the moral sciences in general. When the disturbing
causes are known, the allowance necessary to be made for them detracts
in no way from scientific precision, nor constitutes any deviation from
the _à priori_ method. The disturbing causes are not handed over to be
dealt with by mere conjecture. Like _friction_ in mechanics, to which
they have been often compared, they may at first have been considered
merely as a non-assignable deduction to be made by guess from the result
given by the general principles of science; but in time many of them are
brought within the pale of the abstract science itself, and their effect
is found to admit of as accurate an estimation as those more striking
effects which they modify. The disturbing causes have their laws, as the
causes which are thereby disturbed have theirs; and from the laws of the
disturbing causes, the nature and amount of the disturbance may be
predicted _à priori_, like the operation of the more general laws which
they are said to modify or disturb, but with which they might more
properly be said to be concurrent. The effect of the special causes is
then to be added to, or subtracted from, the effect of the general ones.

These disturbing causes are sometimes circumstances which operate upon
human conduct through the same principle of human nature with which
Political Economy is conversant, namely, the desire of wealth, but which
are not general enough to be taken into account in the abstract science.
Of disturbances of this description every political economist can
produce many examples. In other instances the disturbing cause is some
other law of human nature. In the latter case it never can fall within
the province of Political Economy; it belongs to some other science; and
here the mere political economist, he who has studied no science but
Political Economy, if he attempt to apply his science to practice, will
fail. [11]

As for the other kind of disturbing causes, namely those which operate
through the same law of human nature out of which the general principles
of the science arise, these might always be brought within the pale of
the abstract science if it were worth while; and when we make the
necessary allowances for them in practice, if we are doing anything but
guess, we are following out the method of the abstract science into
minuter details; inserting among its hypotheses a fresh and still more
complex combination of circumstances, and so adding _pro hác vice_ a
supplementary chapter or appendix, or at least a supplementary theorem,
to the abstract science.

Having now shown that the method _à priori_ in Political Economy, and
in all the other branches of moral science, is the only certain or
scientific mode of investigation, and that the _à posteriori_ method,
or that of specific experience, as a means of arriving at truth, is
inapplicable to these subjects, we shall be able to show that the latter
method is notwithstanding of great value in the moral sciences; namely,
not as a means of discovering truth, but of verifying it, and reducing
to the lowest point that uncertainty before alluded to as arising from
the complexity of every particular case, and from the difficulty (not to
say impossibility) of our being assured _à priori_ that we have taken
into account all the material circumstances.

If we could be quite certain that we knew all the facts of the
particular case, we could derive little additional advantage from
specific experience. The causes being given, we may know what will be
their effect, without an actual trial of every possible combination;
since the causes are human feelings, and outward circumstances fitted to
excite them: and, as these for the most part are, or at least might be,
familiar to us, we can more surely judge of their combined effect from
that familiarity, than from any evidence which can be elicited from the
complicated and entangled circumstances of an actual experiment. If the
knowledge what are the particular causes operating in any given instance
were revealed to us by infallible authority, then, if our abstract
science were perfect, we should become prophets. But the causes are not
so revealed: they are to be collected by observation; and observation in
circumstances of complexity is apt to be imperfect. Some of the causes
may lie beyond observation; many are apt to escape it, unless we are on
the look-out for them; and it is only the habit of long and accurate
observation which can give us so correct a preconception what causes we
are likely to find, as shall induce us to look for them in the right
quarter. But such is the nature of the human understanding, that the
very fact of attending with intensity to one part of a thing, has a
tendency to withdraw the attention from the other parts. We are
consequently in great danger of adverting to a portion only of the
causes which are actually at work. And if we are in this predicament,
the more accurate our deductions and the more certain our conclusions in
the abstract, (that is, making abstraction of all circumstances except
those which form part of the hypothesis,) the less we are likely to
suspect that we are in error: for no one can have looked closely into
the sources of fallacious thinking without being deeply conscious that
the coherence, and neat concatenation of our philosophical systems, is
more apt than we are commonly aware to pass with us as evidence of their
truth.

We cannot, therefore, too carefully endeavour to verify our theory, by
comparing, in the particular cases to which we have access, the results
which it would have led us to predict, with the most trustworthy
accounts we can obtain of those which have been actually realized. The
discrepancy between our anticipations and the actual fact is often the
only circumstance which would have drawn our attention to some important
disturbing cause which we had overlooked. Nay, it often discloses to us
errors in thought, still more serious than the omission of what can with
any propriety be termed a disturbing cause. It often reveals to us that
the basis itself of our whole argument is insufficient; that the data,
from which we had reasoned, comprise only a part, and not always the
most important part, of the circumstances by which the result is really
determined. Such oversights are committed by very good reasoners, and
even by a still rarer class, that of good observers. It is a kind of
error to which those are peculiarly liable whose views are the largest
and most philosophical: for exactly in that ratio are their minds more
accustomed to dwell upon those laws, qualities, and tendencies, which
are common to large classes of cases, and which belong to all place and
all time; while it often happens that circumstances almost peculiar to
the particular case or era have a far greater share in governing that
one case.

Although, therefore, a philosopher be convinced that no general truths
can be attained in the affairs of nations by the _à posteriori_ road,
it does not the less behove him, according to the measure of his
opportunities, to sift and scrutinize the details of every specific
experiment. Without this, he may be an excellent professor of abstract
science; for a person may be of great use who points out correctly what
effects will follow from certain combinations of possible circumstances,
in whatever tract of the extensive region of hypothetical cases those
combinations may be found. He stands in the same relation to the
legislator, as the mere geographer to the practical navigator; telling
him the latitude and longitude of all sorts of places, but not how to
find whereabouts he himself is sailing. If, however, he does no more
than this, he must rest contented to take no share in practical
politics; to have no opinion, or to hold it with extreme modesty, on
the applications which should be made of his doctrines to existing
circumstances.

No one who attempts to lay down propositions for the guidance of
mankind, however perfect his scientific acquirements, can dispense with
a practical knowledge of the actual modes in which the affairs of the
world are carried on, and an extensive personal experience of the actual
ideas, feelings, and intellectual and moral tendencies of his own
country and of his own age. The true practical statesman is he who
combines this experience with a profound knowledge of abstract political
philosophy. Either acquirement, without the other, leaves him lame and
impotent if he is sensible of the deficiency; renders him obstinate and
presumptuous if, as is more probable, he is entirely unconscious of it.

Such, then, are the respective offices and uses of the _à priori_ and
the _à posteriori_ methods--the method of abstract science, and that of
specific experiment--as well in Political Economy, as in all the other
branches of social philosophy. Truth compels us to express our
conviction that whether among those who have written on, these subjects,
or among those for whose use they wrote, few can be pointed out who have
allowed to each of these methods its just value, and systematically kept
each to its proper objects and functions. One of the peculiarities of
modern times, the separation of theory from practice--of the studies of
the closet, from the outward business of the world--has given a wrong
bias to the ideas and feelings both of the student and of the man of
business. Each undervalues that part of the materials of thought with
which he is not familiar. The one despises all comprehensive views, the
other neglects details. The one draws his notion of the universe from
the few objects with which his course of life has happened to render him
familiar; the other having got demonstration on his side, and forgetting
that it is only a demonstration _nisi_--a proof at all times liable to
be set aside by the addition of a single new fact to the hypothesis
--denies, instead of examining and sifting, the allegations which are
opposed to him. For this he has considerable excuse in the worthlessness
of the testimony on which the facts brought forward to invalidate the
conclusions of theory usually rest. In these complex matters, men see
with their preconceived opinions, not with their eyes: an interested or
a passionate man's statistics are of little worth; and a year seldom
passes without examples of the astounding falsehoods which large bodies
of respectable men will back each other in publishing to the world as
facts within their personal knowledge. It is not because a thing is
_asserted_ to be true, but because in its nature it _may_ be true, that
a sincere and patient inquirer will feel himself called upon to
investigate it. He will use the assertions of opponents not as evidence,
but indications leading to evidence; suggestions of the most proper
course for his own inquiries.

But while the philosopher and the practical man bandy half-truths with
one another, we may seek far without finding one who, placed on a higher
eminence of thought, comprehends as a whole what they see only in
separate parts; who can make the anticipations of the philosopher guide
the observation of the practical man, and the specific experience of the
practical man warn the philosopher where something is to be added to his
theory.

The most memorable example in modern times of a man who united the
spirit of philosophy with the pursuits of active life, and kept wholly
clear from the partialities and prejudices both of the student and of
the practical statesman, was Turgot; the wonder not only of his age, but
of history, for his astonishing combination of the most opposite, and,
judging from common experience, almost incompatible excellences.

Though it is impossible to furnish any test by which a speculative
thinker, either in Political Economy or in any other branch of social
philosophy, may know that he is competent to judge of the application of
his principles to the existing condition of his own or any other country,
indications may be suggested by the absence of which he may well and
surely know that he is not competent. His knowledge must at least enable
him to explain and account for what _is_, or he is an insufficient judge
of what ought to be. If a political economist, for instance, finds
himself puzzled by any recent or present commercial phenomena; if there
is any mystery to him in the late or present state of the productive
industry of the country, which his knowledge of principle does not
enable him to unriddle; he may be sure that something is wanting to
render his system of opinions a safe guide in existing circumstances.
Either some of the facts which influence the situation of the country
and the course of events are not known to him; or, knowing them, he
knows not what ought to be their effects. In the latter case his system
is imperfect even as an abstract system; it does not enable him to trace
correctly all the consequences even of assumed premises. Though he
succeed in throwing doubts upon the reality of some of the phenomena
which he is required to explain, his task is not yet completed; even
then he is called upon to show how the belief, which he deems unfounded,
arose; and what is the real nature of the appearances which gave a
colour of probability to allegations which examination proves to be
untrue.

When the speculative politician has gone through this labour--has gone
through it conscientiously, not with the desire of finding his system
complete, but of making it so--he may deem himself qualified to apply
his principles to the guidance of practice: but he must still continue
to exercise the same discipline upon every new combination of facts as
it arises; he must make a large allowance for the disturbing influence
of unforeseen causes, and must carefully watch the result of every
experiment, in order that any residuum of facts which his principles did
not lead him to expect, and do not enable him to explain, may become the
subject of a fresh analysis, and furnish the occasion for a consequent
enlargement or correction of his general views.

The method of the practical philosopher consists, therefore, of two
processes; the one analytical, the other synthetical. He must _analyze_
the existing state of society into its elements, not dropping and losing
any of them by the way. After referring to the experience of individual
man to learn the _law_ of each of these elements, that is, to learn what
are its natural effects, and how much of the effect follows from so much
of the cause when not counteracted by any other cause, there remains an
operation of _synthesis_; to put all these effects together, and, from
what they are separately, to collect what would be the effect of all the
causes acting at once. If these various operations could be correctly
performed, the result would be prophecy; but, as they can be performed
only with a certain approximation to correctness, mankind can never
predict with absolute certainty, but only with a less or greater degree
of probability; according as they are better or worse apprised what the
causes are,--have learnt with more or less accuracy from experience the
law to which each of those causes, when acting separately, conforms,
--and have summed up the aggregate effect more or less carefully.

With all the precautions which have been indicated there will still be
some danger of falling into partial views; but we shall at least have
taken the best securities against it. All that we can do more, is to
endeavour to be impartial critics of our own theories, and to free
ourselves, as far as we are able, from that reluctance from which few
inquirers are altogether him to expect, and do not enable him to
explain, may become the subject of a fresh analysis, and furnish the
occasion for a consequent enlargement or correction of his general
views.

The method of the practical philosopher consists, therefore, of two
processes; the one analytical, the other synthetical. He must _analyze_
the existing state of society into its elements, not dropping and losing
any of them by the way. After referring to the experience of individual
man to learn the _law_ of each of these elements, that is, to learn what
are its natural effects, and how much of the effect follows from so much
of the cause when not counteracted by any other cause, there remains an
operation of _synthesis_; to put all these effects together, and, from
what they are separately, to collect what would be the effect of all the
causes acting at once. If these various operations could be correctly
performed, the result would be prophecy; but, as they can be performed
only with a certain approximation to correctness, mankind can never
predict with absolute certainty, but only with a less or greater degree
of probability; according as they are better or worse apprised what the
causes are,--have learnt with more or less accuracy from experience the
law to which each of those causes, when acting separately, conforms,--and
have summed up the aggregate effect more or less carefully.

With all the precautions which have been indicated there will still be
some danger of falling into partial views; but we shall at least have
taken the best securities against it. All that we can do more, is to
endeavour to be impartial critics of our own theories, and to free
ourselves, as far as we are able, from that reluctance from which few
inquirers are altogether exempt, to admit the reality or relevancy of
any facts which they have not previously either taken into, or left a
place open for in, their systems.

If indeed every phenomenon was generally the effect of no more than one
cause, a knowledge of the law of that cause would, unless there was a
logical error in our reasoning, enable us confidently to predict all the
circumstances of the phenomenon. We might then, if we had carefully
examined our premises and our reasoning, and found no flaw, venture to
disbelieve the testimony which might be brought to show that matters had
turned out differently from what we should have predicted. If the causes
of erroneous conclusions were always patent on the face of the
reasonings which lead to them, the human understanding would be a far
more trustworthy instrument than it is. But the narrowest examination of
the process itself will help us little towards discovering that we have
omitted part of the premises which we ought to have taken into our
reasoning. Effects are commonly determined by a _concurrence_ of causes.
If we have overlooked any one cause, we may reason justly from all the
others, and only be the further wrong. Our premises will be true, and
our reasoning correct, and yet the result of no value in the particular
case. There is, therefore, almost always room for a modest doubt as to
our practical conclusions. Against false premises and unsound reasoning,
a good mental discipline may effectually secure us; but against the
danger of _overlooking_ something, neither strength of understanding nor
intellectual cultivation can be more than a very imperfect protection.
A person may be warranted in feeling confident, that whatever he has
carefully contemplated with his mind's eye he has seen correctly; but no
one can be sure that there is not something in existence which he has
not seen at all. He can do no more than satisfy himself that he has seen
all that is visible to any other persons who have concerned themselves
with the subject. For this purpose he must endeavour to place himself at
their point of view, and strive earnestly to see the object as they see
it; nor give up the attempt until he has either added the appearance
which is floating before them to his own stock of realities, or made out
clearly that it is an optical deception.

       *       *       *       *       *

The principles which we have now stated are by no means alien to common
apprehension: they are not absolutely hidden, perhaps, from any one, but
are commonly seen through a mist. We might have presented the latter
part of them in a phraseology in which they would have seemed the most
familiar of truisms: we might have cautioned inquirers against too
extensive _generalization_, and reminded them that there are _exceptions_
to all rules. Such is the current language of those who distrust
comprehensive thinking, without having any clear notion why or where it
ought to be distrusted. We have avoided the use of these expressions
purposely, because we deem them superficial and inaccurate. The error,
when there is error, does _not_ arise from generalizing too extensively;
that is, from including too wide a range of particular cases in a single
proposition. Doubtless, a man often asserts of an entire class what is
only true of a part of it; but his error generally consists not in making
too wide an assertion, but in making the wrong _kind_ of assertion: he
predicated an actual result, when he should only have predicated a
_tendency_ to that result--a power acting with a certain intensity in that
direction. With regard to _exceptions_; in any tolerably ably advanced
science there is properly no such thing as an exception. What is thought
to be an exception to a principle is always some other and distinct
principle cutting into the former: some other force which impinges against
the first force, and deflects it from its direction. There are not a _law_
and an _exception_ to that law--the law acting in ninety-nine cases, and
the exception in one. There are two laws, each possibly acting in the
whole hundred cases, and bringing about a common effect by their conjunct
operation. If the force which, being the less conspicuous of the two, is
called the disturbing force, prevails sufficiently over the other force
in some one case, to constitute that case what is commonly called an
exception, the same disturbing force probably acts as a modifying cause
in many other cases which no one will call exceptions.

Thus if it were stated to be a law of nature, that all heavy bodies fall
to the ground, it would probably be said that the resistance of the
atmosphere, which prevents a balloon from falling, constitutes the
balloon an exception to that pretended law of nature. But the real law
is, that all heavy bodies _tend_ to fall; and to this there is no
exception, not even the sun and moon; for even they, as every astronomer
knows, tend towards the earth, with a force exactly equal to that with
which the earth tends towards them. The resistance of the atmosphere
might, in the particular case of the balloon, from a misapprehension of
what the law of gravitation is, be said to _prevail_ over the law; but
its disturbing effect is quite as real in every other case, since though
it does not prevent, it retards the fall of all bodies whatever. The
rule, and the so-called exception, do not divide the cases between them;
each of them is a comprehensive rule extending to all cases. To call one
of these concurrent principles an exception to the other, is
superficial, and contrary to the correct principles of nomenclature and
arrangement. An effect of precisely the same kind, and arising from the
same cause, ought not to be placed in two different categories, merely
as there does or does not exist another cause preponderating over it.

It is only in art, as distinguished from science, that we can with
propriety speak of exceptions. Art, the immediate end of which is
practice, has nothing to do with causes, except as the means of bringing
about effects. However heterogeneous the causes, it carries the effects
of them all into one single reckoning, and according as the sum-total is
_plus_ or _minus_, according as it falls above or below a certain line,
Art says, Do this, or Abstain from doing it. The exception does not run
by insensible degrees into the rule, like what are called exceptions in
science. In a question of practice it frequently happens that a certain
thing is either fit to be done, or fit to be altogether abstained from,
there being no medium. If, in the majority of cases, it is fit to be
done, that is made the rule. When a case subsequently occurs in which
the thing ought not to be done, an entirely new leaf is turned over; the
rule is now done with, and dismissed: a new train of ideas is introduced,
between which and those involved in the rule there is a broad line of
demarcation; as broad and _tranchant_ as the difference between Ay and
No. Very possibly, between the last case which comes within the rule and
the first of the exception, there is only the difference of a shade: but
that shade probably makes the whole interval between acting in one way
and in a totally different one. We may, therefore, in talking of art,
unobjectionably speak of the _rule_ and the _exception_; meaning by the
rule, the cases in which there exists a preponderance, however slight,
of inducements for acting in a particular way; and by the exception, the
cases in which the preponderance is on the contrary side.


THE END.


NOTES:

[8] We say, the _production_ and _distribution_, not, as is usual with
writers on this science, the production, distribution, and _consumption_.
For we contend that Political Economy, as conceived by those very
writers, has nothing to do with the consumption of wealth, further than
as the consideration of it is inseparable from that of production, or
from that of distribution. We know not of any _laws_ of the _consumption_
of wealth as the subject of a distinct science: they can be no other
than the laws of human enjoyment. Political economists have never treated
of consumption on its own account, but always for the purpose of the
inquiry in what manner different kinds of consumption affect the production
and distribution of wealth. Under the head of Consumption, in professed
treatises on the science, the following are the subjects treated of: 1st,
The distinction between _productive_ and _unproductive_ consumption; 2nd,
The inquiry whether it is possible for _too much_ wealth to be _produced_,
and for too great a portion of what has been produced to be applied to the
purpose of further _production_; 3rd, The theory of taxation, that is to
say, the following two questions--by whom each particular tax is paid
(a question of _distribution_), and in what manner particular taxes affect
_production_.

[9] The physical laws of the production of useful objects are all
equally presupposed by the science of Political Economy: most of them,
however, it presupposes in the gross, seeming to say nothing about them.
A few (such, for instance, as the decreasing ratio in which the produce
of the soil is increased by an increased application of labour) it is
obliged particularly to specify, and thus seems to borrow those truths
from the physical sciences to which they properly belong, and include
them among its own.

[10] The _science_ of legislation is an incorrect and misleading
expression. Legislation is _making laws_. We do not talk of the
_science_ of _making_ anything. Even the _science of government_ would
be an objectionable expression, were it not that _government_ is often
loosely taken to signify, not the act of governing, but the state or
condition of _being governed_, or of living under a government. A
preferable expression would be, the science of _political society_; a
principal branch of the more extensive science of society, characterized
in the text.

[11] One of the strongest reasons for drawing the line of separation
clearly and broadly between science and art is the following:--That the
principle of classification in science most conveniently follows the
classification of _causes_, while arts must necessarily be classified
according to the classification of the _effects_, the production of
which is their appropriate end. Now an effect, whether in physics or
morals, commonly depends upon a concurrence of causes, and it frequently
happens that several of these causes belong to different sciences. Thus
in the construction of engines upon the principles of the science of
_mechanics_, it is necessary to bear in mind the _chemical_ properties
of the material, such as its liability to oxydize; its electrical and
magnetic properties, and so forth. From this it follows that although
the necessary foundation of all art is science, that is, the knowledge
of the properties or laws of the objects upon which, and with which, the
art dons its work; it is not equally true that every art corresponds to
one particular science. Each art presupposes, not one science, but
science in general; or, at least, many distinct sciences.



(Editor's note:)

Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy

These five essays represent Mill's earliest thoughts on economic matters
and were first composed in 1829 and 1830 before his reputation had been
established by the publication of _Logic_ in 1843. Their successful
reception no doubt hastened the composition of his comprehensive work
the _Principles of Political Economy_ (1848).




On Liberty.

By John Stuart Mill.

With an Introduction by W. L. Courtney, LL.D.

The Walter Scott Publishing Co., Ltd.
London and Felling-on-Tyne
New York and Melbourne




_To the beloved and deplored memory of her who was the inspirer, and in
part the author, of all that is best in my writings--the friend and wife
whose exalted sense of truth and right was my strongest incitement, and
whose approbation was my chief reward--I dedicate this volume. Like all
that I have written for many years, it belongs as much to her as to me;
but the work as it stands has had, in a very insufficient degree, the
inestimable advantage of her revision; some of the most important
portions having been reserved for a more careful re-examination, which
they are now never destined to receive. Were I but capable of
interpreting to the world one-half the great thoughts and noble feelings
which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of a greater
benefit to it than is ever likely to arise from anything that I can
write, unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled wisdom._




INTRODUCTION.


I.

John Stuart Mill was born on 20th May 1806. He was a delicate child, and
the extraordinary education designed by his father was not calculated to
develop and improve his physical powers. "I never was a boy," he says;
"never played cricket." His exercise was taken in the form of walks with
his father, during which the elder Mill lectured his son and examined
him on his work. It is idle to speculate on the possible results of a
different treatment. Mill remained delicate throughout his life, but was
endowed with that intense mental energy which is so often combined with
physical weakness. His youth was sacrificed to an idea; he was designed
by his father to carry on his work; the individuality of the boy was
unimportant. A visit to the south of France at the age of fourteen, in
company with the family of General Sir Samuel Bentham, was not without
its influence. It was a glimpse of another atmosphere, though the
studious habits of his home life were maintained. Moreover, he derived
from it his interest in foreign politics, which remained one of his
characteristics to the end of his life. In 1823 he was appointed junior
clerk in the Examiners' Office at the India House.

Mill's first essays were written in the _Traveller_ about a year before
he entered the India House. From that time forward his literary work was
uninterrupted save by attacks of illness. His industry was stupendous.
He wrote articles on an infinite variety of subjects, political,
metaphysical, philosophic, religious, poetical. He discovered Tennyson
for his generation, he influenced the writing of Carlyle's _French
Revolution_ as well as its success. And all the while he was engaged in
studying and preparing for his more ambitious works, while he rose step
by step at the India Office. His _Essays on Unsettled Questions in
Political Economy_ were written in 1831, although they did not appear
until thirteen years later. His _System of Logic_, the design of which
was even then fashioning itself in his brain, took thirteen years to
complete, and was actually published before the _Political Economy_. In
1844 appeared the article on Michelet, which its author anticipated
would cause some discussion, but which did not create the sensation he
expected. Next year there were the "Claims of Labour" and "Guizot," and
in 1847 his articles on Irish affairs in the _Morning Chronicle_. These
years were very much influenced by his friendship and correspondence
with Comte, a curious comradeship between men of such different
temperament. In 1848 Mill published his _Political Economy_, to which he
had given his serious study since the completion of his _Logic_. His
articles and reviews, though they involved a good deal of work--as, for
instance, the re-perusal of the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey_ in the
original before reviewing Grote's _Greece_--were recreation to the
student. The year 1856 saw him head of the Examiners' Office in the
India House, and another two years brought the end of his official work,
owing to the transfer of India to the Crown. In the same year his wife
died. _Liberty_ was published shortly after, as well as the _Thoughts on
Parliamentary Reform_, and no year passed without Mill making important
contributions on the political, philosophical, and ethical questions of
the day.

Seven years after the death of his wife, Mill was invited to contest
Westminster. His feeling on the conduct of elections made him refuse to
take any personal action in the matter, and he gave the frankest
expression to his political views, but nevertheless he was elected by a
large majority. He was not a conventional success in the House; as a
speaker he lacked magnetism. But his influence was widely felt. "For the
sake of the House of Commons at large," said Mr. Gladstone, "I rejoiced
in his advent and deplored his disappearance. He did us all good." After
only three years in Parliament, he was defeated at the next General
Election by Mr. W. H. Smith. He retired to Avignon, to the pleasant
little house where the happiest years of his life had been spent in the
companionship of his wife, and continued his disinterested labours. He
completed his edition of his father's _Analysis of the Mind_, and also
produced, in addition to less important work, _The Subjection of Women_,
in which he had the active co-operation of his step-daughter. A book on
Socialism was under consideration, but, like an earlier study of
Sociology, it never was written. He died in 1873, his last years being
spent peacefully in the pleasant society of his step-daughter, from
whose tender care and earnest intellectual sympathy he caught maybe a
far-off reflection of the light which had irradiated his spiritual life.


II.

The circumstances under which John Stuart Mill wrote his _Liberty_ are
largely connected with the influence which Mrs. Taylor wielded over his
career. The dedication is well known. It contains the most extraordinary
panegyric on a woman that any philosopher has ever penned. "Were I but
capable of interpreting to the world one-half the great thoughts and
noble feelings which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of
a greater benefit to it than is ever likely to arise from anything that
I can write, unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled
wisdom." It is easy for the ordinary worldly cynicism to curl a
sceptical lip over sentences like these. There may be exaggeration of
sentiment, the necessary and inevitable reaction of a man who was
trained according to the "dry light" of so unimpressionable a man as
James Mill, the father; but the passage quoted is not the only one in
which John Stuart Mill proclaims his unhesitating belief in the
intellectual influence of his wife. The treatise on _Liberty_ was
written especially under her authority and encouragement, but there are
many earlier references to the power which she exercised over his mind.
Mill was introduced to her as early as 1831, at a dinner-party at Mr.
Taylor's house, where were present, amongst others, Roebuck, W. J. Fox,
and Miss Harriet Martineau. The acquaintance rapidly ripened into
intimacy and the intimacy into friendship, and Mill was never weary of
expatiating on all the advantages of so singular a relationship. In some
of the presentation copies of his work on _Political Economy_, he wrote
the following dedication:--"To Mrs. John Taylor, who, of all persons
known to the author, is the most highly qualified either to originate or
to appreciate speculation on social advancement, this work is with the
highest respect and esteem dedicated." An article on the enfranchisement
of women was made the occasion for another encomium. We shall hardly be
wrong in attributing a much later book, _The Subjection of Women_,
published in 1869, to the influence wielded by Mrs. Taylor. Finally, the
pages of the _Autobiography_ ring with the dithyrambic praise of his
"almost infallible counsellor."

The facts of this remarkable intimacy can easily be stated. The
deductions are more difficult. There is no question that Mill's
infatuation was the cause of considerable trouble to his acquaintances
and friends. His father openly taxed him with being in love with another
man's wife. Roebuck, Mrs. Grote, Mrs. Austin, Miss Harriet Martineau
were amongst those who suffered because they made some allusion to a
forbidden subject. Mrs. Taylor lived with her daughter in a lodging in
the country; but in 1851 her husband died, and then Mill made her his
wife. Opinions were widely divergent as to her merits; but every one
agreed that up to the time of her death, in 1858, Mill was wholly lost
to his friends. George Mill, one of Mill's younger brothers, gave it as
his opinion that she was a clever and remarkable woman, but "nothing
like what John took her to be." Carlyle, in his reminiscences, described
her with ambiguous epithets. She was "vivid," "iridescent," "pale and
passionate and sad-looking, a living-romance heroine of the royalist
volition and questionable destiny." It is not possible to make much of a
judgment like this, but we get on more certain ground when we discover
that Mrs. Carlyle said on one occasion that "she is thought to be
dangerous," and that Carlyle added that she was worse than dangerous,
she was patronising. The occasion when Mill and his wife were brought
into close contact with the Carlyles is well known. The manuscript of
the first volume of the _French Revolution_ had been lent to Mill, and
was accidentally burnt by Mrs. Mill's servant. Mill and his wife drove
up to Carlyle's door, the wife speechless, the husband so full of
conversation that he detained Carlyle with desperate attempts at
loquacity for two hours. But Dr. Garnett tells us, in his _Life of
Carlyle_, that Mill made a substantial reparation for the calamity for
which he was responsible by inducing the aggrieved author to accept half
of the £200 which he offered. Mrs. Mill, as I have said, died in 1858,
after seven years of happy companionship with her husband, and was
buried at Avignon. The inscription which Mill wrote for her grave is too
characteristic to be omitted:--"Her great and loving heart, her noble
soul, her clear, powerful, original, and comprehensive intellect, made
her the guide and support, the instructor in wisdom and the example in
goodness, as she was the sole earthly delight of those who had the
happiness to belong to her. As earnest for all public good as she was
generous and devoted to all who surrounded her, her influence has been
felt in many of the greatest improvements of the age, and will be in
those still to come. Were there even a few hearts and intellects like
hers, this earth would already become the hoped-for Heaven." These lines
prove the intensity of Mill's feeling, which is not afraid of abundant
verbiage; but they also prove that he could not imagine what the effect
would be on others, and, as Grote said, only Mill's reputation could
survive these and similar displays.

Every one will judge for himself of this romantic episode in Mill's
career, according to such experience as he may possess of the
philosophic mind and of the value of these curious but not infrequent
relationships. It may have been a piece of infatuation, or, if we prefer
to say so, it may have been the most gracious and the most human page in
Mill's career. Mrs. Mill may have flattered her husband's vanity by
echoing his opinions, or she may have indeed been an Egeria, full of
inspiration and intellectual helpfulness. What usually happens in these
cases,--although the philosopher himself, through his belief in the
equality of the sexes, was debarred from thinking so,--is the extremely
valuable action and reaction of two different classes and orders of
mind. To any one whose thoughts have been occupied with the sphere of
abstract speculation, the lively and vivid presentment of concrete fact
comes as a delightful and agreeable shock. The instinct of the woman
often enables her not only to apprehend but to illustrate a truth for
which she would be totally unable to give the adequate philosophic
reasoning. On the other hand, the man, with the more careful logical
methods and the slow processes of formal reasoning, is apt to suppose
that the happy intuition which leaps to the conclusion is really based
on the intellectual processes of which he is conscious in his own case.
Thus both parties to the happy contract are equally pleased. The
abstract truth gets the concrete illustration; the concrete illustration
finds its proper foundation in a series of abstract inquiries. Perhaps
Carlyle's epithets of "iridescent" and "vivid" refer incidentally to
Mrs. Mill's quick perceptiveness, and thus throw a useful light on the
mutual advantages of the common work of husband and wife. But it savours
almost of impertinence even to attempt to lift the veil on a mystery
like this. It is enough to say, perhaps, that however much we may
deplore the exaggeration of Mill's references to his wife, we recognise
that, for whatever reason, the pair lived an ideally happy life.

It still, however, remains to estimate the extent to which Mrs. Taylor,
both before and after her marriage with Mill, made actual contributions
to his thoughts and his public work. Here I may be perhaps permitted to
avail myself of what I have already written in a previous work.[1] Mill
gives us abundant help in this matter in the _Autobiography_. When first
he knew her, his thoughts were turning to the subject of Logic. But his
published work on the subject owed nothing to her, he tells us, in its
doctrines. It was Mill's custom to write the whole of a book so as to
get his general scheme complete, and then laboriously to re-write it in
order to perfect the phrases and the composition. Doubtless Mrs. Taylor
was of considerable help to him as a critic of style. But to be a critic
of doctrine she was hardly qualified. Mill has made some clear
admissions on this point. "The only actual revolution which has ever
taken place in my modes of thinking was already complete,"[2] he says,
before her influence became paramount. There is a curiously humble
estimate of his own powers (to which Dr. Bain has called attention),
which reads at first sight as if it contradicted this. "During the
greater part of my literary life I have performed the office in relation
to her, which, from a rather early period, I had considered as the most
useful part that I was qualified to take in the domain of thought, that
of an interpreter of original thinkers, and mediator between them and
the public." So far it would seem that Mill had sat at the feet of his
oracle; but observe the highly remarkable exception which is made in the
following sentence:--"For I had always a humble opinion of my own powers
as an original thinker, _except in abstract science (logic, metaphysics,
and the theoretic principles of political economy and politics.)_"[3] If
Mill then was an original thinker in logic, metaphysics, and the science
of economy and politics, it is clear that he had not learnt these from
her lips. And to most men logic and metaphysics may be safely taken as
forming a domain in which originality of thought, if it can be honestly
professed, is a sufficient title of distinction.

Mrs. Taylor's assistance in the _Political Economy_ is confined to
certain definite points. The purely scientific part was, we are assured,
not learnt from her. "But it was chiefly her influence which gave to the
book that general tone by which it is distinguished from all previous
expositions of political economy that had any pretensions to be
scientific, and which has made it so useful in conciliating minds which
those previous expositions had repelled. This tone consisted chiefly in
making the proper distinction between the laws of the production of
wealth, which are real laws of Nature, dependent on the properties of
objects, and the modes of its distribution, which, subject to certain
conditions, depend on human will.... _I had indeed partially learnt this
view of things from the thoughts awakened in me by the speculations of
St. Simonians_; but it was made a living principle, pervading and
animating the book, by my wife's promptings."[4] The part which is
italicised is noticeable. Here, as elsewhere, Mill thinks out the matter
by himself; the concrete form of the thoughts is suggested or prompted
by the wife. Apart from this "general tone," Mill tells us that there
was a specific contribution. "The chapter which has had a greater
influence on opinion than all the rest, that on the Probable Future of
the Labouring Classes, is entirely due to her. In the first draft of the
book that chapter did not exist. She pointed out the need of such a
chapter, and the extreme imperfection of the book without it; she was
the cause of my writing it." From this it would appear that she gave
Mill that tendency to Socialism which, while it lends a progressive
spirit to his speculations on politics, at the same time does not
manifestly accord with his earlier advocacy of peasant proprietorships.
Nor, again, is it, on the face of it, consistent with those doctrines of
individual liberty which, aided by the intellectual companionship of his
wife, he propounded in a later work. The ideal of individual freedom is
not the ideal of Socialism, just as that invocation of governmental aid
to which the Socialist resorts is not consistent with the theory of
_laisser-faire_. Yet _Liberty_ was planned by Mill and his wife in
concert. Perhaps a slight visionariness of speculation was no less the
attribute of Mrs. Mill than an absence of rigid logical principles. Be
this as it may, she undoubtedly checked the half-recognised leanings of
her husband in the direction of Coleridge and Carlyle. Whether this was
an instance of her steadying influence,[5] or whether it added one more
unassimilated element to Mill's diverse intellectual sustenance, may be
wisely left an open question. We cannot, however, be wrong in
attributing to her the parentage of one book of Mill, _The Subjection of
Women_. It is true that Mill had before learnt that men and women ought
to be equal in legal, political, social, and domestic relations. This
was a point on which he had already fallen foul of his father's essay on
_Government_. But Mrs. Taylor had actually written on this very point,
and the warmth and fervour of Mill's denunciations of women's servitude
were unmistakably caught from his wife's view of the practical
disabilities entailed by the feminine position.


III.

_Liberty_ was published in 1859, when the nineteenth century was half
over, but in its general spirit and in some of its special tendencies
the little tract belongs rather to the standpoint of the eighteenth
century than to that which saw its birth. In many of his speculations
John Stuart Mill forms a sort of connecting link between the doctrines
of the earlier English empirical school and those which we associate
with the name of Mr. Herbert Spencer. In his _Logic_, for instance, he
represents an advance on the theories of Hume, and yet does not see how
profoundly the victories of Science modify the conclusions of the
earlier thinker. Similarly, in his _Political Economy_, he desires to
improve and to enlarge upon Ricardo, and yet does not advance so far as
the modifications of political economy by Sociology, indicated by some
later--and especially German--speculations on the subject. In the tract
on _Liberty_, Mill is advocating the rights of the individual as against
Society at the very opening of an era that was rapidly coming to the
conclusion that the individual had no absolute rights against Society.
The eighteenth century view is that individuals existed first, each with
their own special claims and responsibilities; that they deliberately
formed a Social State, either by a contract or otherwise; and that then
finally they limited their own action out of regard for the interests of
the social organism thus arbitrarily produced. This is hardly the view
of the nineteenth century. It is possible that logically the individual
is prior to the State; historically and in the order of Nature, the
State is prior to the individual. In other words, such rights as every
single personality possesses in a modern world do not belong to him by
an original ordinance of Nature, but are slowly acquired in the growth
and development of the social state. It is not the truth that individual
liberties were forfeited by some deliberate act when men made themselves
into a Commonwealth. It is more true to say, as Aristotle said long ago,
that man is naturally a political animal, that he lived under strict
social laws as a mere item, almost a nonentity, as compared with the
Order, Society, or Community to which he belonged, and that such
privileges as he subsequently acquired have been obtained in virtue of
his growing importance as a member of a growing organisation. But if
this is even approximately true, it seriously restricts that liberty of
the individual for which Mill pleads. The individual has no chance,
because he has no rights, against the social organism. Society can
punish him for acts or even opinions which are anti-social in character.
His virtue lies in recognising the intimate communion with his fellows.
His sphere of activity is bounded by the common interest. Just as it is
an absurd and exploded theory that all men are originally equal, so it
is an ancient and false doctrine to protest that a man has an individual
liberty to live and think as he chooses in any spirit of antagonism to
that larger body of which he forms an insignificant part.

Nowadays this view of Society and of its development, which we largely
owe to the _Philosophie Positive_ of M. Auguste Comte, is so familiar
and possibly so damaging to the individual initiative, that it becomes
necessary to advance and proclaim the truth which resides in an opposite
theory. All progress, as we are aware, depends on the joint process of
integration and differentiation; synthesis, analysis, and then a larger
synthesis seem to form the law of development. If it ever comes to pass
that Society is tyrannical in its restrictions of the individual, if, as
for instance in some forms of Socialism, based on deceptive analogies of
Nature's dealings, the type is everything and the individual nothing, it
must be confidently urged in answer that the fuller life of the future
depends on the manifold activities, even though they may be
antagonistic, of the individual. In England, at all events, we know that
government in all its different forms, whether as King, or as a caste
of nobles, or as an oligarchical plutocracy, or even as trades unions,
is so dwarfing in its action that, for the sake of the future, the
individual must revolt. Just as our former point of view limited the
value of Mill's treatise on _Liberty_, so these considerations tend to
show its eternal importance. The omnipotence of Society means a dead
level of uniformity. The claim of the individual to be heard, to say
what he likes, to do what he likes, to live as he likes, is absolutely
necessary, not only for the variety of elements without which life is
poor, but also for the hope of a future age. So long as individual
initiative and effort are recognised as a vital element in English
history, so long will Mill's _Liberty_, which he confesses was based on
a suggestion derived from Von Humboldt, remain as an indispensable
contribution to the speculations, and also to the health and sanity, of
the world.


What his wife really was to Mill, we shall, perhaps, never know. But
that she was an actual and vivid force, which roused the latent
enthusiasm of his nature, we have abundant evidence. And when she died
at Avignon, though his friends may have regained an almost estranged
companionship, Mill was, personally, the poorer. Into the sorrow of that
bereavement we cannot enter: we have no right or power to draw the veil.
It is enough to quote the simple words, so eloquent of an unspoken
grief--"I can say nothing which could describe, even in the faintest
manner, what that loss was and is. But because I know that she would
have wished it, I endeavour to make the best of what life I have left,
and to work for her purposes with such diminished strength as can be
derived from thoughts of her, and communion with her memory."


W. L. COURTNEY.

LONDON, _July 5th, 1901_.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Life of John Stuart Mill_, chapter vi. (Walter Scott.)

[2] _Autobiography_, p. 190.

[3] _Ibid._, p. 242.

[4] _Autobiography_, pp. 246, 247.

[5] Cf. an instructive page in the _Autobiography_, p. 252.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.
                                            PAGE
INTRODUCTORY                                   1


CHAPTER II.

OF THE LIBERTY OF THOUGHT AND DISCUSSION      28


CHAPTER III.

OF INDIVIDUALITY, AS ONE OF THE ELEMENTS
OF WELL-BEING                                103


CHAPTER IV.

OF THE LIMITS TO THE AUTHORITY OF SOCIETY
OVER THE INDIVIDUAL                          140


CHAPTER V.

APPLICATIONS                                 177




The grand, leading principle, towards which every argument
unfolded in these pages directly converges, is the absolute and
essential importance of human development in its richest
diversity.--WILHELM VON HUMBOLDT: _Sphere and Duties of
Government_.




ON LIBERTY.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.


The subject of this Essay is not the so-called Liberty of the Will, so
unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of Philosophical
Necessity; but Civil, or Social Liberty: the nature and limits of the
power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the
individual. A question seldom stated, and hardly ever discussed, in
general terms, but which profoundly influences the practical
controversies of the age by its latent presence, and is likely soon to
make itself recognised as the vital question of the future. It is so far
from being new, that in a certain sense, it has divided mankind, almost
from the remotest ages; but in the stage of progress into which the more
civilised portions of the species have now entered, it presents itself
under new conditions, and requires a different and more fundamental
treatment.

The struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous
feature in the portions of history with which we are earliest familiar,
particularly in that of Greece, Rome, and England. But in old times this
contest was between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the
government. By liberty, was meant protection against the tyranny of the
political rulers. The rulers were conceived (except in some of the
popular governments of Greece) as in a necessarily antagonistic position
to the people whom they ruled. They consisted of a governing One, or a
governing tribe or caste, who derived their authority from inheritance
or conquest, who, at all events, did not hold it at the pleasure of the
governed, and whose supremacy men did not venture, perhaps did not
desire, to contest, whatever precautions might be taken against its
oppressive exercise. Their power was regarded as necessary, but also as
highly dangerous; as a weapon which they would attempt to use against
their subjects, no less than against external enemies. To prevent the
weaker members of the community from being preyed upon by innumerable
vultures, it was needful that there should be an animal of prey
stronger than the rest, commissioned to keep them down. But as the king
of the vultures would be no less bent upon preying on the flock than any
of the minor harpies, it was indispensable to be in a perpetual attitude
of defence against his beak and claws. The aim, therefore, of patriots,
was to set limits to the power which the ruler should be suffered to
exercise over the community; and this limitation was what they meant by
liberty. It was attempted in two ways. First, by obtaining a recognition
of certain immunities, called political liberties or rights, which it
was to be regarded as a breach of duty in the ruler to infringe, and
which if he did infringe, specific resistance, or general rebellion, was
held to be justifiable. A second, and generally a later expedient, was
the establishment of constitutional checks; by which the consent of the
community, or of a body of some sort, supposed to represent its
interests, was made a necessary condition to some of the more important
acts of the governing power. To the first of these modes of limitation,
the ruling power, in most European countries, was compelled, more or
less, to submit. It was not so with the second; and to attain this, or
when already in some degree possessed, to attain it more completely,
became everywhere the principal object of the lovers of liberty. And so
long as mankind were content to combat one enemy by another, and to be
ruled by a master, on condition of being guaranteed more or less
efficaciously against his tyranny, they did not carry their aspirations
beyond this point.

A time, however, came, in the progress of human affairs, when men ceased
to think it a necessity of nature that their governors should be an
independent power, opposed in interest to themselves. It appeared to
them much better that the various magistrates of the State should be
their tenants or delegates, revocable at their pleasure. In that way
alone, it seemed, could they have complete security that the powers of
government would never be abused to their disadvantage. By degrees, this
new demand for elective and temporary rulers became the prominent object
of the exertions of the popular party, wherever any such party existed;
and superseded, to a considerable extent, the previous efforts to limit
the power of rulers. As the struggle proceeded for making the ruling
power emanate from the periodical choice of the ruled, some persons
began to think that too much importance had been attached to the
limitation of the power itself. _That_ (it might seem) was a resource
against rulers whose interests were habitually opposed to those of the
people. What was now wanted was, that the rulers should be identified
with the people; that their interest and will should be the interest and
will of the nation. The nation did not need to be protected against its
own will. There was no fear of its tyrannising over itself. Let the
rulers be effectually responsible to it, promptly removable by it, and
it could afford to trust them with power of which it could itself
dictate the use to be made. Their power was but the nation's own power,
concentrated, and in a form convenient for exercise. This mode of
thought, or rather perhaps of feeling, was common among the last
generation of European liberalism, in the Continental section of which
it still apparently predominates. Those who admit any limit to what a
government may do, except in the case of such governments as they think
ought not to exist, stand out as brilliant exceptions among the
political thinkers of the Continent. A similar tone of sentiment might
by this time have been prevalent in our own country, if the
circumstances which for a time encouraged it, had continued unaltered.

But, in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons,
success discloses faults and infirmities which failure might have
concealed from observation. The notion, that the people have no need to
limit their power over themselves, might seem axiomatic, when popular
government was a thing only dreamed about, or read of as having existed
at some distant period of the past. Neither was that notion necessarily
disturbed by such temporary aberrations as those of the French
Revolution, the worst of which were the work of a usurping few, and
which, in any case, belonged, not to the permanent working of popular
institutions, but to a sudden and convulsive outbreak against
monarchical and aristocratic despotism. In time, however, a democratic
republic came to occupy a large portion of the earth's surface, and made
itself felt as one of the most powerful members of the community of
nations; and elective and responsible government became subject to the
observations and criticisms which wait upon a great existing fact. It
was now perceived that such phrases as "self-government," and "the power
of the people over themselves," do not express the true state of the
case. The "people" who exercise the power are not always the same people
with those over whom it is exercised; and the "self-government" spoken
of is not the government of each by himself, but of each by all the
rest. The will of the people, moreover, practically means, the will of
the most numerous or the most active _part_ of the people; the majority,
or those who succeed in making themselves accepted as the majority: the
people, consequently, _may_ desire to oppress a part of their number;
and precautions are as much needed against this, as against any other
abuse of power. The limitation, therefore, of the power of government
over individuals, loses none of its importance when the holders of power
are regularly accountable to the community, that is, to the strongest
party therein. This view of things, recommending itself equally to the
intelligence of thinkers and to the inclination of those important
classes in European society to whose real or supposed interests
democracy is adverse, has had no difficulty in establishing itself; and
in political speculations "the tyranny of the majority" is now generally
included among the evils against which society requires to be on its
guard.

Like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first, and is
still vulgarly, held in dread, chiefly as operating through the acts of
the public authorities. But reflecting persons perceived that when
society is itself the tyrant--society collectively, over the separate
individuals who compose it--its means of tyrannising are not restricted
to the acts which it may do by the hands of its political functionaries.
Society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong
mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which
it ought not to meddle, it practises a social tyranny more formidable
than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually
upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape,
penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the
soul itself. Protection, therefore, against the tyranny of the
magistrate is not enough: there needs protection also against the
tyranny of the prevailing opinion and feeling; against the tendency of
society to impose, by other means than civil penalties, its own ideas
and practices as rules of conduct on those who dissent from them; to
fetter the development, and, if possible, prevent the formation, of any
individuality not in harmony with its ways, and compel all characters to
fashion themselves upon the model of its own. There is a limit to the
legitimate interference of collective opinion with individual
independence: and to find that limit, and maintain it against
encroachment, is as indispensable to a good condition of human affairs,
as protection against political despotism.

But though this proposition is not likely to be contested in general
terms, the practical question, where to place the limit--how to make the
fitting adjustment between individual independence and social
control--is a subject on which nearly everything remains to be done. All
that makes existence valuable to any one, depends on the enforcement of
restraints upon the actions of other people. Some rules of conduct,
therefore, must be imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on
many things which are not fit subjects for the operation of law. What
these rules should be, is the principal question in human affairs; but
if we except a few of the most obvious cases, it is one of those which
least progress has been made in resolving. No two ages, and scarcely any
two countries, have decided it alike; and the decision of one age or
country is a wonder to another. Yet the people of any given age and
country no more suspect any difficulty in it, than if it were a subject
on which mankind had always been agreed. The rules which obtain among
themselves appear to them self-evident and self-justifying. This all but
universal illusion is one of the examples of the magical influence of
custom, which is not only, as the proverb says, a second nature, but is
continually mistaken for the first. The effect of custom, in preventing
any misgiving respecting the rules of conduct which mankind impose on
one another, is all the more complete because the subject is one on
which it is not generally considered necessary that reasons should be
given, either by one person to others, or by each to himself. People are
accustomed to believe, and have been encouraged in the belief by some
who aspire to the character of philosophers, that their feelings, on
subjects of this nature, are better than reasons, and render reasons
unnecessary. The practical principle which guides them to their opinions
on the regulation of human conduct, is the feeling in each person's mind
that everybody should be required to act as he, and those with whom he
sympathises, would like them to act. No one, indeed, acknowledges to
himself that his standard of judgment is his own liking; but an opinion
on a point of conduct, not supported by reasons, can only count as one
person's preference; and if the reasons, when given, are a mere appeal
to a similar preference felt by other people, it is still only many
people's liking instead of one. To an ordinary man, however, his own
preference, thus supported, is not only a perfectly satisfactory
reason, but the only one he generally has for any of his notions of
morality, taste, or propriety, which are not expressly written in his
religious creed; and his chief guide in the interpretation even of that.
Men's opinions, accordingly, on what is laudable or blamable, are
affected by all the multifarious causes which influence their wishes in
regard to the conduct of others, and which are as numerous as those
which determine their wishes on any other subject. Sometimes their
reason--at other times their prejudices or superstitions: often their
social affections, not seldom their anti-social ones, their envy or
jealousy, their arrogance or contemptuousness: but most commonly, their
desires or fears for themselves--their legitimate or illegitimate
self-interest. Wherever there is an ascendant class, a large portion of
the morality of the country emanates from its class interests, and its
feelings of class superiority. The morality between Spartans and Helots,
between planters and negroes, between princes and subjects, between
nobles and roturiers, between men and women, has been for the most part
the creation of these class interests and feelings: and the sentiments
thus generated, react in turn upon the moral feelings of the members of
the ascendant class, in their relations among themselves. Where, on the
other hand, a class, formerly ascendant, has lost its ascendancy, or
where its ascendancy is unpopular, the prevailing moral sentiments
frequently bear the impress of an impatient dislike of superiority.
Another grand determining principle of the rules of conduct, both in act
and forbearance, which have been enforced by law or opinion, has been
the servility of mankind towards the supposed preferences or aversions
of their temporal masters, or of their gods. This servility, though
essentially selfish, is not hypocrisy; it gives rise to perfectly
genuine sentiments of abhorrence; it made men burn magicians and
heretics. Among so many baser influences, the general and obvious
interests of society have of course had a share, and a large one, in the
direction of the moral sentiments: less, however, as a matter of reason,
and on their own account, than as a consequence of the sympathies and
antipathies which grew out of them: and sympathies and antipathies which
had little or nothing to do with the interests of society, have made
themselves felt in the establishment of moralities with quite as great
force.

The likings and dislikings of society, or of some powerful portion of
it, are thus the main thing which has practically determined the rules
laid down for general observance, under the penalties of law or
opinion. And in general, those who have been in advance of society in
thought and feeling have left this condition of things unassailed in
principle, however they may have come into conflict with it in some of
its details. They have occupied themselves rather in inquiring what
things society ought to like or dislike, than in questioning whether its
likings or dislikings should be a law to individuals. They preferred
endeavouring to alter the feelings of mankind on the particular points
on which they were themselves heretical, rather than make common cause
in defence of freedom, with heretics generally. The only case in which
the higher ground has been taken on principle and maintained with
consistency, by any but an individual here and there, is that of
religious belief: a case instructive in many ways, and not least so as
forming a most striking instance of the fallibility of what is called
the moral sense: for the _odium theologicum_, in a sincere bigot, is one
of the most unequivocal cases of moral feeling. Those who first broke
the yoke of what called itself the Universal Church, were in general as
little willing to permit difference of religious opinion as that church
itself. But when the heat of the conflict was over, without giving a
complete victory to any party, and each church or sect was reduced to
limit its hopes to retaining possession of the ground it already
occupied; minorities, seeing that they had no chance of becoming
majorities, were under the necessity of pleading to those whom they
could not convert, for permission to differ. It is accordingly on this
battle-field, almost solely, that the rights of the individual against
society have been asserted on broad grounds of principle, and the claim
of society to exercise authority over dissentients, openly controverted.
The great writers to whom the world owes what religious liberty it
possesses, have mostly asserted freedom of conscience as an indefeasible
right, and denied absolutely that a human being is accountable to others
for his religious belief. Yet so natural to mankind is intolerance in
whatever they really care about, that religious freedom has hardly
anywhere been practically realised, except where religious indifference,
which dislikes to have its peace disturbed by theological quarrels, has
added its weight to the scale. In the minds of almost all religious
persons, even in the most tolerant countries, the duty of toleration is
admitted with tacit reserves. One person will bear with dissent in
matters of church government, but not of dogma; another can tolerate
everybody, short of a Papist or a Unitarian; another, every one who
believes in revealed religion; a few extend their charity a little
further, but stop at the belief in a God and in a future state. Wherever
the sentiment of the majority is still genuine and intense, it is found
to have abated little of its claim to be obeyed.

In England, from the peculiar circumstances of our political history,
though the yoke of opinion is perhaps heavier, that of law is lighter,
than in most other countries of Europe; and there is considerable
jealousy of direct interference, by the legislative or the executive
power, with private conduct; not so much from any just regard for the
independence of the individual, as from the still subsisting habit of
looking on the government as representing an opposite interest to the
public. The majority have not yet learnt to feel the power of the
government their power, or its opinions their opinions. When they do so,
individual liberty will probably be as much exposed to invasion from the
government, as it already is from public opinion. But, as yet, there is
a considerable amount of feeling ready to be called forth against any
attempt of the law to control individuals in things in which they have
not hitherto been accustomed to be controlled by it; and this with very
little discrimination as to whether the matter is, or is not, within the
legitimate sphere of legal control; insomuch that the feeling, highly
salutary on the whole, is perhaps quite as often misplaced as well
grounded in the particular instances of its application. There is, in
fact, no recognised principle by which the propriety or impropriety of
government interference is customarily tested. People decide according
to their personal preferences. Some, whenever they see any good to be
done, or evil to be remedied, would willingly instigate the government
to undertake the business; while others prefer to bear almost any amount
of social evil, rather than add one to the departments of human
interests amenable to governmental control. And men range themselves on
one or the other side in any particular case, according to this general
direction of their sentiments; or according to the degree of interest
which they feel in the particular thing which it is proposed that the
government should do, or according to the belief they entertain that the
government would, or would not, do it in the manner they prefer; but
very rarely on account of any opinion to which they consistently adhere,
as to what things are fit to be done by a government. And it seems to me
that in consequence of this absence of rule or principle, one side is
at present as often wrong as the other; the interference of government
is, with about equal frequency, improperly invoked and improperly
condemned.

The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as
entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the
individual in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means used
be physical force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion
of public opinion. That principle is, that the sole end for which
mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with
the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That
the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any
member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to
others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient
warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it
will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier,
because, in the opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even
right. These are good reasons for remonstrating with him, or reasoning
with him, or persuading him, or entreating him, but not for compelling
him, or visiting him with any evil in case he do otherwise. To justify
that, the conduct from which it is desired to deter him must be
calculated to produce evil to some one else. The only part of the
conduct of any one, for which he is amenable to society, is that which
concerns others. In the part which merely concerns himself, his
independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and
mind, the individual is sovereign.

It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine is meant to
apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties. We are
not speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the
law may fix as that of manhood or womanhood. Those who are still in a
state to require being taken care of by others, must be protected
against their own actions as well as against external injury. For the
same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of
society in which the race itself may be considered as in its nonage. The
early difficulties in the way of spontaneous progress are so great, that
there is seldom any choice of means for overcoming them; and a ruler
full of the spirit of improvement is warranted in the use of any
expedients that will attain an end, perhaps otherwise unattainable.
Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with
barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means
justified by actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has
no application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind
have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion.
Until then, there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an Akbar
or a Charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to find one. But as soon
as mankind have attained the capacity of being guided to their own
improvement by conviction or persuasion (a period long since reached in
all nations with whom we need here concern ourselves), compulsion,
either in the direct form or in that of pains and penalties for
non-compliance, is no longer admissible as a means to their own good,
and justifiable only for the security of others.

It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived
to my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent
of utility. I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical
questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the
permanent interests of man as a progressive being. Those interests, I
contend, authorise the subjection of individual spontaneity to external
control, only in respect to those actions of each, which concern the
interest of other people. If any one does an act hurtful to others,
there is a _primâ facie_ case for punishing him, by law, or, where legal
penalties are not safely applicable, by general disapprobation. There
are also many positive acts for the benefit of others, which he may
rightfully be compelled to perform; such as, to give evidence in a court
of justice; to bear his fair share in the common defence, or in any
other joint work necessary to the interest of the society of which he
enjoys the protection; and to perform certain acts of individual
beneficence, such as saving a fellow-creature's life, or interposing to
protect the defenceless against ill-usage, things which whenever it is
obviously a man's duty to do, he may rightfully be made responsible to
society for not doing. A person may cause evil to others not only by his
actions but by his inaction, and in either case he is justly accountable
to them for the injury. The latter case, it is true, requires a much
more cautious exercise of compulsion than the former. To make any one
answerable for doing evil to others, is the rule; to make him answerable
for not preventing evil, is, comparatively speaking, the exception. Yet
there are many cases clear enough and grave enough to justify that
exception. In all things which regard the external relations of the
individual, he is _de jure_ amenable to those whose interests are
concerned, and if need be, to society as their protector. There are
often good reasons for not holding him to the responsibility; but these
reasons must arise from the special expediencies of the case: either
because it is a kind of case in which he is on the whole likely to act
better, when left to his own discretion, than when controlled in any way
in which society have it in their power to control him; or because the
attempt to exercise control would produce other evils, greater than
those which it would prevent. When such reasons as these preclude the
enforcement of responsibility, the conscience of the agent himself
should step into the vacant judgment seat, and protect those interests
of others which have no external protection; judging himself all the
more rigidly, because the case does not admit of his being made
accountable to the judgment of his fellow-creatures.

But there is a sphere of action in which society, as distinguished from
the individual, has, if any, only an indirect interest; comprehending
all that portion of a person's life and conduct which affects only
himself, or if it also affects others, only with their free, voluntary,
and undeceived consent and participation. When I say only himself, I
mean directly, and in the first instance: for whatever affects himself,
may affect others _through_ himself; and the objection which may be
grounded on this contingency, will receive consideration in the sequel.
This, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty. It comprises,
first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of
conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and
feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects,
practical or speculative, scientific, moral, or theological. The liberty
of expressing and publishing opinions may seem to fall under a different
principle, since it belongs to that part of the conduct of an individual
which concerns other people; but, being almost of as much importance as
the liberty of thought itself, and resting in great part on the same
reasons, is practically inseparable from it. Secondly, the principle
requires liberty of tastes and pursuits; of framing the plan of our life
to suit our own character; of doing as we like, subject to such
consequences as may follow: without impediment from our
fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not harm them, even though
they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong. Thirdly, from
this liberty of each individual, follows the liberty, within the same
limits, of combination among individuals; freedom to unite, for any
purpose not involving harm to others: the persons combining being
supposed to be of full age, and not forced or deceived.

No society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected, is
free, whatever may be its form of government; and none is completely
free in which they do not exist absolute and unqualified. The only
freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our
own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or
impede their efforts to obtain it. Each is the proper guardian of his
own health, whether bodily, or mental and spiritual. Mankind are greater
gainers by suffering each other to live as seems good to themselves,
than by compelling each to live as seems good to the rest.

Though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may have
the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly
opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice.
Society has expended fully as much effort in the attempt (according to
its lights) to compel people to conform to its notions of personal, as
of social excellence. The ancient commonwealths thought themselves
entitled to practise, and the ancient philosophers countenanced, the
regulation of every part of private conduct by public authority, on the
ground that the State had a deep interest in the whole bodily and mental
discipline of every one of its citizens; a mode of thinking which may
have been admissible in small republics surrounded by powerful enemies,
in constant peril of being subverted by foreign attack or internal
commotion, and to which even a short interval of relaxed energy and
self-command might so easily be fatal, that they could not afford to
wait for the salutary permanent effects of freedom. In the modern world,
the greater size of political communities, and above all, the separation
between spiritual and temporal authority (which placed the direction of
men's consciences in other hands than those which controlled their
worldly affairs), prevented so great an interference by law in the
details of private life; but the engines of moral repression have been
wielded more strenuously against divergence from the reigning opinion in
self-regarding, than even in social matters; religion, the most powerful
of the elements which have entered into the formation of moral feeling,
having almost always been governed either by the ambition of a
hierarchy, seeking control over every department of human conduct, or by
the spirit of Puritanism. And some of those modern reformers who have
placed themselves in strongest opposition to the religions of the past,
have been noway behind either churches or sects in their assertion of
the right of spiritual domination: M. Comte, in particular, whose social
system, as unfolded in his _Traité de Politique Positive_, aims at
establishing (though by moral more than by legal appliances) a despotism
of society over the individual, surpassing anything contemplated in the
political ideal of the most rigid disciplinarian among the ancient
philosophers.

Apart from the peculiar tenets of individual thinkers, there is also in
the world at large an increasing inclination to stretch unduly the
powers of society over the individual, both by the force of opinion and
even by that of legislation: and as the tendency of all the changes
taking place in the world is to strengthen society, and diminish the
power of the individual, this encroachment is not one of the evils which
tend spontaneously to disappear, but, on the contrary, to grow more and
more formidable. The disposition of mankind, whether as rulers or as
fellow-citizens to impose their own opinions and inclinations as a rule
of conduct on others, is so energetically supported by some of the best
and by some of the worst feelings incident to human nature, that it is
hardly ever kept under restraint by anything but want of power; and as
the power is not declining, but growing, unless a strong barrier of
moral conviction can be raised against the mischief, we must expect, in
the present circumstances of the world, to see it increase.

It will be convenient for the argument, if, instead of at once entering
upon the general thesis, we confine ourselves in the first instance to a
single branch of it, on which the principle here stated is, if not
fully, yet to a certain point, recognised by the current opinions. This
one branch is the Liberty of Thought: from which it is impossible to
separate the cognate liberty of speaking and of writing. Although these
liberties, to some considerable amount, form part of the political
morality of all countries which profess religious toleration and free
institutions, the grounds, both philosophical and practical, on which
they rest, are perhaps not so familiar to the general mind, nor so
thoroughly appreciated by many even of the leaders of opinion, as might
have been expected. Those grounds, when rightly understood, are of much
wider application than to only one division of the subject, and a
thorough consideration of this part of the question will be found the
best introduction to the remainder. Those to whom nothing which I am
about to say will be new, may therefore, I hope, excuse me, if on a
subject which for now three centuries has been so often discussed, I
venture on one discussion more.




CHAPTER II.

OF THE LIBERTY OF THOUGHT AND DISCUSSION.


The time, it is to be hoped, is gone by, when any defence would be
necessary of the "liberty of the press" as one of the securities against
corrupt or tyrannical government. No argument, we may suppose, can now
be needed, against permitting a legislature or an executive, not
identified in interest with the people, to prescribe opinions to them,
and determine what doctrines or what arguments they shall be allowed to
hear. This aspect of the question, besides, has been so often and so
triumphantly enforced by preceding writers, that it need not be
specially insisted on in this place. Though the law of England, on the
subject of the press, is as servile to this day as it was in the time of
the Tudors, there is little danger of its being actually put in force
against political discussion, except during some temporary panic, when
fear of insurrection drives ministers and judges from their
propriety;[6] and, speaking generally, it is not, in constitutional
countries, to be apprehended that the government, whether completely
responsible to the people or not, will often attempt to control the
expression of opinion, except when in doing so it makes itself the organ
of the general intolerance of the public. Let us suppose, therefore,
that the government is entirely at one with the people, and never thinks
of exerting any power of coercion unless in agreement with what it
conceives to be their voice. But I deny the right of the people to
exercise such coercion, either by themselves or by their government. The
power itself is illegitimate. The best government has no more title to
it than the worst. It is as noxious, or more noxious, when exerted in
accordance with public opinion, than when in or opposition to it. If all
mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the
contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that
one person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in
silencing mankind. Were an opinion a personal possession of no value
except to the owner; if to be obstructed in the enjoyment of it were
simply a private injury, it would make some difference whether the
injury was inflicted only on a few persons or on many. But the peculiar
evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing
the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who
dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it. If the
opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging
error for truth: if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit,
the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its
collision with error.

It is necessary to consider separately these two hypotheses, each of
which has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it. We can
never be sure that the opinion we are endeavouring to stifle is a false
opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.


First: the opinion which it is attempted to suppress by authority may
possibly be true. Those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its
truth; but they are not infallible. They have no authority to decide the
question for all mankind, and exclude every other person from the means
of judging. To refuse a hearing to an opinion, because they are sure
that it is false, is to assume that _their_ certainty is the same thing
as _absolute_ certainty. All silencing of discussion is an assumption
of infallibility. Its condemnation may be allowed to rest on this common
argument, not the worse for being common.

Unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact of their
fallibility is far from carrying the weight in their practical judgment,
which is always allowed to it in theory; for while every one well knows
himself to be fallible, few think it necessary to take any precautions
against their own fallibility, or admit the supposition that any
opinion, of which they feel very certain, may be one of the examples of
the error to which they acknowledge themselves to be liable. Absolute
princes, or others who are accustomed to unlimited deference, usually
feel this complete confidence in their own opinions on nearly all
subjects. People more happily situated, who sometimes hear their
opinions disputed, and are not wholly unused to be set right when they
are wrong, place the same unbounded reliance only on such of their
opinions as are shared by all who surround them, or to whom they
habitually defer: for in proportion to a man's want of confidence in his
own solitary judgment, does he usually repose, with implicit trust, on
the infallibility of "the world" in general. And the world, to each
individual, means the part of it with which he comes in contact; his
party, his sect, his church, his class of society: the man may be
called, by comparison, almost liberal and large-minded to whom it means
anything so comprehensive as his own country or his own age. Nor is his
faith in this collective authority at all shaken by his being aware that
other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes, and parties have
thought, and even now think, the exact reverse. He devolves upon his own
world the responsibility of being in the right against the dissentient
worlds of other people; and it never troubles him that mere accident has
decided which of these numerous worlds is the object of his reliance,
and that the same causes which make him a Churchman in London, would
have made him a Buddhist or a Confucian in Pekin. Yet it is as evident
in itself as any amount of argument can make it, that ages are no more
infallible than individuals; every age having held many opinions which
subsequent ages have deemed not only false but absurd; and it is as
certain that many opinions, now general, will be rejected by future
ages, as it is that many, once general, are rejected by the present.

The objection likely to be made to this argument, would probably take
some such form as the following. There is no greater assumption of
infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error, than in any other
thing which is done by public authority on its own judgment and
responsibility. Judgment is given to men that they may use it. Because
it may be used erroneously, are men to be told that they ought not to
use it at all? To prohibit what they think pernicious, is not claiming
exemption from error, but fulfilling the duty incumbent on them,
although fallible, of acting on their conscientious conviction. If we
were never to act on our opinions, because those opinions may be wrong,
we should leave all our interests uncared for, and all our duties
unperformed. An objection which applies to all conduct, can be no valid
objection to any conduct in particular. It is the duty of governments,
and of individuals, to form the truest opinions they can; to form them
carefully, and never impose them upon others unless they are quite sure
of being right. But when they are sure (such reasoners may say), it is
not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from acting on their
opinions, and allow doctrines which they honestly think dangerous to the
welfare of mankind, either in this life or in another, to be scattered
abroad without restraint, because other people, in less enlightened
times, have persecuted opinions now believed to be true. Let us take
care, it may be said, not to make the same mistake: but governments and
nations have made mistakes in other things, which are not denied to be
fit subjects for the exercise of authority: they have laid on bad taxes,
made unjust wars. Ought we therefore to lay on no taxes, and, under
whatever provocation, make no wars? Men, and governments, must act to
the best of their ability. There is no such thing as absolute certainty,
but there is assurance sufficient for the purposes of human life. We
may, and must, assume our opinion to be true for the guidance of our own
conduct: and it is assuming no more when we forbid bad men to pervert
society by the propagation of opinions which we regard as false and
pernicious.

I answer that it is assuming very much more. There is the greatest
difference between presuming an opinion to be true, because, with every
opportunity for contesting it, it has not been refuted, and assuming its
truth for the purpose of not permitting its refutation. Complete liberty
of contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the very condition which
justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no
other terms can a being with human faculties have any rational assurance
of being right.

When we consider either the history of opinion, or the ordinary conduct
of human life, to what is it to be ascribed that the one and the other
are no worse than they are? Not certainly to the inherent force of the
human understanding; for, on any matter not self-evident, there are
ninety-nine persons totally incapable of judging of it, for one who is
capable; and the capacity of the hundredth person is only comparative;
for the majority of the eminent men of every past generation held many
opinions now known to be erroneous, and did or approved numerous things
which no one will now justify. Why is it, then, that there is on the
whole a preponderance among mankind of rational opinions and rational
conduct? If there really is this preponderance--which there must be,
unless human affairs are, and have always been, in an almost desperate
state--it is owing to a quality of the human mind, the source of
everything respectable in man either as an intellectual or as a moral
being, namely, that his errors are corrigible. He is capable of
rectifying his mistakes, by discussion and experience. Not by experience
alone. There must be discussion, to show how experience is to be
interpreted. Wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and
argument: but facts and arguments, to produce any effect on the mind,
must be brought before it. Very few facts are able to tell their own
story, without comments to bring out their meaning. The whole strength
and value, then, of human judgment, depending on the one property, that
it can be set right when it is wrong, reliance can be placed on it only
when the means of setting it right are kept constantly at hand. In the
case of any person whose judgment is really deserving of confidence, how
has it become so? Because he has kept his mind open to criticism of his
opinions and conduct. Because it has been his practice to listen to all
that could be said against him; to profit by as much of it as was just,
and expound to himself, and upon occasion to others, the fallacy of what
was fallacious. Because he has felt, that the only way in which a human
being can make some approach to knowing the whole of a subject, is by
hearing what can be said about it by persons of every variety of
opinion, and studying all modes in which it can be looked at by every
character of mind. No wise man ever acquired his wisdom in any mode but
this; nor is it in the nature of human intellect to become wise in any
other manner. The steady habit of correcting and completing his own
opinion by collating it with those of others, so far from causing doubt
and hesitation in carrying it into practice, is the only stable
foundation for a just reliance on it: for, being cognisant of all that
can, at least obviously, be said against him, and having taken up his
position against all gainsayers--knowing that he has sought for
objections and difficulties, instead of avoiding them, and has shut out
no light which can be thrown upon the subject from any quarter--he has a
right to think his judgment better than that of any person, or any
multitude, who have not gone through a similar process.

It is not too much to require that what the wisest of mankind, those who
are best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary to warrant
their relying on it, should be submitted to by that miscellaneous
collection of a few wise and many foolish individuals, called the
public. The most intolerant of churches, the Roman Catholic Church, even
at the canonisation of a saint, admits, and listens patiently to, a
"devil's advocate." The holiest of men, it appears, cannot be admitted
to posthumous honours, until all that the devil could say against him is
known and weighed. If even the Newtonian philosophy were not permitted
to be questioned, mankind could not feel as complete assurance of its
truth as they now do. The beliefs which we have most warrant for, have
no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the whole world to
prove them unfounded. If the challenge is not accepted, or is accepted
and the attempt fails, we are far enough from certainty still; but we
have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we
have neglected nothing that could give the truth a chance of reaching
us: if the lists are kept open, we may hope that if there be a better
truth, it will be found when the human mind is capable of receiving it;
and in the meantime we may rely on having attained such approach to
truth, as is possible in our own day. This is the amount of certainty
attainable by a fallible being, and this the sole way of attaining it.

Strange it is, that men should admit the validity of the arguments for
free discussion, but object to their being "pushed to an extreme;" not
seeing that unless the reasons are good for an extreme case, they are
not good for any case. Strange that they should imagine that they are
not assuming infallibility, when they acknowledge that there should be
free discussion on all subjects which can possibly be _doubtful_, but
think that some particular principle or doctrine should be forbidden to
be questioned because it is _so certain_, that is, because _they are
certain_ that it is certain. To call any proposition certain, while
there is any one who would deny its certainty if permitted, but who is
not permitted, is to assume that we ourselves, and those who agree with
us, are the judges of certainty, and judges without hearing the other
side.

In the present age--which has been described as "destitute of faith, but
terrified at scepticism"--in which people feel sure, not so much that
their opinions are true, as that they should not know what to do without
them--the claims of an opinion to be protected from public attack are
rested not so much on its truth, as on its importance to society. There
are, it is alleged, certain beliefs, so useful, not to say indispensable
to well-being, that it is as much the duty of governments to uphold
those beliefs, as to protect any other of the interests of society. In a
case of such necessity, and so directly in the line of their duty,
something less than infallibility may, it is maintained, warrant, and
even bind, governments, to act on their own opinion, confirmed by the
general opinion of mankind. It is also often argued, and still oftener
thought, that none but bad men would desire to weaken these salutary
beliefs; and there can be nothing wrong, it is thought, in restraining
bad men, and prohibiting what only such men would wish to practise.
This mode of thinking makes the justification of restraints on
discussion not a question of the truth of doctrines, but of their
usefulness; and flatters itself by that means to escape the
responsibility of claiming to be an infallible judge of opinions. But
those who thus satisfy themselves, do not perceive that the assumption
of infallibility is merely shifted from one point to another. The
usefulness of an opinion is itself matter of opinion: as disputable, as
open to discussion, and requiring discussion as much, as the opinion
itself. There is the same need of an infallible judge of opinions to
decide an opinion to be noxious, as to decide it to be false, unless the
opinion condemned has full opportunity of defending itself. And it will
not do to say that the heretic may be allowed to maintain the utility or
harmlessness of his opinion, though forbidden to maintain its truth. The
truth of an opinion is part of its utility. If we would know whether or
not it is desirable that a proposition should be believed, is it
possible to exclude the consideration of whether or not it is true? In
the opinion, not of bad men, but of the best men, no belief which is
contrary to truth can be really useful: and can you prevent such men
from urging that plea, when they are charged with culpability for
denying some doctrine which they are told is useful, but which they
believe to be false? Those who are on the side of received opinions,
never fail to take all possible advantage of this plea; you do not find
_them_ handling the question of utility as if it could be completely
abstracted from that of truth: on the contrary, it is, above all,
because their doctrine is "the truth," that the knowledge or the belief
of it is held to be so indispensable. There can be no fair discussion of
the question of usefulness, when an argument so vital may be employed on
one side, but not on the other. And in point of fact, when law or public
feeling do not permit the truth of an opinion to be disputed, they are
just as little tolerant of a denial of its usefulness. The utmost they
allow is an extenuation of its absolute necessity, or of the positive
guilt of rejecting it.

In order more fully to illustrate the mischief of denying a hearing to
opinions because we, in our own judgment, have condemned them, it will
be desirable to fix down the discussion to a concrete case; and I
choose, by preference, the cases which are least favourable to me--in
which the argument against freedom of opinion, both on the score of
truth and on that of utility, is considered the strongest. Let the
opinions impugned be the belief in a God and in a future state, or any
of the commonly received doctrines of morality. To fight the battle on
such ground, gives a great advantage to an unfair antagonist; since he
will be sure to say (and many who have no desire to be unfair will say
it internally), Are these the doctrines which you do not deem
sufficiently certain to be taken under the protection of law? Is the
belief in a God one of the opinions, to feel sure of which, you hold to
be assuming infallibility? But I must be permitted to observe, that it
is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call
an assumption of infallibility. It is the undertaking to decide that
question _for others_, without allowing them to hear what can be said on
the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the
less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. However
positive any one's persuasion may be, not only of the falsity, but of
the pernicious consequences--not only of the pernicious consequences,
but (to adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the immorality and
impiety of an opinion; yet if, in pursuance of that private judgment,
though backed by the public judgment of his country or his
contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence,
he assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less
objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or
impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal. These
are exactly the occasions on which the men of one generation commit
those dreadful mistakes, which excite the astonishment and horror of
posterity. It is among such that we find the instances memorable in
history, when the arm of the law has been employed to root out the best
men and the noblest doctrines; with deplorable success as to the men,
though some of the doctrines have survived to be (as if in mockery)
invoked, in defence of similar conduct towards those who dissent from
_them_, or from their received interpretation.

Mankind can hardly be too often reminded that there was once a man named
Socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public opinion of
his time, there took place a memorable collision. Born in an age and
country abounding in individual greatness, this man has been handed down
to us by those who best knew both him and the age, as the most virtuous
man in it; while _we_ know him as the head and prototype of all
subsequent teachers of virtue, the source equally of the lofty
inspiration of Plato and the judicious utilitarianism of Aristotle, "_i
maëstri di color che sanno_," the two headsprings of ethical as of all
other philosophy. This acknowledged master of all the eminent thinkers
who have since lived--whose fame, still growing after more than two
thousand years, all but outweighs the whole remainder of the names which
make his native city illustrious--was put to death by his countrymen,
after a judicial conviction, for impiety and immorality. Impiety, in
denying the gods recognised by the State; indeed his accuser asserted
(see the "Apologia") that he believed in no gods at all. Immorality, in
being, by his doctrines and instructions, a "corruptor of youth." Of
these charges the tribunal, there is every ground for believing,
honestly found him guilty, and condemned the man who probably of all
then born had deserved best of mankind, to be put to death as a
criminal.

To pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity, the
mention of which, after the condemnation of Socrates, would not be an
anticlimax: the event which took place on Calvary rather more than
eighteen hundred years ago. The man who left on the memory of those who
witnessed his life and conversation, such an impression of his moral
grandeur, that eighteen subsequent centuries have done homage to him as
the Almighty in person, was ignominiously put to death, as what? As a
blasphemer. Men did not merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook
him for the exact contrary of what he was, and treated him as that
prodigy of impiety, which they themselves are now held to be, for their
treatment of him. The feelings with which mankind now regard these
lamentable transactions, especially the later of the two, render them
extremely unjust in their judgment of the unhappy actors. These were, to
all appearance, not bad men--not worse than men commonly are, but rather
the contrary; men who possessed in a full, or somewhat more than a full
measure, the religious, moral, and patriotic feelings of their time and
people: the very kind of men who, in all times, our own included, have
every chance of passing through life blameless and respected. The
high-priest who rent his garments when the words were pronounced, which,
according to all the ideas of his country, constituted the blackest
guilt, was in all probability quite as sincere in his horror and
indignation, as the generality of respectable and pious men now are in
the religious and moral sentiments they profess; and most of those who
now shudder at his conduct, if they had lived in his time, and been born
Jews, would have acted precisely as he did. Orthodox Christians who are
tempted to think that those who stoned to death the first martyrs must
have been worse men than they themselves are, ought to remember that one
of those persecutors was Saint Paul.

Let us add one more example, the most striking of all, if the
impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of him
who falls into it. If ever any one, possessed of power, had grounds for
thinking himself the best and most enlightened among his cotemporaries,
it was the Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Absolute monarch of the whole
civilised world, he preserved through life not only the most unblemished
justice, but what was less to be expected from his Stoical breeding, the
tenderest heart. The few failings which are attributed to him, were all
on the side of indulgence: while his writings, the highest ethical
product of the ancient mind, differ scarcely perceptibly, if they differ
at all, from the most characteristic teachings of Christ. This man, a
better Christian in all but the dogmatic sense of the word, than almost
any of the ostensibly Christian sovereigns who have since reigned,
persecuted Christianity. Placed at the summit of all the previous
attainments of humanity, with an open, unfettered intellect, and a
character which led him of himself to embody in his moral writings the
Christian ideal, he yet failed to see that Christianity was to be a good
and not an evil to the world, with his duties to which he was so deeply
penetrated. Existing society he knew to be in a deplorable state. But
such as it was, he saw, or thought he saw, that it was held together,
and prevented from being worse, by belief and reverence of the received
divinities. As a ruler of mankind, he deemed it his duty not to suffer
society to fall in pieces; and saw not how, if its existing ties were
removed, any others could be formed which could again knit it together.
The new religion openly aimed at dissolving these ties: unless,
therefore, it was his duty to adopt that religion, it seemed to be his
duty to put it down. Inasmuch then as the theology of Christianity did
not appear to him true or of divine origin; inasmuch as this strange
history of a crucified God was not credible to him, and a system which
purported to rest entirely upon a foundation to him so wholly
unbelievable, could not be foreseen by him to be that renovating agency
which, after all abatements, it has in fact proved to be; the gentlest
and most amiable of philosophers and rulers, under a solemn sense of
duty, authorised the persecution of Christianity. To my mind this is one
of the most tragical facts in all history. It is a bitter thought, how
different a thing the Christianity of the world might have been, if the
Christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the empire under the
auspices of Marcus Aurelius instead of those of Constantine. But it
would be equally unjust to him and false to truth, to deny, that no one
plea which can be urged for punishing anti-Christian teaching, was
wanting to Marcus Aurelius for punishing, as he did, the propagation of
Christianity. No Christian more firmly believes that Atheism is false,
and tends to the dissolution of society, than Marcus Aurelius believed
the same things of Christianity; he who, of all men then living, might
have been thought the most capable of appreciating it. Unless any one
who approves of punishment for the promulgation of opinions, flatters
himself that he is a wiser and better man than Marcus Aurelius--more
deeply versed in the wisdom of his time, more elevated in his intellect
above it--more earnest in his search for truth, or more single-minded in
his devotion to it when found;--let him abstain from that assumption of
the joint infallibility of himself and the multitude, which the great
Antoninus made with so unfortunate a result.

Aware of the impossibility of defending the use of punishment for
restraining irreligious opinions, by any argument which will not justify
Marcus Antoninus, the enemies of religious freedom, when hard pressed,
occasionally accept this consequence, and say, with Dr. Johnson, that
the persecutors of Christianity were in the right; that persecution is
an ordeal through which truth ought to pass, and always passes
successfully, legal penalties being, in the end, powerless against
truth, though sometimes beneficially effective against mischievous
errors. This is a form of the argument for religious intolerance,
sufficiently remarkable not to be passed without notice.

A theory which maintains that truth may justifiably be persecuted
because persecution cannot possibly do it any harm, cannot be charged
with being intentionally hostile to the reception of new truths; but we
cannot commend the generosity of its dealing with the persons to whom
mankind are indebted for them. To discover to the world something which
deeply concerns it, and of which it was previously ignorant; to prove to
it that it had been mistaken on some vital point of temporal or
spiritual interest, is as important a service as a human being can
render to his fellow-creatures, and in certain cases, as in those of the
early Christians and of the Reformers, those who think with Dr. Johnson
believe it to have been the most precious gift which could be bestowed
on mankind. That the authors of such splendid benefits should be
requited by martyrdom; that their reward should be to be dealt with as
the vilest of criminals, is not, upon this theory, a deplorable error
and misfortune, for which humanity should mourn in sackcloth and ashes,
but the normal and justifiable state of things. The propounder of a new
truth, according to this doctrine, should stand, as stood, in the
legislation of the Locrians, the proposer of a new law, with a halter
round his neck, to be instantly tightened if the public assembly did
not, on hearing his reasons, then and there adopt his proposition.
People who defend this mode of treating benefactors, cannot be supposed
to set much value on the benefit; and I believe this view of the subject
is mostly confined to the sort of persons who think that new truths may
have been desirable once, but that we have had enough of them now.

But, indeed, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution, is
one of those pleasant falsehoods which men repeat after one another
till they pass into commonplaces, but which all experience refutes.
History teems with instances of truth put down by persecution. If not
suppressed for ever, it may be thrown back for centuries. To speak only
of religious opinions: the Reformation broke out at least twenty times
before Luther, and was put down. Arnold of Brescia was put down. Fra
Dolcino was put down. Savonarola was put down. The Albigeois were put
down. The Vaudois were put down. The Lollards were put down. The
Hussites were put down. Even after the era of Luther, wherever
persecution was persisted in, it was successful. In Spain, Italy,
Flanders, the Austrian empire, Protestantism was rooted out; and, most
likely, would have been so in England, had Queen Mary lived, or Queen
Elizabeth died. Persecution has always succeeded, save where the
heretics were too strong a party to be effectually persecuted. No
reasonable person can doubt that Christianity might have been extirpated
in the Roman Empire. It spread, and became predominant, because the
persecutions were only occasional, lasting but a short time, and
separated by long intervals of almost undisturbed propagandism. It is a
piece of idle sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any
inherent power denied to error, of prevailing against the dungeon and
the stake. Men are not more zealous for truth than they often are for
error, and a sufficient application of legal or even of social penalties
will generally succeed in stopping the propagation of either. The real
advantage which truth has, consists in this, that when an opinion is
true, it may be extinguished once, twice, or many times, but in the
course of ages there will generally be found persons to rediscover it,
until some one of its reappearances falls on a time when from favourable
circumstances it escapes persecution until it has made such head as to
withstand all subsequent attempts to suppress it.

It will be said, that we do not now put to death the introducers of new
opinions: we are not like our fathers who slew the prophets, we even
build sepulchres to them. It is true we no longer put heretics to death;
and the amount of penal infliction which modern feeling would probably
tolerate, even against the most obnoxious opinions, is not sufficient to
extirpate them. But let us not flatter ourselves that we are yet free
from the stain even of legal persecution. Penalties for opinion, or at
least for its expression, still exist by law; and their enforcement is
not, even in these times, so unexampled as to make it at all incredible
that they may some day be revived in full force. In the year 1857, at
the summer assizes of the county of Cornwall, an unfortunate man,[7]
said to be of unexceptionable conduct in all relations of life, was
sentenced to twenty-one months' imprisonment, for uttering, and writing
on a gate, some offensive words concerning Christianity. Within a month
of the same time, at the Old Bailey, two persons, on two separate
occasions,[8] were rejected as jurymen, and one of them grossly insulted
by the judge and by one of the counsel, because they honestly declared
that they had no theological belief; and a third, a foreigner,[9] for
the same reason, was denied justice against a thief. This refusal of
redress took place in virtue of the legal doctrine, that no person can
be allowed to give evidence in a court of justice, who does not profess
belief in a God (any god is sufficient) and in a future state; which is
equivalent to declaring such persons to be outlaws, excluded from the
protection of the tribunals; who may not only be robbed or assaulted
with impunity, if no one but themselves, or persons of similar opinions,
be present, but any one else may be robbed or assaulted with impunity,
if the proof of the fact depends on their evidence. The assumption on
which this is grounded, is that the oath is worthless, of a person who
does not believe in a future state; a proposition which betokens much
ignorance of history in those who assent to it (since it is historically
true that a large proportion of infidels in all ages have been persons
of distinguished integrity and honour); and would be maintained by no
one who had the smallest conception how many of the persons in greatest
repute with the world, both for virtues and for attainments, are well
known, at least to their intimates, to be unbelievers. The rule,
besides, is suicidal, and cuts away its own foundation. Under pretence
that atheists must be liars, it admits the testimony of all atheists who
are willing to lie, and rejects only those who brave the obloquy of
publicly confessing a detested creed rather than affirm a falsehood. A
rule thus self-convicted of absurdity so far as regards its professed
purpose, can be kept in force only as a badge of hatred, a relic of
persecution; a persecution, too, having the peculiarity, that the
qualification for undergoing it, is the being clearly proved not to
deserve it. The rule, and the theory it implies, are hardly less
insulting to believers than to infidels. For if he who does not believe
in a future state, necessarily lies, it follows that they who do believe
are only prevented from lying, if prevented they are, by the fear of
hell. We will not do the authors and abettors of the rule the injury of
supposing, that the conception which they have formed of Christian
virtue is drawn from their own consciousness.

These, indeed, are but rags and remnants of persecution, and may be
thought to be not so much an indication of the wish to persecute, as an
example of that very frequent infirmity of English minds, which makes
them take a preposterous pleasure in the assertion of a bad principle,
when they are no longer bad enough to desire to carry it really into
practice. But unhappily there is no security in the state of the public
mind, that the suspension of worse forms of legal persecution, which has
lasted for about the space of a generation, will continue. In this age
the quiet surface of routine is as often ruffled by attempts to
resuscitate past evils, as to introduce new benefits. What is boasted of
at the present time as the revival of religion, is always, in narrow
and uncultivated minds, at least as much the revival of bigotry; and
where there is the strong permanent leaven of intolerance in the
feelings of a people, which at all times abides in the middle classes of
this country, it needs but little to provoke them into actively
persecuting those whom they have never ceased to think proper objects of
persecution.[10] For it is this--it is the opinions men entertain, and
the feelings they cherish, respecting those who disown the beliefs they
deem important, which makes this country not a place of mental freedom.
For a long time past, the chief mischief of the legal penalties is that
they strengthen the social stigma. It is that stigma which is really
effective, and so effective is it that the profession of opinions which
are under the ban of society is much less common in England, than is, in
many other countries, the avowal of those which incur risk of judicial
punishment. In respect to all persons but those whose pecuniary
circumstances make them independent of the good will of other people,
opinion, on this subject, is as efficacious as law; men might as well be
imprisoned, as excluded from the means of earning their bread. Those
whose bread is already secured, and who desire no favours from men in
power, or from bodies of men, or from the public, have nothing to fear
from the open avowal of any opinions, but to be ill-thought of and
ill-spoken of, and this it ought not to require a very heroic mould to
enable them to bear. There is no room for any appeal _ad misericordiam_
in behalf of such persons. But though we do not now inflict so much evil
on those who think differently from us, as it was formerly our custom to
do, it may be that we do ourselves as much evil as ever by our treatment
of them. Socrates was put to death, but the Socratic philosophy rose
like the sun in heaven, and spread its illumination over the whole
intellectual firmament. Christians were cast to the lions, but the
Christian church grew up a stately and spreading tree, overtopping the
older and less vigorous growths, and stifling them by its shade. Our
merely social intolerance kills no one, roots out no opinions, but
induces men to disguise them, or to abstain from any active effort for
their diffusion. With us, heretical opinions do not perceptibly gain, or
even lose, ground in each decade or generation; they never blaze out far
and wide, but continue to smoulder in the narrow circles of thinking and
studious persons among whom they originate, without ever lighting up the
general affairs of mankind with either a true or a deceptive light. And
thus is kept up a state of things very satisfactory to some minds,
because, without the unpleasant process of fining or imprisoning
anybody, it maintains all prevailing opinions outwardly undisturbed,
while it does not absolutely interdict the exercise of reason by
dissentients afflicted with the malady of thought. A convenient plan for
having peace in the intellectual world, and keeping all things going on
therein very much as they do already. But the price paid for this sort
of intellectual pacification, is the sacrifice of the entire moral
courage of the human mind. A state of things in which a large portion of
the most active and inquiring intellects find it advisable to keep the
genuine principles and grounds of their convictions within their own
breasts, and attempt, in what they address to the public, to fit as much
as they can of their own conclusions to premises which they have
internally renounced, cannot send forth the open, fearless characters,
and logical, consistent intellects who once adorned the thinking world.
The sort of men who can be looked for under it, are either mere
conformers to commonplace, or time-servers for truth, whose arguments on
all great subjects are meant for their hearers, and are not those which
have convinced themselves. Those who avoid this alternative, do so by
narrowing their thoughts and interest to things which can be spoken of
without venturing within the region of principles, that is, to small
practical matters, which would come right of themselves, if but the
minds of mankind were strengthened and enlarged, and which will never be
made effectually right until then: while that which would strengthen and
enlarge men's minds, free and daring speculation on the highest
subjects, is abandoned.

Those in whose eyes this reticence on the part of heretics is no evil,
should consider in the first place, that in consequence of it there is
never any fair and thorough discussion of heretical opinions; and that
such of them as could not stand such a discussion, though they may be
prevented from spreading, do not disappear. But it is not the minds of
heretics that are deteriorated most, by the ban placed on all inquiry
which does not end in the orthodox conclusions. The greatest harm done
is to those who are not heretics, and whose whole mental development is
cramped, and their reason cowed, by the fear of heresy. Who can compute
what the world loses in the multitude of promising intellects combined
with timid characters, who dare not follow out any bold, vigorous,
independent train of thought, lest it should land them in something
which would admit of being considered irreligious or immoral? Among
them we may occasionally see some man of deep conscientiousness, and
subtle and refined understanding, who spends a life in sophisticating
with an intellect which he cannot silence, and exhausts the resources of
ingenuity in attempting to reconcile the promptings of his conscience
and reason with orthodoxy, which yet he does not, perhaps, to the end
succeed in doing. No one can be a great thinker who does not recognise,
that as a thinker it is his first duty to follow his intellect to
whatever conclusions it may lead. Truth gains more even by the errors of
one who, with due study and preparation, thinks for himself, than by the
true opinions of those who only hold them because they do not suffer
themselves to think. Not that it is solely, or chiefly, to form great
thinkers, that freedom of thinking is required. On the contrary, it is
as much, and even more indispensable, to enable average human beings to
attain the mental stature which they are capable of. There have been,
and may again be, great individual thinkers, in a general atmosphere of
mental slavery. But there never has been, nor ever will be, in that
atmosphere, an intellectually active people. Where any people has made a
temporary approach to such a character, it has been because the dread
of heterodox speculation was for a time suspended. Where there is a
tacit convention that principles are not to be disputed; where the
discussion of the greatest questions which can occupy humanity is
considered to be closed, we cannot hope to find that generally high
scale of mental activity which has made some periods of history so
remarkable. Never when controversy avoided the subjects which are large
and important enough to kindle enthusiasm, was the mind of a people
