
"Everything," she repeated, paused, and added much lower, "It is the
very least." He seemed to lose himself in thought.

"It is extraordinary," he reflected half aloud, "how I dislike that
man." She leaned forward a little.

"Remember those two men are innocent," she began.

"So am I--innocent. So is everybody in the world. Have you ever met a
man or a woman that was not? They've got to take their chances all the
same."

"I expect you to be generous," she said.

"To you?"

"Well--to me. Yes--if you like to me alone."

"To you alone! And you know everything!" His voice dropped. "You want
your happiness."

She made an impatient movement and he saw her clench the hand that was
lying on the table.

"I want my husband back," she said, sharply.

"Yes. Yes. It's what I was saying. Same thing," he muttered with strange
placidity. She looked at him searchingly. He had a large simplicity that
filled one's vision. She found herself slowly invaded by this masterful
figure. He was not mediocre. Whatever he might have been he was not
mediocre. The glamour of a lawless life stretched over him like the sky
over the sea down on all sides to an unbroken horizon. Within, he moved
very lonely, dangerous and romantic. There was in him crime, sacrifice,
tenderness, devotion, and the madness of a fixed idea. She thought with
wonder that of all the men in the world he was indeed the one she knew
the best and yet she could not foresee the speech or the act of the next
minute. She said distinctly:

"You've given me your confidence. Now I want you to give me the life of
these two men. The life of two men whom you do not know, whom to-morrow
you will forget. It can be done. It must be done. You cannot refuse them
to me." She waited.

"Why can't I refuse?" he whispered, gloomily, without looking up.

"You ask!" she exclaimed. He made no sign. He seemed at a loss for
words.

"You ask . . . Ah!" she cried. "Don't you see that I have no kingdoms to
conquer?"



III

A slight change of expression which passed away almost directly showed
that Lingard heard the passionate cry wrung from her by the distress of
her mind. He made no sign. She perceived clearly the extreme difficulty
of her position. The situation was dangerous; not so much the facts
of it as the feeling of it. At times it appeared no more actual than a
tradition; and she thought of herself as of some woman in a ballad, who
has to beg for the lives of innocent captives. To save the lives of Mr.
Travers and Mr. d'Alcacer was more than a duty. It was a necessity, it
was an imperative need, it was an irresistible mission. Yet she had to
reflect upon the horrors of a cruel and obscure death before she could
feel for them the pity they deserved. It was when she looked at Lingard
that her heart was wrung by an extremity of compassion. The others were
pitiful, but he, the victim of his own extravagant impulses, appeared
tragic, fascinating, and culpable. Lingard lifted his head. Whispers
were heard at the door and Hassim followed by Immada entered the cabin.

Mrs. Travers looked at Lingard, because of all the faces in the cabin
his was the only one that was intelligible to her. Hassim began to speak
at once, and when he ceased Immada's deep sigh was heard in the sudden
silence. Then Lingard looked at Mrs. Travers and said:

"The gentlemen are alive. Rajah Hassim here has seen them less than two
hours ago, and so has the girl. They are alive and unharmed, so far. And
now. . . ."

He paused. Mrs. Travers, leaning on her elbow, shaded her eyes under the
glint of suspended thunderbolts.

"You must hate us," she murmured.

"Hate you," he repeated with, as she fancied, a tinge of disdain in his
tone. "No. I hate myself."

"Why yourself?" she asked, very low.

"For not knowing my mind," he answered. "For not knowing my mind. For
not knowing what it is that's got hold of me since--since this morning.
I was angry then. . . . Nothing but very angry. . . ."

"And now?" she murmured.

"I am . . . unhappy," he said. After a moment of silence which gave to
Mrs. Travers the time to wonder how it was that this man had succeeded
in penetrating into the very depths of her compassion, he hit the table
such a blow that all the heavy muskets seemed to jump a little.

Mrs. Travers heard Hassim pronounce a few words earnestly, and a moan of
distress from Immada.

"I believed in you before you . . . before you gave me your confidence,"
she began. "You could see that. Could you not?"

He looked at her fixedly. "You are not the first that believed in me,"
he said.

Hassim, lounging with his back against the closed door, kept his eye on
him watchfully and Immada's dark and sorrowful eyes rested on the face
of the white woman. Mrs. Travers felt as though she were engaged in
a contest with them; in a struggle for the possession of that man's
strength and of that man's devotion. When she looked up at Lingard she
saw on his face--which should have been impassive or exalted, the face
of a stern leader or the face of a pitiless dreamer--an expression
of utter forgetfulness. He seemed to be tasting the delight of some
profound and amazing sensation. And suddenly in the midst of her appeal
to his generosity, in the middle of a phrase, Mrs. Travers faltered,
becoming aware that she was the object of his contemplation.

"Do not! Do not look at that woman!" cried Immada. "O! Master--look
away. . . ." Hassim threw one arm round the girl's neck. Her voice sank.
"O! Master--look at us." Hassim, drawing her to himself, covered her
lips with his hand. She struggled a little like a snared bird and
submitted, hiding her face on his shoulder, very quiet, sobbing without
noise.

"What do they say to you?" asked Mrs. Travers with a faint and pained
smile. "What can they say? It is intolerable to think that their words
which have no meaning for me may go straight to your heart. . . ."

"Look away," whispered Lingard without making the slightest movement.

Mrs. Travers sighed.

"Yes, it is very hard to think that I who want to touch you cannot make
myself understood as well as they. And yet I speak the language of your
childhood, the language of the man for whom there is no hope but in your
generosity."

He shook his head. She gazed at him anxiously for a moment. "In your
memories then," she said and was surprised by the expression of profound
sadness that over-spread his attentive face.

"Do you know what I remember?" he said. "Do you want to know?" She
listened with slightly parted lips. "I will tell you. Poverty, hard
work--and death," he went on, very quietly. "And now I've told you, and
you don't know. That's how it is between us. You talk to me--I talk to
you--and we don't know."

Her eyelids dropped.

"What can I find to say?" she went on. "What can I do? I mustn't
give in. Think! Amongst your memories there must be some face--some
voice--some name, if nothing more. I can not believe that there is
nothing but bitterness."

"There's no bitterness," he murmured.

"O! Brother, my heart is faint with fear," whispered Immada. Lingard
turned swiftly to that whisper.

"Then, they are to be saved," exclaimed Mrs. Travers. "Ah, I knew. . . ."

"Bear thy fear in patience," said Hassim, rapidly, to his sister.

"They are to be saved. You have said it," Lingard pronounced aloud,
suddenly. He felt like a swimmer who, in the midst of superhuman efforts
to reach the shore, perceives that the undertow is taking him to sea. He
would go with the mysterious current; he would go swiftly--and see the
end, the fulfilment both blissful and terrible.

With this state of exaltation in which he saw himself in some
incomprehensible way always victorious, whatever might befall, there was
mingled a tenacity of purpose. He could not sacrifice his intention,
the intention of years, the intention of his life; he could no more
part with it and exist than he could cut out his heart and live. The
adventurer held fast to his adventure which made him in his own sight
exactly what he was.

He considered the problem with cool audacity, backed by a belief in
his own power. It was not these two men he had to save; he had to save
himself! And looked upon in this way the situation appeared familiar.

Hassim had told him the two white men had been taken by their captors
to Daman's camp. The young Rajah, leaving his sister in the canoe, had
landed on the sand and had crept to the very edge of light thrown by the
fires by which the Illanuns were cooking. Daman was sitting apart by a
larger blaze. Two praus rode in shallow water near the sandbank; on the
ridge, a sentry walked watching the lights of the brig; the camp was
full of quiet whispers. Hassim returned to his canoe, then he and his
sister, paddling cautiously round the anchored praus, in which women's
voices could be heard, approached the other end of the camp. The light
of the big blaze there fell on the water and the canoe skirted it
without a splash, keeping in the night. Hassim, landing for the second
time, crept again close to the fires. Each prau had, according to the
customs of the Illanun rovers when on a raiding expedition, a smaller
war-boat and these being light and manageable were hauled up on the sand
not far from the big blaze; they sat high on the shelving shore throwing
heavy shadows. Hassim crept up toward the largest of them and then
standing on tiptoe could look at the camp across the gunwales. The
confused talking of the men was like the buzz of insects in a forest.
A child wailed on board one of the praus and a woman hailed the shore
shrilly. Hassim unsheathed his kris and held it in his hand.

Very soon--he said--he saw the two white men walking amongst the fires.
They waved their arms and talked together, stopping from time to time;
they approached Daman; and the short man with the hair on his face
addressed him earnestly and at great length. Daman sat cross-legged upon
a little carpet with an open Koran on his knees and chanted the versets
swaying to and fro with his eyes shut.

The Illanun chiefs reclining wrapped in cloaks on the ground raised
themselves on their elbows to look at the whites. When the short white
man finished speaking he gazed down at them for a while, then stamped
his foot. He looked angry because no one understood him. Then suddenly
he looked very sad; he covered his face with his hands; the tall man put
his hand on the short man's shoulder and whispered into his ear. The dry
wood of the fires crackled, the Illanuns slept, cooked, talked, but
with their weapons at hand. An armed man or two came up to stare at the
prisoners and then returned to their fire. The two whites sank down in
the sand in front of Daman. Their clothes were soiled, there was sand in
their hair. The tall man had lost his hat; the glass in the eye of the
short man glittered very much; his back was muddy and one sleeve of his
coat torn up to the elbow.

All this Hassim saw and then retreated undetected to that part of
the shore where Immada waited for him, keeping the canoe afloat. The
Illanuns, trusting to the sea, kept very bad watch on their prisoners,
and had he been able to speak with them Hassim thought an escape could
have been effected. But they could not have understood his signs and
still less his words. He consulted with his sister. Immada murmured
sadly; at their feet the ripple broke with a mournful sound no louder
than their voices.

Hassim's loyalty was unshaken, but now it led him on not in the bright
light of hopes but in the deepened shadow of doubt. He wanted to obtain
information for his friend who was so powerful and who perhaps would
know how to be constant. When followed by Immada he approached the camp
again--this time openly--their appearance did not excite much surprise.
It was well known to the Chiefs of the Illanuns that the Rajah for whom
they were to fight--if God so willed--was upon the shoals looking out
for the coming of the white man who had much wealth and a store of
weapons and who was his servant. Daman, who alone understood the exact
relation, welcomed them with impenetrable gravity. Hassim took his
seat on the carpet at his right hand. A consultation was being held
half-aloud in short and apparently careless sentences, with long
intervals of silence between. Immada, nestling close to her brother,
leaned one arm on his shoulder and listened with serious attention and
with outward calm as became a princess of Wajo accustomed to consort
with warriors and statesmen in moments of danger and in the hours of
deliberation. Her heart was beating rapidly, and facing her the silent
white men stared at these two known faces, as if across a gulf.
Four Illanun chiefs sat in a row. Their ample cloaks fell from their
shoulders, and lay behind them on the sand in which their four long
lances were planted upright, each supporting a small oblong shield of
wood, carved on the edges and stained a dull purple. Daman stretched out
his arm and pointed at the prisoners. The faces of the white men were
very quiet. Daman looked at them mutely and ardently, as if consumed by
an unspeakable longing.

The Koran, in a silk cover, hung on his breast by a crimson cord. It
rested over his heart and, just below, the plain buffalo-horn handle of
a kris, stuck into the twist of his sarong, protruded ready to his hand.
The clouds thickening over the camp made the darkness press heavily on
the glow of scattered fires. "There is blood between me and the whites,"
he pronounced, violently. The Illanun chiefs remained impassive. There
was blood between them and all mankind. Hassim remarked dispassionately
that there was one white man with whom it would be wise to remain
friendly; and besides, was not Daman his friend already? Daman smiled
with half-closed eyes. He was that white man's friend, not his slave.
The Illanuns playing with their sword-handles grunted assent. Why, asked
Daman, did these strange whites travel so far from their country? The
great white man whom they all knew did not want them. No one wanted
them. Evil would follow in their footsteps. They were such men as are
sent by rulers to examine the aspects of far-off countries and talk of
peace and make treaties. Such is the beginning of great sorrows. The
Illanuns were far from their country, where no white man dared to come,
and therefore they were free to seek their enemies upon the open waters.
They had found these two who had come to see. He asked what they had
come to see? Was there nothing to look at in their own country?

He talked in an ironic and subdued tone. The scattered heaps of embers
glowed a deeper red; the big blaze of the chief's fire sank low and
grew dim before he ceased. Straight-limbed figures rose, sank, moved,
whispered on the beach. Here and there a spear-blade caught a red gleam
above the black shape of a head.

"The Illanuns seek booty on the sea," cried Daman. "Their fathers and
the fathers of their fathers have done the same, being fearless like
those who embrace death closely."

A low laugh was heard. "We strike and go," said an exulting voice. "We
live and die with our weapons in our hands." The Illanuns leaped to
their feet. They stamped on the sand, flourishing naked blades over the
heads of their prisoners. A tumult arose.

When it subsided Daman stood up in a cloak that wrapped him to his feet
and spoke again giving advice.

The white men sat on the sand and turned their eyes from face to face
as if trying to understand. It was agreed to send the prisoners into the
lagoon where their fate would be decided by the ruler of the land. The
Illanuns only wanted to plunder the ship. They did not care what became
of the men. "But Daman cares," remarked Hassim to Lingard, when relating
what took place. "He cares, O Tuan!"

Hassim had learned also that the Settlement was in a state of unrest
as if on the eve of war. Belarab with his followers was encamped by his
father's tomb in the hollow beyond the cultivated fields. His stockade
was shut up and no one appeared on the verandahs of the houses within.
You could tell there were people inside only by the smoke of the cooking
fires. Tengga's followers meantime swaggered about the Settlement
behaving tyrannically to those who were peaceable. A great madness had
descended upon the people, a madness strong as the madness of love, the
madness of battle, the desire to spill blood. A strange fear also had
made them wild. The big smoke seen that morning above the forests of
the coast was some agreed signal from Tengga to Daman but what it meant
Hassim had been unable to find out. He feared for Jorgenson's safety.
He said that while one of the war-boats was being made ready to take the
captives into the lagoon, he and his sister left the camp quietly and
got away in their canoe. The flares of the brig, reflected in a faint
loom upon the clouds, enabled them to make straight for the vessel
across the banks. Before they had gone half way these flames went out
and the darkness seemed denser than any he had known before. But it was
no greater than the darkness of his mind--he added. He had looked upon
the white men sitting unmoved and silent under the edge of swords; he
had looked at Daman, he had heard bitter words spoken; he was looking
now at his white friend--and the issue of events he could not see. One
can see men's faces but their fate, which is written on their foreheads,
one cannot see. He had no more to say, and what he had spoken was true
in every word.



IV

Lingard repeated it all to Mrs. Travers. Her courage, her intelligence,
the quickness of her apprehension, the colour of her eyes and the
intrepidity of her glance evoked in him an admiring enthusiasm. She
stood by his side! Every moment that fatal illusion clung closer to his
soul--like a garment of light--like an armour of fire.

He was unwilling to face the facts. All his life--till that day--had
been a wrestle with events in the daylight of this world, but now he
could not bring his mind to the consideration of his position. It
was Mrs. Travers who, after waiting awhile, forced on him the pain
of thought by wanting to know what bearing Hassim's news had upon the
situation.

Lingard had not the slightest doubt Daman wanted him to know what had
been done with the prisoners. That is why Daman had welcomed Hassim, and
let him hear the decision and had allowed him to leave the camp on the
sandbank. There could be only one object in this; to let him, Lingard,
know that the prisoners had been put out of his reach as long as he
remained in his brig. Now this brig was his strength. To make him leave
his brig was like removing his hand from his sword.

"Do you understand what I mean, Mrs. Travers?" he asked. "They are
afraid of me because I know how to fight this brig. They fear the
brig because when I am on board her, the brig and I are one. An armed
man--don't you see? Without the brig I am disarmed, without me she can't
strike. So Daman thinks. He does not know everything but he is not far
off the truth. He says to himself that if I man the boats to go after
these whites into the lagoon then his Illanuns will get the yacht for
sure--and perhaps the brig as well. If I stop here with my brig he holds
the two white men and can talk as big as he pleases. Belarab believes in
me no doubt, but Daman trusts no man on earth. He simply does not know
how to trust any one, because he is always plotting himself. He came to
help me and as soon as he found I was not there he began to plot with
Tengga. Now he has made a move--a clever move; a cleverer move than he
thinks. Why? I'll tell you why. Because I, Tom Lingard, haven't a single
white man aboard this brig I can trust. Not one. I only just discovered
my mate's got the notion I am some kind of pirate. And all your yacht
people think the same. It is as though you had brought a curse on me
in your yacht. Nobody believes me. Good God! What have I come to! Even
those two--look at them--I say look at them! By all the stars they doubt
me! Me! . . ."

He pointed at Hassim and Immada. The girl seemed frightened. Hassim
looked on calm and intelligent with inexhaustible patience. Lingard's
voice fell suddenly.

"And by heavens they may be right. Who knows? You? Do you know? They
have waited for years. Look. They are waiting with heavy hearts. Do you
think that I don't care? Ought I to have kept it all in--told no one--no
one--not even you? Are they waiting for what will never come now?"

Mrs. Travers rose and moved quickly round the table. "Can we give
anything to this--this Daman or these other men? We could give them more
than they could think of asking. I--my husband. . . ."

"Don't talk to me of your husband," he said, roughly. "You don't know
what you are doing." She confronted the sombre anger of his eyes--"But I
must," she asserted with heat.--"Must," he mused, noticing that she was
only half a head less tall than himself. "Must! Oh, yes. Of course, you
must. Must! Yes. But I don't want to hear. Give! What can you give? You
may have all the treasures of the world for all I know. No! You can't
give anything. . . ."

"I was thinking of your difficulty when I spoke," she interrupted. His
eyes wandered downward following the line of her shoulder.--"Of me--of
me!" he repeated.

All this was said almost in whispers. The sound of slow footsteps was
heard on deck above their heads. Lingard turned his face to the open
skylight.

"On deck there! Any wind?"

All was still for a moment. Somebody above answered in a leisurely tone:

"A steady little draught from the northward."

Then after a pause added in a mutter:

"Pitch dark."

"Aye, dark enough," murmured Lingard. He must do something. Now. At
once. The world was waiting. The world full of hopes and fear.
What should he do? Instead of answering that question he traced the
ungleaming coils of her twisted hair and became fascinated by a stray
lock at her neck. What should he do? No one to leave his brig to. The
voice that had answered his question was Carter's voice. "He is hanging
about keeping his eye on me," he said to Mrs. Travers. She shook her
head and tried to smile. The man above coughed discreetly. "No," said
Lingard, "you must understand that you have nothing to give."

The man on deck who seemed to have lingered by the skylight was heard
saying quietly, "I am at hand if you want me, Mrs. Travers." Hassim and
Immada looked up. "You see," exclaimed Lingard. "What did I tell you?
He's keeping his eye on me! On board my own ship. Am I dreaming? Am I in
a fever? Tell him to come down," he said after a pause. Mrs. Travers
did so and Lingard thought her voice very commanding and very sweet.
"There's nothing in the world I love so much as this brig," he went on.
"Nothing in the world. If I lost her I would have no standing room on
the earth for my feet. You don't understand this. You can't."

Carter came in and shut the cabin door carefully. He looked with
serenity at everyone in turn.

"All quiet?" asked Lingard.

"Quiet enough if you like to call it so," he answered. "But if you only
put your head outside the door you'll hear them all on the quarter-deck
snoring against each other, as if there were no wives at home and no
pirates at sea."

"Look here," said Lingard. "I found out that I can't trust my mate."

"Can't you?" drawled Carter. "I am not exactly surprised. I must say
_he_ does not snore but I believe it is because he is too crazy to
sleep. He waylaid me on the poop just now and said something about evil
communications corrupting good manners. Seems to me I've heard that
before. Queer thing to say. He tried to make it out somehow that if he
wasn't corrupt it wasn't your fault. As if this was any concern of mine.
He's as mad as he's fat--or else he puts it on." Carter laughed a little
and leaned his shoulders against a bulkhead.

Lingard gazed at the woman who expected so much from him and in the
light she seemed to shed he saw himself leading a column of armed boats
to the attack of the Settlement. He could burn the whole place to the
ground and drive every soul of them into the bush. He could! And
there was a surprise, a shock, a vague horror at the thought of the
destructive power of his will. He could give her ever so many lives. He
had seen her yesterday, and it seemed to him he had been all his life
waiting for her to make a sign. She was very still. He pondered a plan
of attack. He saw smoke and flame--and next moment he saw himself alone
amongst shapeless ruins with the whispers, with the sigh and moan of the
Shallows in his ears. He shuddered, and shaking his hand:

"No! I cannot give you all those lives!" he cried.

Then, before Mrs. Travers could guess the meaning of this outburst, he
declared that as the two captives must be saved he would go alone into
the lagoon. He could not think of using force. "You understand why," he
said to Mrs. Travers and she whispered a faint "Yes." He would run the
risk alone. His hope was in Belarab being able to see where his true
interest lay. "If I can only get at him I would soon make him see," he
mused aloud. "Haven't I kept his power up for these two years past? And
he knows it, too. He feels it." Whether he would be allowed to reach
Belarab was another matter. Lingard lost himself in deep thought. "He
would not dare," he burst out. Mrs. Travers listened with parted lips.
Carter did not move a muscle of his youthful and self-possessed face;
only when Lingard, turning suddenly, came up close to him and asked with
a red flash of eyes and in a lowered voice, "Could you fight this brig?"
something like a smile made a stir amongst the hairs of his little fair
moustache.

"'Could I?" he said. "I could try, anyhow." He paused, and added hardly
above his breath, "For the lady--of course."

Lingard seemed staggered as though he had been hit in the chest. "I was
thinking of the brig," he said, gently.

"Mrs. Travers would be on board," retorted Carter.

"What! on board. Ah yes; on board. Where else?" stammered Lingard.

Carter looked at him in amazement. "Fight! You ask!" he said, slowly.
"You just try me."

"I shall," ejaculated Lingard. He left the cabin calling out "serang!" A
thin cracked voice was heard immediately answering, "Tuan!" and the door
slammed to.

"You trust him, Mrs. Travers?" asked Carter, rapidly.

"You do not--why?" she answered.

"I can't make him out. If he was another kind of man I would say he was
drunk," said Carter. "Why is he here at all--he, and this brig of his?
Excuse my boldness--but have you promised him anything?"

"I--I promised!" exclaimed Mrs. Travers in a bitter tone which silenced
Carter for a moment.

"So much the better," he said at last. "Let him show what he can do
first and . . ."

"Here! Take this," said Lingard, who re-entered the cabin fumbling about
his neck. Carter mechanically extended his hand.

"What's this for?" he asked, looking at a small brass key attached to a
thin chain.

"Powder magazine. Trap door under the table. The man who has this key
commands the brig while I am away. The serang understands. You have her
very life in your hand there."

Carter looked at the small key lying in his half-open palm.

"I was just telling Mrs. Travers I didn't trust you--not
altogether. . . ."

"I know all about it," interrupted Lingard, contemptuously. "You carry
a blamed pistol in your pocket to blow my brains out--don't you? What's
that to me? I am thinking of the brig. I think I know your sort. You
will do."

"Well, perhaps I might," mumbled Carter, modestly.

"Don't be rash," said Lingard, anxiously. "If you've got to fight use
your head as well as your hands. If there's a breeze fight under way. If
they should try to board in a calm, trust to the small arms to hold them
off. Keep your head and--" He looked intensely into Carter's eyes; his
lips worked without a sound as though he had been suddenly struck dumb.
"Don't think about me. What's that to you who I am? Think of the ship,"
he burst out. "Don't let her go!--Don't let her go!" The passion in his
voice impressed his hearers who for a time preserved a profound silence.

"All right," said Carter at last. "I will stick to your brig as though
she were my own; but I would like to see clear through all this. Look
here--you are going off somewhere? Alone, you said?"

"Yes. Alone."

"Very well. Mind, then, that you don't come back with a crowd of those
brown friends of yours--or by the Heavens above us I won't let you come
within hail of your own ship. Am I to keep this key?"

"Captain Lingard," said Mrs. Travers suddenly. "Would it not be better
to tell him everything?"

"Tell him everything?" repeated Lingard. "Everything! Yesterday it might
have been done. Only yesterday! Yesterday, did I say? Only six hours
ago--only six hours ago I had something to tell. You heard it. And now
it's gone. Tell him! There's nothing to tell any more." He remained for
a time with bowed head, while before him Mrs. Travers, who had begun a
gesture of protest, dropped her arms suddenly. In a moment he looked up
again.

"Keep the key," he said, calmly, "and when the time comes step forward
and take charge. I am satisfied."

"I would like to see clear through all this though," muttered Carter
again. "And for how long are you leaving us, Captain?" Lingard made no
answer. Carter waited awhile. "Come, sir," he urged. "I ought to have
some notion. What is it? Two, three days?" Lingard started.

"Days," he repeated. "Ah, days. What is it you want to know? Two . . .
three--what did the old fellow say--perhaps for life." This was spoken
so low that no one but Carter heard the last words.--"Do you mean it?"
he murmured. Lingard nodded.--"Wait as long as you can--then go," he
said in the same hardly audible voice. "Go where?"--"Where you like,
nearest port, any port."--"Very good. That's something plain at any
rate," commented the young man with imperturbable good humour.

"I go, O Hassim!" began Lingard and the Malay made a slow inclination of
the head which he did not raise again till Lingard had ceased speaking.
He betrayed neither surprise nor any other emotion while Lingard in a
few concise and sharp sentences made him acquainted with his purpose to
bring about singlehanded the release of the prisoners. When Lingard had
ended with the words: "And you must find a way to help me in the time of
trouble, O Rajah Hassim," he looked up and said:

"Good. You never asked me for anything before."

He smiled at his white friend. There was something subtle in the smile
and afterward an added firmness in the repose of the lips. Immada moved
a step forward. She looked at Lingard with terror in her black and
dilated eyes. She exclaimed in a voice whose vibration startled the
hearts of all the hearers with an indefinable sense of alarm, "He will
perish, Hassim! He will perish alone!"

"No," said Hassim. "Thy fear is as vain to-night as it was at sunrise.
He shall not perish alone."

Her eyelids dropped slowly. From her veiled eyes the tears fell,
vanishing in the silence. Lingard's forehead became furrowed by folds
that seemed to contain an infinity of sombre thoughts. "Remember, O
Hassim, that when I promised you to take you back to your country you
promised me to be a friend to all white men. A friend to all whites who
are of my people, forever."

"My memory is good, O Tuan," said Hassim; "I am not yet back in my
country, but is not everyone the ruler of his own heart? Promises made
by a man of noble birth live as long as the speaker endures."

"Good-bye," said Lingard to Mrs. Travers. "You will be safe here." He
looked all around the cabin. "I leave you," he began again and stopped
short. Mrs. Travers' hand, resting lightly on the edge of the table,
began to tremble. "It's for you . . . Yes. For you alone . . . and it
seems it can't be. . . ."

It seemed to him that he was saying good-bye to all the world, that
he was taking a last leave of his own self. Mrs. Travers did not say a
word, but Immada threw herself between them and cried:

"You are a cruel woman! You are driving him away from where his strength
is. You put madness into his heart, O! Blind--without pity--without
shame! . . ."

"Immada," said Hassim's calm voice. Nobody moved.

"What did she say to me?" faltered Mrs. Travers and again repeated in a
voice that sounded hard, "What did she say?"

"Forgive her," said Lingard. "Her fears are for me . . ."--"It's about
your going?" Mrs. Travers interrupted, swiftly.

"Yes, it is--and you must forgive her." He had turned away his eyes with
something that resembled embarrassment but suddenly he was assailed by
an irresistible longing to look again at that woman. At the moment of
parting he clung to her with his glance as a man holds with his hands
a priceless and disputed possession. The faint blush that overspread
gradually Mrs. Travers' features gave her face an air of extraordinary
and startling animation.

"The danger you run?" she asked, eagerly. He repelled the suggestion by
a slighting gesture of the hand.--"Nothing worth looking at twice. Don't
give it a thought," he said. "I've been in tighter places." He clapped
his hands and waited till he heard the cabin door open behind his back.
"Steward, my pistols." The mulatto in slippers, aproned to the chin,
glided through the cabin with unseeing eyes as though for him no one
there had existed. . . .--"Is it my heart that aches so?" Mrs. Travers
asked herself, contemplating Lingard's motionless figure. "How long will
this sensation of dull pain last? Will it last forever. . . ."--"How
many changes of clothes shall I put up, sir?" asked the steward, while
Lingard took the pistols from him and eased the hammers after putting
on fresh caps.--"I will take nothing this time, steward." He received in
turn from the mulatto's hands a red silk handkerchief, a pocket book, a
cigar-case. He knotted the handkerchief loosely round his throat; it
was evident he was going through the routine of every departure for
the shore; he even opened the cigar-case to see whether it had been
filled.--"Hat, sir," murmured the half-caste. Lingard flung it on his
head.--"Take your orders from this lady, steward--till I come back. The
cabin is hers--do you hear?" He sighed ready to go and seemed unable to
lift a foot.--"I am coming with you," declared Mrs. Travers suddenly in
a tone of unalterable decision. He did not look at her; he did not even
look up; he said nothing, till after Carter had cried: "You can't, Mrs.
Travers!"--when without budging he whispered to himself:--"Of course."
Mrs. Travers had pulled already the hood of her cloak over her head
and her face within the dark cloth had turned an intense and unearthly
white, in which the violet of her eyes appeared unfathomably mysterious.
Carter started forward.--"You don't know this man," he almost shouted.

"I do know him," she said, and before the reproachfully unbelieving
attitude of the other she added, speaking slowly and with emphasis:
"There is not, I verily believe, a single thought or act of his life
that I don't know."--"It's true--it's true," muttered Lingard to
himself. Carter threw up his arms with a groan. "Stand back," said a
voice that sounded to him like a growl of thunder, and he felt a grip
on his hand which seemed to crush every bone. He jerked it away.--"Mrs.
Travers! stay," he cried. They had vanished through the open door and
the sound of their footsteps had already died away. Carter turned about
bewildered as if looking for help.--"Who is he, steward? Who in the name
of all the mad devils is he?" he asked, wildly. He was confounded by the
cold and philosophical tone of the answer:--"'Tain't my place to trouble
about that, sir--nor yours I guess."--"Isn't it!" shouted Carter. "Why,
he has carried the lady off." The steward was looking critically at
the lamp and after a while screwed the light down.--"That's better," he
mumbled.--"Good God! What is a fellow to do?" continued Carter, looking
at Hassim and Immada who were whispering together and gave him only an
absent glance. He rushed on deck and was struck blind instantly by the
night that seemed to have been lying in wait for him; he stumbled over
something soft, kicked something hard, flung himself on the rail. "Come
back," he cried. "Come back. Captain! Mrs. Travers!--or let me come,
too."

He listened. The breeze blew cool against his cheek. A black bandage
seemed to lie over his eyes. "Gone," he groaned, utterly crushed.
And suddenly he heard Mrs. Travers' voice remote in the depths of
the night.--"Defend the brig," it said, and these words, pronouncing
themselves in the immensity of a lightless universe, thrilled every
fibre of his body by the commanding sadness of their tone. "Defend,
defend the brig." . . . "I am damned if I do," shouted Carter in
despair. "Unless you come back! . . . Mrs. Travers!"

". . . as though--I were--on board--myself," went on the rising
cadence of the voice, more distant now, a marvel of faint and imperious
clearness.

Carter shouted no more; he tried to make out the boat for a time, and
when, giving it up, he leaped down from the rail, the heavy obscurity
of the brig's main deck was agitated like a sombre pool by his jump,
swayed, eddied, seemed to break up. Blotches of darkness recoiled,
drifted away, bare feet shuffled hastily, confused murmurs died out.
"Lascars," he muttered, "The crew is all agog." Afterward he listened
for a moment to the faintly tumultuous snores of the white men sleeping
in rows, with their heads under the break of the poop. Somewhere
about his feet, the yacht's black dog, invisible, and chained to a
deck-ringbolt, whined, rattled the thin links, pattered with his claws
in his distress at the unfamiliar surroundings, begging for the charity
of human notice. Carter stooped impulsively, and was met by a startling
lick in the face.--"Hallo, boy!" He thumped the thick curly sides,
stroked the smooth head--"Good boy, Rover. Down. Lie down, dog. You
don't know what to make of it--do you, boy?" The dog became still as
death. "Well, neither do I," muttered Carter. But such natures are
helped by a cheerful contempt for the intricate and endless suggestions
of thought. He told himself that he would soon see what was to come of
it, and dismissed all speculation. Had he been a little older he would
have felt that the situation was beyond his grasp; but he was too
young to see it whole and in a manner detached from himself. All these
inexplicable events filled him with deep concern--but then on the other
hand he had the key of the magazine and he could not find it in his
heart to dislike Lingard. He was positive about this at last, and to
know that much after the discomfort of an inward conflict went a long
way toward a solution. When he followed Shaw into the cabin he could not
repress a sense of enjoyment or hide a faint and malicious smile.

"Gone away--did you say? And carried off the lady with him?" discoursed
Shaw very loud in the doorway. "Did he? Well, I am not surprised. What
can you expect from a man like that, who leaves his ship in an open
roadstead without--I won't say orders--but without as much as a single
word to his next in command? And at night at that! That just shows you
the kind of man. Is this the way to treat a chief mate? I apprehend he
was riled at the little al-ter-cation we had just before you came on
board. I told him a truth or two--but--never mind. There's the law and
that's enough for me. I am captain as long as he is out of the ship, and
if his address before very long is not in one of Her Majesty's jails or
other I au-tho-rize you to call me a Dutchman. You mark my words."

He walked in masterfully, sat down and surveyed the cabin in a leisurely
and autocratic manner; but suddenly his eyes became stony with amazement
and indignation; he pointed a fat and trembling forefinger.

"Niggers," he said, huskily. "In the cuddy! In the cuddy!" He appeared
bereft of speech for a time.

Since he entered the cabin Hassim had been watching him in thoughtful
and expectant silence. "I can't have it," he continued with genuine
feeling in his voice. "Damme! I've too much respect for myself." He rose
with heavy deliberation; his eyes bulged out in a severe and
dignified stare. "Out you go!" he bellowed; suddenly, making a step
forward.--"Great Scott! What are you up to, mister?" asked in a tone of
dispassionate surprise the steward whose head appeared in the doorway.
"These are the Captain's friends." "Show me a man's friends and . . ."
began Shaw, dogmatically, but abruptly passed into the tone of
admonition. "You take your mug out of the way, bottle-washer. They ain't
friends of mine. I ain't a vagabond. I know what's due to myself. Quit!"
he hissed, fiercely. Hassim, with an alert movement, grasped the handle
of his kris. Shaw puffed out his cheeks and frowned.--"Look out! He
will stick you like a prize pig," murmured Carter without moving
a muscle. Shaw looked round helplessly.--"And you would enjoy the
fun--wouldn't you?" he said with slow bitterness. Carter's distant
non-committal smile quite overwhelmed him by its horrid frigidity.
Extreme despondency replaced the proper feeling of racial pride in the
primitive soul of the mate. "My God! What luck! What have I done to fall
amongst that lot?" he groaned, sat down, and took his big grey head in
his hands. Carter drew aside to make room for Immada, who, in obedience
to a whisper from her brother, sought to leave the cabin. She passed
out after an instant of hesitation, during which she looked up at Carter
once. Her brother, motionless in a defensive attitude, protected her
retreat. She disappeared; Hassim's grip on his weapon relaxed; he looked
in turn at every object in the cabin as if to fix its position in
his mind forever, and following his sister, walked out with noiseless
footfalls.

They entered the same darkness which had received, enveloped, and hidden
the troubled souls of Lingard and Edith, but to these two the light from
which they had felt themselves driven away was now like the light of
forbidden hopes; it had the awful and tranquil brightness that a light
burning on the shore has for an exhausted swimmer about to give himself
up to the fateful sea. They looked back; it had disappeared; Carter had
shut the cabin door behind them to have it out with Shaw. He wanted to
arrive at some kind of working compromise with the nominal commander,
but the mate was so demoralized by the novelty of the assaults made upon
his respectability that the young defender of the brig could get nothing
from him except lamentations mingled with mild blasphemies. The brig
slept, and along her quiet deck the voices raised in her cabin--Shaw's
appeals and reproaches directed vociferously to heaven, together with
Carter's inflexible drawl mingled into one deadened, modulated, and
continuous murmur. The lockouts in the waist, motionless and peering
into obscurity, one ear turned to the sea, were aware of that strange
resonance like the ghost of a quarrel that seemed to hover at their
backs. Wasub, after seeing Hassim and Immada into their canoe, prowled
to and fro the whole length of the vessel vigilantly. There was not
a star in the sky and no gleam on the water; there was no horizon, no
outline, no shape for the eye to rest upon, nothing for the hand to
grasp. An obscurity that seemed without limit in space and time had
submerged the universe like a destroying flood.

A lull of the breeze kept for a time the small boat in the neighbourhood
of the brig. The hoisted sail, invisible, fluttered faintly,
mysteriously, and the boat rising and falling bodily to the passage of
each invisible undulation of the waters seemed to repose upon a living
breast. Lingard, his hand on the tiller, sat up erect, expectant and
silent. Mrs. Travers had drawn her cloak close around her body. Their
glances plunged infinitely deep into a lightless void, and yet they were
still so near the brig that the piteous whine of the dog, mingled with
the angry rattling of the chain, reached their ears faintly, evoking
obscure images of distress and fury. A sharp bark ending in a plaintive
howl that seemed raised by the passage of phantoms invisible to men,
rent the black stillness, as though the instinct of the brute inspired
by the soul of night had voiced in a lamentable plaint the fear of the
future, the anguish of lurking death, the terror of shadows. Not far
from the brig's boat Hassim and Immada in their canoe, letting their
paddles trail in the water, sat in a silent and invincible torpor as
if the fitful puffs of wind had carried to their hearts the breath of a
subtle poison that, very soon, would make them die.--"Have you seen
the white woman's eyes?" cried the girl. She struck her palms together
loudly and remained with her arms extended, with her hands clasped. "O
Hassim! Have you seen her eyes shining under her eyebrows like rays of
light darting under the arched boughs in a forest? They pierced me. I
shuddered at the sound of her voice! I saw her walk behind him--and
it seems to me that she does not live on earth--that all this is
witchcraft."

She lamented in the night. Hassim kept silent. He had no illusions and
in any other man but Lingard he would have thought the proceeding no
better than suicidal folly. For him Travers and d'Alcacer were two
powerful Rajahs--probably relatives of the Ruler of the land of the
English whom he knew to be a woman; but why they should come and
interfere with the recovery of his own kingdom was an obscure problem.
He was concerned for Lingard's safety. That the risk was incurred mostly
for his sake--so that the prospects of the great enterprise should not
be ruined by a quarrel over the lives of these whites--did not strike
him so much as may be imagined. There was that in him which made such
an action on Lingard's part appear all but unavoidable. Was he not Rajah
Hassim and was not the other a man of strong heart, of strong arm, of
proud courage, a man great enough to protect highborn princes--a friend?
Immada's words called out a smile which, like the words, was lost in the
darkness. "Forget your weariness," he said, gently, "lest, O Sister, we
should arrive too late." The coming day would throw its light on some
decisive event. Hassim thought of his own men who guarded the Emma and
he wished to be where they could hear his voice. He regretted Jaffir was
not there. Hassim was saddened by the absence from his side of that man
who once had carried what he thought would be his last message to his
friend. It had not been the last. He had lived to cherish new hopes and
to face new troubles and, perchance, to frame another message yet, while
death knocked with the hands of armed enemies at the gate. The breeze
steadied; the succeeding swells swung the canoe smoothly up the unbroken
ridges of water travelling apace along the land. They progressed slowly;
but Immada's heart was more weary than her arms, and Hassim, dipping the
blade of his paddle without a splash, peered right and left, trying to
make out the shadowy forms of islets. A long way ahead of the canoe and
holding the same course, the brig's dinghy ran with broad lug extended,
making for that narrow and winding passage between the coast and the
southern shoals, which led to the mouth of the creek connecting the
lagoon with the sea.

Thus on that starless night the Shallows were peopled by uneasy souls.
The thick veil of clouds stretched over them, cut them off from the
rest of the universe. At times Mrs. Travers had in the darkness the
impression of dizzy speed, and again it seemed to her that the boat was
standing still, that everything in the world was standing still and only
her fancy roamed free from all trammels. Lingard, perfectly motionless
by her side, steered, shaping his course by the feel of the wind.
Presently he perceived ahead a ghostly flicker of faint, livid light
which the earth seemed to throw up against the uniform blackness of
the sky. The dinghy was approaching the expanse of the Shallows. The
confused clamour of broken water deepened its note.

"How long are we going to sail like this?" asked Mrs. Travers, gently.
She did not recognize the voice that pronounced the word "Always" in
answer to her question. It had the impersonal ring of a voice without a
master. Her heart beat fast.

"Captain Lingard!" she cried.

"Yes. What?" he said, nervously, as if startled out of a dream.

"I asked you how long we were going to sail like this," she repeated,
distinctly.

"If the breeze holds we shall be in the lagoon soon after daybreak. That
will be the right time, too. I shall leave you on board the hulk with
Jorgenson."

"And you? What will you do?" she asked. She had to wait for a while.

"I will do what I can," she heard him say at last. There was another
pause. "All I can," he added.

The breeze dropped, the sail fluttered.

"I have perfect confidence in you," she said. "But are you certain of
success?"

"No."

The futility of her question came home to Mrs. Travers. In a few hours
of life she had been torn away from all her certitudes, flung into
a world of improbabilities. This thought instead of augmenting her
distress seemed to soothe her. What she experienced was not doubt and
it was not fear. It was something else. It might have been only a great
fatigue.

She heard a dull detonation as if in the depth of the sea. It was hardly
more than a shock and a vibration. A roller had broken amongst the
shoals; the livid clearness Lingard had seen ahead flashed and flickered
in expanded white sheets much nearer to the boat now. And all this--the
wan burst of light, the faint shock as of something remote and immense
falling into ruins, was taking place outside the limits of her
life which remained encircled by an impenetrable darkness and by an
impenetrable silence. Puffs of wind blew about her head and expired;
the sail collapsed, shivered audibly, stood full and still in turn;
and again the sensation of vertiginous speed and of absolute immobility
succeeding each other with increasing swiftness merged at last into
a bizarre state of headlong motion and profound peace. The darkness
enfolded her like the enervating caress of a sombre universe. It was
gentle and destructive. Its languor seduced her soul into surrender.
Nothing existed and even all her memories vanished into space. She was
content that nothing should exist.

Lingard, aware all the time of their contact in the narrow stern sheets
of the boat, was startled by the pressure of the woman's head drooping
on his shoulder. He stiffened himself still more as though he had
tried on the approach of a danger to conceal his life in the breathless
rigidity of his body. The boat soared and descended slowly; a region
of foam and reefs stretched across her course hissing like a gigantic
cauldron; a strong gust of wind drove her straight at it for a moment
then passed on and abandoned her to the regular balancing of the swell.
The struggle of the rocks forever overwhelmed and emerging, with the sea
forever victorious and repulsed, fascinated the man. He watched it as he
would have watched something going on within himself while Mrs. Travers
slept sustained by his arm, pressed to his side, abandoned to his
support. The shoals guarding the Shore of Refuge had given him his first
glimpse of success--the solid support he needed for his action. The
Shallows were the shelter of his dreams; their voice had the power to
soothe and exalt his thoughts with the promise of freedom for his hopes.
Never had there been such a generous friendship. . . . A mass of white
foam whirling about a centre of intense blackness spun silently past the
side of the boat. . . . That woman he held like a captive on his arm had
also been given to him by the Shallows.

Suddenly his eyes caught on a distant sandbank the red gleam of Daman's
camp fire instantly eclipsed like the wink of a signalling lantern along
the level of the waters. It brought to his mind the existence of the two
men--those other captives. If the war canoe transporting them into the
lagoon had left the sands shortly after Hassim's retreat from Daman's
camp, Travers and d'Alcacer were by this time far away up the creek.
Every thought of action had become odious to Lingard since all he could
do in the world now was to hasten the moment of his separation from that
woman to whom he had confessed the whole secret of his life.

And she slept. She could sleep! He looked down at her as he would have
looked at the slumbering ignorance of a child, but the life within him
had the fierce beat of supreme moments. Near by, the eddies sighed along
the reefs, the water soughed amongst the stones, clung round the rocks
with tragic murmurs that resembled promises, good-byes, or prayers. From
the unfathomable distances of the night came the booming of the swell
assaulting the seaward face of the Shallows. He felt the woman's
nearness with such intensity that he heard nothing. . . . Then suddenly
he thought of death.

"Wake up!" he shouted in her ear, swinging round in his seat. Mrs.
Travers gasped; a splash of water flicked her over the eyes and she felt
the separate drops run down her cheeks, she tasted them on her lips,
tepid and bitter like tears. A swishing undulation tossed the boat on
high followed by another and still another; and then the boat with the
breeze abeam glided through still water, laying over at a steady angle.

"Clear of the reef now," remarked Lingard in a tone of relief.

"Were we in any danger?" asked Mrs. Travers in a whisper.

"Well, the breeze dropped and we drifted in very close to the rocks," he
answered. "I had to rouse you. It wouldn't have done for you to wake up
suddenly struggling in the water."

So she had slept! It seemed to her incredible that she should have
closed her eyes in this small boat, with the knowledge of their
desperate errand, on so disturbed a sea. The man by her side leaned
forward, extended his arm, and the boat going off before the wind went
on faster on an even keel. A motionless black bank resting on the sea
stretched infinitely right in their way in ominous stillness. She called
Lingard's attention to it. "Look at this awful cloud."

"This cloud is the coast and in a moment we shall be entering the
creek," he said, quietly. Mrs. Travers stared at it. Was it land--land!
It seemed to her even less palpable than a cloud, a mere sinister
immobility above the unrest of the sea, nursing in its depth the unrest
of men who, to her mind, were no more real than fantastic shadows.



V

What struck Mrs. Travers most, directly she set eyes on him, was the
other-world aspect of Jorgenson. He had been buried out of sight so long
that his tall, gaunt body, his unhurried, mechanical movements, his
set face and his eyes with an empty gaze suggested an invincible
indifference to all the possible surprises of the earth. That appearance
of a resuscitated man who seemed to be commanded by a conjuring spell
strolled along the decks of what was even to Mrs. Travers' eyes the mere
corpse of a ship and turned on her a pair of deep-sunk, expressionless
eyes with an almost unearthly detachment. Mrs. Travers had never been
looked at before with that strange and pregnant abstraction. Yet she
didn't dislike Jorgenson. In the early morning light, white from head to
foot in a perfectly clean suit of clothes which seemed hardly to contain
any limbs, freshly shaven (Jorgenson's sunken cheeks with their withered
colouring always had a sort of gloss as though he had the habit of
shaving every two hours or so), he looked as immaculate as though he
had been indeed a pure spirit superior to the soiling contacts of the
material earth. He was disturbing but he was not repulsive. He gave no
sign of greeting.

Lingard addressed him at once.

"You have had a regular staircase built up the side of the hulk,
Jorgenson," he said. "It was very convenient for us to come aboard now,
but in case of an attack don't you think . . ."

"I did think." There was nothing so dispassionate in the world as the
voice of Captain H. C. Jorgenson, ex Barque Wild Rose, since he had
recrossed the Waters of Oblivion to step back into the life of men. "I
did think, but since I don't want to make trouble. . . ."

"Oh, you don't want to make trouble," interrupted Lingard.

"No. Don't believe in it. Do you, King Tom?"

"I may have to make trouble."

"So you came up here in this small dinghy of yours like this to start
making trouble, did you?"

"What's the matter with you? Don't you know me yet, Jorgenson?"

"I thought I knew you. How could I tell that a man like you would come
along for a fight bringing a woman with him?"

"This lady is Mrs. Travers," said Lingard. "The wife of one of the
luckless gentlemen Daman got hold of last evening. . . . This is
Jorgenson, the friend of whom I have been telling you, Mrs. Travers."

Mrs. Travers smiled faintly. Her eyes roamed far and near and the
strangeness of her surroundings, the overpowering curiosity, the
conflict of interest and doubt gave her the aspect of one still new to
life, presenting an innocent and naive attitude before the surprises
of experience. She looked very guileless and youthful between those two
men. Lingard gazed at her with that unconscious tenderness mingled with
wonder, which some men manifest toward girlhood. There was nothing of
a conqueror of kingdoms in his bearing. Jorgenson preserved his
amazing abstraction which seemed neither to hear nor see anything. But,
evidently, he kept a mysterious grip on events in the world of living
men because he asked very naturally:

"How did she get away?"

"The lady wasn't on the sandbank," explained Lingard, curtly.

"What sandbank?" muttered Jorgenson, perfunctorily. . . . "Is the yacht
looted, Tom?"

"Nothing of the kind," said Lingard.

"Ah, many dead?" inquired Jorgenson.

"I tell you there was nothing of the kind," said Lingard, impatiently.

"What? No fight!" inquired Jorgenson again without the slightest sign of
animation.

"No."

"And you a fighting man."

"Listen to me, Jorgenson. Things turned out so that before the time came
for a fight it was already too late." He turned to Mrs. Travers still
looking about with anxious eyes and a faint smile on her lips. "While I
was talking to you that evening from the boat it was already too late.
No. There was never any time for it. I have told you all about myself,
Mrs. Travers, and you know that I speak the truth when I say too late.
If you had only been alone in that yacht going about the seas!"

"Yes," she struck in, "but I was not alone."

Lingard dropped his chin on his breast. Already a foretaste of noonday
heat staled the sparkling freshness of the morning. The smile had
vanished from Edith Travers' lips and her eyes rested on Lingard's bowed
head with an expression no longer curious but which might have appeared
enigmatic to Jorgenson if he had looked at her. But Jorgenson looked at
nothing. He asked from the remoteness of his dead past, "What have you
left outside, Tom? What is there now?"

"There's the yacht on the shoals, my brig at anchor, and about a hundred
of the worst kind of Illanun vagabonds under three chiefs and with two
war-praus moored to the edge of the bank. Maybe Daman is with them, too,
out there."

"No," said Jorgenson, positively.

"He has come in," cried Lingard. "He brought his prisoners in himself
then."

"Landed by torchlight," uttered precisely the shade of Captain
Jorgenson, late of the Barque Wild Rose. He swung his arm pointing
across the lagoon and Mrs. Travers turned about in that direction.

All the scene was but a great light and a great solitude. Her gaze
travelled over the lustrous, dark sheet of empty water to a shore
bordered by a white beach empty, too, and showing no sign of human life.
The human habitations were lost in the shade of the fruit trees, masked
by the cultivated patches of Indian corn and the banana plantations.
Near the shore the rigid lines of two stockaded forts could be
distinguished flanking the beach, and between them with a great open
space before it, the brown roof slope of an enormous long building that
seemed suspended in the air had a great square flag fluttering above it.
Something like a small white flame in the sky was the carved white coral
finial on the gable of the mosque which had caught full the rays of
the sun. A multitude of gay streamers, white and red, flew over the
half-concealed roofs, over the brilliant fields and amongst the sombre
palm groves. But it might have been a deserted settlement decorated and
abandoned by its departed population. Lingard pointed to the stockade on
the right.

"That's where your husband is," he said to Mrs. Travers.

"Who is the other?" uttered Jorgenson's voice at their backs. He also
was turned that way with his strange sightless gaze fixed beyond them
into the void.

"A Spanish gentleman I believe you said, Mrs Travers," observed Lingard.

"It is extremely difficult to believe that there is anybody there,"
murmured Mrs. Travers.

"Did you see them both, Jorgenson?" asked Lingard.

"Made out nobody. Too far. Too dark."

As a matter of fact Jorgenson had seen nothing, about an hour before
daybreak, but the distant glare of torches while the loud shouts of an
excited multitude had reached him across the water only like a faint
and tempestuous murmur. Presently the lights went away processionally
through the groves of trees into the armed stockades. The distant glare
vanished in the fading darkness and the murmurs of the invisible crowd
ceased suddenly as if carried off by the retreating shadow of the night.
Daylight followed swiftly, disclosing to the sleepless Jorgenson the
solitude of the shore and the ghostly outlines of the familiar forms of
grouped trees and scattered human habitations. He had watched the varied
colours come out in the dawn, the wide cultivated Settlement of
many shades of green, framed far away by the fine black lines of the
forest-edge that was its limit and its protection.

Mrs. Travers stood against the rail as motionless as a statue. Her face
had lost all its mobility and her cheeks were dead white as if all the
blood in her body had flowed back into her heart and had remained there.
Her very lips had lost their colour. Lingard caught hold of her arm
roughly.

"Don't, Mrs. Travers. Why are you terrifying yourself like this? If you
don't believe what I say listen to me asking Jorgenson. . . ."

"Yes, ask me," mumbled Jorgenson in his white moustache.

"Speak straight, Jorgenson. What do you think? Are the gentlemen alive?"

"Certainly," said Jorgenson in a sort of disappointed tone as though he
had expected a much more difficult question.

"Is their life in immediate danger?"

"Of course not," said Jorgenson.

Lingard turned away from the oracle. "You have heard him, Mrs. Travers.
You may believe every word he says. There isn't a thought or a purpose
in that Settlement," he continued, pointing at the dumb solitude of the
lagoon, "that this man doesn't know as if they were his own."

"I know. Ask me," muttered Jorgenson, mechanically.

Mrs. Travers said nothing but made a slight movement and her whole rigid
figure swayed dangerously. Lingard put his arm firmly round her waist
and she did not seem aware of it till after she had turned her head and
found Lingard's face very near her own. But his eyes full of concern
looked so close into hers that she was obliged to shut them like a woman
about to faint.

The effect this produced upon Lingard was such that she felt the
tightening of his arm and as she opened her eyes again some of the
colour returned to her face. She met the deepened expression of his
solicitude with a look so steady, with a gaze that in spite of herself
was so profoundly vivid that its clearness seemed to Lingard to throw
all his past life into shade.--"I don't feel faint. It isn't that at
all," she declared in a perfectly calm voice. It seemed to Lingard as
cold as ice.

"Very well," he agreed with a resigned smile. "But you just catch hold
of that rail, please, before I let you go." She, too, forced a smile on
her lips.

"What incredulity," she remarked, and for a time made not the slightest
movement. At last, as if making a concession, she rested the tips of her
fingers on the rail. Lingard gradually removed his arm. "And pray don't
look upon me as a conventional 'weak woman' person, the delicate lady of
your own conception," she said, facing Lingard, with her arm extended to
the rail. "Make that effort please against your own conception of what
a woman like me should be. I am perhaps as strong as you are, Captain
Lingard. I mean it literally. In my body."--"Don't you think I have
seen that long ago?" she heard his deep voice protesting.--"And as to
my courage," Mrs. Travers continued, her expression charmingly undecided
between frowns and smiles; "didn't I tell you only a few hours ago, only
last evening, that I was not capable of thinking myself into a fright;
you remember, when you were begging me to try something of the kind.
Don't imagine that I would have been ashamed to try. But I couldn't have
done it. No. Not even for the sake of somebody else's kingdom. Do you
understand me?"

"God knows," said the attentive Lingard after a time, with an unexpected
sigh. "You people seem to be made of another stuff."

"What has put that absurd notion into your head?"

"I didn't mean better or worse. And I wouldn't say it isn't good stuff
either. What I meant to say is that it's different. One feels it. And
here we are."

"Yes, here we are," repeated Mrs. Travers. "And as to this moment of
emotion, what provoked it is not a concern for anybody or anything
outside myself. I felt no terror. I cannot even fix my fears upon any
distinct image. You think I am shamelessly heartless in telling you
this."

Lingard made no sign. It didn't occur to him to make a sign. He
simply hung on Mrs. Travers' words as it were only for the sake of the
sound.--"I am simply frank with you," she continued. "What do I know of
savagery, violence, murder? I have never seen a dead body in my life.
The light, the silence, the mysterious emptiness of this place have
suddenly affected my imagination, I suppose. What is the meaning of this
wonderful peace in which we stand--you and I alone?"

Lingard shook his head. He saw the narrow gleam of the woman's teeth
between the parted lips of her smile, as if all the ardour of her
conviction had been dissolved at the end of her speech into wistful
recognition of their partnership before things outside their knowledge.
And he was warmed by something a little helpless in that smile. Within
three feet of them the shade of Jorgenson, very gaunt and neat, stared
into space.

"Yes. You are strong," said Lingard. "But a whole long night sitting in
a small boat! I wonder you are not too stiff to stand."

"I am not stiff in the least," she interrupted, still smiling. "I am
really a very strong woman," she added, earnestly. "Whatever happens you
may reckon on that fact."

Lingard gave her an admiring glance. But the shade of Jorgenson, perhaps
catching in its remoteness the sound of the word woman, was suddenly
moved to begin scolding with all the liberty of a ghost, in a flow of
passionless indignation.

"Woman! That's what I say. That's just about the last touch--that you,
Tom Lingard, red-eyed Tom, King Tom, and all those fine names, that you
should leave your weapons twenty miles behind you, your men, your guns,
your brig that is your strength, and come along here with your mouth
full of fight, bare-handed and with a woman in tow.--Well--well!"

"Don't forget, Jorgenson, that the lady hears you," remonstrated Lingard
in a vexed tone. . . . "He doesn't mean to be rude," he remarked to Mrs.
Travers quite loud, as if indeed Jorgenson were but an immaterial and
feelingless illusion. "He has forgotten."

"The woman is not in the least offended. I ask for nothing better than
to be taken on that footing."

"Forgot nothing!" mumbled Jorgenson with a sort of ghostly assertiveness
and as it were for his own satisfaction. "What's the world coming to?"

"It was I who insisted on coming with Captain Lingard," said Mrs.
Travers, treating Jorgenson to a fascinating sweetness of tone.

"That's what I say! What is the world coming to? Hasn't King Tom a mind
of his own? What has come over him? He's mad! Leaving his brig with a
hundred and twenty born and bred pirates of the worst kind in two praus
on the other side of a sandbank. Did you insist on that, too? Has he put
himself in the hands of a strange woman?"

Jorgenson seemed to be asking those questions of himself. Mrs. Travers
observed the empty stare, the self-communing voice, his unearthly lack
of animation. Somehow it made it very easy to speak the whole truth to
him.

"No," she said, "it is I who am altogether in his hands."

Nobody would have guessed that Jorgenson had heard a single word of that
emphatic declaration if he had not addressed himself to Lingard with the
question neither more nor less abstracted than all his other speeches.

"Why then did you bring her along?"

"You don't understand. It was only right and proper. One of the
gentlemen is the lady's husband."

"Oh, yes," muttered Jorgenson. "Who's the other?"

"You have been told. A friend."

"Poor Mr. d'Alcacer," said Mrs. Travers. "What bad luck for him to have
accepted our invitation. But he is really a mere acquaintance."

"I hardly noticed him," observed Lingard, gloomily. "He was talking to
you over the back of your chair when I came aboard the yacht as if he
had been a very good friend."

"We always understood each other very well," said Mrs. Travers, picking
up from the rail the long glass that was lying there. "I always liked
him, the frankness of his mind, and his great loyalty."

"What did he do?" asked Lingard.

"He loved," said Mrs. Travers, lightly. "But that's an old story." She
raised the glass to her eyes, one arm extended fully to sustain the long
tube, and Lingard forgot d'Alcacer in admiring the firmness of her pose
and the absolute steadiness of the heavy glass. She was as firm as a
rock after all those emotions and all that fatigue.

Mrs. Travers directed the glass instinctively toward the entrance of the
lagoon. The smooth water there shone like a piece of silver in the dark
frame of the forest. A black speck swept across the field of her vision.
It was some time before she could find it again and then she saw,
apparently so near as to be within reach of the voice, a small canoe
with two people in it. She saw the wet paddles rising and dipping with
a flash in the sunlight. She made out plainly the face of Immada, who
seemed to be looking straight into the big end of the telescope. The
chief and his sister, after resting under the bank for a couple of
hours in the middle of the night, had entered the lagoon and were making
straight for the hulk. They were already near enough to be perfectly
distinguishable to the naked eye if there had been anybody on board to
glance that way. But nobody was even thinking of them. They might not
have existed except perhaps in the memory of old Jorgenson. But that was
mostly busy with all the mysterious secrets of his late tomb.

Mrs. Travers lowered the glass suddenly. Lingard came out from a sort of
trance and said:

"Mr. d'Alcacer. Loved! Why shouldn't he?"

Mrs. Travers looked frankly into Lingard's gloomy eyes. "It isn't that
alone, of course," she said. "First of all he knew how to love and then.
. . . You don't know how artificial and barren certain kinds of life
can be. But Mr. d'Alcacer's life was not that. His devotion was worth
having."

"You seem to know a lot about him,'" said Lingard, enviously. "Why do
you smile?" She continued to smile at him for a little while. The long
brass tube over her shoulder shone like gold against the pale fairness
of her bare head.--"At a thought," she answered, preserving the low tone
of the conversation into which they had fallen as if their words could
have disturbed the self-absorption of Captain H. C. Jorgenson. "At the
thought that for all my long acquaintance with Mr. d'Alcacer I don't
know half as much about him as I know about you."

"Ah, that's impossible," contradicted Lingard. "Spaniard or no Spaniard,
he is one of your kind."

"Tarred with the same brush," murmured Mrs. Travers, with only a
half-amused irony. But Lingard continued:

"He was trying to make it up between me and your husband, wasn't he? I
was too angry to pay much attention, but I liked him well enough. What
pleased me most was the way in which he gave it up. That was done like a
gentleman. Do you understand what I mean, Mrs. Travers?"

"I quite understand."

"Yes, you would," he commented, simply. "But just then I was too angry
to talk to anybody. And so I cleared out on board my own ship and stayed
there, not knowing what to do and wishing you all at the bottom of the
sea. Don't mistake me, Mrs. Travers; it's you, the people aft, that I
wished at the bottom of the sea. I had nothing against the poor devils
on board, They would have trusted me quick enough. So I fumed there
till--till. . . ."

"Till nine o'clock or a little after," suggested Mrs. Travers,
impenetrably.

"No. Till I remembered you," said Lingard with the utmost innocence.

"Do you mean to say that you forgot my existence so completely till
then? You had spoken to me on board the yacht, you know."

"Did I? I thought I did. What did I say?"

"You told me not to touch a dusky princess," answered Mrs. Travers with
a short laugh. Then with a visible change of mood as if she had suddenly
out of a light heart been recalled to the sense of the true situation:
"But indeed I meant no harm to this figure of your dream. And, look over
there. She is pursuing you." Lingard glanced toward the north shore and
suppressed an exclamation of remorse. For the second time he discovered
that he had forgotten the existence of Hassim and Immada. The canoe was
now near enough for its occupants to distinguish plainly the heads of
three people above the low bulwark of the Emma. Immada let her paddle
trail suddenly in the water, with the exclamation, "I see the white
woman there." Her brother looked over his shoulder and the canoe
floated, arrested as if by the sudden power of a spell.--"They are no
dream to me," muttered Lingard, sturdily. Mrs. Travers turned abruptly
away to look at the further shore. It was still and empty to the naked
eye and seemed to quiver in the sunshine like an immense painted curtain
lowered upon the unknown.

"Here's Rajah Hassim coming, Jorgenson. I had an idea he would perhaps
stay outside." Mrs. Travers heard Lingard's voice at her back and the
answering grunt of Jorgenson. She raised deliberately the long glass to
her eye, pointing it at the shore.

She distinguished plainly now the colours in the flutter of the
streamers above the brown roofs of the large Settlement, the stir of
palm groves, the black shadows inland and the dazzling white beach of
coral sand all ablaze in its formidable mystery. She swept the whole
range of the view and was going to lower the glass when from behind
the massive angle of the stockade there stepped out into the brilliant
immobility of the landscape a man in a long white gown and with an
enormous black turban surmounting a dark face. Slow and grave he
paced the beach ominously in the sunshine, an enigmatical figure in an
Oriental tale with something weird and menacing in its sudden emergence
and lonely progress.

With an involuntary gasp Mrs. Travers lowered the glass. All at once
behind her back she heard a low musical voice beginning to pour out
incomprehensible words in a tone of passionate pleading. Hassim and
Immada had come on board and had approached Lingard. Yes! It was
intolerable to feel that this flow of soft speech which had no meaning
for her could make its way straight into that man's heart.



PART V. THE POINT OF HONOUR AND THE POINT OF PASSION

I

"May I come in?"

"Yes," said a voice within. "The door is open." It had a wooden latch.
Mr. Travers lifted it while the voice of his wife continued as he
entered. "Did you imagine I had locked myself in? Did you ever know me
lock myself in?"

Mr. Travers closed the door behind him. "No, it has never come to that,"
he said in a tone that was not conciliatory. In that place which was a
room in a wooden hut and had a square opening without glass but with a
half-closed shutter he could not distinguish his wife very well at once.
She was sitting in an armchair and what he could see best was her
fair hair all loose over the back of the chair. There was a moment
of silence. The measured footsteps of two men pacing athwart the
quarter-deck of the dead ship Emma commanded by the derelict shade of
Jorgenson could be heard outside.

Jorgenson, on taking up his dead command, had a house of thin boards
built on the after deck for his own accommodation and that of Lingard
during his flying visits to the Shore of Refuge. A narrow passage
divided it in two and Lingard's side was furnished with a camp bedstead,
a rough desk, and a rattan armchair. On one of his visits Lingard had
brought with him a black seaman's chest and left it there. Apart from
these objects and a small looking-glass worth about half a crown and
nailed to the wall there was nothing else in there whatever. What was
on Jorgenson's side of the deckhouse no one had seen, but from external
evidence one could infer the existence of a set of razors.

The erection of that primitive deckhouse was a matter of propriety
rather than of necessity. It was proper that the white men should have a
place to themselves on board, but Lingard was perfectly accurate when he
told Mrs. Travers that he had never slept there once. His practice was
to sleep on deck. As to Jorgenson, if he did sleep at all he slept very
little. It might have been said that he haunted rather than commanded
the Emma. His white form flitted here and there in the night or stood
for hours, silent, contemplating the sombre glimmer of the lagoon. Mr.
Travers' eyes accustomed gradually to the dusk of the place could
now distinguish more of his wife's person than the great mass of
honey-coloured hair. He saw her face, the dark eyebrows and her eyes
that seemed profoundly black in the half light. He said:

"You couldn't have done so here. There is neither lock nor bolt."

"Isn't there? I didn't notice. I would know how to protect myself
without locks and bolts."

"I am glad to hear it," said Mr. Travers in a sullen tone and fell
silent again surveying the woman in the chair. "Indulging your taste for
fancy dress," he went on with faint irony.

Mrs. Travers clasped her hands behind her head. The wide sleeves
slipping back bared her arms to her shoulders. She was wearing a Malay
thin cotton jacket, cut low in the neck without a collar and fastened
with wrought silver clasps from the throat downward. She had replaced
her yachting skirt by a blue check sarong embroidered with threads of
gold. Mr. Travers' eyes travelling slowly down attached themselves to
the gleaming instep of an agitated foot from which hung a light leather
sandal.

"I had no clothes with me but what I stood in," said Mrs. Travers. "I
found my yachting costume too heavy. It was intolerable. I was soaked
in dew when I arrived. So when these things were produced for my
inspection. . . ."

"By enchantment," muttered Mr. Travers in a tone too heavy for sarcasm.

"No. Out of that chest. There are very fine stuffs there."

"No doubt," said Mr. Travers. "The man wouldn't be above plundering the
natives. . . ." He sat down heavily on the chest. "A most appropriate
costume for this farce," he continued. "But do you mean to wear it in
open daylight about the decks?"

"Indeed I do," said Mrs. Travers. "D'Alcacer has seen me already and he
didn't seem shocked."

"You should," said Mr. Travers, "try to get yourself presented with some
bangles for your ankles so that you may jingle as you walk."

"Bangles are not necessities," said Mrs. Travers in a weary tone and
with the fixed upward look of a person unwilling to relinquish her
dream. Mr. Travers dropped the subject to ask:

"And how long is this farce going to last?"

Mrs. Travers unclasped her hands, lowered her glance, and changed her
whole pose in a moment.

"What do you mean by farce? What farce?"

"The one which is being played at my expense."

"You believe that?"

"Not only believe. I feel deeply that it is so. At my expense. It's a
most sinister thing," Mr. Travers pursued, still with downcast eyes and
in an unforgiving tone. "I must tell you that when I saw you in that
courtyard in a crowd of natives and leaning on that man's arm, it gave
me quite a shock."

"Did I, too, look sinister?" said Mrs. Travers, turning her head
slightly toward her husband. "And yet I assure you that I was glad,
profoundly glad, to see you safe from danger for a time at least. To
gain time is everything. . . ."

"I ask myself," Mr. Travers meditated aloud, "was I ever in danger? Am
I safe now? I don't know. I can't tell. No! All this seems an abominable
farce."

There was that in his tone which made his wife continue to look at him
with awakened interest. It was obvious that he suffered from a distress
which was not the effect of fear; and Mrs. Travers' face expressed real
concern till he added in a freezing manner: "The question, however, is
as to your discretion."

She leaned back again in the chair and let her hands rest quietly in her
lap. "Would you have preferred me to remain outside, in the yacht, in
the near neighbourhood of these wild men who captured you? Or do you
think that they, too, were got up to carry on a farce?"

"Most decidedly." Mr. Travers raised his head, though of course not his
voice. "You ought to have remained in the yacht amongst white men, your
servants, the sailing-master, the crew whose duty it was to. . . . Who
would have been ready to die for you."

"I wonder why they should have--and why I should have asked them for
that sacrifice. However, I have no doubt they would have died. Or would
you have preferred me to take up my quarters on board that man's brig?
We were all fairly safe there. The real reason why I insisted on coming
in here was to be nearer to you--to see for myself what could be or was
being done. . . . But really if you want me to explain my motives then I
may just as well say nothing. I couldn't remain outside for days without
news, in a state of horrible doubt. We couldn't even tell whether you
and d'Alcacer were still alive till we arrived here. You might have been
actually murdered on the sandbank, after Rajah Hassim and that girl had
gone away; or killed while going up the river. And I wanted to know at
once, as soon as possible. It was a matter of impulse. I went off in
what I stood in without delaying a moment."

"Yes," said Mr. Travers. "And without even thinking of having a
few things put up for me in a bag. No doubt you were in a state of
excitement. Unless you took such a tragic view that it seemed to you
hardly worth while to bother about my clothes."

"It was absolutely the impulse of the moment. I could have done nothing
else. Won't you give me credit for it?"

Mr. Travers raised his eyes again to his wife's face. He saw it calm,
her attitude reposeful. Till then his tone had been resentful, dull,
without sarcasm. But now he became slightly pompous.

"No. As a matter of fact, as a matter of experience, I can't credit
you with the possession of feelings appropriate to your origin, social
position, and the ideas of the class to which you belong. It was the
heaviest disappointment of my life. I had made up my mind not to mention
it as long as I lived. This, however, seems an occasion which you have
provoked yourself. It isn't at all a solemn occasion. I don't look upon
it as solemn at all. It's very disagreeable and humiliating. But it
has presented itself. You have never taken a serious interest in the
activities of my life which of course are its distinction and its value.
And why you should be carried away suddenly by a feeling toward the mere
man I don't understand."

"Therefore you don't approve," Mrs. Travers commented in an even
tone. "But I assure you, you may safely. My feeling was of the most
conventional nature, exactly as if the whole world were looking on.
After all, we are husband and wife. It's eminently fitting that I should
be concerned about your fate. Even the man you distrust and dislike so
much (the warmest feeling, let me tell you, that I ever saw you display)
even that man found my conduct perfectly proper. His own word. Proper.
So eminently proper that it altogether silenced his objections."

Mr. Travers shifted uneasily on his seat.

"It's my belief, Edith, that if you had been a man you would have led
a most irregular life. You would have been a frank adventurer. I mean
morally. It has been a great grief to me. You have a scorn in you for
the serious side of life, for the ideas and the ambitions of the social
sphere to which you belong."

He stopped because his wife had clasped again her hands behind her head
and was no longer looking at him.

"It's perfectly obvious," he began again. "We have been living amongst
most distinguished men and women and your attitude to them has been
always so--so negative! You would never recognize the importance of
achievements, of acquired positions. I don't remember you ever admiring
frankly any political or social success. I ask myself what after all you
could possibly have expected from life."

"I could never have expected to hear such a speech from you. As to what
I did expect! . . . I must have been very stupid."

"No, you are anything but that," declared Mr. Travers, conscientiously.
"It isn't stupidity." He hesitated for a moment. "It's a kind of
wilfulness, I think. I preferred not to think about this grievous
difference in our points of view, which, you will admit, I could not
have possibly foreseen before we. . . ."

A sort of solemn embarrassment had come over Mr. Travers. Mrs. Travers,
leaning her chin on the palm of her hand, stared at the bare matchboard
side of the hut.

"Do you charge me with profound girlish duplicity?" she asked, very
softly.

The inside of the deckhouse was full of stagnant heat perfumed by
a slight scent which seemed to emanate from the loose mass of Mrs.
Travers' hair. Mr. Travers evaded the direct question which struck him
as lacking fineness even to the point of impropriety.

"I must suppose that I was not in the calm possession of my insight and
judgment in those days," he said. "I--I was not in a critical state of
mind at the time," he admitted further; but even after going so far
he did not look up at his wife and therefore missed something like
the ghost of a smile on Mrs. Travers' lips. That smile was tinged with
scepticism which was too deep-seated for anything but the faintest
expression. Therefore she said nothing, and Mr. Travers went on as if
thinking aloud:

"Your conduct was, of course, above reproach; but you made for yourself
a detestable reputation of mental superiority, expressed ironically. You
inspired mistrust in the best people. You were never popular."

"I was bored," murmured Mrs. Travers in a reminiscent tone and with her
chin resting in the hollow of her hand.

Mr. Travers got up from the seaman's chest as unexpectedly as if he had
been stung by a wasp, but, of course, with a much slower and more solemn
motion.

"The matter with you, Edith, is that at heart you are perfectly
primitive." Mrs. Travers stood up, too, with a supple, leisurely
movement, and raising her hands to her hair turned half away with a
pensive remark:

"Imperfectly civilized."

"Imperfectly disciplined," corrected Mr. Travers after a moment of
dreary meditation.

She let her arms fall and turned her head.

"No, don't say that," she protested with strange earnestness. "I am the
most severely disciplined person in the world. I am tempted to say that
my discipline has stopped at nothing short of killing myself. I suppose
you can hardly understand what I mean."

Mr. Travers made a slight grimace at the floor.

"I shall not try," he said. "It sounds like something that a barbarian,
hating the delicate complexities and the restraints of a nobler life,
might have said. From you it strikes me as wilful bad taste. . . .
I have often wondered at your tastes. You have always liked
extreme opinions, exotic costumes, lawless characters, romantic
personalities--like d'Alcacer . . ."

"Poor Mr. d'Alcacer," murmured Mrs. Travers.

"A man without any ideas of duty or usefulness," said Mr. Travers,
acidly. "What are you pitying him for?"

"Why! For finding himself in this position out of mere good-nature.
He had nothing to expect from joining our voyage, no advantage for his
political ambitions or anything of the kind. I suppose you asked him on
board to break our tete-a-tete which must have grown wearisome to you."

"I am never bored," declared Mr. Travers. "D'Alcacer seemed glad to
come. And, being a Spaniard, the horrible waste of time cannot matter to
him in the least."

"Waste of time!" repeated Mrs. Travers, indignantly.

"He may yet have to pay for his good nature with his life."

Mr. Travers could not conceal a movement of anger.

"Ah! I forgot those assumptions," he said between his clenched teeth.
"He is a mere Spaniard. He takes this farcical conspiracy with perfect
nonchalance. Decayed races have their own philosophy."

"He takes it with a dignity of his own."

"I don't know what you call his dignity. I should call it lack of
self-respect."

"Why? Because he is quiet and courteous, and reserves his judgment. And
allow me to tell you, Martin, that you are not taking our troubles very
well."

"You can't expect from me all those foreign affectations. I am not in
the habit of compromising with my feelings."

Mrs. Travers turned completely round and faced her husband. "You sulk,"
she said. . . . Mr. Travers jerked his head back a little as if to let
the word go past.--"I am outraged," he declared. Mrs. Travers recognized
there something like real suffering.--"I assure you," she said,
seriously (for she was accessible to pity), "I assure you that this
strange Lingard has no idea of your importance. He doesn't know anything
of your social and political position and still less of your great
ambitions." Mr. Travers listened with some attention.--"Couldn't you
have enlightened him?" he asked.--"It would have been no use; his mind
is fixed upon his own position and upon his own sense of power. He is
a man of the lower classes. . . ."--"He is a brute," said Mr. Travers,
obstinately, and for a moment those two looked straight into each
other's eyes.--"Oh," said Mrs. Travers, slowly, "you are determined not
to compromise with your feelings!" An undertone of scorn crept into her
voice. "But shall I tell you what I think? I think," and she advanced
her head slightly toward the pale, unshaven face that confronted her
dark eyes, "I think that for all your blind scorn you judge the man
well enough to feel that you can indulge your indignation with perfect
safety. Do you hear? With perfect safety!" Directly she had spoken she
regretted these words. Really it was unreasonable to take Mr. Travers'
tricks of character more passionately on this spot of the Eastern
Archipelago full of obscure plots and warring motives than in the more
artificial atmosphere of the town. After all what she wanted was simply
to save his life, not to make him understand anything. Mr. Travers
opened his mouth and without uttering a word shut it again. His wife
turned toward the looking-glass nailed to the wall. She heard his voice
behind her.

"Edith, where's the truth in all this?"

She detected the anguish of a slow mind with an instinctive dread of
obscure places wherein new discoveries can be made. She looked over her
shoulder to say:

"It's on the surface, I assure you. Altogether on the surface."

She turned again to the looking-glass where her own face met her with
dark eyes and a fair mist of hair above the smooth forehead; but her
words had produced no soothing effect.

"But what does it mean?" cried Mr. Travers. "Why doesn't the fellow
apologize? Why are we kept here? Are we being kept here? Why don't we
get away? Why doesn't he take me back on board my yacht? What does he
want from me? How did he procure our release from these people on shore
who he says intended to cut our throats? Why did they give us up to him
instead?"

Mrs. Travers began to twist her hair on her head.

"Matters of high policy and of local politics. Conflict of personal
interests, mistrust between the parties, intrigues of individuals--you
ought to know how that sort of thing works. His diplomacy made use of
all that. The first thing to do was not to liberate you but to get you
into his keeping. He is a very great man here and let me tell you that
your safety depends on his dexterity in the use of his prestige rather
than on his power which he cannot use. If you would let him talk to
you I am sure he would tell you as much as it is possible for him to
disclose."

"I don't want to be told about any of his rascalities. But haven't you
been taken into his confidence?"

"Completely," admitted Mrs. Travers, peering into the small
looking-glass.

"What is the influence you brought to bear upon this man? It looks to me
as if our fate were in your hands."

"Your fate is not in my hands. It is not even in his hands. There is a
moral situation here which must be solved."

"Ethics of blackmail," commented Mr. Travers with unexpected sarcasm. It
flashed through his wife's mind that perhaps she didn't know him so well
as she had supposed. It was as if the polished and solemn crust of hard
proprieties had cracked slightly, here and there, under the strain,
disclosing the mere wrongheadedness of a common mortal. But it was
only manner that had cracked a little; the marvellous stupidity of
his conceit remained the same. She thought that this discussion was
perfectly useless, and as she finished putting up her hair she said: "I
think we had better go on deck now."

"You propose to go out on deck like this?" muttered Mr. Travers with
downcast eyes.

"Like this? Certainly. It's no longer a novelty. Who is going to be
shocked?"

Mr. Travers made no reply. What she had said of his attitude was very
true. He sulked at the enormous offensiveness of men, things, and
events; of words and even of glances which he seemed to feel physically
resting on his skin like a pain, like a degrading contact. He managed
not to wince. But he sulked. His wife continued, "And let me tell
you that those clothes are fit for a princess--I mean they are of the
quality, material and style custom prescribes for the highest in the
land, a far-distant land where I am informed women rule as much as the
men. In fact they were meant to be presented to an actual princess in
due course. They were selected with the greatest care for that child
Immada. Captain Lingard. . . ."

Mr. Travers made an inarticulate noise partaking of a groan and a grunt.

"Well, I must call him by some name and this I thought would be the
least offensive for you to hear. After all, the man exists. But he is
known also on a certain portion of the earth's surface as King Tom.
D'Alcacer is greatly taken by that name. It seems to him wonderfully
well adapted to the man, in its familiarity and deference. And if you
prefer. . . ."

"I would prefer to hear nothing," said Mr. Travers, distinctly. "Not a
single word. Not even from you, till I am a free agent again. But words
don't touch me. Nothing can touch me; neither your sinister warnings nor
the moods of levity which you think proper to display before a man whose
life, according to you, hangs on a thread."

"I never forget it for a moment," said Mrs. Travers. "And I not only
know that it does but I also know the strength of the thread. It is a
wonderful thread. You may say if you like it has been spun by the same
fate which made you what you are."

Mr. Travers felt awfully offended. He had never heard anybody, let alone
his own self, addressed in such terms. The tone seemed to question his
very quality. He reflected with shocked amazement that he had lived with
that woman for eight years! And he said to her gloomily:

"You talk like a pagan."

It was a very strong condemnation which apparently Mrs. Travers had
failed to hear for she pursued with animation:

"But really, you can't expect me to meditate on it all the time or shut
myself up here and mourn the circumstances from morning to night. It
would be morbid. Let us go on deck."

"And you look simply heathenish in this costume," Mr. Travers went on
as though he had not been interrupted, and with an accent of deliberate
disgust.

Her heart was heavy but everything he said seemed to force the tone
of levity on to her lips. "As long as I don't look like a guy," she
remarked, negligently, and then caught the direction of his lurid stare
which as a matter of fact was fastened on her bare feet. She checked
herself, "Oh, yes, if you prefer it I will put on my stockings. But you
know I must be very careful of them. It's the only pair I have here. I
have washed them this morning in that bathroom which is built over the
stern. They are now drying over the rail just outside. Perhaps you will
be good enough to pass them to me when you go on deck."

Mr. Travers spun round and went on deck without a word. As soon as she
was alone Mrs. Travers pressed her hands to her temples, a gesture of
distress which relieved her by its sincerity. The measured footsteps of
two men came to her plainly from the deck, rhythmic and double with
a suggestion of tranquil and friendly intercourse. She distinguished
particularly the footfalls of the man whose life's orbit was most remote
from her own. And yet the orbits had cut! A few days ago she could
not have even conceived of his existence, and now he was the man whose
footsteps, it seemed to her, her ears could single unerringly in the
tramp of a crowd. It was, indeed, a fabulous thing. In the half light of
her over-heated shelter she let an irresolute, frightened smile pass off
her lips before she, too, went on deck.



II

An ingeniously constructed framework of light posts and thin laths
occupied the greater part of the deck amidships of the Emma. The four
walls of that airy structure were made of muslin. It was comparatively
lofty. A door-like arrangement of light battens filled with calico
was further protected by a system of curtains calculated to baffle the
pursuit of mosquitoes that haunted the shores of the lagoon in great
singing clouds from sunset till sunrise. A lot of fine mats covered
the deck space within the transparent shelter devised by Lingard and
Jorgenson to make Mrs. Travers' existence possible during the time when
the fate of the two men, and indeed probably of everybody else on board
the Emma, had to hang in the balance. Very soon Lingard's unbidden and
fatal guests had learned the trick of stepping in and out of the place
quickly. Mr. d'Alcacer performed the feat without apparent haste, almost
nonchalantly, yet as well as anybody. It was generally conceded that he
had never let a mosquito in together with himself. Mr. Travers dodged in
and out without grace and was obviously much irritated at the necessity.
Mrs. Travers did it in a manner all her own, with marked cleverness
and an unconscious air. There was an improvised table in there and some
wicker armchairs which Jorgenson had produced from somewhere in the
depths of the ship. It was hard to say what the inside of the Emma
did not contain. It was crammed with all sorts of goods like a general
store. That old hulk was the arsenal and the war-chest of Lingard's
political action; she was stocked with muskets and gunpowder, with bales
of longcloth, of cotton prints, of silks; with bags of rice and currency
brass guns. She contained everything necessary for dealing death and
distributing bribes, to act on the cupidity and upon the fears of men,
to march and to organize, to feed the friends and to combat the enemies
of the cause. She held wealth and power in her flanks, that grounded
ship that would swim no more, without masts and with the best part
of her deck cumbered by the two structures of thin boards and of
transparent muslin.

Within the latter lived the Europeans, visible in the daytime to the few
Malays on board as if through a white haze. In the evening the lighting
of the hurricane lamps inside turned them into dark phantoms surrounded
by a shining mist, against which the insect world rushing in its
millions out of the forest on the bank was baffled mysteriously in its
assault. Rigidly enclosed by transparent walls, like captives of
an enchanted cobweb, they moved about, sat, gesticulated, conversed
publicly during the day; and at night when all the lanterns but one were
extinguished, their slumbering shapes covered all over by white cotton
sheets on the camp bedsteads, which were brought in every evening,
conveyed the gruesome suggestion of dead bodies reposing on stretchers.
The food, such as it was, was served within that glorified mosquito net
which everybody called the "Cage" without any humorous intention. At
meal times the party from the yacht had the company of Lingard who
attached to this ordeal a sense of duty performed at the altar of
civility and conciliation. He could have no conception how much his
presence added to the exasperation of Mr. Travers because Mr. Travers'
manner was too intensely consistent to present any shades. It was
determined by an ineradicable conviction that he was a victim held to
ransom on some incomprehensible terms by an extraordinary and outrageous
bandit. This conviction, strung to the highest pitch, never left him for
a moment, being the object of indignant meditation to his mind, and even
clinging, as it were, to his very body. It lurked in his eyes, in his
gestures, in his ungracious mutters, and in his sinister silences. The
shock to his moral being had ended by affecting Mr. Travers' physical
machine. He was aware of hepatic pains, suffered from accesses of
somnolence and suppressed gusts of fury which frightened him secretly.
His complexion had acquired a yellow tinge, while his heavy eyes had
become bloodshot because of the smoke of the open wood fires during
his three days' detention inside Belarab's stockade. His eyes had been
always very sensitive to outward conditions. D'Alcacer's fine black eyes
were more enduring and his appearance did not differ very much from his
ordinary appearance on board the yacht. He had accepted with smiling
thanks the offer of a thin blue flannel tunic from Jorgenson. Those two
men were much of the same build, though of course d'Alcacer, quietly
alive and spiritually watchful, did not resemble Jorgenson, who, without
being exactly macabre, behaved more like an indifferent but restless
corpse. Those two could not be said to have ever conversed together.
Conversation with Jorgenson was an impossible thing. Even Lingard never
attempted the feat. He propounded questions to Jorgenson much as a
magician would interrogate an evoked shade, or gave him curt directions
as one would make use of some marvellous automaton. And that was
apparently the way in which Jorgenson preferred to be treated. Lingard's
real company on board the Emma was d'Alcacer. D'Alcacer had met Lingard
on the easy terms of a man accustomed all his life to good society in
which the very affectations must be carried on without effort. Whether
affectation, or nature, or inspired discretion, d'Alcacer never let the
slightest curiosity pierce the smoothness of his level, grave courtesy
lightened frequently by slight smiles which often had not much
connection with the words he uttered, except that somehow they made them
sound kindly and as it were tactful. In their character, however, those
words were strictly neutral.

The only time when Lingard had detected something of a deeper
comprehension in d'Alcacer was the day after the long negotiations
inside Belarab's stockade for the temporary surrender of the prisoners.
That move had been suggested to him, exactly as Mrs. Travers had told
her husband, by the rivalries of the parties and the state of public
opinion in the Settlement deprived of the presence of the man who,
theoretically at least, was the greatest power and the visible ruler
of the Shore of Refuge. Belarab still lingered at his father's tomb.
Whether that man of the embittered and pacific heart had withdrawn there
to meditate upon the unruliness of mankind and the thankless nature of
his task; or whether he had gone there simply to bathe in a particularly
clear pool which was a feature of the place, give himself up to the
enjoyment of a certain fruit which grew in profusion there and indulge
for a time in a scrupulous performance of religious exercises, his
absence from the Settlement was a fact of the utmost gravity. It is true
that the prestige of a long-unquestioned rulership and the long-settled
mental habits of the people had caused the captives to be taken straight
to Belarab's stockade as a matter of course. Belarab, at a distance,
could still outweigh the power on the spot of Tengga, whose secret
purposes were no better known, who was jovial, talkative, outspoken and
pugnacious; but who was not a professed servant of God famed for many
charities and a scrupulous performance of pious practices, and who also
had no father who had achieved a local saintship. But Belarab, with
his glamour of asceticism and melancholy together with a reputation for
severity (for a man so pious would be naturally ruthless), was not on
the spot. The only favourable point in his absence was the fact that
he had taken with him his latest wife, the same lady whom Jorgenson had
mentioned in his letter to Lingard as anxious to bring about battle,
murder, and the looting of the yacht, not because of inborn wickedness
of heart but from a simple desire for silks, jewels and other objects
of personal adornment, quite natural in a girl so young and elevated to
such a high position. Belarab had selected her to be the companion of
his retirement and Lingard was glad of it. He was not afraid of her
influence over Belarab. He knew his man. No words, no blandishments, no
sulks, scoldings, or whisperings of a favourite could affect either the
resolves or the irresolutions of that Arab whose action ever seemed
to hang in mystic suspense between the contradictory speculations and
judgments disputing the possession of his will. It was not what Belarab
would either suddenly do or leisurely determine upon that Lingard was
afraid of. The danger was that in his taciturn hesitation, which had
something hopelessly godlike in its remote calmness, the man would do
nothing and leave his white friend face to face with unruly impulses
against which Lingard had no means of action but force which he dared
not use since it would mean the destruction of his plans and the
downfall of his hopes; and worse still would wear an aspect of treachery
to Hassim and Immada, those fugitives whom he had snatched away from
the jaws of death on a night of storm and had promised to lead back
in triumph to their own country he had seen but once, sleeping unmoved
under the wrath and fire of heaven.

On the afternoon of the very day he had arrived with her on board the
Emma--to the infinite disgust of Jorgenson--Lingard held with Mrs.
Travers (after she had had a couple of hours' rest) a long, fiery, and
perplexed conversation. From the nature of the problem it could not be
exhaustive; but toward the end of it they were both feeling thoroughly
exhausted. Mrs. Travers had no longer to be instructed as to facts and
possibilities. She was aware of them only too well and it was not her
part to advise or argue. She was not called upon to decide or to plead.
The situation was far beyond that. But she was worn out with watching
the passionate conflict within the man who was both so desperately
reckless and so rigidly restrained in the very ardour of his heart and
the greatness of his soul. It was a spectacle that made her forget
the actual questions at issue. This was no stage play; and yet she had
caught herself looking at him with bated breath as at a great actor on a
darkened stage in some simple and tremendous drama. He extorted from her
a response to the forces that seemed to tear at his single-minded
brain, at his guileless breast. He shook her with his own struggles, he
possessed her with his emotions and imposed his personality as if its
tragedy were the only thing worth considering in this matter. And
yet what had she to do with all those obscure and barbarous things?
Obviously nothing. Unluckily she had been taken into the confidence of
that man's passionate perplexity, a confidence provoked apparently by
nothing but the power of her personality. She was flattered, and even
more, she was touched by it; she was aware of something that resembled
gratitude and provoked a sort of emotional return as between equals who
had secretly recognized each other's value. Yet at the same time she
regretted not having been left in the dark; as much in the dark as Mr.
Travers himself or d'Alcacer, though as to the latter it was impossible
to say how much precise, unaccountable, intuitive knowledge was buried
under his unruffled manner.

D'Alcacer was the sort of man whom it would be much easier to suspect
of anything in the world than ignorance--or stupidity. Naturally he
couldn't know anything definite or even guess at the bare outline of the
facts but somehow he must have scented the situation in those few days
of contact with Lingard. He was an acute and sympathetic observer in all
his secret aloofness from the life of men which was so very different
from Jorgenson's secret divorce from the passions of this earth. Mrs.
Travers would have liked to share with d'Alcacer the burden (for it
was a burden) of Lingard's story. After all, she had not provoked those
confidences, neither had that unexpected adventurer from the sea laid on
her an obligation of secrecy. No, not even by implication. He had never
said to her that she was the _only_ person whom he wished to know that
story.

No. What he had said was that she was the only person to whom he _could_
tell the tale himself, as if no one else on earth had the power to draw
it from him. That was the sense and nothing more. Yes, it would have
been a relief to tell d'Alcacer. It would have been a relief to her
feeling of being shut off from the world alone with Lingard as if within
the four walls of a romantic palace and in an exotic atmosphere. Yes,
that relief and also another: that of sharing the responsibility with
somebody fit to understand. Yet she shrank from it, with unaccountable
reserve, as if by talking of Lingard with d'Alcacer she was bound to
give him an insight into herself. It was a vague uneasiness and yet so
persistent that she felt it, too, when she had to approach and talk to
Lingard under d'Alcacer's eyes. Not that Mr. d'Alcacer would ever dream
of staring or even casting glances. But was he averting his eyes on
purpose? That would be even more offensive.

"I am stupid," whispered Mrs. Travers to herself, with a complete and
reassuring conviction. Yet she waited motionless till the footsteps of
the two men stopped outside the deckhouse, then separated and died away,
before she went out on deck. She came out on deck some time after her
husband. As if in intended contrast to the conflicts of men a great
aspect of serenity lay upon all visible things. Mr. Travers had gone
inside the Cage in which he really looked like a captive and thoroughly
out of place. D'Alcacer had gone in there, too, but he preserved--or was
it an illusion?--an air of independence. It was not that he put it
on. Like Mr. Travers he sat in a wicker armchair in very much the same
attitude as the other gentleman and also silent; but there was somewhere
a subtle difference which did away with the notion of captivity.
Moreover, d'Alcacer had that peculiar gift of never looking out of place
in any surroundings. Mrs. Travers, in order to save her European boots
for active service, had been persuaded to use a pair of leather sandals
also extracted from that seaman's chest in the deckhouse. An additional
fastening had been put on them but she could not avoid making a delicate
clatter as she walked on the deck. No part of her costume made her feel
so exotic. It also forced her to alter her usual gait and move with
quick, short steps very much like Immada.

"I am robbing the girl of her clothes," she had thought to herself,
"besides other things." She knew by this time that a girl of such
high rank would never dream of wearing anything that had been worn by
somebody else.

At the slight noise of Mrs. Travers' sandals d'Alcacer looked over the
back of his chair. But he turned his head away at once and Mrs. Travers,
leaning her elbow on the rail and resting her head on the palm of her
hand, looked across the calm surface of the lagoon, idly.

She was turning her back on the Cage, the fore-part of the deck and
the edge of the nearest forest. That great erection of enormous solid
trunks, dark, rugged columns festooned with writhing creepers and
steeped in gloom, was so close to the bank that by looking over the
side of the ship she could see inverted in the glassy belt of water
its massive and black reflection on the reflected sky that gave the
impression of a clear blue abyss seen through a transparent film. And
when she raised her eyes the same abysmal immobility seemed to reign
over the whole sun-bathed enlargement of that lagoon which was one of
the secret places of the earth. She felt strongly her isolation. She was
so much the only being of her kind moving within this mystery that even
to herself she looked like an apparition without rights and without
defence and that must end by surrendering to those forces which seemed
to her but the expression of the unconscious genius of the place. Hers
was the most complete loneliness, charged with a catastrophic tension.
It lay about her as though she had been set apart within a magic circle.
It cut off--but it did not protect. The footsteps that she knew how to
distinguish above all others on that deck were heard suddenly behind
her. She did not turn her head.

Since that afternoon when the gentlemen, as Lingard called them, had
been brought on board, Mrs. Travers and Lingard had not exchanged one
significant word.

When Lingard had decided to proceed by way of negotiation she had asked
him on what he based his hope of success; and he had answered her: "On
my luck." What he really depended on was his prestige; but even if he
had been aware of such a word he would not have used it, since it would
have sounded like a boast. And, besides, he did really believe in his
luck. Nobody, either white or brown, had ever doubted his word and that,
of course, gave him great assurance in entering upon the negotiation.
But the ultimate issue of it would be always a matter of luck. He said
so distinctly to Mrs. Travers at the moment of taking leave of her,
with Jorgenson already waiting for him in the boat that was to take them
across the lagoon to Belarab's stockade.

Startled by his decision (for it had come suddenly clinched by the words
"I believe I can do it"), Mrs. Travers had dropped her hand into
his strong open palm on which an expert in palmistry could have
distinguished other lines than the line of luck. Lingard's hand closed
on hers with a gentle pressure. She looked at him, speechless. He waited
for a moment, then in an unconsciously tender voice he said: "Well, wish
me luck then."

She remained silent. And he still holding her hand looked surprised at
her hesitation. It seemed to her that she could not let him go, and she
didn't know what to say till it occurred to her to make use of the power
she knew she had over him. She would try it again. "I am coming with
you," she declared with decision. "You don't suppose I could remain here
in suspense for hours, perhaps."

He dropped her hand suddenly as if it had burnt him--"Oh, yes, of
course," he mumbled with an air of confusion. One of the men over there
was her husband! And nothing less could be expected from such a woman.
He had really nothing to say but she thought he hesitated.--"Do you
think my presence would spoil everything? I assure you I am a lucky
person, too, in a way. . . . As lucky as you, at least," she had added
in a murmur and with a smile which provoked his responsive mutter--"Oh,
yes, we are a lucky pair of people."--"I count myself lucky in having
found a man like you to fight my--our battles," she said, warmly.
"Suppose you had not existed? . . . . You must let me come with you!"
For the second time before her expressed wish to stand by his side he
bowed his head. After all, if things came to the worst, she would be as
safe between him and Jorgenson as left alone on board the Emma with
a few Malay spearmen for all defence. For a moment Lingard thought
of picking up the pistols he had taken out of his belt preparatory to
joining Jorgenson in the boat, thinking it would be better to go to a
big talk completely unarmed. They were lying on the rail but he didn't
pick them up. Four shots didn't matter. They could not matter if the
world of his creation were to go to pieces. He said nothing of that to
Mrs. Travers but busied himself in giving her the means to alter her
personal appearance. It was then that the sea-chest in the deckhouse
was opened for the first time before the interested Mrs. Travers who had
followed him inside. Lingard handed to her a Malay woman's light cotton
coat with jewelled clasps to put over her European dress. It covered
half of her yachting skirt. Mrs. Travers obeyed him without comment. He
pulled out a long and wide scarf of white silk embroidered heavily on
the edges and ends, and begged her to put it over her head and arrange
the ends so as to muffle her face, leaving little more than her eyes
exposed to view.--"We are going amongst a lot of Mohammedans," he
explained.--"I see. You want me to look respectable," she jested.--"I
assure you, Mrs. Travers," he protested, earnestly, "that most of the
people there and certainly all the great men have never seen a white
woman in their lives. But perhaps you would like better one of those
other scarves? There are three in there."--"No, I like this one well
enough. They are all very gorgeous. I see that the Princess is to be
sent back to her land with all possible splendour. What a thoughtful man
you are, Captain Lingard. That child will be touched by your generosity.
. . . Will I do like this?"

"Yes," said Lingard, averting his eyes. Mrs. Travers followed him into
the boat where the Malays stared in silence while Jorgenson, stiff and
angular, gave no sign of life, not even so much as a movement of the
eyes. Lingard settled her in the stern sheets and sat down by her side.
The ardent sunshine devoured all colours. The boat swam forward on the
glare heading for the strip of coral beach dazzling like a crescent of
metal raised to a white heat. They landed. Gravely, Jorgenson opened
above Mrs. Travers' head a big white cotton parasol and she advanced
between the two men, dazed, as if in a dream and having no other contact
with the earth but through the soles of her feet. Everything was still,
empty, incandescent, and fantastic. Then when the gate of the stockade
was thrown open she perceived an expectant and still multitude of bronze
figures draped in coloured stuffs. They crowded the patches of shade
under the three lofty forest trees left within the enclosure between the
sun-smitten empty spaces of hard-baked ground. The broad blades of the
spears decorated with crimson tufts of horsehair had a cool gleam under
the outspread boughs. To the left a group of buildings on piles with
long verandahs and immense roofs towered high in the air above the
heads of the crowd, and seemed to float in the glare, looking much less
substantial than their heavy shadows. Lingard, pointing to one of the
smallest, said in an undertone, "I lived there for a fortnight when I
first came to see Belarab"; and Mrs. Travers felt more than ever as if
walking in a dream when she perceived beyond the rails of its verandah
and visible from head to foot two figures in an armour of chain mail
with pointed steel helmets crested with white and black feathers and
guarding the closed door. A high bench draped in turkey cloth stood
in an open space of the great audience shed. Lingard led her up to it,
Jorgenson on her other side closed the parasol calmly, and when she sat
down between them the whole throng before her eyes sank to the ground
with one accord disclosing in the distance of the courtyard a lonely
figure leaning against the smooth trunk of a tree. A white cloth was
fastened round his head by a yellow cord. Its pointed ends fell on
his shoulders, framing a thin dark face with large eyes, a silk cloak
striped black and white fell to his feet, and in the distance he looked
aloof and mysterious in his erect and careless attitude suggesting
assurance and power.

Lingard, bending slightly, whispered into Mrs. Travers' ear that that
man, apart and dominating the scene, was Daman, the supreme leader of
the Illanuns, the one who had ordered the capture of those gentlemen in
order perhaps to force his hand. The two barbarous, half-naked figures
covered with ornaments and charms, squatting at his feet with their
heads enfolded in crimson and gold handkerchiefs and with straight
swords lying across their knees, were the Pangerans who carried out the
order, and had brought the captives into the lagoon. But the two men in
chain armour on watch outside the door of the small house were Belarab's
two particular body-guards, who got themselves up in that way only on
very great occasions. They were the outward and visible sign that the
prisoners were in Belarab's keeping, and this was good, so far. The pity
was that the Great Chief himself was not there. Then Lingard assumed a
formal pose and Mrs. Travers stared into the great courtyard and with
rows and rows of faces ranged on the ground at her feet felt a little
giddy for a moment.

Every movement had died in the crowd. Even the eyes were still under the
variegated mass of coloured headkerchiefs: while beyond the open gate a
noble palm tree looked intensely black against the glitter of the lagoon
and the pale incandescence of the sky. Mrs. Travers gazing that way
wondered at the absence of Hassim and Immada. But the girl might have
been somewhere within one of the houses with the ladies of Belarab's
stockade. Then suddenly Mrs. Travers became aware that another bench
had been brought out and was already occupied by five men dressed in
gorgeous silks, and embroidered velvets, round-faced and grave. Their
hands reposed on their knees; but one amongst them clad in a white robe
and with a large nearly black turban on his head leaned forward a little
with his chin in his hand. His cheeks were sunken and his eyes remained
fixed on the ground as if to avoid looking at the infidel woman.

She became aware suddenly of a soft murmur, and glancing at Lingard
she saw him in an attitude of impassive attention. The momentous
negotiations had begun, and it went on like this in low undertones with
long pauses and in the immobility of all the attendants squatting on the
ground, with the distant figure of Daman far off in the shade towering
over all the assembly. But in him, too, Mrs. Travers could not detect
the slightest movement while the slightly modulated murmurs went on
enveloping her in a feeling of peace.

The fact that she couldn't understand anything of what was said soothed
her apprehensions. Sometimes a silence fell and Lingard bending toward
her would whisper, "It isn't so easy," and the stillness would be so
perfect that she would hear the flutter of a pigeon's wing somewhere
high up in the great overshadowing trees. And suddenly one of the men
before her without moving a limb would begin another speech rendered
more mysterious still by the total absence of action or play of feature.
Only the watchfulness of the eyes which showed that the speaker was
not communing with himself made it clear that this was not a spoken
meditation but a flow of argument directed to Lingard who now and then
uttered a few words either with a grave or a smiling expression. They
were always followed by murmurs which seemed mostly to her to convey
assent; and then a reflective silence would reign again and the
immobility of the crowd would appear more perfect than before.

When Lingard whispered to her that it was now his turn to make a
speech Mrs. Travers expected him to get up and assert himself by some
commanding gesture. But he did not. He remained seated, only his voice
had a vibrating quality though he obviously tried to restrain it, and
it travelled masterfully far into the silence. He spoke for a long time
while the sun climbing the unstained sky shifted the diminished shadows
of the trees, pouring on the heads of men its heat through the thick and
motionless foliage. Whenever murmurs arose he would stop and glancing
fearlessly at the assembly, wait till they subsided. Once or twice, they
rose to a loud hum and Mrs. Travers could hear on the other side of her
Jorgenson muttering something in his moustache. Beyond the rows of heads
Daman under the tree had folded his arms on his breast. The edge of
the white cloth concealed his forehead and at his feet the two Illanun
chiefs, half naked and bedecked with charms and ornaments of bright
feathers, of shells, with necklaces of teeth, claws, and shining beads,
remained cross-legged with their swords across their knees like two
bronze idols. Even the plumes of their head-dresses stirred not.

"Sudah! It is finished!" A movement passed along all the heads, the
seated bodies swayed to and fro. Lingard had ceased speaking. He
remained seated for a moment looking his audience all over and when he
stood up together with Mrs. Travers and Jorgenson the whole assembly
rose from the ground together and lost its ordered formation. Some
of Belarab's retainers, young broad-faced fellows, wearing a sort of
uniform of check-patterned sarongs, black silk jackets and crimson
skull-caps set at a rakish angle, swaggered through the broken groups
and ranged themselves in two rows before the motionless Daman and his
Illanun chiefs in martial array. The members of the council who had
left their bench approached the white people with gentle smiles
and deferential movements of the hands. Their bearing was faintly
propitiatory; only the man in the big turban remained fanatically aloof,
keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.

"I have done it," murmured Lingard to Mrs. Travers.--"Was it very
difficult?" she asked.--"No," he said, conscious in his heart that he
had strained to the fullest extent the prestige of his good name and
that habit of deference to his slightest wish established by the glamour
of his wealth and the fear of his personality in this great talk which
after all had done nothing except put off the decisive hour. He offered
Mrs. Travers his arm ready to lead her away, but at the last moment did
not move.

With an authoritative gesture Daman had parted the ranks of Belarab's
young followers with the red skullcaps and was seen advancing toward the
whites striking into an astonished silence all the scattered groups in
the courtyard. But the broken ranks had closed behind him. The Illanun
chiefs, for all their truculent aspect, were much too prudent to attempt
to move. They had not needed for that the faint warning murmur from
Daman. He advanced alone. The plain hilt of a sword protruded from the
open edges of his cloak. The parted edges disclosed also the butts of
two flintlock pistols. The Koran in a velvet case hung on his breast by
a red cord of silk. He was pious, magnificent, and warlike, with calm
movements and a straight glance from under the hem of the simple piece
of linen covering his head. He carried himself rigidly and his bearing
had a sort of solemn modesty. Lingard said hurriedly to Mrs. Travers
that the man had met white people before and that, should he attempt to
shake hands with her, she ought to offer her own covered with the end
of her scarf.--"Why?" she asked. "Propriety?"--"Yes, it will be better,"
said Lingard and the next moment Mrs. Travers felt her enveloped hand
pressed gently by slender dark fingers and felt extremely Oriental
herself when, with her face muffled to the eyes, she encountered the
lustrous black stare of the sea-robbers' leader. It was only for an
instant, because Daman turned away at once to shake hands with Lingard.
In the straight, ample folds of his robes he looked very slender facing
the robust white man.

"Great is your power," he said, in a pleasant voice. "The white men are
going to be delivered to you."

"Yes, they pass into my keeping," said Lingard, returning the other's
bright smile but otherwise looking grim enough with the frown which
had settled on his forehead at Daman's approach. He glanced over his
shoulder at a group of spearmen escorting the two captives who had come
down the steps from the hut. At the sight of Daman barring as it were
Lingard's way they had stopped at some distance and had closed round the
two white men. Daman also glanced dispassionately that way.

"They were my guests," he murmured. "Please God I shall come soon to ask
you for them . . . as a friend," he added after a slight pause.

"And please God you will not go away empty handed," said Lingard,
smoothing his brow. "After all you and I were not meant to meet only
to quarrel. Would you have preferred to see them pass into Tengga's
keeping?"

"Tengga is fat and full of wiles," said Daman, disdainfully, "a mere
shopkeeper smitten by a desire to be a chief. He is nothing. But you and
I are men that have real power. Yet there is a truth that you and I can
confess to each other. Men's hearts grow quickly discontented. Listen.
The leaders of men are carried forward in the hands of their followers;
and common men's minds are unsteady, their desires changeable, and
their thoughts not to be trusted. You are a great chief they say. Do not
forget that I am a chief, too, and a leader of armed men."

"I have heard of you, too," said Lingard in a composed voice.

Daman had cast his eyes down. Suddenly he opened them very wide with an
effect that startled Mrs. Travers.--"Yes. But do you see?" Mrs. Travers,
her hand resting lightly on Lingard's arm, had the sensation of acting
in a gorgeously got up play on the brilliantly lighted stage of an
exotic opera whose accompaniment was not music but the varied strains
of the all-pervading silence.--"Yes, I see," Lingard replied with a
surprisingly confidential intonation. "But power, too, is in the hands
of a great leader."

Mrs. Travers watched the faint movements of Daman's nostrils as though
the man were suffering from some powerful emotion, while under her
fingers Lingard's forearm in its white sleeve was as steady as a limb of
marble. Without looking at him she seemed to feel that with one movement
he could crush that nervous figure in which lived the breath of the
great desert haunted by his nomad, camel-riding ancestors.--"Power is
in the hand of God," he said, all animation dying out of his face, and
paused to wait for Lingard's "Very true," then continued with a fine
smile, "but He apportions it according to His will for His own purposes,
even to those that are not of the Faith."

"Such being the will of God you should harbour no bitterness against
them in your heart."

The low exclamation, "Against those!" and a slight dismissing gesture
of a meagre dark hand out of the folds of the cloak were almost
understandable to Mrs. Travers in the perfection of their melancholy
contempt, and gave Lingard a further insight into the character of
the ally secured to him by the diplomacy of Belarab. He was only half
reassured by this assumption of superior detachment. He trusted to the
man's self-interest more; for Daman no doubt looked to the reconquered
kingdom for the reward of dignity and ease. His father and grandfather
(the men of whom Jorgenson had written as having been hanged for an
example twelve years before) had been friends of Sultans, advisers of
Rulers, wealthy financiers of the great raiding expeditions of the
past. It was hatred that had turned Daman into a self-made outcast,
till Belarab's diplomacy had drawn him out from some obscure and uneasy
retreat.

In a few words Lingard assured Daman of the complete safety of his
followers as long as they themselves made no attempt to get possession
of the stranded yacht. Lingard understood very well that the capture of
Travers and d'Alcacer was the result of a sudden fear, a move directed
by Daman to secure his own safety. The sight of the stranded yacht shook
his confidence completely. It was as if the secrets of the place had
been betrayed. After all, it was perhaps a great folly to trust any
white man, no matter how much he seemed estranged from his own people.
Daman felt he might have been the victim of a plot. Lingard's brig
appeared to him a formidable engine of war. He did not know what to
think and the motive for getting hold of the two white men was really
the wish to secure hostages. Distrusting the fierce impulses of his
followers he had hastened to put them into Belarab's keeping. But
everything in the Settlement seemed to him suspicious: Belarab's
absence, Jorgenson's refusal to make over at once the promised supply
of arms and ammunition. And now that white man had by the power of his
speech got them away from Belarab's people. So much influence filled
Daman with wonder and awe. A recluse for many years in the most obscure
corner of the Archipelago he felt himself surrounded by intrigues. But
the alliance was a great thing, too. He did not want to quarrel. He was
quite willing for the time being to accept Lingard's assurance that no
harm should befall his people encamped on the sandbanks. Attentive and
slight, he seemed to let Lingard's deliberate words sink into him. The
force of that unarmed big man seemed overwhelming. He bowed his head
slowly.

"Allah is our refuge," he murmured, accepting the inevitable.

He delighted Mrs. Travers not as a living being but like a clever
sketch in colours, a vivid rendering of an artist's vision of some soul,
delicate and fierce. His bright half-smile was extraordinary, sharp like
clear steel, painfully penetrating. Glancing right and left Mrs. Travers
saw the whole courtyard smitten by the desolating fury of sunshine and
peopled with shadows, their forms and colours fading in the violence of
the light. The very brown tones of roof and wall dazzled the eye. Then
Daman stepped aside. He was no longer smiling and Mrs. Travers advanced
with her hand on Lingard's arm through a heat so potent that it seemed
to have a taste, a feel, a smell of its own. She moved on as if floating
in it with Lingard's support.

"Where are they?" she asked.

"They are following us all right," he answered. Lingard was so certain
that the prisoners would be delivered to him on the beach that he never
glanced back till, after reaching the boat, he and Mrs. Travers turned
about.

The group of spearmen parted right and left, and Mr. Travers and
d'Alcacer walked forward alone looking unreal and odd like their own
day-ghosts. Mr. Travers gave no sign of being aware of his wife's
presence. It was certainly a shock to him. But d'Alcacer advanced
smiling, as if the beach were a drawing room.

With a very few paddlers the heavy old European-built boat moved
slowly over the water that seemed as pale and blazing as the sky above.
Jorgenson had perched himself in the bow. The other four white people
sat in the stern sheets, the ex-prisoners side by side in the middle.
Lingard spoke suddenly.

"I want you both to understand that the trouble is not over yet. Nothing
is finished. You are out on my bare word."

While Lingard was speaking Mr. Travers turned his face away but
d'Alcacer listened courteously. Not another word was spoken for the rest
of the way. The two gentlemen went up the ship's side first. Lingard
remained to help Mrs. Travers at the foot of the ladder. She pressed his
hand strongly and looking down at his upturned face:

"This was a wonderful success," she said.

For a time the character of his fascinated gaze did not change. It
was as if she had said nothing. Then he whispered, admiringly, "You
understand everything."

She moved her eyes away and had to disengage her hand to which he clung
for a moment, giddy, like a man falling out of the world.



III

Mrs. Travers, acutely aware of Lingard behind her, remained gazing over
the lagoon. After a time he stepped forward and placed himself beside
her close to the rail. She went on staring at the sheet of water turned
to deep purple under the sunset sky.

"Why have you been avoiding me since we came back from the stockade?"
she asked in a deadened voice.

"There is nothing to tell you till Rajah Hassim and his sister Immada
return with some news," Lingard answered in the same tone. "Has my
friend succeeded? Will Belarab listen to any arguments? Will he consent
to come out of his shell? Is he on his way back? I wish I knew! . . .
Not a whisper comes from there! He may have started two days ago and
he may be now near the outskirts of the Settlement. Or he may have gone
into camp half way down, from some whim or other; or he may be already
arrived for all I know. We should not have seen him. The road from the
hills does not lead along the beach."

He snatched nervously at the long glass and directed it at the dark
stockade. The sun had sunk behind the forests leaving the contour of the
tree-tops outlined by a thread of gold under a band of delicate green
lying across the lower sky. Higher up a faint crimson glow faded into
the darkened blue overhead. The shades of the evening deepened over the
lagoon, clung to the sides of the Emma and to the forms of the further
shore. Lingard laid the glass down.

"Mr. d'Alcacer, too, seems to have been avoiding me," said Mrs. Travers.
"You are on very good terms with him, Captain Lingard."

"He is a very pleasant man," murmured Lingard, absently. "But he says
funny things sometimes. He inquired the other day if there were any
playing cards on board, and when I asked him if he liked card-playing,
just for something to say, he told me with that queer smile of his that
he had read a story of some people condemned to death who passed the
time before execution playing card games with their guards."

"And what did you say?"

"I told him that there were probably cards on board somewhere--Jorgenson
would know. Then I asked him whether he looked on me as a gaoler. He was
quite startled and sorry for what he said."

"It wasn't very kind of you, Captain Lingard."

"It slipped out awkwardly and we made it up with a laugh."

Mrs. Travers leaned her elbows on the rail and put her head into her
hands. Every attitude of that woman surprised Lingard by its enchanting
effect upon himself. He sighed, and the silence lasted for a long while.

"I wish I had understood every word that was said that morning."

"That morning," repeated Lingard. "What morning do you mean?"

"I mean the morning when I walked out of Belarab's stockade on your arm,
Captain Lingard, at the head of the procession. It seemed to me that I
was walking on a splendid stage in a scene from an opera, in a gorgeous
show fit to make an audience hold its breath. You can't possibly guess
how unreal all this seemed, and how artificial I felt myself. An opera,
you know. . . ."

"I know. I was a gold digger at one time. Some of us used to come down
to Melbourne with our pockets full of money. I daresay it was poor
enough to what you must have seen, but once I went to a show like that.
It was a story acted to music. All the people went singing through it
right to the very end."

"How it must have jarred on your sense of reality," said Mrs. Travers,
still not looking at him. "You don't remember the name of the opera?"

"No. I never troubled my head about it. We--our lot never did."

"I won't ask you what the story was like. It must have appeared to
you like the very defiance of all truth. Would real people go singing
through their life anywhere except in a fairy tale?"

"These people didn't always sing for joy," said Lingard, simply. "I
don't know much about fairy tales."

"They are mostly about princesses," murmured Mrs. Travers.

Lingard didn't quite hear. He bent his ear for a moment but she wasn't
looking at him and he didn't ask her to repeat her remark. "Fairy tales
are for children, I believe," he said. "But that story with music I am
telling you of, Mrs. Travers, was not a tale for children. I assure you
that of the few shows I have seen that one was the most real to me. More
real than anything in life."

Mrs. Travers, remembering the fatal inanity of most opera librettos, was
touched by these words as if there had been something pathetic in this
readiness of response; as if she had heard a starved man talking of the
delight of a crust of dry bread. "I suppose you forgot yourself in that
story, whatever it was," she remarked in a detached tone.

"Yes, it carried me away. But I suppose you know the feeling."

"No. I never knew anything of the kind, not even when I was a chit of
a girl." Lingard seemed to accept this statement as an assertion of
superiority. He inclined his head slightly. Moreover, she might have
said what she liked. What pleased him most was her not looking at him;
for it enabled him to contemplate with perfect freedom the curve of her
cheek, her small ear half hidden by the clear mesh of fine hair,
the fascination of her uncovered neck. And her whole person was an
impossible, an amazing and solid marvel which somehow was not so much
convincing to the eye as to something within him that was apparently
independent of his senses. Not even for a moment did he think of her as
remote. Untouchable--possibly! But remote--no. Whether consciously or
unconsciously he took her spiritually for granted. It was materially
that she was a wonder of the sort that is at the same time familiar and
sacred.

"No," Mrs. Travers began again, abruptly. "I never forgot myself in a
story. It was not in me. I have not even been able to forget myself on
that morning on shore which was part of my own story."

"You carried yourself first rate," said Lingard, smiling at the nape of
her neck, her ear, the film of escaped hair, the modelling of the corner
of her eye. He could see the flutter of the dark eyelashes: and the
delicate flush on her cheek had rather the effect of scent than of
colour.

"You approved of my behaviour."

"Just right, I tell you. My word, weren't they all struck of a heap when
they made out what you were."

"I ought to feel flattered. I will confess to you that I felt only half
disguised and was half angry and wholly uncomfortable. What helped me, I
suppose, was that I wanted to please. . . ."

"I don't mean to say that they were exactly pleased," broke in Lingard,
conscientiously. "They were startled more."

"I wanted to please you," dropped Mrs. Travers, negligently. A faint,
hoarse, and impatient call of a bird was heard from the woods as if
calling to the oncoming night. Lingard's face grew hot in the deepening
dusk. The delicate lemon yellow and ethereal green tints had vanished
from the sky and the red glow darkened menacingly. The sun had set
behind the black pall of the forest, no longer edged with a line of
gold. "Yes, I was absurdly self-conscious," continued Mrs. Travers in a
conversational tone. "And it was the effect of these clothes that you
made me put on over some of my European--I almost said disguise; because
you know in the present more perfect costume I feel curiously at home;
and yet I can't say that these things really fit me. The sleeves of this
silk under-jacket are rather tight. My shoulders feel bound, too, and as
to the sarong it is scandalously short. According to rule it should have
been long enough to fall over my feet. But I like freedom of movement. I
have had very little of what I liked in life."

"I can hardly believe that," said Lingard. "If it wasn't for your saying
so. . . ."

"I wouldn't say so to everybody," she said, turning her head for a
moment to Lingard and turning it away again to the dusk which seemed to
come floating over the black lagoon. Far away in its depth a couple of
feeble lights twinkled; it was impossible to say whether on the shore
or on the edge of the more distant forest. Overhead the stars were
beginning to come out, but faint yet, as if too remote to be reflected
in the lagoon. Only to the west a setting planet shone through the red
fog of the sunset glow. "It was supposed not to be good for me to have
much freedom of action. So at least I was told. But I have a suspicion
that it was only unpleasing to other people."

"I should have thought," began Lingard, then hesitated and stopped. It
seemed to him inconceivable that everybody should not have loved to make
that woman happy. And he was impressed by the bitterness of her tone.
Mrs. Travers did not seem curious to know what he wanted to say and
after a time she added, "I don't mean only when I was a child. I don't
remember that very well. I daresay I was very objectionable as a child."

Lingard tried to imagine her as a child. The idea was novel to him.
Her perfection seemed to have come into the world complete, mature, and
without any hesitation or weakness. He had nothing in his experience
that could help him to imagine a child of that class. The children he
knew played about the village street and ran on the beach. He had been
one of them. He had seen other children, of course, since, but he
had not been in touch with them except visually and they had not been
English children. Her childhood, like his own, had been passed in
England, and that very fact made it almost impossible for him to imagine
it. He could not even tell whether it was in town or in the country, or
whether as a child she had even seen the sea. And how could a child of
that kind be objectionable? But he remembered that a child disapproved
of could be very unhappy, and he said:

"I am sorry."

Mrs. Travers laughed a little. Within the muslin cage forms had turned
to blurred shadows. Amongst them the form of d'Alcacer arose and moved.
The systematic or else the morbid dumbness of Mr. Travers bored and
exasperated him, though, as a matter of fact, that gentleman's speeches
had never had the power either to entertain or to soothe his mind.

"It's very nice of you. You have a great capacity for sympathy, but
after all I am not certain on which side your sympathies lie. With me,
or those much-tried people," said Mrs. Travers.

"With the child," said Lingard, disregarding the bantering tone. "A
child can have a very bad time of it all to itself."

"What can you know of it?" she asked.

"I have my own feelings," he answered in some surprise.

Mrs. Travers, with her back to him, was covered with confusion. Neither
could she depict to herself his childhood as if he, too, had come
into the world in the fullness of his strength and his purpose. She
discovered a certain naiveness in herself and laughed a little. He made
no sound.

"Don't be angry," she said. "I wouldn't dream of laughing at your
feelings. Indeed your feelings are the most serious thing that ever came
in my way. I couldn't help laughing at myself--at a funny discovery I
made."

"In the days of your childhood?" she heard Lingard's deep voice asking
after a pause.

"Oh, no. Ages afterward. No child could have made that discovery. Do
you know the greatest difference there is between us? It is this: That I
have been living since my childhood in front of a show and that I
never have been taken in for a moment by its tinsel and its noise or
by anything that went on on the stage. Do you understand what I mean,
Captain Lingard?"

There was a moment of silence. "What does it matter? We are no children
now." There was an infinite gentleness in Lingard's deep tones. "But if
you have been unhappy then don't tell me that it has not been made up to
you since. Surely you have only to make a sign. A woman like you."

"You think I could frighten the whole world on to its knees?"

"No, not frighten." The suggestion of a laugh in the deadened voice
passed off in a catch of the breath. Then he was heard beginning
soberly: "Your husband. . . ." He hesitated a little and she took the
opportunity to say coldly:

"His name is Mr. Travers."

Lingard didn't know how to take it. He imagined himself to have been
guilty of some sort of presumption. But how on earth was he to call the
man? After all he was her husband. That idea was disagreeable to him
because the man was also inimical in a particularly unreasonable and
galling manner. At the same time he was aware that he didn't care a
bit for his enmity and had an idea that he would not have cared for his
friendship either. And suddenly he felt very much annoyed.

"Yes. That's the man I mean," he said in a contemptuous tone. "I don't
particularly like the name and I am sure I don't want to talk about him
more than I can help. If he hadn't been your husband I wouldn't have put
up with his manners for an hour. Do you know what would have happened to
him if he hadn't been your husband?"

"No," said Mrs. Travers. "Do you, Captain Lingard?"

"Not exactly," he admitted. "Something he wouldn't have liked, you may
be sure."

"While of course he likes this very much," she observed. Lingard gave an
abrupt laugh.

"I don't think it's in my power to do anything that he would like," he
said in a serious tone. "Forgive me my frankness, Mrs. Travers, but he
makes it very difficult sometimes for me to keep civil. Whatever I have
had to put up with in life I have never had to put up with contempt."

"I quite believe that," said Mrs. Travers. "Don't your friends call you
King Tom?"

"Nobody that I care for. I have no friends. Oh, yes, they call me
that . . ."

"You have no friends?"

"Not I," he said with decision. "A man like me has no chums."

"It's quite possible," murmured Mrs. Travers to herself.

"No, not even Jorgenson. Old crazy Jorgenson. He calls me King Tom, too.
You see what that's worth."

"Yes, I see. Or rather I have heard. That poor man has no tone, and so
much depends on that. Now suppose I were to call you King Tom now
and then between ourselves," Mrs. Travers' voice proposed, distantly
tentative in the night that invested her person with a colourless
vagueness of form.

She waited in the stillness, her elbows on the rail and her face in her
hands as if she had already forgotten what she had said. She heard at
her elbow the deep murmur of:

"Let's hear you say it."

She never moved the least bit. The sombre lagoon sparkled faintly with
the reflection of the stars.

"Oh, yes, I will let you hear it," she said into the starlit space in a
voice of unaccented gentleness which changed subtly as she went on. "I
hope you will never regret that you came out of your friendless mystery
to speak to me, King Tom. How many days ago it was! And here is another
day gone. Tell me how many more of them there must be? Of these blinding
days and nights without a sound."

"Be patient," he murmured. "Don't ask me for the impossible."

"How do you or I know what is possible?" she whispered with a strange
scorn. "You wouldn't dare guess. But I tell you that every day that
passes is more impossible to me than the day before."

The passion of that whisper went like a stab into his breast. "What am
I to tell you?" he murmured, as if with despair. "Remember that every
sunset makes it a day less. Do you think I want you here?"

A bitter little laugh floated out into the starlight. Mrs. Travers heard
Lingard move suddenly away from her side. She didn't change her pose by
a hair's breadth. Presently she heard d'Alcacer coming out of the Cage.
His cultivated voice asked half playfully:

"Have you had a satisfactory conversation? May I be told something of
it?"

"Mr. d'Alcacer, you are curious."

"Well, in our position, I confess. . . . You are our only refuge,
remember."

"You want to know what we were talking about," said Mrs. Travers,
altering slowly her position so as to confront d'Alcacer whose face was
almost undistinguishable. "Oh, well, then, we talked about opera, the
realities and illusions of the stage, of dresses, of people's names, and
things of that sort."

"Nothing of importance," he said courteously. Mrs. Travers moved forward
and he stepped to one side. Inside the Cage two Malay hands were hanging
round lanterns, the light of which fell on Mr. Travers' bowed head as he
sat in his chair.

When they were all assembled for the evening meal Jorgenson strolled up
from nowhere in particular as his habit was, and speaking through the
muslin announced that Captain Lingard begged to be excused from joining
the company that evening. Then he strolled away. From that moment till
they got up from the table and the camp bedsteads were brought in not
twenty words passed between the members of the party within the net. The
strangeness of their situation made all attempts to exchange ideas very
arduous; and apart from that each had thoughts which it was distinctly
useless to communicate to the others. Mr. Travers had abandoned himself
to his sense of injury. He did not so much brood as rage inwardly in
a dull, dispirited way. The impossibility of asserting himself in any
manner galled his very soul. D'Alcacer was extremely puzzled. Detached
in a sense from the life of men perhaps as much even as Jorgenson
himself, he took yet a reasonable interest in the course of events and
had not lost all his sense of self-preservation. Without being able to
appreciate the exact values of the situation he was not one of those men
who are ever completely in the dark in any given set of circumstances.
Without being humorous he was a good-humoured man. His habitual, gentle
smile was a true expression. More of a European than of a Spaniard he
had that truly aristocratic nature which is inclined to credit every
honest man with something of its own nobility and in its judgment is
altogether independent of class feeling. He believed Lingard to be an
honest man and he never troubled his head to classify him, except in
the sense that he found him an interesting character. He had a sort of
esteem for the outward personality and the bearing of that seaman. He
found in him also the distinction of being nothing of a type. He was a
specimen to be judged only by its own worth. With his natural gift of
insight d'Alcacer told himself that many overseas adventurers of history
were probably less worthy because obviously they must have been less
simple. He didn't, however, impart those thoughts formally to Mrs.
Travers. In fact he avoided discussing Lingard with Mrs. Travers who, he
thought, was quite intelligent enough to appreciate the exact shade of
his attitude. If that shade was fine, Mrs. Travers was fine, too; and
there was no need to discuss the colours of this adventure. Moreover,
she herself seemed to avoid all direct discussion of the Lingard element
in their fate. D'Alcacer was fine enough to be aware that those two
seemed to understand each other in a way that was not obvious even to
themselves. Whenever he saw them together he was always much tempted to
observe them. And he yielded to the temptation. The fact of one's
life depending on the phases of an obscure action authorizes a certain
latitude of behaviour. He had seen them together repeatedly, communing
openly or apart, and there was in their way of joining each other,
in their poses and their ways of separating, something special and
characteristic and pertaining to themselves only, as if they had been
made for each other.

What he couldn't understand was why Mrs. Travers should have put off his
natural curiosity as to her latest conference with the Man of Fate by
an incredible statement as to the nature of the conversation. Talk about
dresses, opera, people's names. He couldn't take this seriously. She
might have invented, he thought, something more plausible; or simply
have told him that this was not for him to know. She ought to have known
that he would not have been offended. Couldn't she have seen already
that he accepted the complexion of mystery in her relation to that man
completely, unquestionably; as though it had been something preordained
from the very beginning of things? But he was not annoyed with Mrs.
Travers. After all it might have been true. She would talk exactly as
she liked, and even incredibly, if it so pleased her, and make the man
hang on her lips. And likewise she was capable of making the man talk
about anything by a power of inspiration for reasons simple or perverse.
Opera! Dresses! Yes--about Shakespeare and the musical glasses! For a
mere whim or for the deepest purpose. Women worthy of the name were like
that. They were very wonderful. They rose to the occasion and sometimes
above the occasion when things were bound to occur that would be comic
or tragic (as it happened) but generally charged with trouble even to
innocent beholders. D'Alcacer thought these thoughts without bitterness
and even without irony. With his half-secret social reputation as a man
of one great passion in a world of mere intrigues he liked all women.
He liked them in their sentiment and in their hardness, in the tragic
character of their foolish or clever impulses, at which he looked with a
sort of tender seriousness.

He didn't take a favourable view of the position but he considered Mrs.
Travers' statement about operas and dresses as a warning to keep off the
subject. For this reason he remained silent through the meal.

When the bustle of clearing away the table was over he strolled toward
Mrs. Travers and remarked very quietly:

"I think that in keeping away from us this evening the Man of Fate was
well inspired. We dined like a lot of Carthusian monks."

"You allude to our silence?"

"It was most scrupulous. If we had taken an eternal vow we couldn't have
kept it better."

"Did you feel bored?"

"Pas du tout," d'Alcacer assured her with whimsical gravity. "I felt
nothing. I sat in a state of blessed vacuity. I believe I was the
happiest of us three. Unless you, too, Mrs. Travers. . . ."

"It's absolutely no use your fishing for my thoughts, Mr. d'Alcacer. If
I were to let you see them you would be appalled."

"Thoughts really are but a shape of feelings. Let me congratulate you
on the impassive mask you can put on those horrors you say you nurse in
your breast. It was impossible to tell anything by your face."

"You will always say flattering things."

"Madame, my flatteries come from the very bottom of my heart. I have
given up long ago all desire to please. And I was not trying to get at
your thoughts. Whatever else you may expect from me you may count on my
absolute respect for your privacy. But I suppose with a mask such as you
can make for yourself you really don't care. The Man of Fate, I noticed,
is not nearly as good at it as you are."

"What a pretentious name. Do you call him by it to his face, Mr.
d'Alcacer?"

"No, I haven't the cheek," confessed d'Alcacer, equably. "And, besides,
it's too momentous for daily use. And he is so simple that he might
mistake it for a joke and nothing could be further from my thoughts.
Mrs. Travers, I will confess to you that I don't feel jocular in the
least. But what can he know about people of our sort? And when I reflect
how little people of our sort can know of such a man I am quite content
to address him as Captain Lingard. It's common and soothing and most
respectable and satisfactory; for Captain is the most empty of all
titles. What is a Captain? Anybody can be a Captain; and for Lingard
it's a name like any other. Whereas what he deserves is something
special, significant, and expressive, that would match his person, his
simple and romantic person."

He perceived that Mrs. Travers was looking at him intently. They
hastened to turn their eyes away from each other.

"He would like your appreciation," Mrs. Travers let drop negligently.

"I am afraid he would despise it."

"Despise it! Why, that sort of thing is the very breath of his
nostrils."

"You seem to understand him, Mrs. Travers. Women have a singular
capacity for understanding. I mean subjects that interest them; because
when their imagination is stimulated they are not afraid of letting it
go. A man is more mistrustful of himself, but women are born much
more reckless. They push on and on under the protection of secrecy and
silence, and the greater the obscurity of what they wish to explore the
greater their courage."

"Do you mean seriously to tell me that you consider me a creature of
darkness?"

"I spoke in general," remonstrated d'Alcacer. "Anything else would
have been an impertinence. Yes, obscurity is women's best friend. Their
daring loves it; but a sudden flash of light disconcerts them. Generally
speaking, if they don't get exactly at the truth they always manage to
come pretty near to it."

Mrs. Travers had listened with silent attention and she allowed the
silence to continue for some time after d'Alcacer had ceased. When she
spoke it was to say in an unconcerned tone that as to this subject she
had had special opportunities. Her self-possessed interlocutor
managed to repress a movement of real curiosity under an assumption
of conventional interest. "Indeed," he exclaimed, politely. "A special
opportunity. How did you manage to create it?"

This was too much for Mrs. Travers. "I! Create it!" she exclaimed,
indignantly, but under her breath. "How on earth do you think I could
have done it?"

Mr. d'Alcacer, as if communing with himself, was heard to murmur
unrepentantly that indeed women seldom knew how they had "done it," to
which Mrs. Travers in a weary tone returned the remark that no two
men were dense in the same way. To this Mr. d'Alcacer assented without
difficulty. "Yes, our brand presents more varieties. This, from a
certain point of view, is obviously to our advantage. We interest. . . .
Not that I imagine myself interesting to you, Mrs. Travers. But what
about the Man of Fate?"

"Oh, yes," breathed out Mrs. Travers.

"I see! Immensely!" said d'Alcacer in a tone of mysterious
understanding. "Was his stupidity so colossal?"

"It was indistinguishable from great visions that were in no sense mean
and made up for him a world of his own."

"I guessed that much," muttered d'Alcacer to himself. "But that, you
know, Mrs. Travers, that isn't good news at all to me. World of dreams,
eh? That's very bad, very dangerous. It's almost fatal, Mrs. Travers."

"Why all this dismay? Why do you object to a world of dreams?"

"Because I dislike the prospect of being made a sacrifice of by those
Moors. I am not an optimist like our friend there," he continued in a
low tone nodding toward the dismal figure of Mr. Travers huddled up in
the chair. "I don't regard all this as a farce and I have discovered
in myself a strong objection to having my throat cut by those gorgeous
barbarians after a lot of fatuous talk. Don't ask me why, Mrs. Travers.
Put it down to an absurd weakness."

Mrs. Travers made a slight movement in her chair, raising her hands to
her head, and in the dim light of the lanterns d'Alcacer saw the mass of
her clear gleaming hair fall down and spread itself over her shoulders.
She seized half of it in her hands which looked very white, and with her
head inclined a little on one side she began to make a plait.

"You are terrifying," he said after watching the movement of her fingers
for a while.

"Yes . . . ?" she accentuated interrogatively.

"You have the awfulness of the predestined. You, too, are the prey of
dreams."

"Not of the Moors, then," she uttered, calmly, beginning the other
plait. D'Alcacer followed the operation to the end. Close against her,
her diaphanous shadow on the muslin reproduced her slightest movements.
D'Alcacer turned his eyes away.

"No! No barbarian shall touch you. Because if it comes to that I believe
_he_ would be capable of killing you himself."

A minute elapsed before he stole a glance in her direction. She was
leaning back again, her hands had fallen on her lap and her head with a
plait of hair on each side of her face, her head incredibly changed in
character and suggesting something medieval, ascetic, drooped dreamily
on her breast.

D'Alcacer waited, holding his breath. She didn't move. In the dim gleam
of jewelled clasps, the faint sheen of gold embroideries and the shimmer
of silks, she was like a figure in a faded painting. Only her neck
appeared dazzlingly white in the smoky redness of the light. D'Alcacer's
wonder approached a feeling of awe. He was on the point of moving away
quietly when Mrs. Travers, without stirring in the least, let him hear
the words:

"I have told him that every day seemed more difficult to live. Don't you
see how impossible this is?"

D'Alcacer glanced rapidly across the Cage where Mr. Travers seemed to
be asleep all in a heap and presenting a ruffled appearance like a sick
bird. Nothing was distinct of him but the bald patch on the top of his
head.

"Yes," he murmured, "it is most unfortunate. . . . I understand your
anxiety, Mrs. Travers, but . . ."

"I am frightened," she said.

He reflected a moment. "What answer did you get?" he asked, softly.

"The answer was: 'Patience.'"

D'Alcacer laughed a little.--"You may well laugh," murmured Mrs. Travers
in a tone of anguish.--"That's why I did," he whispered. "Patience!
Didn't he see the horror of it?"--"I don't know. He walked away," said
Mrs. Travers. She looked immovably at her hands clasped in her lap,
and then with a burst of distress, "Mr. d'Alcacer, what is going to
happen?"--"Ah, you are asking yourself the question at last. _That_
will happen which cannot be avoided; and perhaps you know best what it
is."--"No. I am still asking myself what he will do."--"Ah, that is not
for me to know," declared d'Alcacer. "I can't tell you what he will do,
but I know what will happen to him."--"To him, you say! To him!" she
cried.--"He will break his heart," said d'Alcacer, distinctly, bending
a little over the chair with a slight gasp at his own audacity--and
waited.

"Croyez-vous?" came at last from Mrs. Travers in an accent so coldly
languid that d'Alcacer felt a shudder run down his spine.

Was it possible that she was that kind of woman, he asked himself.
Did she see nothing in the world outside herself? Was she above the
commonest kind of compassion? He couldn't suspect Mrs. Travers of
stupidity; but she might have been heartless and, like some women of
her class, quite unable to recognize any emotion in the world except her
own. D'Alcacer was shocked and at the same time he was relieved because
he confessed to himself that he had ventured very far. However, in her
humanity she was not vulgar enough to be offended. She was not the slave
of small meannesses. This thought pleased d'Alcacer who had schooled
himself not to expect too much from people. But he didn't know what to
do next. After what he had ventured to say and after the manner in
which she had met his audacity the only thing to do was to change the
conversation. Mrs. Travers remained perfectly still. "I will pretend
that I think she is asleep," he thought to himself, meditating a retreat
on tip-toe.

He didn't know that Mrs. Travers was simply trying to recover the full
command of her faculties. His words had given her a terrible shock.
After managing to utter this defensive "croyez-vous" which came out of
her lips cold and faint as if in a last effort of dying strength, she
felt herself turn rigid and speechless. She was thinking, stiff all over
with emotion: "D'Alcacer has seen it! How much more has he been able to
see?" She didn't ask herself that question in fear or shame but with
a reckless resignation. Out of that shock came a sensation of peace. A
glowing warmth passed through all her limbs. If d'Alcacer had peered
by that smoky light into her face he might have seen on her lips a
fatalistic smile come and go. But d'Alcacer would not have dreamed of
doing such a thing, and, besides, his attention just then was drawn in
another direction. He had heard subdued exclamations, had noticed a stir
on the decks of the Emma, and even some sort of noise outside the ship.

"These are strange sounds," he said.

"Yes, I hear," Mrs. Travers murmured, uneasily.

Vague shapes glided outside the Cage, barefooted, almost noiseless,
whispering Malay words secretly.

"It seems as though a boat had come alongside," observed d'Alcacer,
lending an attentive ear. "I wonder what it means. In our
position. . . ."

"It may mean anything," interrupted Mrs. Travers.

"Jaffir is here," said a voice in the darkness of the after end of the
ship. Then there were some more words in which d'Alcacer's attentive ear
caught the word "surat."

"A message of some sort has come," he said. "They will be calling
Captain Lingard. I wonder what thoughts or what dreams this call will
interrupt." He spoke lightly, looking now at Mrs. Travers who had
altered her position in the chair; and by their tones and attitudes
these two might have been on board the yacht sailing the sea in perfect
safety. "You, of course, are the one who will be told. Don't you feel a
sort of excitement, Mrs. Travers?"

"I have been lately exhorted to patience," she said in the same easy
tone. "I can wait and I imagine I shall have to wait till the morning."

"It can't be very late yet," he said. "Time with us has been standing
still for ever so long. And yet this may be the hour of fate."

"Is this the feeling you have at this particular moment?"

"I have had that feeling for a considerable number of moments already.
At first it was exciting. Now I am only moderately anxious. I have
employed my time in going over all my past life."

"Can one really do that?"

"Yes. I can't say I have been bored to extinction. I am still alive, as
you see; but I have done with that and I feel extremely idle. There is
only one thing I would like to do. I want to find a few words that could
convey to you my gratitude for all your friendliness in the past, at the
time when you let me see so much of you in London. I felt always
that you took me on my own terms and that so kindly that often I felt
inclined to think better of myself. But I am afraid I am wearying you,
Mrs. Travers."

"I assure you you have never done that--in the past. And as to the
present moment I beg you not to go away. Stay by me please. We are not
going to pretend that we are sleepy at this early hour."

D'Alcacer brought a stool close to the long chair and sat down on it.
"Oh, yes, the possible hour of fate," he said. "I have a request to
make, Mrs. Travers. I don't ask you to betray anything. What would be
the good? The issue when it comes will be plain enough. But I should
like to get a warning, just something that would give me time to pull
myself together, to compose myself as it were. I want you to promise me
that if the balance tips against us you will give me a sign. You could,
for instance, seize the opportunity when I am looking at you to put your
left hand to your forehead like this. It is a gesture that I have never
seen you make, and so. . . ."

"Jorgenson!" Lingard's voice was heard forward where the light of a
lantern appeared suddenly. Then, after a pause, Lingard was heard again:
"Here!"

Then the silent minutes began to go by. Mrs. Travers reclining in her
chair and d'Alcacer sitting on the stool waited motionless without a
word. Presently through the subdued murmurs and agitation pervading the
dark deck of the Emma Mrs. Travers heard a firm footstep, and, lantern
in hand, Lingard appeared outside the muslin cage.

"Will you come out and speak to me?" he said, loudly. "Not you. The
lady," he added in an authoritative tone as d'Alcacer rose hastily from
the stool. "I want Mrs. Travers."

"Of course," muttered d'Alcacer to himself and as he opened the door of
the Cage to let Mrs. Travers slip through he whispered to her, "This is
the hour of fate."

She brushed past him swiftly without the slightest sign that she had
heard the words. On the after deck between the Cage and the deckhouse
Lingard waited, lantern in hand. Nobody else was visible about; but
d'Alcacer felt in the air the presence of silent and excited beings
hovering outside the circle of light. Lingard raised the lantern as Mrs.
Travers approached and d'Alcacer heard him say:

"I have had news which you ought to know. Let us go into the deckhouse."

D'Alcacer saw their heads lighted up by the raised lantern surrounded by
the depths of shadow with an effect of a marvellous and symbolic vision.
He heard Mrs. Travers say "I would rather not hear your news," in a
tone that made that sensitive observer purse up his lips in wonder. He
thought that she was over-wrought, that the situation had grown too much
for her nerves. But this was not the tone of a frightened person. It
flashed through his mind that she had become self-conscious, and there
he stopped in his speculation. That friend of women remained discreet
even in his thoughts. He stepped backward further into the Cage and
without surprise saw Mrs. Travers follow Lingard into the deckhouse.



IV

Lingard stood the lantern on the table. Its light was very poor. He
dropped on to the sea-chest heavily. He, too, was over-wrought. His
flannel shirt was open at the neck. He had a broad belt round his waist
and was without his jacket. Before him, Mrs. Travers, straight and tall
in the gay silks, cottons, and muslins of her outlandish dress, with the
ends of the scarf thrown over her head, hanging down in front of her,
looked dimly splendid and with a black glance out of her white face. He
said:

"Do you, too, want to throw me over? I tell you you can't do that now."

"I wasn't thinking of throwing you over, but I don't even know what you
mean. There seem to be no end of things I can't do. Hadn't you better
tell me of something that I could do? Have you any idea yourself what
you want from me?"

"You can let me look at you. You can listen to me. You can speak to me."

"Frankly, I have never shirked doing all those things, whenever you
wanted me to. You have led me . . ."

"I led you!" cried Lingard.

"Oh! It was my fault," she said, without anger. "I must have dreamed
then that it was you who came to me in the dark with the tale of your
impossible life. Could I have sent you away?"

"I wish you had. Why didn't you?"

"Do you want me to tell you that you were irresistible? How could I have
sent you away? But you! What made you come back to me with your very
heart on your lips?"

When Lingard spoke after a time it was in jerky sentences.

"I didn't stop to think. I had been hurt. I didn't think of you people
as ladies and gentlemen. I thought of you as people whose lives I held
in my hand. How was it possible to forget you in my trouble? It is your
face that I brought back with me on board my brig. I don't know why. I
didn't look at you more than at anybody else. It took me all my time to
keep my temper down lest it should burn you all up. I didn't want to be
rude to you people, but I found it wasn't very easy because threats were
the only argument I had. Was I very offensive, Mrs. Travers?"

She had listened tense and very attentive, almost stern. And it was
without the slightest change of expression that she said:

"I think that you bore yourself appropriately to the state of life to
which it has pleased God to call you."

"What state?" muttered Lingard to himself. "I am what I am. They call me
Rajah Laut, King Tom, and such like. I think it amused you to hear it,
but I can tell you it is no joke to have such names fastened on one,
even in fun. And those very names have in them something which makes all
this affair here no small matter to anybody."

She stood before him with a set, severe face.--"Did you call me out
in this alarming manner only to quarrel with me?"--"No, but why do you
choose this time to tell me that my coming for help to you was nothing
but impudence in your sight? Well, I beg your pardon for intruding
on your dignity."--"You misunderstood me," said Mrs. Travers, without
relaxing for a moment her contemplative severity. "Such a flattering
thing had never happened to me before and it will never happen to me
again. But believe me, King Tom, you did me too much honour. Jorgenson
is perfectly right in being angry with you for having taken a woman in
tow."--"He didn't mean to be rude," protested Lingard, earnestly. Mrs.
Travers didn't even smile at this intrusion of a point of manners into
the atmosphere of anguish and suspense that seemed always to arise
between her and this man who, sitting on the sea-chest, had raised his
eyes to her with an air of extreme candour and seemed unable to take
them off again. She continued to look at him sternly by a tremendous
effort of will.

"How changed you are," he murmured.

He was lost in the depths of the simplest wonder. She appeared to him
vengeful and as if turned forever into stone before his bewildered
remorse. Forever. Suddenly Mrs. Travers looked round and sat down in the
chair. Her strength failed her but she remained austere with her hands
resting on the arms of her seat. Lingard sighed deeply and dropped
his eyes. She did not dare relax her muscles for fear of breaking down
altogether and betraying a reckless impulse which lurked at the bottom
of her dismay, to seize the head of d'Alcacer's Man of Fate, press it
to her breast once, fling it far away, and vanish herself, vanish out
of life like a wraith. The Man of Fate sat silent and bowed, yet with
a suggestion of strength in his dejection. "If I don't speak," Mrs.
Travers said to herself, with great inward calmness, "I shall burst into
tears." She said aloud, "What could have happened? What have you dragged
me in here for? Why don't you tell me your news?"

"I thought you didn't want to hear. I believe you really don't want to.
What is all this to you? I believe that you don't care anything about
what I feel, about what I do and how I end. I verily believe that you
don't care how you end yourself. I believe you never cared for your own
or anybody's feelings. I don't think it is because you are hard, I think
it is because you don't know, and don't want to know, and are angry with
life."

He flourished an arm recklessly, and Mrs. Travers noticed for the first
time that he held a sheet of paper in his hand.

"Is that your news there?" she asked, significantly. "It's difficult to
imagine that in this wilderness writing can have any significance. And
who on earth here could send you news on paper? Will you let me see it?
Could I understand it? Is it in English? Come, King Tom, don't look at
me in this awful way."

She got up suddenly, not in indignation, but as if at the end of her
endurance. The jewelled clasps, the gold embroideries, gleamed elusively
amongst the folds of her draperies which emitted a mysterious rustle.

"I can't stand this," she cried. "I can't stand being looked at like
this. No woman could stand it. No woman has ever been looked at like
this. What can you see? Hatred I could understand. What is it you think
me capable of?"

"You are very extraordinary," murmured Lingard, who had regained his
self-possession before that outburst.

"Very well, and you are extraordinary, too. That's understood--here we
are both under that curse and having to face together whatever may turn
up. But who on earth could have sent you this writing?"

"Who?" repeated Lingard. "Why, that young fellow that blundered on my
brig in the dark, bringing a boatload of trouble alongside on that
quiet night in Carimata Straits. The darkest night I have ever known. An
accursed night."

Mrs. Travers bit her lip, waited a little, then asked quietly:

"What difficulty has he got into now?"

"Difficulty!" cried Lingard. "He is immensely pleased with himself, the
young fool. You know, when you sent him to talk to me that evening you
left the yacht, he came with a loaded pistol in his pocket. And now he
has gone and done it."

"Done it?" repeated Mrs. Travers blankly. "Done what?"

She snatched from Lingard's unresisting palm the sheet of paper. While
she was smoothing it Lingard moved round and stood close at her elbow.
She ran quickly over the first lines, then her eyes steadied. At the end
she drew a quick breath and looked up at Lingard. Their faces had never
been so close together before and Mrs. Travers had a surprising second
of a perfectly new sensation. She looked away.--"Do you understand what
this news means?" he murmured. Mrs. Travers let her hand fall by her
side. "Yes," she said in a low tone. "The compact is broken."

Carter had begun his letter without any preliminaries:

You cleared out in the middle of the night and took the lady away with
you. You left me no proper orders. But as a sailorman I looked upon
myself as left in charge of two ships while within half a mile on that
sandbank there were more than a hundred piratical cut-throats watching
me as closely as so many tigers about to leap. Days went by without a
word of you or the lady. To leave the ships outside and go inland to
look for you was not to be thought of with all those pirates within
springing distance. Put yourself in my place. Can't you imagine my
anxiety, my sleepless nights? Each night worse than the night before.
And still no word from you. I couldn't sit still and worry my head off
about things I couldn't understand. I am a sailorman. My first duty was
to the ships. I had to put an end to this impossible situation and I
hope you will agree that I have done it in a seamanlike way. One misty
morning I moved the brig nearer the sandbank and directly the mist
cleared I opened fire on the praus of those savages which were anchored
in the channel. We aimed wide at first to give those vagabonds that
were on board a chance to clear out and join their friends camped on the
sands. I didn't want to kill people. Then we got the long gun to bear
and in about an hour we had the bottom knocked out of the two praus. The
savages on the bank howled and screamed at every shot. They are mighty
angry but I don't care for their anger now, for by sinking their praus
I have made them as harmless as a flock of lambs. They needn't starve on
their sandbank because they have two or three dugouts hauled up on
the sand and they may ferry themselves and their women to the mainland
whenever they like.

I fancy I have acted as a seaman and as a seaman I intend to go on
acting. Now I have made the ships safe I shall set about without loss of
time trying to get the yacht off the mud. When that's done I shall arm
the boats and proceed inshore to look for you and the yacht's gentry,
and shan't rest till I know whether any or all of you are above the
earth yet.

I hope these words will reach you. Just as we had done the business
of those praus the man you sent off that night in Carimata to stop our
chief officer came sailing in from the west with our first gig in
tow and the boat's crew all well. Your serang tells me he is a most
trustworthy messenger and that his name is Jaffir. He seems only too
anxious to try to get to you as soon as possible. I repeat, ships and
men have been made safe and I don't mean to give you up dead or alive.

"You are quick in taking the point," said Lingard in a dull voice, while
Mrs. Travers, with the sheet of paper gripped in her hand, looked into
his face with anxious eyes. "He has been smart and no mistake."

"He didn't know," murmured Mrs. Travers.

"No, he didn't know. But could I take everybody into my confidence?"
protested Lingard in the same low tone. "And yet who else could I trust?
It seemed to me that he must have understood without being told. But he
is too young. He may well be proud according to his lights. He has done
that job outside very smartly--damn his smartness! And here we are with
all our lives depending on my word--which is broken now, Mrs. Travers.
It is broken."

Mrs. Travers nodded at him slightly.

"They would sooner have expected to see the sun and the moon fall out of
the sky," Lingard continued with repressed fire. Next moment it seemed
to have gone out of him and Mrs. Travers heard him mutter a disconnected
phrase. . . . "The world down about my ears."

"What will you do?" she whispered.

"What will I do?" repeated Lingard, gently. "Oh, yes--do. Mrs. Travers,
do you see that I am nothing now? Just nothing."

He had lost himself in the contemplation of her face turned to him with
an expression of awed curiosity. The shock of the world coming down
about his ears in consequence of Carter's smartness was so terrific that
it had dulled his sensibilities in the manner of a great pain or of a
great catastrophe. What was there to look at but that woman's face, in
a world which had lost its consistency, its shape, and its promises in a
moment?

Mrs. Travers looked away. She understood that she had put to Lingard an
impossible question. What was presenting itself to her as a problem was
to that man a crisis of feeling. Obviously Carter's action had broken
the compact entered into with Daman, and she was intelligent enough to
understand that it was the sort of thing that could not be explained
away. It wasn't horror that she felt, but a sort of consternation,
something like the discomfiture of people who have just missed their
train. It was only more intense. The real dismay had yet to make its way
into her comprehension. To Lingard it was a blow struck straight at his
heart.

He was not angry with Carter. The fellow had acted like a seaman.
Carter's concern was for the ships. In this fatality Carter was a mere
incident. The real cause of the disaster was somewhere else, was other,
and more remote. And at the same time Lingard could not defend himself
from a feeling that it was in himself, too, somewhere in the unexplored
depths of his nature, something fatal and unavoidable. He muttered to
himself:

"No. I am not a lucky man."

This was but a feeble expression of the discovery of the truth that
suddenly had come home to him as if driven into his breast by a
revealing power which had decided that this was to be the end of his
fling. But he was not the man to give himself up to the examination
of his own sensations. His natural impulse was to grapple with the
circumstances and that was what he was trying to do; but he missed now
that sense of mastery which is half the battle. Conflict of some sort
was the very essence of his life. But this was something he had never
known before. This was a conflict within himself. He had to face
unsuspected powers, foes that he could not go out to meet at the gate.
They were within, as though he had been betrayed by somebody, by some
secret enemy. He was ready to look round for that subtle traitor. A
sort of blankness fell on his mind and he suddenly thought: "Why! It's
myself."

Immediately afterward he had a clear, merciless recollection of Hassim
and Immada. He saw them far off beyond the forests. Oh, yes, they
existed--within his breast!

"That was a night!" he muttered, looking straight at Mrs. Travers. He
had been looking at her all the time. His glance had held her under a
spell, but for a whole interminable minute he had not been aware of her
at all. At the murmur of his words she made a slight movement and he saw
her again.--"What night?" she whispered, timidly, like an intruder. She
was astonished to see him smile.--"Not like this one," he said. "You
made me notice how quiet and still it was. Yes. Listen how still it is."

Both moved their heads slightly and seemed to lend an ear. There was not
a murmur, sigh, rustle, splash, or footfall. No whispers, no tremors,
not a sound of any kind. They might have been alone on board the Emma,
abandoned even by the ghost of Captain Jorgenson departed to rejoin
the Barque Wild Rose on the shore of the Cimmerian sea.--"It's like the
stillness of the end," said Mrs. Travers in a low, equable voice.--"Yes,
but that, too, is false," said Lingard in the same tone.--"I don't
understand," Mrs. Travers began, hurriedly, after a short silence. "But
don't use that word. Don't use it, King Tom! It frightens me by its mere
sound."

Lingard made no sign. His thoughts were back with Hassim and Immada. The
young chief and his sister had gone up country on a voluntary mission
to persuade Belarab to return to his stockade and to take up again the
direction of affairs. They carried urgent messages from Lingard, who for
Belarab was the very embodiment of truth and force, that unquestioned
force which had permitted Belarab to indulge in all his melancholy
hesitations. But those two young people had also some personal prestige.
They were Lingard's heart's friends. They were like his children. But
beside that, their high birth, their warlike story, their wanderings,
adventures, and prospects had given them a glamour of their own.



V

The very day that Travers and d'Alcacer had come on board the Emma
Hassim and Immada had departed on their mission; for Lingard, of course,
could not think of leaving the white people alone with Jorgenson.
Jorgenson was all right, but his ineradicable habit of muttering in his
moustache about "throwing a lighted match amongst the powder barrels"
had inspired Lingard with a certain amount of mistrust. And, moreover,
he did not want to go away from Mrs. Travers.

It was the only correct inspiration on Carter's part to send Jaffir with
his report to Lingard. That stout-hearted fighter, swimmer, and devoted
follower of the princely misfortunes of Hassim and Immada, had looked
upon his mission to catch the chief officer of the yacht (which he had
received from Lingard in Carimata) as a trifling job. It took him a
little longer than he expected but he had got back to the brig just in
time to be sent on to Lingard with Carter's letter after a couple of
hours' rest. He had the story of all the happenings from Wasub before he
left and though his face preserved its grave impassivity, in his heart
he did not like it at all.

Fearless and wily, Jaffir was the man for difficult missions and a born
messenger--as he expressed it himself--"to bear weighty words between
great men." With his unfailing memory he was able to reproduce them
exactly, whether soft or hard, in council or in private; for he knew no
fear. With him there was no need for writing which might fall into the
hands of the enemy. If he died on the way the message would die with
him. He had also the gift of getting at the sense of any situation
and an observant eye. He was distinctly one of those men from whom
trustworthy information can be obtained by the leaders of great
enterprises. Lingard did put several questions to him, but in this
instance, of course, Jaffir could have only very little to say. Of
Carter, whom he called the "young one," he said that he looked as white
men look when they are pleased with themselves; then added without
waiting for a definite question--"The ships out there are now safe
enough, O, Rajah Laut!" There was no elation in his tone.

Lingard looked at him blankly. When the Greatest of White Men remarked
that there was yet a price to be paid for that safety, Jaffir assented
by a "Yes, by Allah!" without losing for a moment his grim composure.
When told that he would be required to go and find his master and
the lady Immada who were somewhere in the back country, in Belarab's
travelling camp, he declared himself ready to proceed at once. He had
eaten his fill and had slept three hours on board the brig and he was
not tired. When he was young he used to get tired sometimes; but for
many years now he had known no such weakness. He did not require the
boat with paddlers in which he had come up into the lagoon. He would go
alone in a small canoe. This was no time, he remarked, for publicity and
ostentation. His pent-up anxiety burst through his lips. "It is in my
mind, Tuan, that death has not been so near them since that night when
you came sailing in a black cloud and took us all out of the stockade."

Lingard said nothing but there was in Jaffir a faith in that white man
which was not easily shaken.

"How are you going to save them this time, O Rajah Laut?" he asked,
simply.

"Belarab is my friend," murmured Lingard.

In his anxiety Jaffir was very outspoken. "A man of peace!" he exclaimed
in a low tone. "Who could be safe with a man like that?" he asked,
contemptuously.

"There is no war," said Lingard

"There is suspicion, dread, and revenge, and the anger of armed men,"
retorted Jaffir. "You have taken the white prisoners out of their hands
by the force of your words alone. Is that so, Tuan?"

"Yes," said Lingard.

"And you have them on board here?" asked Jaffir, with a glance over his
shoulder at the white and misty structure within which by the light of a
small oil flame d'Alcacer and Mrs. Travers were just then conversing.

"Yes, I have them here."

"Then, Rajah Laut," whispered Jaffir, "you can make all safe by giving
them back."

"Can I do that?" were the words breathed out through Lingard's lips to
the faithful follower of Hassim and Immada.

"Can you do anything else?" was the whispered retort of Jaffir the
messenger accustomed to speak frankly to the great of the earth. "You
are a white man and you can have only one word. And now I go."

A small, rough dug-out belonging to the Emma had been brought round to
the ladder. A shadowy calash hovering respectfully in the darkness of
the deck had already cleared his throat twice in a warning manner.

"Yes, Jaffir, go," said Lingard, "and be my friend."

"I am the friend of a great prince," said the other, sturdily. "But you,
Rajah Laut, were even greater. And great you will remain while you are
with us, people of this sea and of this land. But what becomes of the
strength of your arms before your own white people? Where does it go to,
I say? Well, then, we must trust in the strength of your heart."

"I hope that will never fail," said Lingard, and Jaffir emitted a grunt
of satisfaction. "But God alone sees into men's hearts."

"Yes. Our refuge is with Allah," assented Jaffir, who had acquired
the habit of pious turns of speech in the frequentation of professedly
religious men, of whom there were many in Belarab's stockade. As a
matter of fact, he reposed all his trust in Lingard who had with him
the prestige of a providential man sent at the hour of need by heaven
itself. He waited a while, then: "What is the message I am to take?" he
asked.

"Tell the whole tale to the Rajah Hassim," said Lingard. "And tell him
to make his way here with the lady his sister secretly and with speed.
The time of great trouble has come. Let us, at least, be together."

"Right! Right!" Jaffir approved, heartily. "To die alone under the
weight of one's enemies is a dreadful fate."

He stepped back out of the sheen of the lamp by which they had been
talking and making his way down into the small canoe he took up a paddle
and without a splash vanished on the dark lagoon.

It was then that Mrs. Travers and d'Alcacer heard Lingard call aloud for
Jorgenson. Instantly the familiar shadow stood at Lingard's elbow and
listened in detached silence. Only at the end of the tale it marvelled
audibly: "Here's a mess for you if you like." But really nothing in the
world could astonish or startle old Jorgenson. He turned away muttering
in his moustache. Lingard remained with his chin in his hand and
Jaffir's last words took gradual possession of his mind. Then brusquely
he picked up the lamp and went to seek Mrs. Travers. He went to seek her
because he actually needed her bodily presence, the sound of her voice,
the dark, clear glance of her eyes. She could do nothing for him. On
his way he became aware that Jorgenson had turned out the few Malays
on board the Emma and was disposing them about the decks to watch
the lagoon in all directions. On calling Mrs. Travers out of the Cage
Lingard was, in the midst of his mental struggle, conscious of a certain
satisfaction in taking her away from d'Alcacer. He couldn't spare any of
her attention to any other man, not the least crumb of her time, not
the least particle of her thought! He needed it all. To see it withdrawn
from him for the merest instant was irritating--seemed a disaster.

D'Alcacer, left alone, wondered at the imperious tone of Lingard's call.
To this observer of shades the fact seemed considerable. "Sheer nerves,"
he concluded, to himself. "The man is overstrung. He must have had some
sort of shock." But what could it be--he wondered to himself. In the
tense stagnation of those days of waiting the slightest tremor had an
enormous importance. D'Alcacer did not seek his camp bedstead. He didn't
even sit down. With the palms of his hands against the edge of the table
he leaned back against it. In that negligent attitude he preserved an
alert mind which for a moment wondered whether Mrs. Travers had
not spoiled Lingard a little. Yet in the suddenness of the forced
association, where, too, d'Alcacer was sure there was some moral problem
in the background, he recognized the extreme difficulty of weighing
accurately the imperious demands against the necessary reservations, the
exact proportions of boldness and caution. And d'Alcacer admired upon
the whole Mrs. Travers' cleverness.

There could be no doubt that she had the situation in her hands. That,
of course, did not mean safety. She had it in her hands as one may hold
some highly explosive and uncertain compound. D'Alcacer thought of her
with profound sympathy and with a quite unselfish interest. Sometimes
in a street we cross the path of personalities compelling sympathy and
wonder but for all that we don't follow them home. D'Alcacer refrained
from following Mrs. Travers any further. He had become suddenly aware
that Mr. Travers was sitting up on his camp bedstead. He must have done
it very suddenly. Only a moment before he had appeared plunged in
the deepest slumber, and the stillness for a long time now had been
perfectly unbroken. D'Alcacer was startled enough for an exclamation
and Mr. Travers turned his head slowly in his direction. D'Alcacer
approached the bedstead with a certain reluctance.

"Awake?" he said.

"A sudden chill," said Mr. Travers. "But I don't feel cold now. Strange!
I had the impression of an icy blast."

"Ah!" said d'Alcacer.

"Impossible, of course!" went on Mr. Travers. "This stagnating air never
moves. It clings odiously to one. What time is it?"

"Really, I don't know."

"The glass of my watch was smashed on that night when we were so
treacherously assailed by the savages on the sandbank," grumbled Mr.
Travers.

"I must say I was never so surprised in my life," confessed d'Alcacer.
"We had stopped and I was lighting a cigar, you may remember."

"No," said Mr. Travers. "I had just then pulled out my watch. Of course
it flew out of my hand but it hung by the chain. Somebody trampled on
it. The hands are broken off short. It keeps on ticking but I can't tell
the time. It's absurd. Most provoking."

"Do you mean to say," asked d'Alcacer, "that you have been winding it up
every evening?"

Mr. Travers looked up from his bedstead and he also seemed surprised.
"Why! I suppose I have." He kept silent for a while. "It isn't so
much blind habit as you may think. My habits are the outcome of strict
method. I had to order my life methodically. You know very well, my dear
d'Alcacer, that without strict method I would not have been able to get
through my work and would have had no time at all for social duties,
which, of course, are of very great importance. I may say that,
materially, method has been the foundation of my success in public life.
There were never any empty moments in my day. And now this! . . ." He
looked all round the Cage. . . . "Where's my wife?" he asked.

"I was talking to her only a moment ago," answered d'Alcacer. "I don't
know the time. My watch is on board the yacht; but it isn't late, you
know."

Mr. Travers flung off with unwonted briskness the light cotton sheet
which covered him. He buttoned hastily the tunic which he had unfastened
before lying down, and just as d'Alcacer was expecting him to swing
his feet to the deck impetuously, he lay down again on the pillow and
remained perfectly still.

D'Alcacer waited awhile and then began to pace the Cage. After a couple
of turns he stopped and said, gently:

"I am afraid, Travers, you are not very well."

"I don't know what illness is," answered the voice from the pillow to
the great relief of d'Alcacer who really had not expected an answer.
"Good health is a great asset in public life. Illness may make you miss
a unique opportunity. I was never ill."

All this came out deadened in tone, as if the speaker's face had been
buried in the pillow. D'Alcacer resumed his pacing.

"I think I asked you where my wife was," said the muffled voice.

With great presence of mind d'Alcacer kept on pacing the Cage as if
he had not heard.--"You know, I think she is mad," went on the muffled
voice. "Unless I am."

Again d'Alcacer managed not to interrupt his regular pacing. "Do you
know what I think?" he said, abruptly. "I think, Travers, that you
don't want to talk about her. I think that you don't want to talk about
anything. And to tell you the truth I don't want to, either."

D'Alcacer caught a faint sigh from the pillow and at the same time saw
a small, dim flame appear outside the Cage. And still he kept on his
pacing. Mrs. Travers and Lingard coming out of the deckhouse stopped
just outside the door and Lingard stood the deck-lamp on its roof. They
were too far from d'Alcacer to be heard, but he could make them out:
Mrs. Travers, as straight as an arrow, and the heavy bulk of the man who
faced her with a lowered head. He saw it in profile against the light
and as if deferential in its slight droop. They were looking straight at
each other. Neither of them made the slightest gesture.

"There is that in me," Lingard murmured, deeply, "which would set my
heart harder than a stone. I am King Tom, Rajah Laut, and fit to
look any man hereabouts in the face. I have my name to take care of.
Everything rests on that."

"Mr. d'Alcacer would express this by saying that everything rested on
honour," commented Mrs. Travers with lips that did not tremble, though
from time to time she could feel the accelerated beating of her heart.

"Call it what you like. It's something that a man needs to draw a free
breath. And look!--as you see me standing before you here I care for it
no longer."

"But I do care for it," retorted Mrs. Travers. "As you see me standing
here--I do care. This is something that is your very own. You have a
right to it. And I repeat I do care for it."

"Care for something of my own," murmured Lingard, very close to her
face. "Why should you care for my rights?"

"Because," she said, holding her ground though their foreheads were
nearly touching, "because if I ever get back to my life I don't want to
make it more absurd by real remorse."

Her tone was soft and Lingard received the breath of those words like a
caress on his face. D'Alcacer, in the Cage, made still another effort
to keep up his pacing. He didn't want to give Mr. Travers the slightest
excuse for sitting up again and looking round.

"That I should live to hear anybody say they cared anything for what
was mine!" whispered Lingard. "And that it should be you--you, who have
taken all hardness out of me."

"I don't want your heart to be made hard. I want it to be made firm."

"You couldn't have said anything better than what you have said just now
to make it steady," flowed the murmur of Lingard's voice with something
tender in its depth. "Has anybody ever had a friend like this?" he
exclaimed, raising his head as if taking the starry night to witness.

"And I ask myself is it possible that there should be another man on
earth that I could trust as I trust you. I say to you: Yes! Go and save
what you have a right to and don't forget to be merciful. I will not
remind you of our perfect innocence. The earth must be small indeed that
we should have blundered like this into your life. It's enough to make
one believe in fatality. But I can't find it in me to behave like a
fatalist, to sit down with folded hands. Had you been another kind of
man I might have been too hopeless or too disdainful. Do you know what
Mr. d'Alcacer calls you?"

Inside the Cage d'Alcacer, casting curious glances in their direction,
saw Lingard shake his head and thought with slight uneasiness: "He is
refusing her something."

"Mr. d'Alcacer's name for you is the 'Man of Fate'," said Mrs. Travers,
a little breathlessly.

"A mouthful. Never mind, he is a gentleman. It's what you. . . ."

"I call you all but by your Christian name," said Mrs. Travers, hastily.
"Believe me, Mr. d'Alcacer understands you."

"He is all right," interjected Lingard.

"And he is innocent. I remember what you have said--that the innocent
must take their chance. Well, then, do what is right."

"You think it would be right? You believe it? You feel it?"

"At this time, in this place, from a man like you--Yes, it is right."

Lingard thought that woman wonderfully true to him and wonderfully
fearless with herself. The necessity to take back the two captives to
the stockade was so clear and unavoidable now, that he believed nothing
on earth could have stopped him from doing so, but where was there
another woman in the world who would have taken it like this? And he
reflected that in truth and courage there is found wisdom. It seemed to
him that till Mrs. Travers came to stand by his side he had never known
what truth and courage and wisdom were. With his eyes on her face and
having been told that in her eyes he appeared worthy of being both
commanded and entreated, he felt an instant of complete content, a
moment of, as it were, perfect emotional repose.

During the silence Mrs. Travers with a quick side-glance noticed
d'Alcacer as one sees a man in a mist, his mere dark shape arrested
close to the muslin screen. She had no doubt that he was looking in
their direction and that he could see them much more plainly than she
could see him. Mrs. Travers thought suddenly how anxious he must be; and
she remembered that he had begged her for some sign, for some warning,
beforehand, at the moment of crisis. She had understood very well his
hinted request for time to get prepared. If he was to get more than a
few minutes, _this_ was the moment to make him a sign--the sign he had
suggested himself. Mrs. Travers moved back the least bit so as to let
the light fall in front of her and with a slow, distinct movement she
put her left hand to her forehead.

"Well, then," she heard Lingard's forcible murmur, "well, then, Mrs.
Travers, it must be done to-night."

One may be true, fearless, and wise, and yet catch one's breath
before the simple finality of action. Mrs. Travers caught her breath:
"To-night! To-night!" she whispered. D'Alcacer's dark and misty
silhouette became more blurred. He had seen her sign and had retreated
deeper within the Cage.

"Yes, to-night," affirmed Lingard. "Now, at once, within the hour, this
moment," he murmured, fiercely, following Mrs. Travers in her recoiling
movement. She felt her arm being seized swiftly. "Don't you see that
if it is to do any good, that if they are not to be delivered to mere
slaughter, it must be done while all is dark ashore, before an armed mob
in boats comes clamouring alongside? Yes. Before the night is an hour
older, so that I may be hammering at Belarab's gate while all the
Settlement is still asleep."

Mrs. Travers didn't dream of protesting. For the moment she was unable
to speak. This man was very fierce and just as suddenly as it had been
gripped (making her think incongruously in the midst of her agitation
that there would be certainly a bruise there in the morning) she felt
her arm released and a penitential tone come into Lingard's murmuring
voice.

"And even now it's nearly too late! The road was plain, but I saw you on
it and my heart failed me. I was there like an empty man and I dared
not face you. You must forgive me. No, I had no right to doubt you for
a moment. I feel as if I ought to go on my knees and beg your pardon for
forgetting what you are, for daring to forget."

"Why, King Tom, what is it?"

"It seems as if I had sinned," she heard him say. He seized her by the
shoulders, turned her about, moved her forward a step or two. His hands
were heavy, his force irresistible, though he himself imagined he was
handling her gently. "Look straight before you," he growled into her
ear. "Do you see anything?" Mrs. Travers, passive between the rigid
arms, could see nothing but, far off, the massed, featureless shadows of
the shore.

"No, I see nothing," she said.

"You can't be looking the right way," she heard him behind her. And now
she felt her head between Lingard's hands. He moved it the least bit to
the right. "There! See it?"

"No. What am I to look for?"

"A gleam of light," said Lingard, taking away his hands suddenly. "A
gleam that will grow into a blaze before our boat can get half way
across the lagoon."

Even as Lingard spoke Mrs. Travers caught sight of a red spark far
away. She had looked often enough at the Settlement, as on the face of
a painting on a curtain, to have its configuration fixed in her mind,
to know that it was on the beach at its end furthest from Belarab's
stockade.

"The brushwood is catching," murmured Lingard in her ear. "If they had
some dry grass the whole pile would be blazing by now."

"And this means. . . ."

"It means that the news has spread. And it is before Tengga's enclosure
on his end of the beach. That's where all the brains of the Settlement
are. It means talk and excitement and plenty of crafty words. Tengga's
fire! I tell you, Mrs. Travers, that before half an hour has passed
Daman will be there to make friends with the fat Tengga, who is ready to
say to him, 'I told you so'."

"I see," murmured Mrs. Travers. Lingard drew her gently to the rail.

"And now look over there at the other end of the beach where the shadows
are heaviest. That is Belarab's fort, his houses, his treasure, his
dependents. That's where the strength of the Settlement is. I kept it
up. I made it last. But what is it now? It's like a weapon in the hand
of a dead man. And yet it's all we have to look to, if indeed there is
still time. I swear to you I wouldn't dare land them in daylight for
fear they should be slaughtered on the beach."

"There is no time to lose," whispered Mrs. Travers, and Lingard, too,
spoke very low.

"No, not if I, too, am to keep what is my right. It's you who have said
it."

"Yes, I have said it," she whispered, without lifting her head. Lingard
made a brusque movement at her elbow and bent his head close to her
shoulder.

"And I who mistrusted you! Like Arabs do to their great men, I ought to
kiss the hem of your robe in repentance for having doubted the greatness
of your heart."

"Oh! my heart!" said Mrs. Travers, lightly, still gazing at the fire,
which had suddenly shot up to a tall blaze. "I can assure you it has
been of very little account in the world." She paused for a moment to
steady her voice, then said, firmly, "Let's get this over."

"To tell you the truth the boat has been ready for some time."

"Well, then. . . ."

"Mrs. Travers," said Lingard with an effort, "they are people of your
own kind." And suddenly he burst out: "I cannot take them ashore bound
hand and foot."

"Mr. d'Alcacer knows. You will find him ready. Ever since the beginning
he has been prepared for whatever might happen."

"He is a man," said Lingard with conviction. "But it's of the other that
I am thinking."

"Ah, the other," she repeated. "Then, what about my thoughts? Luckily we
have Mr. d'Alcacer. I shall speak to him first."

She turned away from the rail and moved toward the Cage.

"Jorgenson," the voice of Lingard resounded all along the deck, "get a
light on the gangway." Then he followed Mrs. Travers slowly.



VI

D'Alcacer, after receiving his warning, stepped back and leaned against
the edge of the table. He could not ignore in himself a certain emotion.
And indeed, when he had asked Mrs. Travers for a sign he expected to
be moved--but he had not expected the sign to come so soon. He expected
this night to pass like other nights, in broken slumbers, bodily
discomfort, and the unrest of disconnected thinking. At the same time
he was surprised at his own emotion. He had flattered himself on the
possession of more philosophy. He thought that this famous sense of
self-preservation was a queer thing, a purely animal thing. "For, as
a thinking man," he reflected, "I really ought not to care." It was
probably the unusual that affected him. Clearly. If he had been lying
seriously ill in a room in a hotel and had overheard some ominous
whispers he would not have cared in the least. Ah, but then he would
have been ill--and in illness one grows so indifferent. Illness is a
great help to unemotional behaviour, which of course is the correct
behaviour for a man of the world. He almost regretted he was not very
ill. But, then, Mr. Travers was obviously ill and it did not seem to
help him much. D'Alcacer glanced at the bedstead where Mr. Travers
preserved an immobility which struck d'Alcacer as obviously affected.
He mistrusted it. Generally he mistrusted Mr. Travers. One couldn't tell
what he would do next. Not that he could do much one way or another, but
that somehow he threatened to rob the situation of whatever dignity it
may have had as a stroke of fate, as a call on courage. Mr. d'Alcacer,
acutely observant and alert for the slightest hints, preferred to look
upon himself as the victim not of a swindle but of a rough man naively
engaged in a contest with heaven's injustice. D'Alcacer did not examine
his heart, but some lines of a French poet came into his mind, to the
effect that in all times those who fought with an unjust heaven had
possessed the secret admiration and love of men. He didn't go so far as
love but he could not deny to himself that his feeling toward Lingard
was secretly friendly and--well, appreciative. Mr. Travers sat up
suddenly. What a horrible nuisance, thought d'Alcacer, fixing his eyes
on the tips of his shoes with the hope that perhaps the other would lie
down again. Mr. Travers spoke.

"Still up, d'Alcacer?"

"I assure you it isn't late. It's dark at six, we dined before seven,
that makes the night long and I am not a very good sleeper; that is, I
cannot go to sleep till late in the night."

"I envy you," said Mr. Travers, speaking with a sort of drowsy apathy.
"I am always dropping off and the awakenings are horrible."

D'Alcacer, raising his eyes, noticed that Mrs. Travers and Lingard had
vanished from the light. They had gone to the rail where d'Alcacer
could not see them. Some pity mingled with his vexation at Mr. Travers'
snatchy wakefulness. There was something weird about the man, he
reflected. "Jorgenson," he began aloud.

"What's that?" snapped Mr. Travers.

"It's the name of that lanky old store-keeper who is always about the
decks."

"I haven't seen him. I don't see anybody. I don't know anybody. I prefer
not to notice."

"I was only going to say that he gave me a pack of cards; would you like
a game of piquet?"

"I don't think I could keep my eyes open," said Mr. Travers in an
unexpectedly confidential tone. "Isn't it funny, d'Alcacer? And then I
wake up. It's too awful."

D'Alcacer made no remark and Mr. Travers seemed not to have expected
any.

"When I said my wife was mad," he began, suddenly, causing d'Alcacer
to start, "I didn't mean it literally, of course." His tone sounded
slightly dogmatic and he didn't seem to be aware of any interval during
which he had appeared to sleep. D'Alcacer was convinced more than ever
that he had been shamming, and resigned himself wearily to listen,
folding his arms across his chest. "What I meant, really," continued Mr.
Travers, "was that she is the victim of a craze. Society is subject to
crazes, as you know very well. They are not reprehensible in themselves,
but the worst of my wife is that her crazes are never like those of the
people with whom she naturally associates. They generally run counter to
them. This peculiarity has given me some anxiety, you understand, in the
position we occupy. People will begin to say that she is eccentric. Do
you see her anywhere, d'Alcacer?"

D'Alcacer was thankful to be able to say that he didn't see Mrs.
Travers. He didn't even hear any murmurs, though he had no doubt that
everybody on board the Emma was wide awake by now. But Mr. Travers
inspired him with invincible mistrust and he thought it prudent to add:

"You forget that your wife has a room in the deckhouse."

This was as far as he would go, for he knew very well that she was not
in the deckhouse. Mr. Travers, completely convinced by the statement,
made no sound. But neither did he lie down again. D'Alcacer gave himself
up to meditation. The night seemed extremely oppressive. At Lingard's
shout for Jorgenson, that in the profound silence struck his ears
ominously, he raised his eyes and saw Mrs. Travers outside the door of
the Cage. He started forward but she was already within. He saw she was
moved. She seemed out of breath and as if unable to speak at first.

"Hadn't we better shut the door?" suggested d'Alcacer.

"Captain Lingard's coming in," she whispered to him. "He has made up his
mind."

"That's an excellent thing," commented d'Alcacer, quietly. "I conclude
from this that we shall hear something."

"You shall hear it all from me," breathed out Mrs. Travers.

"Ah!" exclaimed d'Alcacer very low.

By that time Lingard had entered, too, and the decks of the Emma were
all astir with moving figures. Jorgenson's voice was also heard giving
directions. For nearly a minute the four persons within the Cage
remained motionless. A shadowy Malay in the gangway said suddenly:
"Sudah, Tuan," and Lingard murmured, "Ready, Mrs. Travers."

She seized d'Alcacer's arm and led him to the side of the Cage furthest
from the corner in which Mr. Travers' bed was placed, while Lingard
busied himself in pricking up the wick of the Cage lantern as if it had
suddenly occurred to him that this, whatever happened, should not be a
deed of darkness. Mr. Travers did nothing but turn his head to look over
his shoulder.

"One moment," said d'Alcacer, in a low tone and smiling at Mrs. Travers'
agitation. "Before you tell me anything let me ask you: 'Have _you_ made
up your mind?'" He saw with much surprise a widening of her eyes. Was it
indignation? A pause as of suspicion fell between those two people. Then
d'Alcacer said apologetically: "Perhaps I ought not to have asked that
question," and Lingard caught Mrs. Travers' words, "Oh, I am not afraid
to answer that question."

Then their voices sank. Lingard hung the lamp up again and stood idle in
the revived light; but almost immediately he heard d'Alcacer calling him
discreetly.

"Captain Lingard!"

He moved toward them at once. At the same instant Mr. Travers' head
pivoted away from the group to its frontal position.

D'Alcacer, very serious, spoke in a familiar undertone.

"Mrs. Travers tells me that we must be delivered up to those Moors on
shore."

"Yes, there is nothing else for it," said Lingard.

"I confess I am a bit startled," said d'Alcacer; but except for a
slightly hurried utterance nobody could have guessed at anything
resembling emotion.

"I have a right to my good name," said Lingard, also very calm, while
Mrs. Travers near him, with half-veiled eyes, listened impassive like a
presiding genius.

"I wouldn't question that for a moment," conceded d'Alcacer. "A point
of honour is not to be discussed. But there is such a thing as humanity,
too. To be delivered up helplessly. . . ."

"Perhaps!" interrupted Lingard. "But you needn't feel hopeless. I am
not at liberty to give up my life for your own. Mrs. Travers knows why.
That, too, is engaged."

"Always on your honour?"

"I don't know. A promise is a promise."

"Nobody can be held to the impossible," remarked d'Alcacer.

"Impossible! What is impossible? I don't know it. I am not a man to talk
of the impossible or dodge behind it. I did not bring you here."

D'Alcacer lowered his head for a moment. "I have finished," he said,
gravely. "That much I had to say. I hope you don't think I have appeared
unduly anxious."

"It's the best policy, too." Mrs. Travers made herself heard suddenly.
Nothing of her moved but her lips, she did not even raise her eyes.
"It's the only possible policy. You believe me, Mr. d'Alcacer? . . ." He
made an almost imperceptible movement of the head. . . . "Well, then,
I put all my hope in you, Mr. d'Alcacer, to get this over as easily as
possible and save us all from some odious scene. You think perhaps that
it is I who ought to. . . ."

"No, no! I don't think so," interrupted d'Alcacer. "It would be
impossible."

"I am afraid it would," she admitted, nervously.

D'Alcacer made a gesture as if to beg her to say no more and at once
crossed over to Mr. Travers' side of the Cage. He did not want to give
himself time to think about his task. Mr. Travers was sitting up on
the camp bedstead with a light cotton sheet over his legs. He stared at
nothing, and on approaching him d'Alcacer disregarded the slight sinking
of his own heart at this aspect which seemed to be that of extreme
terror. "This is awful," he thought. The man kept as still as a hare in
its form.

The impressed d'Alcacer had to make an effort to bring himself to tap
him lightly on the shoulder.

"The moment has come, Travers, to show some fortitude," he said with
easy intimacy. Mr. Travers looked up swiftly. "I have just been talking
to your wife. She had a communication from Captain Lingard for us both.
It remains for us now to preserve as much as possible our dignity. I
hope that if necessary we will both know how to die."

In a moment of profound stillness, d'Alcacer had time to wonder whether
his face was as stony in expression as the one upturned to him. But
suddenly a smile appeared on it, which was certainly the last thing
d'Alcacer expected to see. An indubitable smile. A slightly contemptuous
smile.

"My wife has been stuffing your head with some more of her nonsense."
Mr. Travers spoke in a voice which astonished d'Alcacer as much as the
smile, a voice that was not irritable nor peevish, but had a distinct
note of indulgence. "My dear d'Alcacer, that craze has got such a hold
of her that she would tell you any sort of tale. Social impostors,
mediums, fortune-tellers, charlatans of all sorts do obtain a strange
influence over women. You have seen that sort of thing yourself. I had a
talk with her before dinner. The influence that bandit has got over her
is incredible. I really believe the fellow is half crazy himself. They
often are, you know. I gave up arguing with her. Now, what is it you
have got to tell me? But I warn you that I am not going to take it
seriously."

He rejected briskly the cotton sheet, put his feet to the ground and
buttoned his jacket. D'Alcacer, as he talked, became aware by the slight
noise behind him that Mrs. Travers and Lingard were leaving the Cage,
but he went on to the end and then waited anxiously for the answer.

"See! She has followed him out on deck," were Mr. Travers' first words.
"I hope you understand that it is a mere craze. You can't help seeing
that. Look at her costume. She simply has lost her head. Luckily the
world needn't know. But suppose that something similar had happened at
home. It would have been extremely awkward. Oh! yes, I will come. I will
go anywhere. I can't stand this hulk, those people, this infernal Cage.
I believe I should fall ill if I were to remain here."

The inward detached voice of Jorgenson made itself heard near the
gangway saying: "The boat has been waiting for this hour past, King
Tom."

"Let us make a virtue of necessity and go with a good grace," said
d'Alcacer, ready to take Mr. Travers under the arm persuasively, for he
did not know what to make of that gentleman.

But Mr. Travers seemed another man. "I am afraid, d'Alcacer, that you,
too, are not very strong-minded. I am going to take a blanket off this
bedstead. . . ." He flung it hastily over his arm and followed d'Alcacer
closely. "What I suffer mostly from, strange to say, is cold."

Mrs. Travers and Lingard were waiting near the gangway. To everybody's
extreme surprise Mr. Travers addressed his wife first.

"You were always laughing at people's crazes," was what he said, "and
now you have a craze of your own. But we won't discuss that."

D'Alcacer passed on, raising his cap to Mrs. Travers, and went down the
ship's side into the boat. Jorgenson had vanished in his own manner like
an exorcised ghost, and Lingard, stepping back, left husband and wife
face to face.

"Did you think I was going to make a fuss?" asked Mr. Travers in a very
low voice. "I assure you I would rather go than stay here. You didn't
think that? You have lost all sense of reality, of probability. I was
just thinking this evening that I would rather be anywhere than here
looking on at you. At your folly. . . ."

Mrs. Travers' loud, "Martin!" made Lingard wince, caused d'Alcacer
to lift his head down there in the boat, and even Jorgenson, forward
somewhere out of sight, ceased mumbling in his moustache. The only
person who seemed not to have heard that exclamation was Mr. Travers
himself, who continued smoothly:

". . . at the aberration of your mind, you who seemed so superior to
common credulities. You are not yourself, not at all, and some day you
will admit to me that . . . No, the best thing will be to forget it, as
you will soon see yourself. We shall never mention that subject in the
future. I am certain you will be only too glad to agree with me on that
point."

"How far ahead are you looking?" asked Mrs. Travers, finding her voice
and even the very tone in which she would have addressed him had they
been about to part in the hall of their town house. She might have been
asking him at what time he expected to be home, while a footman held the
door open and the brougham waited in the street.

"Not very far. This can't last much longer." Mr. Travers made a movement
as if to leave her exactly as though he were rather pressed to keep
an appointment. "By the by," he said, checking himself, "I suppose the
fellow understands thoroughly that we are wealthy. He could hardly doubt
that."

"It's the last thought that would enter his head," said Mrs. Travers.

"Oh, yes, just so," Mr. Travers allowed a little impatience to pierce
under his casual manner. "But I don't mind telling you that I have had
enough of this. I am prepared to make--ah!--to make concessions. A large
pecuniary sacrifice. Only the whole position is so absurd! He might
conceivably doubt my good faith. Wouldn't it be just as well if you,
with your particular influence, would hint to him that with me he would
have nothing to fear? I am a man of my word."

"That is the first thing he would naturally think of any man," said Mrs.
Travers.

"Will your eyes never be opened?" Mr. Travers began, irritably, then
gave it up. "Well, so much the better then. I give you a free hand."

"What made you change your attitude like this?" asked Mrs. Travers,
suspiciously.

"My regard for you," he answered without hesitation.

"I intended to join you in your captivity. I was just trying to persuade
him. . . ."

"I forbid you absolutely," whispered Mr. Travers, forcibly. "I am glad
to get away. I don't want to see you again till your craze is over."

She was confounded by his secret vehemence. But instantly succeeding his
fierce whisper came a short, inane society laugh and a much louder, "Not
that I attach any importance . . ."

He sprang away, as it were, from his wife, and as he went over the
gangway waved his hand to her amiably.

Lighted dimly by the lantern on the roof of the deckhouse Mrs. Travers
remained very still with lowered head and an aspect of profound
meditation. It lasted but an instant before she moved off and brushing
against Lingard passed on with downcast eyes to her deck cabin. Lingard
heard the door shut. He waited awhile, made a movement toward the
gangway but checked himself and followed Mrs. Travers into her cabin.

It was pitch dark in there. He could see absolutely nothing and was
oppressed by the profound stillness unstirred even by the sound of
breathing.

"I am going on shore," he began, breaking the black and deathlike
silence enclosing him and the invisible woman. "I wanted to say
good-bye."

"You are going on shore," repeated Mrs. Travers. Her voice was
emotionless, blank, unringing.

"Yes, for a few hours, or for life," Lingard said in measured tones. "I
may have to die with them or to die maybe for others. For you, if I
only knew how to manage it, I would want to live. I am telling you this
because it is dark. If there had been a light in here I wouldn't have
come in."

"I wish you had not," uttered the same unringing woman's voice. "You are
always coming to me with those lives and those deaths in your hand."

"Yes, it's too much for you," was Lingard's undertoned comment. "You
could be no other than true. And you are innocent! Don't wish me life,
but wish me luck, for you are innocent--and you will have to take your
chance."

"All luck to you, King Tom," he heard her say in the darkness in which
he seemed now to perceive the gleam of her hair. "I will take my chance.
And try not to come near me again for I am weary of you."

"I can well believe it," murmured Lingard, and stepped out of the cabin,
shutting the door after him gently. For half a minute, perhaps, the
stillness continued, and then suddenly the chair fell over in the
darkness. Next moment Mrs. Travers' head appeared in the light of the
lamp left on the roof of the deckhouse. Her bare arms grasped the door
posts.

"Wait a moment," she said, loudly, into the shadows of the deck. She
heard no footsteps, saw nothing moving except the vanishing white shape
of the late Captain H. C. Jorgenson, who was indifferent to the life of
men. "Wait, King Tom!" she insisted, raising her voice; then, "I didn't
mean it. Don't believe me!" she cried, recklessly.

For the second time that night a woman's voice startled the hearts of
men on board the Emma. All except the heart of old Jorgenson. The Malays
in the boat looked up from their thwarts. D'Alcacer, sitting in the
stern sheets beside Lingard, felt a sinking of his heart.

"What's this?" he exclaimed. "I heard your name on deck. You are wanted,
I think."

"Shove off," ordered Lingard, inflexibly, without even looking at
d'Alcacer. Mr. Travers was the only one who didn't seem to be aware
of anything. A long time after the boat left the Emma's side he leaned
toward d'Alcacer.

"I have a most extraordinary feeling," he said in a cautious undertone.
"I seem to be in the air--I don't know. Are we on the water, d'Alcacer?
Are you quite sure? But of course, we are on the water."

"Yes," said d'Alcacer, in the same tone. "Crossing the Styx--perhaps."
He heard Mr. Travers utter an unmoved "Very likely," which he did not
expect. Lingard, his hand on the tiller, sat like a man of stone.

"Then your point of view has changed," whispered d'Alcacer.

"I told my wife to make an offer," went on the earnest whisper of the
other man. "A sum of money. But to tell you the truth I don't believe
very much in its success."

D'Alcacer made no answer and only wondered whether he didn't like better
Mr. Travers' other, unreasonable mood. There was no denying the fact
that Mr. Travers was a troubling person. Now he suddenly gripped
d'Alcacer's fore-arm and added under his breath: "I doubt everything. I
doubt whether the offer will ever be made."

All this was not very impressive. There was something pitiful in it:
whisper, grip, shudder, as of a child frightened in the dark. But the
emotion was deep. Once more that evening, but this time aroused by the
husband's distress, d'Alcacer's wonder approached the borders of awe.



PART VI. THE CLAIM OF LIFE AND THE TOLL OF DEATH

I

"Have you got King Tom's watch in there?" said a voice that seemed not
to attach the slightest importance to the question. Jorgenson, outside
the door of Mrs. Travers' part of the deckhouse, waited for the answer.
He heard a low cry very much like a moan, the startled sound of pain
that may be sometimes heard in sick rooms. But it moved him not at all.
He would never have dreamt of opening the door unless told to do so,
in which case he would have beheld, with complete indifference, Mrs.
Travers extended on the floor with her head resting on the edge of the
camp bedstead (on which Lingard had never slept), as though she had
subsided there from a kneeling posture which is the attitude of prayer,
supplication, or defeat. The hours of the night had passed Mrs. Travers
by. After flinging herself on her knees, she didn't know why, since she
could think of nothing to pray for, had nothing to invoke, and was too
far gone for such a futile thing as despair, she had remained there till
the sense of exhaustion had grown on her to the point in which she lost
her belief in her power to rise. In a half-sitting attitude, her head
resting against the edge of the couch and her arms flung above her head,
she sank into an indifference, the mere resignation of a worn-out body
and a worn-out mind which often is the only sort of rest that comes to
people who are desperately ill and is welcome enough in a way. The voice
of Jorgenson roused her out of that state. She sat up, aching in every
limb and cold all over.

Jorgenson, behind the door, repeated with lifeless obstinacy:

"Do you see King Tom's watch in there?"

Mrs. Travers got up from the floor. She tottered, snatching at the air,
and found the back of the armchair under her hand.

"Who's there?"

She was also ready to ask: "Where am I?" but she remembered and at once
became the prey of that active dread which had been lying dormant for
a few hours in her uneasy and prostrate body. "What time is it?" she
faltered out.

"Dawn," pronounced the imperturbable voice at the door. It seemed to
her that it was a word that could make any heart sink with apprehension.
Dawn! She stood appalled. And the toneless voice outside the door
insisted:

"You must have Tom's watch there!"

"I haven't seen it," she cried as if tormented by a dream.

"Look in that desk thing. If you push open the shutter you will be able
to see."

Mrs. Travers became aware of the profound darkness of the cabin.
Jorgenson heard her staggering in there. After a moment a woman's voice,
which struck even him as strange, said in faint tones:

"I have it. It's stopped."

"It doesn't matter. I don't want to know the time. There should be a key
about. See it anywhere?"

"Yes, it's fastened to the watch," the dazed voice answered from within.
Jorgenson waited before making his request. "Will you pass it out to me?
There's precious little time left now!"

The door flew open, which was certainly something Jorgenson had not
expected. He had expected but a hand with the watch protruded through
a narrow crack, But he didn't start back or give any other sign of
surprise at seeing Mrs. Travers fully dressed. Against the faint
clearness in the frame of the open shutter she presented to him the dark
silhouette of her shoulders surmounted by a sleek head, because her
hair was still in the two plaits. To Jorgenson Mrs. Travers in her
un-European dress had always been displeasing, almost monstrous. Her
stature, her gestures, her general carriage struck his eye as
absurdly incongruous with a Malay costume, too ample, too free, too
bold--offensive. To Mrs. Travers, Jorgenson, in the dusk of the passage,
had the aspect of a dim white ghost, and he chilled her by his ghost's
aloofness.

He picked up the watch from her outspread palm without a word of thanks,
only mumbling in his moustache, "H'm, yes, that's it. I haven't yet
forgotten how to count seconds correctly, but it's better to have a
watch."

She had not the slightest notion what he meant. And she did not care.
Her mind remained confused and the sense of bodily discomfort oppressed
her. She whispered, shamefacedly, "I believe I've slept."

"I haven't," mumbled Jorgenson, growing more and more distinct to her
eyes. The brightness of the short dawn increased rapidly as if the sun
were impatient to look upon the Settlement. "No fear of that," he added,
boastfully.

It occurred to Mrs. Travers that perhaps she had not slept either. Her
state had been more like an imperfect, half-conscious, quivering death.
She shuddered at the recollection.

"What an awful night," she murmured, drearily.

There was nothing to hope for from Jorgenson. She expected him to
vanish, indifferent, like a phantom of the dead carrying off the
appropriately dead watch in his hand for some unearthly purpose.
Jorgenson didn't move. His was an insensible, almost a senseless
presence! Nothing could be extorted from it. But a wave of anguish as
confused as all her other sensations swept Mrs. Travers off her feet.

"Can't you tell me something?" she cried.

For half a minute perhaps Jorgenson made no sound; then: "For years
I have been telling anybody who cared to ask," he mumbled in his
moustache. "Telling Tom, too. And Tom knew what he wanted to do. How's
one to know what _you_ are after?"

She had never expected to hear so many words from that rigid shadow. Its
monotonous mumble was fascinating, its sudden loquacity was shocking.
And in the profound stillness that reigned outside it was as if there
had been no one left in the world with her but the phantom of that old
adventurer. He was heard again: "What I could tell you would be worse
than poison."

Mrs. Travers was not familiar with Jorgenson's consecrated phrases. The
mechanical voice, the words themselves, his air of abstraction appalled
her. And he hadn't done yet; she caught some more of his unconcerned
mumbling: "There is nothing I don't know," and the absurdity of the
statement was also appalling. Mrs. Travers gasped and with a wild little
laugh:

"Then you know why I called after King Tom last night."

He glanced away along his shoulder through the door of the deckhouse at
the growing brightness of the day. She did so, too. It was coming. It
had come! Another day! And it seemed to Mrs. Travers a worse calamity
than any discovery she had made in her life, than anything she could
have imagined to come to her. The very magnitude of horror steadied her,
seemed to calm her agitation as some kinds of fatal drugs do before they
kill. She laid a steady hand on Jorgenson's sleeve and spoke quietly,
distinctly, urgently.

"You were on deck. What I want to know is whether I was heard?"

"Yes," said Jorgenson, absently, "I heard you." Then, as if roused a
little, he added less mechanically: "The whole ship heard you."

Mrs. Travers asked herself whether perchance she had not simply
screamed. It had never occurred to her before that perhaps she had. At
the time it seemed to her she had no strength for more than a whisper.
Had she been really so loud? And the deadly chill, the night that had
gone by her had left in her body, vanished from her limbs, passed out of
her in a flush. Her face was turned away from the light, and that
fact gave her courage to continue. Moreover, the man before her was so
detached from the shames and prides and schemes of life that he seemed
not to count at all, except that somehow or other he managed at times to
catch the mere literal sense of the words addressed to him--and answer
them. And answer them! Answer unfailingly, impersonally, without any
feeling.

"You saw Tom--King Tom? Was he there? I mean just then, at the moment.
There was a light at the gangway. Was he on deck?"

"No. In the boat."

"Already? Could I have been heard in the boat down there? You say the
whole ship heard me--and I don't care. But could he hear me?"

"Was it Tom you were after?" said Jorgenson in the tone of a negligent
remark.

"Can't you answer me?" she cried, angrily.

"Tom was busy. No child's play. The boat shoved off," said Jorgenson, as
if he were merely thinking aloud.

"You won't tell me, then?" Mrs. Travers apostrophized him, fearlessly.
She was not afraid of Jorgenson. Just then she was afraid of nothing and
nobody. And Jorgenson went on thinking aloud.

"I guess he will be kept busy from now on and so shall I."

Mrs. Travers seemed ready to take by the shoulders and shake that
dead-voiced spectre till it begged for mercy. But suddenly her strong
white arms fell down by her side, the arms of an exhausted woman.

"I shall never, never find out," she whispered to herself.

She cast down her eyes in intolerable humiliation, in intolerable
desire, as though she had veiled her face. Not a sound reached the
loneliness of her thought. But when she raised her eyes again Jorgenson
was no longer standing before her.

For an instant she saw him all black in the brilliant and narrow
doorway, and the next moment he had vanished outside, as if devoured by
the hot blaze of light. The sun had risen on the Shore of Refuge.

When Mrs. Travers came out on deck herself it was as it were with a
boldly unveiled face, with wide-open and dry, sleepless eyes. Their
gaze, undismayed by the sunshine, sought the innermost heart of things
each day offered to the passion of her dread and of her impatience. The
lagoon, the beach, the colours and the shapes struck her more than ever
as a luminous painting on an immense cloth hiding the movements of an
inexplicable life. She shaded her eyes with her hand. There were figures
on the beach, moving dark dots on the white semicircle bounded by the
stockades, backed by roof ridges above the palm groves. Further back the
mass of carved white coral on the roof of the mosque shone like a white
day-star. Religion and politics--always politics! To the left, before
Tengga's enclosure, the loom of fire had changed into a pillar of smoke.
But there were some big trees over there and she couldn't tell whether
the night council had prolonged its sitting. Some vague forms were still
moving there and she could picture them to herself: Daman, the supreme
chief of sea-robbers, with a vengeful heart and the eyes of a gazelle;
Sentot, the sour fanatic with the big turban, that other saint with
a scanty loin cloth and ashes in his hair, and Tengga whom she could
imagine from hearsay, fat, good-tempered, crafty, but ready to spill
blood on his ambitious way and already bold enough to flaunt a yellow
state umbrella at the very gate of Belarab's stockade--so they said.

She saw, she imagined, she even admitted now the reality of those
things no longer a mere pageant marshalled for her vision with barbarous
splendour and savage emphasis. She questioned it no longer--but she did
not feel it in her soul any more than one feels the depth of the sea
under its peaceful glitter or the turmoil of its grey fury. Her eyes
ranged afar, unbelieving and fearful--and then all at once she became
aware of the empty Cage with its interior in disorder, the camp
bedsteads not taken away, a pillow lying on the deck, the dying flame
like a shred of dull yellow stuff inside the lamp left hanging over
the table. The whole struck her as squalid and as if already decayed,
a flimsy and idle phantasy. But Jorgenson, seated on the deck with his
back to it, was not idle. His occupation, too, seemed fantastic and so
truly childish that her heart sank at the man's utter absorption in it.
Jorgenson had before him, stretched on the deck, several bits of rather
thin and dirty-looking rope of different lengths from a couple of inches
to about a foot. He had (an idiot might have amused himself in that
way) set fire to the ends of them. They smouldered with amazing energy,
emitting now and then a splutter, and in the calm air within the
bulwarks sent up very slender, exactly parallel threads of smoke,
each with a vanishing curl at the end; and the absorption with which
Jorgenson gave himself up to that pastime was enough to shake all
confidence in his sanity.

In one half-opened hand he was holding the watch. He was also provided
with a scrap of paper and the stump of a pencil. Mrs. Travers was
confident that he did not either hear or see her.

"Captain Jorgenson, you no doubt think. . . ."

He tried to wave her away with the stump of the pencil. He did not want
to be interrupted in his strange occupation. He was playing very gravely
indeed with those bits of string. "I lighted them all together," he
murmured, keeping one eye on the dial of the watch. Just then the
shortest piece of string went out, utterly consumed. Jorgenson made
a hasty note and remained still while Mrs. Travers looked at him with
stony eyes thinking that nothing in the world was any use. The other
threads of smoke went on vanishing in spirals before the attentive
Jorgenson.

"What are you doing?" asked Mrs. Travers, drearily.

"Timing match . . . precaution. . . ."

He had never in Mrs. Travers' experience been less spectral than then.
He displayed a weakness of the flesh. He was impatient at her intrusion.
He divided his attention between the threads of smoke and the face of
the watch with such interest that the sudden reports of several guns
breaking for the first time for days the stillness of the lagoon and the
illusion of the painted scene failed to make him raise his head. He only
jerked it sideways a little. Mrs. Travers stared at the wisps of
white vapour floating above Belarab's stockade. The series of sharp
detonations ceased and their combined echoes came back over the lagoon
like a long-drawn and rushing sigh.

"What's this?" cried Mrs. Travers.

"Belarab's come home," said Jorgenson.

The last thread of smoke disappeared and Jorgenson got up. He had lost
all interest in the watch and thrust it carelessly into his pocket,
together with the bit of paper and the stump of pencil. He had resumed
his aloofness from the life of men, but approaching the bulwark he
condescended to look toward Belarab's stockade.

"Yes, he is home," he said very low.

"What's going to happen?" cried Mrs. Travers. "What's to be done?"
Jorgenson kept up his appearance of communing with himself.

"I know what to do," he mumbled.

"You are lucky," said Mrs. Travers, with intense bitterness.

It seemed to her that she was abandoned by all the world. The opposite
shore of the lagoon had resumed its aspect of a painted scene that would
never roll up to disclose the truth behind its blinding and soulless
splendour. It seemed to her that she had said her last words to all of
them: to d'Alcacer, to her husband, to Lingard himself--and that they
had all gone behind the curtain forever out of her sight. Of all the
white men Jorgenson alone was left, that man who had done with life so
completely that his mere presence robbed it of all heat and mystery,
leaving nothing but its terrible, its revolting insignificance. And Mrs.
Travers was ready for revolt. She cried with suppressed passion:

"Are you aware, Captain Jorgenson, that I am alive?"

He turned his eyes on her, and for a moment she was daunted by their
cold glassiness. But before they could drive her away, something like
the gleam of a spark gave them an instant's animation.

"I want to go and join them. I want to go ashore," she said, firmly.
"There!"

Her bare and extended arm pointed across the lagoon, and Jorgenson's
resurrected eyes glided along the white limb and wandered off into
space.

"No boat," he muttered.

"There must be a canoe. I know there is a canoe. I want it."

She stepped forward compelling, commanding, trying to concentrate in
her glance all her will power, the sense of her own right to dispose of
herself and her claim to be served to the last moment of her life. It
was as if she had done nothing. Jorgenson didn't flinch.

"Which of them are you after?" asked his blank, unringing voice.

She continued to look at him; her face had stiffened into a severe mask;
she managed to say distinctly:

"I suppose you have been asking yourself that question for some time,
Captain Jorgenson?"

"No. I am asking you now."

His face disclosed nothing to Mrs. Travers' bold and weary eyes.
"What could you do over there?" Jorgenson added as merciless, as
irrepressible, and sincere as though he were the embodiment of that
inner voice that speaks in all of us at times and, like Jorgenson, is
offensive and difficult to answer.

"Remember that I am not a shadow but a living woman still, Captain
Jorgenson. I can live and I can die. Send me over to share their fate."

"Sure you would like?" asked the roused Jorgenson in a voice that had an
unexpected living quality, a faint vibration which no man had known in
it for years. "There may be death in it," he mumbled, relapsing into
indifference.

"Who cares?" she said, recklessly. "All I want is to ask Tom a question
and hear his answer. That's what I would like. That's what I must have."



II

Along the hot and gloomy forest path, neglected, overgrown and strangled
in the fierce life of the jungle, there came a faint rustle of leaves.
Jaffir, the servant of princes, the messenger of great men, walked,
stooping, with a broad chopper in his hand. He was naked from the waist
upward, his shoulders and arms were scratched and bleeding. A multitude
of biting insects made a cloud about his head. He had lost his costly
and ancient head-kerchief, and when in a slightly wider space he stopped
in a listening attitude anybody would have taken him for a fugitive.

He waved his arms about, slapping his shoulders, the sides of his head,
his heaving flanks; then, motionless, listened again for a while. A
sound of firing, not so much made faint by distance as muffled by the
masses of foliage, reached his ears, dropping shots which he could have
counted if he had cared to. "There is fighting in the forest already,"
he thought. Then putting his head low in the tunnel of vegetation he
dashed forward out of the horrible cloud of flies, which he actually
managed for an instant to leave behind him. But it was not from the
cruelty of insects that he was flying, for no man could hope to drop
that escort, and Jaffir in his life of a faithful messenger had been
accustomed, if such an extravagant phrase may be used, to be eaten
alive. Bent nearly double he glided and dodged between the trees,
through the undergrowth, his brown body streaming with sweat, his firm
limbs gleaming like limbs of imperishable bronze through the mass
of green leaves that are forever born and forever dying. For all his
desperate haste he was no longer a fugitive; he was simply a man in a
tremendous hurry. His flight, which had begun with a bound and a rush
and a general display of great presence of mind, was a simple issue
from a critical situation. Issues from critical situations are generally
simple if one is quick enough to think of them in time. He became aware
very soon that the attempt to pursue him had been given up, but he had
taken the forest path and had kept up his pace because he had left his
Rajah and the lady Immada beset by enemies on the edge of the forest, as
good as captives to a party of Tengga's men.

Belarab's hesitation had proved too much even for Hassim's hereditary
patience in such matters. It is but becoming that weighty negotiations
should be spread over many days, that the same requests and arguments
should be repeated in the same words, at many successive interviews, and
receive the same evasive answers. Matters of state demand the dignity of
such a procedure as if time itself had to wait on the power and wisdom
of rulers. Such are the proceedings of embassies and the dignified
patience of envoys. But at this time of crisis Hassim's impatience
obtained the upper hand; and though he never departed from the tradition
of soft speech and restrained bearing while following with his sister in
the train of the pious Belarab, he had his moments of anger, of anxiety,
of despondency. His friendships, his future, his country's destinies
were at stake, while Belarab's camp wandered deviously over the back
country as if influenced by the vacillation of the ruler's thought, the
very image of uncertain fate.

Often no more than the single word "Good" was all the answer vouchsafed
to Hassim's daily speeches. The lesser men, companions of the Chief,
treated him with deference; but Hassim could feel the opposition from
the women's side of the camp working against his cause in subservience
to the mere caprice of the new wife, a girl quite gentle and kind to her
dependents, but whose imagination had run away with her completely and
had made her greedy for the loot of the yacht from mere simplicity and
innocence. What could Hassim, that stranger, wandering and poor, offer
for her acceptance? Nothing. The wealth of his far-off country was but
an idle tale, the talk of an exile looking for help.

At night Hassim had to listen to the anguished doubts of Immada, the
only companion of his life, child of the same mother, brave as a man,
but in her fears a very woman. She whispered them to him far into the
night while the camp of the great Belarab was hushed in sleep and the
fires had sunk down to mere glowing embers. Hassim soothed her gravely.
But he, too, was a native of Wajo where men are more daring and quicker
of mind than other Malays. More energetic, too, and energy does not go
without an inner fire. Hassim lost patience and one evening he declared
to his sister Immada: "To-morrow we leave this ruler without a mind and
go back to our white friend."

Therefore next morning, letting the camp move on the direct road to
the settlement, Hassim and Immada took a course of their own. It was
a lonely path between the jungle and the clearings. They had two
attendants with them, Hassim's own men, men of Wajo; and so the lady
Immada, when she had a mind to, could be carried, after the manner of
the great ladies of Wajo who need not put foot to the ground unless they
like. The lady Immada, accustomed to the hardships that are the lot
of exiles, preferred to walk, but from time to time she let herself
be carried for a short distance out of regard for the feelings of her
attendants. The party made good time during the early hours, and Hassim
expected confidently to reach before evening the shore of the lagoon
at a spot very near the stranded Emma. At noon they rested in the shade
near a dark pool within the edge of the forest; and it was there that
Jaffir met them, much to his and their surprise. It was the occasion
of a long talk. Jaffir, squatting on his heels, discoursed in measured
tones. He had entranced listeners. The story of Carter's exploit amongst
the Shoals had not reached Belarab's camp. It was a great shock to
Hassim, but the sort of half smile with which he had been listening to
Jaffir never altered its character. It was the Princess Immada who cried
out in distress and wrung her hands. A deep silence fell.

Indeed, before the fatal magnitude of the fact it seemed even to those
Malays that there was nothing to say and Jaffir, lowering his head,
respected his Prince's consternation. Then, before that feeling could
pass away from that small group of people seated round a few smouldering
sticks, the noisy approach of a large party of men made them all leap
to their feet. Before they could make another movement they perceived
themselves discovered. The men were armed as if bound on some warlike
expedition. Amongst them Sentot, in his loin cloth and with unbound wild
locks, capered and swung his arms about like the lunatic he was. The
others' astonishment made them halt, but their attitude was obviously
hostile. In the rear a portly figure flanked by two attendants carrying
swords was approaching prudently. Rajah Hassim resumed quietly his seat
on the trunk of a fallen tree, Immada rested her hand lightly on her
brother's shoulder, and Jaffir, squatting down again, looked at the
ground with all his faculties and every muscle of his body tensely on
the alert.

"Tengga's fighters," he murmured, scornfully.

In the group somebody shouted, and was answered by shouts from afar.
There could be no thought of resistance. Hassim slipped the emerald
ring from his finger stealthily and Jaffir got hold of it by an almost
imperceptible movement. The Rajah did not even look at the trusty
messenger.

"Fail not to give it to the white man," he murmured. "Thy servant hears,
O Rajah. It's a charm of great power."

The shadows were growing to the westward. Everybody was silent, and
the shifting group of armed men seemed to have drifted closer. Immada,
drawing the end of a scarf across her face, confronted the advance
with only one eye exposed. On the flank of the armed men Sentot was
performing a slow dance but he, too, seemed to have gone dumb.

"Now go," breathed out Rajah Hassim, his gaze levelled into space
immovably.

For a second or more Jaffir did not stir, then with a sudden leap from
his squatting posture he flew through the air and struck the jungle in
a great commotion of leaves, vanishing instantly like a swimmer diving
from on high. A deep murmur of surprise arose in the armed party, a
spear was thrown, a shot was fired, three or four men dashed into the
forest, but they soon returned crestfallen with apologetic smiles; while
Jaffir, striking an old path that seemed to lead in the right direction,
ran on in solitude, raising a rustle of leaves, with a naked parang in
his hand and a cloud of flies about his head. The sun declining to the
westward threw shafts of light across his dark path. He ran at a springy
half-trot, his eyes watchful, his broad chest heaving, and carrying
the emerald ring on the forefinger of a clenched hand as though he were
afraid it should slip off, fly off, be torn from him by an invisible
force, or spirited away by some enchantment. Who could tell what
might happen? There were evil forces at work in the world, powerful
incantations, horrible apparitions. The messenger of princes and of
great men, charged with the supreme appeal of his master, was afraid
in the deepening shade of the forest. Evil presences might have been
lurking in that gloom. Still the sun had not set yet. He could see its
face through the leaves as he skirted the shore of the lagoon. But what
if Allah's call should come to him suddenly and he die as he ran!

He drew a long breath on the shore of the lagoon within about a hundred
yards from the stranded bows of the Emma. The tide was out and he
walked to the end of a submerged log and sent out a hail for a boat.
Jorgenson's voice answered. The sun had sunk behind the forest belt of
the coast. All was still as far as the eye could reach over the black
water. A slight breeze came along it and Jaffir on the brink, waiting
for a canoe, shivered a little.

At the same moment Carter, exhausted by thirty hours of uninterrupted
toil at the head of whites and Malays in getting the yacht afloat,
dropped into Mrs. Travers' deck chair, on board the Hermit, said to the
devoted Wasub: "Let a good watch be kept to-night, old man," glanced
contentedly at the setting sun and fell asleep.



III

There was in the bows of the Emma an elevated grating over the heel of
her bowsprit whence the eye could take in the whole range of her
deck and see every movement of her crew. It was a spot safe from
eaves-droppers, though, of course, exposed to view. The sun had just set
on the supreme content of Carter when Jorgenson and Jaffir sat down
side by side between the knightheads of the Emma and, public but
unapproachable, impressive and secret, began to converse in low tones.

Every Wajo fugitive who manned the hulk felt the approach of a decisive
moment. Their minds were made up and their hearts beat steadily. They
were all desperate men determined to fight and to die and troubling not
about the manner of living or dying. This was not the case with Mrs.
Travers who, having shut herself up in the deckhouse, was profoundly
troubled about those very things, though she, too, felt desperate enough
to welcome almost any solution.

Of all the people on board she alone did not know anything of that
conference. In her deep and aimless thinking she had only become aware
of the absence of the slightest sound on board the Emma. Not a rustle,
not a footfall. The public view of Jorgenson and Jaffir in deep
consultation had the effect of taking all wish to move from every man.

Twilight enveloped the two figures forward while they talked, looking in
the stillness of their pose like carved figures of European and Asiatic
contrasted in intimate contact. The deepening dusk had nearly effaced
them when at last they rose without warning, as it were, and thrilling
the heart of the beholders by the sudden movement. But they did not
separate at once. They lingered in their high place as if awaiting the
fall of complete darkness, a fit ending to their mysterious communion.
Jaffir had given Jorgenson the whole story of the ring, the symbol of a
friendship matured and confirmed on the night of defeat, on the night of
flight from a far-distant land sleeping unmoved under the wrath and fire
of heaven.

"Yes, Tuan," continued Jaffir, "it was first sent out to the white man,
on a night of mortal danger, a present to remember a friend by. I was
the bearer of it then even as I am now. Then, as now, it was given to me
and I was told to save myself and hand the ring over in confirmation of
my message. I did so and that white man seemed to still the very storm
to save my Rajah. He was not one to depart and forget him whom he had
once called his friend. My message was but a message of good-bye, but
the charm of the ring was strong enough to draw all the power of that
white man to the help of my master. Now I have no words to say. Rajah
Hassim asks for nothing. But what of that? By the mercy of Allah all
things are the same, the compassion of the Most High, the power of
the ring, the heart of the white man. Nothing is changed, only the
friendship is a little older and love has grown because of the shared
dangers and long companionship. Therefore, Tuan, I have no fear. But how
am I to get the ring to the Rajah Laut? Just hand it to him. The last
breath would be time enough if they were to spear me at his feet. But
alas! the bush is full of Tengga's men, the beach is open and I could
never even hope to reach the gate."

Jorgenson, with his hands deep in the pockets of his tunic, listened,
looking down. Jaffir showed as much consternation as his nature was
capable of.

"Our refuge is with God," he murmured. "But what is to be done? Has your
wisdom no stratagem, O Tuan?"

Jorgenson did not answer. It appeared as though he had no stratagem. But
God is great and Jaffir waited on the other's immobility, anxious but
patient, perplexed yet hopeful in his grim way, while the night flowing
on from the dark forest near by hid their two figures from the sight
of observing men. Before the silence of Jorgenson Jaffir began to talk
practically. Now that Tengga had thrown off the mask Jaffir did not
think that he could land on the beach without being attacked, captured,
nay killed, since a man like he, though he could save himself by taking
flight at the order of his master, could not be expected to surrender
without a fight. He mentioned that in the exercise of his important
functions he knew how to glide like a shadow, creep like a snake, and
almost burrow his way underground. He was Jaffir who had never been
foiled. No bog, morass, great river or jungle could stop him. He would
have welcomed them. In many respects they were the friends of a crafty
messenger. But that was an open beach, and there was no other way, and
as things stood now every bush around, every tree trunk, every deep
shadow of house or fence would conceal Tengga's men or such of Daman's
infuriated partisans as had already made their way to the Settlement.
How could he hope to traverse the distance between the water's edge
and Belarab's gate which now would remain shut night and day? Not only
himself but anybody from the Emma would be sure to be rushed upon and
speared in twenty places.

He reflected for a moment in silence.

"Even you, Tuan, could not accomplish the feat."

"True," muttered Jorgenson.

When, after a period of meditation, he looked round, Jaffir was no
longer by his side. He had descended from the high place and was
probably squatting on his heels in some dark nook on the fore deck.
Jorgenson knew Jaffir too well to suppose that he would go to sleep.
He would sit there thinking himself into a state of fury, then get away
from the Emma in some way or other, go ashore and perish fighting. He
would, in fact, run amok; for it looked as if there could be no way out
of the situation. Then, of course, Lingard would know nothing of Hassim
and Immada's captivity for the ring would never reach him--the ring that
could tell its own tale. No, Lingard would know nothing. He would know
nothing about anybody outside Belarab's stockade till the end came,
whatever the end might be, for all those people that lived the life of
men. Whether to know or not to know would be good for Lingard Jorgenson
could not tell. He admitted to himself that here there was something
that he, Jorgenson, could not tell. All the possibilities were wrapped
up in doubt, uncertain, like all things pertaining to the life of men.
It was only when giving a short thought to himself that Jorgenson had no
doubt. He, of course, would know what to do.

On the thin face of that old adventurer hidden in the night not a
feature moved, not a muscle twitched, as he descended in his turn and
walked aft along the decks of the Emma. His faded eyes, which had seen
so much, did not attempt to explore the night, they never gave a glance
to the silent watchers against whom he brushed. Had a light been flashed
on him suddenly he would have appeared like a man walking in his sleep:
the somnambulist of an eternal dream. Mrs. Travers heard his footsteps
pass along the side of the deckhouse. She heard them--and let her head
fall again on her bare arms thrown over the little desk before which she
sat.

Jorgenson, standing by the taffrail, noted the faint reddish glow in the
massive blackness of the further shore. Jorgenson noted things quickly,
cursorily, perfunctorily, as phenomena unrelated to his own apparitional
existence of a visiting ghost. They were but passages in the game of men
who were still playing at life. He knew too well how much that game was
worth to be concerned about its course. He had given up the habit
of thinking for so long that the sudden resumption of it irked him
exceedingly, especially as he had to think on toward a conclusion. In
that world of eternal oblivion, of which he had tasted before Lingard
made him step back into the life of men, all things were settled
once for all. He was irritated by his own perplexity which was like a
reminder of that mortality made up of questions and passions from which
he had fancied he had freed himself forever. By a natural association
his contemptuous annoyance embraced the existence of Mrs. Travers, too,
for how could he think of Tom Lingard, of what was good or bad for King
Tom, without thinking also of that woman who had managed to put the
ghost of a spark even into his own extinguished eyes? She was of no
account; but Tom's integrity was. It was of Tom that he had to think, of
what was good or bad for Tom in that absurd and deadly game of his life.
Finally he reached the conclusion that to be given the ring would be
good for Tom Lingard. Just to be given the ring and no more. The ring
and no more.

"It will help him to make up his mind," muttered Jorgenson in his
moustache, as if compelled by an obscure conviction. It was only then
that he stirred slightly and turned away from the loom of the fires on
the distant shore. Mrs. Travers heard his footsteps passing again along
the side of the deckhouse--and this time never raised her head. That
man was sleepless, mad, childish, and inflexible. He was impossible. He
haunted the decks of that hulk aimlessly. . . .

It was, however, in pursuance of a very distinct aim that Jorgenson had
gone forward again to seek Jaffir.

The first remark he had to offer to Jaffir's consideration was that
the only person in the world who had the remotest chance of reaching
Belarab's gate on that night was that tall white woman the Rajah Laut
had brought on board, the wife of one of the captive white chiefs.
Surprise made Jaffir exclaim, but he wasn't prepared to deny that. It
was possible that for many reasons, some quite simple and others very
subtle, those sons of the Evil One belonging to Tengga and Daman would
refrain from killing a white woman walking alone from the water's
edge to Belarab's gate. Yes, it was just possible that she might walk
unharmed.

"Especially if she carried a blazing torch," muttered Jorgenson in his
moustache. He told Jaffir that she was sitting now in the dark, mourning
silently in the manner of white women. She had made a great outcry in
the morning to be allowed to join the white men on shore. He, Jorgenson,
had refused her the canoe. Ever since she had secluded herself in the
deckhouse in great distress.

Jaffir listened to it all without particular sympathy. And when
Jorgenson added, "It is in my mind, O Jaffir, to let her have her will
now," he answered by a "Yes, by Allah! let her go. What does it matter?"
of the greatest unconcern, till Jorgenson added:

"Yes. And she may carry the ring to the Rajah Laut."

Jorgenson saw Jaffir, the grim and impassive Jaffir, give a perceptible
start. It seemed at first an impossible task to persuade Jaffir to part
with the ring. The notion was too monstrous to enter his mind, to move
his heart. But at last he surrendered in an awed whisper, "God is great.
Perhaps it is her destiny."

Being a Wajo man he did not regard women as untrustworthy or unequal
to a task requiring courage and judgment. Once he got over the personal
feeling he handed the ring to Jorgenson with only one reservation, "You
know, Tuan, that she must on no account put it on her finger."

"Let her hang it round her neck," suggested Jorgenson, readily.

As Jorgenson moved toward the deckhouse it occurred to him that perhaps
now that woman Tom Lingard had taken in tow might take it into her head
to refuse to leave the Emma. This did not disturb him very much. All
those people moved in the dark. He himself at that particular moment was
moving in the dark. Beyond the simple wish to guide Lingard's thought in
the direction of Hassim and Immada, to help him to make up his mind at
last to a ruthless fidelity to his purpose Jorgenson had no other aim.
The existence of those whites had no meaning on earth. They were the
sort of people that pass without leaving footprints. That woman would
have to act in ignorance. And if she refused to go then in ignorance she
would have to stay on board. He would tell her nothing.

As a matter of fact, he discovered that Mrs. Travers would simply have
nothing to do with him. She would not listen to what he had to say. She
desired him, a mere weary voice confined in the darkness of the deck
cabin, to go away and trouble her no more. But the ghost of Jorgenson
was not easily exorcised. He, too, was a mere voice in the outer
darkness, inexorable, insisting that she should come out on deck and
listen. At last he found the right words to say.

"It is something about Tom that I want to tell you. You wish him well,
don't you?"

After this she could not refuse to come out on deck, and once there she
listened patiently to that white ghost muttering and mumbling above her
drooping head.

"It seems to me, Captain Jorgenson," she said after he had ceased,
"that you are simply trifling with me. After your behaviour to me this
morning, I can have nothing to say to you."

"I have a canoe for you now," mumbled Jorgenson.

"You have some new purpose in view now," retorted Mrs. Travers with
spirit. "But you won't make it clear to me. What is it that you have in
your mind?"

"Tom's interest."

"Are you really his friend?"

"He brought me here. You know it. He has talked a lot to you."

"He did. But I ask myself whether you are capable of being anybody's
friend."

"You ask yourself!" repeated Jorgenson, very quiet and morose. "If I am
not his friend I should like to know who is."

Mrs. Travers asked, quickly: "What's all this about a ring? What ring?"

"Tom's property. He has had it for years."

"And he gave it to you? Doesn't he care for it?"

"Don't know. It's just a thing."

"But it has a meaning as between you and him. Is that so?"

"Yes. It has. He will know what it means."

"What does it mean?"

"I am too much his friend not to hold my tongue."

"What! To me!"

"And who are you?" was Jorgenson's unexpected remark. "He has told you
too much already."

"Perhaps he has," whispered Mrs. Travers, as if to herself. "And you
want that ring to be taken to him?" she asked, in a louder tone.

"Yes. At once. For his good."

"Are you certain it is for his good? Why can't you. . . ."

She checked herself. That man was hopeless. He would never tell
anything and there was no means of compelling him. He was invulnerable,
unapproachable. . . . He was dead.

"Just give it to him," mumbled Jorgenson as though pursuing a mere fixed
idea. "Just slip it quietly into his hand. He will understand."

"What is it? Advice, warning, signal for action?"

"It may be anything," uttered Jorgenson, morosely, but as it were in a
mollified tone. "It's meant for his good."

"Oh, if I only could trust that man!" mused Mrs. Travers, half aloud.

Jorgenson's slight noise in the throat might have been taken for an
expression of sympathy. But he remained silent.

"Really, this is most extraordinary!" cried Mrs. Travers, suddenly
aroused. "Why did you come to me? Why should it be my task? Why should
you want me specially to take it to him?"

"I will tell you why," said Jorgenson's blank voice. "It's because there
is no one on board this hulk that can hope to get alive inside that
stockade. This morning you told me yourself that you were ready to
die--for Tom--or with Tom. Well, risk it then. You are the only one that
has half a chance to get through--and Tom, maybe, is waiting."

"The only one," repeated Mrs. Travers with an abrupt movement forward
and an extended hand before which Jorgenson stepped back a pace. "Risk
it! Certainly! Where's that mysterious ring?"

"I have got it in my pocket," said Jorgenson, readily; yet nearly half
a minute elapsed before Mrs. Travers felt the characteristic shape being
pressed into her half-open palm. "Don't let anybody see it," Jorgenson
admonished her in a murmur. "Hide it somewhere about you. Why not hang
it round your neck?"

Mrs. Travers' hand remained firmly closed on the ring. "Yes, that will
do," she murmured, hastily. "I'll be back in a moment. Get everything
ready." With those words she disappeared inside the deckhouse and
presently threads of light appeared in the interstices of the boards.
Mrs. Travers had lighted a candle in there. She was busy hanging that
ring round her neck. She was going. Yes--taking the risk for Tom's sake.

"Nobody can resist that man," Jorgenson muttered to himself with
increasing moroseness. "_I_ couldn't."


IV

Jorgenson, after seeing the canoe leave the ship's side, ceased to live
intellectually. There was no need for more thinking, for any display
of mental ingenuity. He had done with it all. All his notions were
perfectly fixed and he could go over them in the same ghostly way in
which he haunted the deck of the Emma. At the sight of the ring Lingard
would return to Hassim and Immada, now captives, too, though Jorgenson
certainly did not think them in any serious danger. What had happened
really was that Tengga was now holding hostages, and those Jorgenson
looked upon as Lingard's own people. They were his. He had gone in with
them deep, very deep. They had a hold and a claim on King Tom just as
many years ago people of that very race had had a hold and a claim
on him, Jorgenson. Only Tom was a much bigger man. A very big man.
Nevertheless, Jorgenson didn't see why he should escape his own
fate--Jorgenson's fate--to be absorbed, captured, made their own either
in failure or in success. It was an unavoidable fatality and Jorgenson
felt certain that the ring would compel Lingard to face it without
flinching. What he really wanted Lingard to do was to cease to take the
slightest interest in those whites--who were the sort of people that
left no footprints.

Perhaps at first sight, sending that woman to Lingard was not the best
way toward that end. Jorgenson, however, had a distinct impression in
which his morning talk with Mrs. Travers had only confirmed him, that
those two had quarrelled for good. As, indeed, was unavoidable. What did
Tom Lingard want with any woman? The only woman in Jorgenson's life had
come in by way of exchange for a lot of cotton stuffs and several
brass guns. This fact could not but affect Jorgenson's judgment since
obviously in this case such a transaction was impossible. Therefore
the case was not serious. It didn't exist. What did exist was Lingard's
relation to the Wajo exiles, a great and warlike adventure such as no
rover in those seas had ever attempted.

That Tengga was much more ready to negotiate than to fight, the old
adventurer had not the slightest doubt. How Lingard would deal with him
was not a concern of Jorgenson's. That would be easy enough. Nothing
prevented Lingard from going to see Tengga and talking to him with
authority. All that ambitious person really wanted was to have a share
in Lingard's wealth, in Lingard's power, in Lingard's friendship. A year
before Tengga had once insinuated to Jorgenson, "In what way am I less
worthy of being a friend than Belarab?"

It was a distinct overture, a disclosure of the man's innermost mind.
Jorgenson, of course, had met it with a profound silence. His task was
not diplomacy but the care of stores.

After the effort of connected mental processes in order to bring about
Mrs. Travers' departure he was anxious to dismiss the whole matter from
his mind. The last thought he gave to it was severely practical. It
occurred to him that it would be advisable to attract in some way or
other Lingard's attention to the lagoon. In the language of the sea
a single rocket is properly a signal of distress, but, in the
circumstances, a group of three sent up simultaneously would convey a
warning. He gave his orders and watched the rockets go up finely with a
trail of red sparks, a bursting of white stars high up in the air, and
three loud reports in quick succession. Then he resumed his pacing of
the whole length of the hulk, confident that after this Tom would guess
that something was up and set a close watch over the lagoon. No doubt
these mysterious rockets would have a disturbing effect on Tengga and
his friends and cause a great excitement in the Settlement; but for that
Jorgenson did not care. The Settlement was already in such a turmoil
that a little more excitement did not matter. What Jorgenson did not
expect, however, was the sound of a musket-shot fired from the jungle
facing the bows of the Emma. It caused him to stop dead short. He had
heard distinctly the bullet strike the curve of the bow forward. "Some
hot-headed ass fired that," he said to himself, contemptuously. It
simply disclosed to him the fact that he was already besieged on the
shore side and set at rest his doubts as to the length Tengga was
prepared to go. Any length! Of course there was still time for Tom to
put everything right with six words, unless . . . Jorgenson smiled,
grimly, in the dark and resumed his tireless pacing.

What amused him was to observe the fire which had been burning night
and day before Tengga's residence suddenly extinguished. He pictured
to himself the wild rush with bamboo buckets to the lagoon shore, the
confusion, the hurry and jostling in a great hissing of water midst
clouds of steam. The image of the fat Tengga's consternation appealed to
Jorgenson's sense of humour for about five seconds. Then he took up the
binoculars from the roof of the deckhouse.

The bursting of the three white stars over the lagoon had given him
a momentary glimpse of the black speck of the canoe taking over Mrs.
Travers. He couldn't find it again with the glass, it was too dark; but
the part of the shore for which it was steered would be somewhere near
the angle of Belarab's stockade nearest to the beach. This Jorgenson
could make out in the faint rosy glare of fires burning inside.
Jorgenson was certain that Lingard was looking toward the Emma through
the most convenient loophole he could find.

As obviously Mrs. Travers could not have paddled herself across, two men
were taking her over; and for the steersman she had Jaffir. Though he
had assented to Jorgenson's plan Jaffir was anxious to accompany the
ring as near as possible to its destination. Nothing but dire necessity
had induced him to part with the talisman. Crouching in the stern and
flourishing his paddle from side to side he glared at the back of the
canvas deck-chair which had been placed in the middle for Mrs. Travers.
Wrapped up in the darkness she reclined in it with her eyes closed,
faintly aware of the ring hung low on her breast. As the canoe was
rather large it was moving very slowly. The two men dipped their paddles
without a splash: and surrendering herself passively, in a temporary
relaxation of all her limbs, to this adventure Mrs. Travers had no sense
of motion at all. She, too, like Jorgenson, was tired of thinking. She
abandoned herself to the silence of that night full of roused passions
and deadly purposes. She abandoned herself to an illusory feeling; to
the impression that she was really resting. For the first time in many
days she could taste the relief of being alone. The men with her were
less than nothing. She could not speak to them; she could not understand
them; the canoe might have been moving by enchantment--if it did move
at all. Like a half-conscious sleeper she was on the verge of saying to
herself, "What a strange dream I am having."

The low tones of Jaffir's voice stole into it quietly telling the men to
cease paddling, and the long canoe came to a rest slowly, no more than
ten yards from the beach. The party had been provided with a torch which
was to be lighted before the canoe touched the shore, thus giving a
character of openness to this desperate expedition. "And if it draws
fire on us," Jaffir had commented to Jorgenson, "well, then, we shall
see whose fate it is to die on this night."

"Yes," had muttered Jorgenson. "We shall see."

Jorgenson saw at last the small light of the torch against the blackness
of the stockade. He strained his hearing for a possible volley of
musketry fire but no sound came to him over the broad surface of the
lagoon. Over there the man with the torch, the other paddler, and Jaffir
himself impelling with a gentle motion of his paddle the canoe toward
the shore, had the glistening eyeballs and the tense faces of silent
excitement. The ruddy glare smote Mrs. Travers' closed eyelids but she
didn't open her eyes till she felt the canoe touch the strand. The two
men leaped instantly out of it. Mrs. Travers rose, abruptly. Nobody made
a sound. She stumbled out of the canoe on to the beach and almost before
she had recovered her balance the torch was thrust into her hand.
The heat, the nearness of the blaze confused and blinded her till,
instinctively, she raised the torch high above her head. For a moment
she stood still, holding aloft the fierce flame from which a few sparks
were falling slowly.

A naked bronze arm lighted from above pointed out the direction and Mrs.
Travers began to walk toward the featureless black mass of the stockade.
When after a few steps she looked back over her shoulder, the lagoon,
the beach, the canoe, the men she had just left had become already
invisible. She was alone bearing up a blazing torch on an earth that was
a dumb shadow shifting under her feet. At last she reached firmer ground
and the dark length of the palisade untouched as yet by the light of the
torch seemed to her immense, intimidating. She felt ready to drop from
sheer emotion. But she moved on.

"A little more to the left," shouted a strong voice.

It vibrated through all her fibres, rousing like the call of a trumpet,
went far beyond her, filled all the space. Mrs. Travers stood still for
a moment, then casting far away from her the burning torch ran forward
blindly with her hands extended toward the great sound of Lingard's
voice, leaving behind her the light flaring and spluttering on the
ground. She stumbled and was only saved from a fall by her hands coming
in contact with the rough stakes. The stockade rose high above her
head and she clung to it with widely open arms, pressing her whole body
against the rugged surface of that enormous and unscalable palisade. She
heard through it low voices inside, heavy thuds; and felt at every blow
a slight vibration of the ground under her feet. She glanced fearfully
over her shoulder and saw nothing in the darkness but the expiring glow
of the torch she had thrown away and the sombre shimmer of the lagoon
bordering the opaque darkness of the shore. Her strained eyeballs seemed
to detect mysterious movements in the darkness and she gave way to
irresistible terror, to a shrinking agony of apprehension. Was she to be
transfixed by a broad blade, to the high, immovable wall of wood against
which she was flattening herself desperately, as though she could hope
to penetrate it by the mere force of her fear? She had no idea where
she was, but as a matter of fact she was a little to the left of the
principal gate and almost exactly under one of the loopholes of the
stockade. Her excessive anguish passed into insensibility. She ceased to
hear, to see, and even to feel the contact of the surface to which
she clung. Lingard's voice somewhere from the sky above her head was
directing her, distinct, very close, full of concern.

"You must stoop low. Lower yet."

The stagnant blood of her body began to pulsate languidly. She stooped
low--lower yet--so low that she had to sink on her knees, and then
became aware of a faint smell of wood smoke mingled with the confused
murmur of agitated voices. This came to her through an opening no higher
than her head in her kneeling posture, and no wider than the breadth of
two stakes. Lingard was saying in a tone of distress:

"I couldn't get any of them to unbar the gate."

She was unable to make a sound.--"Are you there?" Lingard asked,
anxiously, so close to her now that she seemed to feel the very breath
of his words on her face. It revived her completely; she understood what
she had to do. She put her head and shoulders through the opening, was
at once seized under the arms by an eager grip and felt herself pulled
through with an irresistible force and with such haste that her scarf
was dragged off her head, its fringes having caught in the rough timber.
The same eager grip lifted her up, stood her on her feet without her
having to make any exertion toward that end. She became aware that
Lingard was trying to say something, but she heard only a confused
stammering expressive of wonder and delight in which she caught the
words "You . . . you . . ." deliriously repeated. He didn't release his
hold of her; his helpful and irresistible grip had changed into a close
clasp, a crushing embrace, the violent taking possession by an embodied
force that had broken loose and was not to be controlled any longer.
As his great voice had done a moment before, his great strength,
too, seemed able to fill all space in its enveloping and undeniable
authority. Every time she tried instinctively to stiffen herself against
its might, it reacted, affirming its fierce will, its uplifting power.
Several times she lost the feeling of the ground and had a sensation of
helplessness without fear, of triumph without exultation. The inevitable
had come to pass. She had foreseen it--and all the time in that dark
place and against the red glow of camp fires within the stockade the
man in whose arms she struggled remained shadowy to her eyes--to her
half-closed eyes. She thought suddenly, "He will crush me to death
without knowing it."

He was like a blind force. She closed her eyes altogether. Her head fell
back a little. Not instinctively but with wilful resignation and as
it were from a sense of justice she abandoned herself to his arms. The
effect was as though she had suddenly stabbed him to the heart. He let
her go so suddenly and completely that she would have fallen down in
a heap if she had not managed to catch hold of his forearm. He seemed
prepared for it and for a moment all her weight hung on it without
moving its rigidity by a hair's breadth. Behind her Mrs. Travers heard
the heavy thud of blows on wood, the confused murmurs and movements of
men.

A voice said suddenly, "It's done," with such emphasis that though,
of course, she didn't understand the words it helped her to regain
possession of herself; and when Lingard asked her very little above a
whisper: "Why don't you say something?" she answered readily, "Let me
get my breath first."

Round them all sounds had ceased. The men had secured again the
opening through which those arms had snatched her into a moment of
self-forgetfulness which had left her out of breath but uncrushed. As
if something imperative had been satisfied she had a moment of inward
serenity, a period of peace without thought while, holding to that arm
that trembled no more than an arm of iron, she felt stealthily over the
ground for one of the sandals which she had lost. Oh, yes, there was no
doubt of it, she had been carried off the earth, without shame, without
regret. But she would not have let him know of that dropped sandal for
anything in the world. That lost sandal was as symbolic as a dropped
veil. But he did not know of it. He must never know. Where was that
thing? She felt sure that they had not moved an inch from that spot.
Presently her foot found it and still gripping Lingard's forearm she
stooped to secure it properly. When she stood up, still holding his arm,
they confronted each other, he rigid in an effort of self-command but
feeling as if the surges of the heaviest sea that he could remember in
his life were running through his heart; and the woman as if emptied
of all feeling by her experience, without thought yet, but beginning to
regain her sense of the situation and the memory of the immediate past.

"I have been watching at that loophole for an hour, ever since they came
running to me with that story of the rockets," said Lingard. "I was shut
up with Belarab then. I was looking out when the torch blazed and you
stepped ashore. I thought I was dreaming. But what could I do? I felt I
must rush to you but I dared not. That clump of palms is full of men. So
are the houses you saw that time you came ashore with me. Full of men.
Armed men. A trigger is soon pulled and when once shooting begins. . . .
And you walking in the open with that light above your head! I didn't
dare. You were safer alone. I had the strength to hold myself in and
watch you come up from the shore. No! No man that ever lived had seen
such a sight. What did you come for?"

"Didn't you expect somebody? I don't mean me, I mean a messenger?"

"No!" said Lingard, wondering at his own self-control. "Why did he let
you come?"

"You mean Captain Jorgenson? Oh, he refused at first. He said that he
had your orders."

"How on earth did you manage to get round him?" said Lingard in his
softest tones.

"I did not try," she began and checked herself. Lingard's question,
though he really didn't seem to care much about an answer, had aroused
afresh her suspicion of Jorgenson's change of front. "I didn't have
to say very much at the last," she continued, gasping yet a little and
feeling her personality, crushed to nothing in the hug of those arms,
expand again to its full significance before the attentive immobility
of that man. "Captain Jorgenson has always looked upon me as a nuisance.
Perhaps he had made up his mind to get rid of me even against your
orders. Is he quite sane?"

She released her firm hold of that iron forearm which fell slowly
by Lingard's side. She had regained fully the possession of her
personality. There remained only a fading, slightly breathless
impression of a short flight above that earth on which her feet were
firmly planted now. "And is that all?" she asked herself, not bitterly,
but with a sort of tender contempt.

"He is so sane," sounded Lingard's voice, gloomily, "that if I had
listened to him you would not have found me here."

"What do you mean by here? In this stockade?"

"Anywhere," he said.

"And what would have happened then?"

"God knows," he answered. "What would have happened if the world had not
been made in seven days? I have known you for just about that time. It
began by me coming to you at night--like a thief in the night. Where the
devil did I hear that? And that man you are married to thinks I am no
better than a thief."

"It ought to be enough for you that I never made a mistake as to what
you are, that I come to you in less than twenty-four hours after you
left me contemptuously to my distress. Don't pretend you didn't hear me
call after you. Oh, yes, you heard. The whole ship heard me for I had no
shame."

"Yes, you came," said Lingard, violently. "But have you really come? I
can't believe my eyes! Are you really here?"

"This is a dark spot, luckily," said Mrs. Travers. "But can you really
have any doubt?" she added, significantly.

He made a sudden movement toward her, betraying so much passion that
Mrs. Travers thought, "I shan't come out alive this time," and yet he
was there, motionless before her, as though he had never stirred. It
was more as though the earth had made a sudden movement under his feet
without being able to destroy his balance. But the earth under Mrs.
Travers' feet had made no movement and for a second she was overwhelmed
by wonder not at this proof of her own self-possession but at the man's
immense power over himself. If it had not been for her strange inward
exhaustion she would perhaps have surrendered to that power. But it
seemed to her that she had nothing in her worth surrendering, and it
was in a perfectly even tone that she said, "Give me your arm, Captain
Lingard. We can't stay all night on this spot."

As they moved on she thought, "There is real greatness in that man."
He was great even in his behaviour. No apologies, no explanations, no
abasement, no violence, and not even the slightest tremor of the frame
holding that bold and perplexed soul. She knew that for certain because
her fingers were resting lightly on Lingard's arm while she walked
slowly by his side as though he were taking her down to dinner. And yet
she couldn't suppose for a moment, that, like herself, he was emptied of
all emotion. She never before was so aware of him as a dangerous force.
"He is really ruthless," she thought. They had just left the shadow of
the inner defences about the gate when a slightly hoarse, apologetic
voice was heard behind them repeating insistently, what even Mrs.
Travers' ear detected to be a sort of formula. The words were: "There
is this thing--there is this thing--there is this thing." They turned
round.

"Oh, my scarf," said Mrs. Travers.

A short, squat, broad-faced young fellow having for all costume a pair
of white drawers was offering the scarf thrown over both his arms, as
if they had been sticks, and holding it respectfully as far as possible
from his person. Lingard took it from him and Mrs. Travers claimed it
at once. "Don't forget the proprieties," she said. "This is also my face
veil."

She was arranging it about her head when Lingard said, "There is no
need. I am taking you to those gentlemen."--"I will use it all the
same," said Mrs. Travers. "This thing works both ways, as a matter of
propriety or as a matter of precaution. Till I have an opportunity of
looking into a mirror nothing will persuade me that there isn't some
change in my face." Lingard swung half round and gazed down at her.
Veiled now she confronted him boldly. "Tell me, Captain Lingard, how
many eyes were looking at us a little while ago?"

"Do you care?" he asked.

"Not in the least," she said. "A million stars were looking on, too, and
what did it matter? They were not of the world I know. And it's just the
same with the eyes. They are not of the world I live in."

Lingard thought: "Nobody is." Never before had she seemed to him more
unapproachable, more different and more remote. The glow of a number of
small fires lighted the ground only, and brought out the black bulk
of men lying down in the thin drift of smoke. Only one of these fires,
rather apart and burning in front of the house which was the quarter of
the prisoners, might have been called a blaze and even that was not a
great one. It didn't penetrate the dark space between the piles and the
depth of the verandah above where only a couple of heads and the glint
of a spearhead could be seen dimly in the play of the light. But down
on the ground outside, the black shape of a man seated on a bench had
an intense relief. Another intensely black shadow threw a handful of
brushwood on the fire and went away. The man on the bench got up. It was
d'Alcacer. He let Lingard and Mrs. Travers come quite close up to him.
Extreme surprise seemed to have made him dumb.

"You didn't expect . . ." began Mrs. Travers with some embarrassment
before that mute attitude.

"I doubted my eyes," struck in d'Alcacer, who seemed embarrassed, too.
Next moment he recovered his tone and confessed simply: "At the moment
I wasn't thinking of you, Mrs. Travers." He passed his hand over his
forehead. "I hardly know what I was thinking of."

In the light of the shooting-up flame Mrs. Travers could see d'Alcacer's
face. There was no smile on it. She could not remember ever seeing him
so grave and, as it were, so distant. She abandoned Lingard's arm and
moved closer to the fire.

"I fancy you were very far away, Mr. d'Alcacer," she said.

"This is the sort of freedom of which nothing can deprive us," he
observed, looking hard at the manner in which the scarf was drawn across
Mrs. Travers' face. "It's possible I was far away," he went on, "but I
can assure you that I don't know where I was. Less than an hour ago we
had a great excitement here about some rockets, but I didn't share in
it. There was no one I could ask a question of. The captain here was,
I understood, engaged in a most momentous conversation with the king or
the governor of this place."

He addressed Lingard, directly. "May I ask whether you have reached any
conclusion as yet? That Moor is a very dilatory person, I believe."

"Any direct attack he would, of course, resist," said Lingard. "And, so
far, you are protected. But I must admit that he is rather angry with
me. He's tired of the whole business. He loves peace above anything in
the world. But I haven't finished with him yet."

"As far as I understood from what you told me before," said Mr.
d'Alcacer, with a quick side glance at Mrs. Travers' uncovered and
attentive eyes, "as far as I can see he may get all the peace he wants
at once by driving us two, I mean Mr. Travers and myself, out of the
gate on to the spears of those other enraged barbarians. And there are
some of his counsellors who advise him to do that very thing no later
than the break of day I understand."

Lingard stood for a moment perfectly motionless.

"That's about it," he said in an unemotional tone, and went away with
a heavy step without giving another look at d'Alcacer and Mrs. Travers,
who after a moment faced each other.

"You have heard?" said d'Alcacer. "Of course that doesn't affect your
fate in any way, and as to him he is much too prestigious to be killed
light-heartedly. When all this is over you will walk triumphantly on his
arm out of this stockade; for there is nothing in all this to affect his
greatness, his absolute value in the eyes of those people--and indeed in
any other eyes." D'Alcacer kept his glance averted from Mrs. Travers and
as soon as he had finished speaking busied himself in dragging the bench
a little way further from the fire. When they sat down on it he kept his
distance from Mrs. Travers. She made no sign of unveiling herself and
her eyes without a face seemed to him strangely unknown and disquieting.

"The situation in a nutshell," she said. "You have arranged it all
beautifully, even to my triumphal exit. Well, and what then? No, you
needn't answer, it has no interest. I assure you I came here not with
any notion of marching out in triumph, as you call it. I came here, to
speak in the most vulgar way, to save your skin--and mine."

Her voice came muffled to d'Alcacer's ears with a changed character,
even to the very intonation. Above the white and embroidered scarf her
eyes in the firelight transfixed him, black and so steady that even the
red sparks of the reflected glare did not move in them. He concealed the
strong impression she made. He bowed his head a little.

"I believe you know perfectly well what you are doing."

"No! I don't know," she said, more quickly than he had ever heard her
speak before. "First of all, I don't think he is so safe as you imagine.
Oh, yes, he has prestige enough, I don't question that. But you are
apportioning life and death with too much assurance. . . ."

"I know my portion," murmured d'Alcacer, gently. A moment of silence
fell in which Mrs. Travers' eyes ended by intimidating d'Alcacer,
who looked away. The flame of the fire had sunk low. In the dark
agglomeration of buildings, which might have been called Belarab's
palace, there was a certain animation, a flitting of people, voices
calling and answering, the passing to and fro of lights that would
illuminate suddenly a heavy pile, the corner of a house, the eaves of a
low-pitched roof, while in the open parts of the stockade the armed men
slept by the expiring fires.

Mrs. Travers said, suddenly, "That Jorgenson is not friendly to us."

"Possibly."

With clasped hands and leaning over his knees d'Alcacer had assented
in a very low tone. Mrs. Travers, unobserved, pressed her hands to her
breast and felt the shape of the ring, thick, heavy, set with a big
stone. It was there, secret, hung against her heart, and enigmatic. What
did it mean? What could it mean? What was the feeling it could arouse or
the action it could provoke? And she thought with compunction that she
ought to have given it to Lingard at once, without thinking, without
hesitating. "There! This is what I came for. To give you this." Yes, but
there had come an interval when she had been able to think of nothing,
and since then she had had the time to reflect--unfortunately. To
remember Jorgenson's hostile, contemptuous glance enveloping her from
head to foot at the break of a day after a night of lonely anguish. And
now while she sat there veiled from his keen sight there was that other
man, that d'Alcacer, prophesying. O yes, triumphant. She knew already
what that was. Mrs. Travers became afraid of the ring. She felt ready to
pluck it from her neck and cast it away.

"I mistrust him," she said.--"You do!" exclaimed d'Alcacer,
very low.--"I mean that Jorgenson. He seems a merciless sort of
creature."--"He is indifferent to everything," said d'Alcacer.--"It may
be a mask."--"Have you some evidence, Mrs. Travers?"

"No," said Mrs. Travers without hesitation. "I have my instinct."

D'Alcacer remained silent for a while as though he were pursuing another
train of thought altogether, then in a gentle, almost playful tone: "If
I were a woman," he said, turning to Mrs. Travers, "I would always trust
my intuition."--"If you were a woman, Mr. d'Alcacer, I would not be
speaking to you in this way because then I would be suspect to you."

The thought that before long perhaps he would be neither man nor woman
but a lump of cold clay, crossed d'Alcacer's mind, which was living,
alert, and unsubdued by the danger. He had welcomed the arrival of Mrs.
Travers simply because he had been very lonely in that stockade, Mr.
Travers having fallen into a phase of sulks complicated with shivering
fits. Of Lingard d'Alcacer had seen almost nothing since they had
landed, for the Man of Fate was extremely busy negotiating in the
recesses of Belarab's main hut; and the thought that his life was being
a matter of arduous bargaining was not agreeable to Mr. d'Alcacer. The
Chief's dependents and the armed men garrisoning the stockade paid very
little attention to him apparently, and this gave him the feeling of his
captivity being very perfect and hopeless. During the afternoon, while
pacing to and fro in the bit of shade thrown by the glorified sort of
hut inside which Mr. Travers shivered and sulked misanthropically, he
had been aware of the more distant verandahs becoming filled now and
then by the muffled forms of women of Belarab's household taking a
distant and curious view of the white man. All this was irksome. He
found his menaced life extremely difficult to get through. Yes, he
welcomed the arrival of Mrs. Travers who brought with her a tragic note
into the empty gloom.

"Suspicion is not in my nature, Mrs. Travers, I assure you, and I
hope that you on your side will never suspect either my reserve or my
frankness. I respect the mysterious nature of your conviction but hasn't
Jorgenson given you some occasion to. . ."

"He hates me," said Mrs. Travers, and frowned at d'Alcacer's incipient
smile. "It isn't a delusion on my part. The worst is that he hates me
not for myself. I believe he is completely indifferent to my existence.
Jorgenson hates me because as it were I represent you two who are in
danger, because it is you two that are the trouble and I . . . Well!"

"Yes, yes, that's certain," said d'Alcacer, hastily. "But Jorgenson is
wrong in making you the scapegoat. For if you were not here cool reason
would step in and would make Lingard pause in his passion to make a king
out of an exile. If we were murdered it would certainly make some stir
in the world in time and he would fall under the suspicion of complicity
with those wild and inhuman Moors. Who would regard the greatness of his
day-dreams, his engaged honour, his chivalrous feelings? Nothing could
save him from that suspicion. And being what he is, you understand me,
Mrs. Travers (but you know him much better than I do), it would morally
kill him."

"Heavens!" whispered Mrs. Travers. "This has never occurred to me."
Those words seemed to lose themselves in the folds of the scarf without
reaching d'Alcacer, who continued in his gentle tone:

'"However, as it is, he will be safe enough whatever happens. He will
have your testimony to clear him."

Mrs. Travers stood up, suddenly, but still careful to keep her face
covered, she threw the end of the scarf over her shoulder.

"I fear that Jorgenson," she cried with suppressed passion. "One can't
understand what that man means to do. I think him so dangerous that if I
were, for instance, entrusted with a message bearing on the situation, I
would . . . suppress it."

D'Alcacer was looking up from the seat, full of wonder. Mrs. Travers
appealed to him in a calm voice through the folds of the scarf:

"Tell me, Mr. d'Alcacer, you who can look on it calmly, wouldn't I be
right?"

"Why, has Jorgenson told you anything?"

"Directly--nothing, except a phrase or two which really I could not
understand. They seemed to have a hidden sense and he appeared to attach
some mysterious importance to them that he dared not explain to me."

"That was a risk on his part," exclaimed d'Alcacer. "And he trusted you.
Why you, I wonder!"

"Who can tell what notions he has in his head? Mr. d'Alcacer, I believe
his only object is to call Captain Lingard away from us. I understood it
only a few minutes ago. It has dawned upon me. All he wants is to call
him off."

"Call him off," repeated d'Alcacer, a little bewildered by the aroused
fire of her conviction. "I am sure I don't want him called off any more
than you do; and, frankly, I don't believe Jorgenson has any such power.
But upon the whole, and if you feel that Jorgenson has the power, I
would--yes, if I were in your place I think I would suppress anything I
could not understand."

Mrs. Travers listened to the very end. Her eyes--they appeared
incredibly sombre to d'Alcacer--seemed to watch the fall of every
deliberate word and after he had ceased they remained still for an
appreciable time. Then she turned away with a gesture that seemed to
say: "So be it."

D'Alcacer raised his voice suddenly after her. "Stay! Don't forget that
not only your husband's but my head, too, is being played at that game.
My judgment is not . . ."

She stopped for a moment and freed her lips. In the profound stillness
of the courtyard her clear voice made the shadows at the nearest fires
stir a little with low murmurs of surprise.

"Oh, yes, I remember whose heads I have to save," she cried. "But in all
the world who is there to save that man from himself?"



V

D'Alcacer sat down on the bench again. "I wonder what she knows," he
thought, "and I wonder what I have done." He wondered also how far he
had been sincere and how far affected by a very natural aversion from
being murdered obscurely by ferocious Moors with all the circumstances
of barbarity. It was a very naked death to come upon one suddenly. It
was robbed of all helpful illusions, such as the free will of a suicide,
the heroism of a warrior, or the exaltation of a martyr. "Hadn't I
better make some sort of fight of it?" he debated with himself. He saw
himself rushing at the naked spears without any enthusiasm. Or wouldn't
it be better to go forth to meet his doom (somewhere outside the
stockade on that horrible beach) with calm dignity. "Pah! I shall be
probably speared through the back in the beastliest possible fashion,"
he thought with an inward shudder. It was certainly not a shudder of
fear, for Mr. d'Alcacer attached no high value to life. It was a shudder
of disgust because Mr. d'Alcacer was a civilized man and though he had
no illusions about civilization he could not but admit the superiority
of its methods. It offered to one a certain refinement of form, a
comeliness of proceedings and definite safeguards against deadly
surprises. "How idle all this is," he thought, finally. His next thought
was that women were very resourceful. It was true, he went on meditating
with unwonted cynicism, that strictly speaking they had only one
resource but, generally, it served--it served.

He was surprised by his supremely shameless bitterness at this juncture.
It was so uncalled for. This situation was too complicated to be
entrusted to a cynical or shameless hope. There was nothing to trust to.
At this moment of his meditation he became aware of Lingard's approach.
He raised his head eagerly. D'Alcacer was not indifferent to his fate
and even to Mr. Travers' fate. He would fain learn. . . . But one look
at Lingard's face was enough. "It's no use asking him anything," he said
to himself, "for he cares for nothing just now."

Lingard sat down heavily on the other end of the bench, and d'Alcacer,
looking at his profile, confessed to himself that this was the most
masculinely good-looking face he had ever seen in his life. It was
an expressive face, too, but its present expression was also beyond
d'Alcacer's past experience. At the same time its quietness set up a
barrier against common curiosities and even common fears. No, it was
no use asking him anything. Yet something should be said to break the
spell, to call down again this man to the earth. But it was Lingard who
spoke first. "Where has Mrs. Travers gone?"

"She has gone . . . where naturally she would be anxious to go first of
all since she has managed to come to us," answered d'Alcacer, wording
his answer with the utmost regard for the delicacy of the situation.

The stillness of Lingard seemed to have grown even more impressive. He
spoke again.

"I wonder what those two can have to say to each other."

He might have been asking that of the whole darkened part of the globe,
but it was d'Alcacer who answered in his courteous tones.

"Would it surprise you very much, Captain Lingard, if I were to tell you
that those two people are quite fit to understand each other thoroughly?
Yes? It surprises you! Well, I assure you that seven thousand miles from
here nobody would wonder."

"I think I understand," said Lingard, "but don't you know the man is
light-headed? A man like that is as good as mad."

"Yes, he had been slightly delirious since seven o'clock," said
d'Alcacer. "But believe me, Captain Lingard," he continued, earnestly,
and obeying a perfectly disinterested impulse, "that even in his
delirium he is far more understandable to her and better able to
understand her than . . . anybody within a hundred miles from here."

"Ah!" said Lingard without any emotion, "so you don't wonder. You don't
see any reason for wonder."

"No, for, don't you see, I do know."

"What do you know?"

"Men and women, Captain Lingard, which you. . . ."

"I don't know any woman."

"You have spoken the strictest truth there," said d'Alcacer, and for the
first time Lingard turned his head slowly and looked at his neighbour on
the bench.

"Do you think she is as good as mad, too?" asked Lingard in a startled
voice.

D'Alcacer let escape a low exclamation. No, certainly he did not think
so. It was an original notion to suppose that lunatics had a sort of
common logic which made them understandable to each other. D'Alcacer
tried to make his voice as gentle as possible while he pursued: "No,
Captain Lingard, I believe the woman of whom we speak is and will always
remain in the fullest possession of herself."

Lingard, leaning back, clasped his hands round his knees. He seemed
not to be listening and d'Alcacer, pulling a cigarette case out of his
pocket, looked for a long time at the three cigarettes it contained. It
was the last of the provision he had on him when captured. D'Alcacer
had put himself on the strictest allowance. A cigarette was only to be
lighted on special occasions; and now there were only three left and
they had to be made to last till the end of life. They calmed, they
soothed, they gave an attitude. And only three left! One had to be
kept for the morning, to be lighted before going through the gate of
doom--the gate of Belarab's stockade. A cigarette soothed, it gave an
attitude. Was this the fitting occasion for one of the remaining two?
D'Alcacer, a true Latin, was not afraid of a little introspection. In
the pause he descended into the innermost depths of his being, then
glanced up at the night sky. Sportsman, traveller, he had often looked
up at the stars before to see how time went. It was going very slowly.
He took out a cigarette, snapped-to the case, bent down to the embers.
Then he sat up and blew out a thin cloud of smoke. The man by his side
looked with his bowed head and clasped knee like a masculine rendering
of mournful meditation. Such attitudes are met with sometimes on the
sculptures of ancient tombs. D'Alcacer began to speak:

"She is a representative woman and yet one of those of whom there are
but very few at any time in the world. Not that they are very rare but
that there is but little room on top. They are the iridescent gleams on
a hard and dark surface. For the world is hard, Captain Lingard, it is
hard, both in what it will remember and in what it will forget. It
is for such women that people toil on the ground and underground and
artists of all sorts invoke their inspiration."

Lingard seemed not to have heard a word. His chin rested on his breast.
D'Alcacer appraised the remaining length of his cigarette and went on in
an equable tone through which pierced a certain sadness:

"No, there are not many of them. And yet they are all. They decorate our
life for us. They are the gracious figures on the drab wall which lies
on this side of our common grave. They lead a sort of ritual dance, that
most of us have agreed to take seriously. It is a very binding agreement
with which sincerity and good faith and honour have nothing to do.
Very binding. Woe to him or her who breaks it. Directly they leave the
pageant they get lost."

Lingard turned his head sharply and discovered d'Alcacer looking at him
with profound attention.

"They get lost in a maze," continued d'Alcacer, quietly. "They wander in
it lamenting over themselves. I would shudder at that fate for anything
I loved. Do you know, Captain Lingard, how people lost in a maze end?"
he went on holding Lingard by a steadfast stare. "No? . . . I will
tell you then. They end by hating their very selves, and they die in
disillusion and despair."

As if afraid of the force of his words d'Alcacer laid a soothing hand
lightly on Lingard's shoulder. But Lingard continued to look into the
embers at his feet and remained insensible to the friendly touch. Yet
d'Alcacer could not imagine that he had not been heard. He folded his
arms on his breast.

"I don't know why I have been telling you all this," he said,
apologetically. "I hope I have not been intruding on your thoughts."

"I can think of nothing," Lingard declared, unexpectedly. "I only know
that your voice was friendly; and for the rest--"

"One must get through a night like this somehow," said d'Alcacer.
"The very stars seem to lag on their way. It's a common belief that a
drowning man is irresistibly compelled to review his past experience.
Just now I feel quite out of my depth, and whatever I have said has come
from my experience. I am sure you will forgive me. All that it amounts
to is this: that it is natural for us to cry for the moon but it would
be very fatal to have our cries heard. For what could any one of us do
with the moon if it were given to him? I am speaking now of us--common
mortals."

It was not immediately after d'Alcacer had ceased speaking but only
after a moment that Lingard unclasped his fingers, got up, and walked
away. D'Alcacer followed with a glance of quiet interest the big,
shadowy form till it vanished in the direction of an enormous forest
tree left in the middle of the stockade. The deepest shade of the night
was spread over the ground of Belarab's fortified courtyard. The very
embers of the fires had turned black, showing only here and there a mere
spark; and the forms of the prone sleepers could hardly be distinguished
from the hard ground on which they rested, with their arms lying
beside them on the mats. Presently Mrs. Travers appeared quite close to
d'Alcacer, who rose instantly.

"Martin is asleep," said Mrs. Travers in a tone that seemed to have
borrowed something of the mystery and quietness of the night.

"All the world's asleep," observed d'Alcacer, so low that Mrs. Travers
barely caught the words, "Except you and me, and one other who has left
me to wander about in the night."

"Was he with you? Where has he gone?"

"Where it's darkest I should think," answered d'Alcacer, secretly. "It's
no use going to look for him; but if you keep perfectly still and hold
your breath you may presently hear his footsteps."

"What did he tell you?" breathed out Mrs. Travers.

"I didn't ask him anything. I only know that something has happened
which has robbed him of his power of thinking . . . Hadn't I better go
to the hut? Don Martin ought to have someone with him when he wakes up."
Mrs. Travers remained perfectly still and even now and then held her
breath with a vague fear of hearing those footsteps wandering in the
dark. D'Alcacer had disappeared. Again Mrs. Travers held her breath. No.
Nothing. Not a sound. Only the night to her eyes seemed to have grown
darker. Was that a footstep? "Where could I hide myself?" she thought.
But she didn't move.

After leaving d'Alcacer, Lingard threading his way between the fires
found himself under the big tree, the same tree against which Daman had
been leaning on the day of the great talk when the white prisoners had
been surrendered to Lingard's keeping on definite conditions. Lingard
passed through the deep obscurity made by the outspread boughs of the
only witness left there of a past that for endless ages had seen no
mankind on this shore defended by the Shallows, around this lagoon
overshadowed by the jungle. In the calm night the old giant, without
shudders or murmurs in its enormous limbs, saw the restless man drift
through the black shade into the starlight.

In that distant part of the courtyard there were only a few sentries
who, themselves invisible, saw Lingard's white figure pace to and fro
endlessly. They knew well who that was. It was the great white man. A
very great man. A very rich man. A possessor of fire-arms, who could
dispense valuable gifts and deal deadly blows, the friend of their
Ruler, the enemy of his enemies, known to them for years and always
mysterious. At their posts, flattened against the stakes near convenient
loopholes, they cast backward glances and exchanged faint whispers from
time to time.

Lingard might have thought himself alone. He had lost touch with the
world. What he had said to d'Alcacer was perfectly true. He had no
thought. He was in the state of a man who, having cast his eyes through
the open gates of Paradise, is rendered insensible by that moment's
vision to all the forms and matters of the earth; and in the extremity
of his emotion ceases even to look upon himself but as the subject of
a sublime experience which exalts or unfits, sanctifies or damns--he
didn't know which. Every shadowy thought, every passing sensation was
like a base intrusion on that supreme memory. He couldn't bear it.

When he had tried to resume his conversation with Belarab after Mrs.
Travers' arrival he had discovered himself unable to go on. He had just
enough self-control to break off the interview in measured terms. He
pointed out the lateness of the hour, a most astonishing excuse to
people to whom time is nothing and whose life and activities are not
ruled by the clock. Indeed Lingard hardly knew what he was saying or
doing when he went out again leaving everybody dumb with astonishment
at the change in his aspect and in his behaviour. A suspicious silence
reigned for a long time in Belarab's great audience room till the Chief
dismissed everybody by two quiet words and a slight gesture.

With her chin in her hand in the pose of a sybil trying to read the
future in the glow of dying embers, Mrs. Travers, without holding
her breath, heard quite close to her the footsteps which she had been
listening for with mingled alarm, remorse, and hope.

She didn't change her attitude. The deep red glow lighted her up dimly,
her face, the white hand hanging by her side, her feet in their sandals.
The disturbing footsteps stopped close to her.

"Where have you been all this time?" she asked, without looking round.

"I don't know," answered Lingard. He was speaking the exact truth.
He didn't know. Ever since he had released that woman from his arms
everything but the vaguest notions had departed from him. Events,
necessities, things--he had lost his grip on them all. And he didn't
care. They were futile and impotent; he had no patience with them. The
offended and astonished Belarab, d'Alcacer with his kindly touch and
friendly voice, the sleeping men, the men awake, the Settlement full of
unrestful life and the restless Shallows of the coast, were removed from
him into an immensity of pitying contempt. Perhaps they existed. Perhaps
all this waited for him. Well, let all this wait; let everything wait,
till to-morrow or to the end of time, which could now come at any moment
for all he cared--but certainly till to-morrow.

"I only know," he went on with an emphasis that made Mrs. Travers raise
her head, "that wherever I go I shall carry you with me--against my
breast."

Mrs. Travers' fine ear caught the mingled tones of suppressed exultation
and dawning fear, the ardour and the faltering of those words. She was
feeling still the physical truth at the root of them so strongly that
she couldn't help saying in a dreamy whisper:

"Did you mean to crush the life out of me?"

He answered in the same tone:

"I could not have done it. You are too strong. Was I rough? I didn't
mean to be. I have been often told I didn't know my own strength. You
did not seem able to get through that opening and so I caught hold
of you. You came away in my hands quite easily. Suddenly I thought to
myself, 'now I will make sure.'"

He paused as if his breath had failed him. Mrs. Travers dared not make
the slightest movement. Still in the pose of one in quest of hidden
truth she murmured, "Make sure?"

"Yes. And now I am sure. You are here--here! Before I couldn't tell."

"Oh, you couldn't tell before," she said.

"No."

"So it was reality that you were seeking."

He repeated as if speaking to himself: "And now I am sure."

Her sandalled foot, all rosy in the glow, felt the warmth of the embers.
The tepid night had enveloped her body; and still under the impression
of his strength she gave herself up to a momentary feeling of quietude
that came about her heart as soft as the night air penetrated by the
feeble clearness of the stars. "This is a limpid soul," she thought.

"You know I always believed in you," he began again. "You know I did.
Well. I never believed in you so much as I do now, as you sit there,
just as you are, and with hardly enough light to make you out by."

It occurred to her that she had never heard a voice she liked so
well--except one. But that had been a great actor's voice; whereas this
man was nothing in the world but his very own self. He persuaded, he
moved, he disturbed, he soothed by his inherent truth. He had wanted to
make sure and he had made sure apparently; and too weary to resist
the waywardness of her thoughts Mrs. Travers reflected with a sort of
amusement that apparently he had not been disappointed. She thought, "He
believes in me. What amazing words. Of all the people that might have
believed in me I had to find this one here. He believes in me more than
in himself." A gust of sudden remorse tore her out from her quietness,
made her cry out to him:

"Captain Lingard, we forget how we have met, we forget what is going on.
We mustn't. I won't say that you placed your belief wrongly but I have
to confess something to you. I must tell you how I came here to-night.
Jorgenson . . ."

He interrupted her forcibly but without raising his voice.

"Jorgenson. Who's Jorgenson? You came to me because you couldn't help
yourself."

This took her breath away. "But I must tell you. There is something in
my coming which is not clear to me."

"You can tell me nothing that I don't know already," he said in
a pleading tone. "Say nothing. Sit still. Time enough to-morrow.
To-morrow! The night is drawing to an end and I care for nothing in the
world but you. Let me be. Give me the rest that is in you."

She had never heard such accents on his lips and she felt for him a
great and tender pity. Why not humour this mood in which he wanted to
preserve the moments that would never come to him again on this earth?
She hesitated in silence. She saw him stir in the darkness as if he
could not make up his mind to sit down on the bench. But suddenly he
scattered the embers with his foot and sank on the ground against her
feet, and she was not startled in the least to feel the weight of his
head on her knee. Mrs. Travers was not startled but she felt profoundly
moved. Why should she torment him with all those questions of freedom
and captivity, of violence and intrigue, of life and death? He was not
in a state to be told anything and it seemed to her that she did not
want to speak, that in the greatness of her compassion she simply could
not speak. All she could do for him was to rest her hand lightly on his
head and respond silently to the slight movement she felt, sigh or sob,
but a movement which suddenly immobilized her in an anxious emotion.

About the same time on the other side of the lagoon Jorgenson, raising
his eyes, noted the stars and said to himself that the night would not
last long now. He wished for daylight. He hoped that Lingard had already
done something. The blaze in Tengga's compound had been re-lighted.
Tom's power was unbounded, practically unbounded. And he was
invulnerable.

Jorgenson let his old eyes wander amongst the gleams and shadows of the
great sheet of water between him and that hostile shore and fancied he
could detect a floating shadow having the characteristic shape of a man
in a small canoe.

"O! Ya! Man!" he hailed. "What do you want?" Other eyes, too, had
detected that shadow. Low murmurs arose on the deck of the Emma. "If you
don't speak at once I shall fire," shouted Jorgenson, fiercely.

"No, white man," returned the floating shape in a solemn drawl. "I am
the bearer of friendly words. A chief's words. I come from Tengga."

"There was a bullet that came on board not a long time ago--also from
Tengga," said Jorgenson.

"That was an accident," protested the voice from the lagoon. "What else
could it be? Is there war between you and Tengga? No, no, O white man!
All Tengga desires is a long talk. He has sent me to ask you to come
ashore."

At these words Jorgenson's heart sank a little. This invitation meant
that Lingard had made no move. Was Tom asleep or altogether mad?

"The talk would be of peace," declared impressively the shadow which had
drifted much closer to the hulk now.

"It isn't for me to talk with great chiefs," Jorgenson returned,
cautiously.

"But Tengga is a friend," argued the nocturnal messenger. "And by that
fire there are other friends--your friends, the Rajah Hassim and the
lady Immada, who send you their greetings and who expect their eyes to
rest on you before sunrise."

"That's a lie," remarked Jorgenson, perfunctorily, and fell into
thought, while the shadowy bearer of words preserved a scandalized
silence, though, of course, he had not expected to be believed for a
moment. But one could never tell what a white man would believe. He
had wanted to produce the impression that Hassim and Immada were the
honoured guests of Tengga. It occurred to him suddenly that perhaps
Jorgenson didn't know anything of the capture. And he persisted.

"My words are all true, Tuan. The Rajah of Wajo and his sister are with
my master. I left them sitting by the fire on Tengga's right hand. Will
you come ashore to be welcomed amongst friends?"

Jorgenson had been reflecting profoundly. His object was to gain as much
time as possible for Lingard's interference which indeed could not fail
to be effective. But he had not the slightest wish to entrust himself to
Tengga's friendliness. Not that he minded the risk; but he did not see
the use of taking it.

"No!" he said, "I can't go ashore. We white men have ways of our own
and I am chief of this hulk. And my chief is the Rajah Laut, a white man
like myself. All the words that matter are in him and if Tengga is such
a great chief let him ask the Rajah Laut for a talk. Yes, that's the
proper thing for Tengga to do if he is such a great chief as he says."

"The Rajah Laut has made his choice. He dwells with Belarab, and with
the white people who are huddled together like trapped deer in Belarab's
stockade. Why shouldn't you meantime go over where everything is lighted
up and open and talk in friendship with Tengga's friends, whose hearts
have been made sick by many doubts; Rajah Hassim and the lady Immada and
Daman, the chief of the men of the sea, who do not know now whom they
can trust unless it be you, Tuan, the keeper of much wealth?"

The diplomatist in the small dugout paused for a moment to give special
weight to the final argument:

"Which you have no means to defend. We know how many armed men there are
with you."

"They are great fighters," Jorgenson observed, unconcernedly, spreading
his elbows on the rail and looking over at the floating black patch of
characteristic shape whence proceeded the voice of the wily envoy of
Tengga. "Each man of them is worth ten of such as you can find in the
Settlement."

"Yes, by Allah. Even worth twenty of these common people. Indeed, you
have enough with you to make a great fight but not enough for victory."

"God alone gives victory," said suddenly the voice of Jaffir, who, very
still at Jorgenson's elbow, had been listening to the conversation.

"Very true," was the answer in an extremely conventional tone. "Will you
come ashore, O white man; and be the leader of chiefs?"

"I have been that before," said Jorgenson, with great dignity, "and now
all I want is peace. But I won't come ashore amongst people whose minds
are so much troubled, till Rajah Hassim and his sister return on board
this ship and tell me the tale of their new friendship with Tengga."

His heart was sinking with every minute, the very air was growing
heavier with the sense of oncoming disaster, on that night that was
neither war nor peace and whose only voice was the voice of Tengga's
envoy, insinuating in tone though menacing in words.

"No, that cannot be," said that voice. "But, Tuan, verily Tengga himself
is ready to come on board here to talk with you. He is very ready to
come and indeed, Tuan, he means to come on board here before very long."

"Yes, with fifty war-canoes filled with the ferocious rabble of the
Shore of Refuge," Jaffir was heard commenting, sarcastically, over the
rail; and a sinister muttered "It may be so," ascended alongside from
the black water.

Jorgenson kept silent as if waiting for a supreme inspiration and
suddenly he spoke in his other-world voice: "Tell Tengga from me that as
long as he brings with him Rajah Hassim and the Rajah's sister, he and
his chief men will be welcome on deck here, no matter how many boats
come along with them. For that I do not care. You may go now."

A profound silence succeeded. It was clear that the envoy was gone,
keeping in the shadow of the shore. Jorgenson turned to Jaffir.

"Death amongst friends is but a festival," he quoted, mumbling in his
moustache.

"It is, by Allah," assented Jaffir with sombre fervour.



VI

Thirty-six hours later Carter, alone with Lingard in the cabin of the
brig, could almost feel during a pause in his talk the oppressive, the
breathless peace of the Shallows awaiting another sunset.

"I never expected to see any of you alive," Carter began in his easy
tone, but with much less carelessness in his bearing as though his days
of responsibility amongst the Shoals of the Shore of Refuge had matured
his view of the external world and of his own place therein.

"Of course not," muttered Lingard.

The listlessness of that man whom he had always seen acting under
the stress of a secret passion seemed perfectly appalling to Carter's
youthful and deliberate energy. Ever since he had found himself
again face to face with Lingard he had tried to conceal the shocking
impression with a delicacy which owed nothing to training but was as
intuitive as a child's.

While justifying to Lingard his manner of dealing with the situation
on the Shore of Refuge, he could not for the life of him help asking
himself what was this new mystery. He was also young enough to long for
a word of commendation.

"Come, Captain," he argued; "how would you have liked to come out and
find nothing but two half-burnt wrecks stuck on the sands--perhaps?"

He waited for a moment, then in sheer compassion turned away his eyes
from that fixed gaze, from that harassed face with sunk cheeks, from
that figure of indomitable strength robbed of its fire. He said to
himself: "He doesn't hear me," and raised his voice without altering its
self-contained tone:

"I was below yesterday morning when we felt the shock, but the noise
came to us only as a deep rumble. I made one jump for the companion but
that precious Shaw was before me yelling, 'Earthquake! Earthquake!' and
I am hanged if he didn't miss his footing and land down on his head at
the bottom of the stairs. I had to stop to pick him up but I got on deck
in time to see a mighty black cloud that seemed almost solid pop up from
behind the forest like a balloon. It stayed there for quite a long time.
Some of our Calashes on deck swore to me that they had seen a red flash
above the tree-tops. But that's hard to believe. I guessed at once that
something had blown up on shore. My first thought was that I would never
see you any more and I made up my mind at once to find out all the truth
you have been keeping away from me. No, sir! Don't you make a mistake! I
wasn't going to give you up, dead or alive."

He looked hard at Lingard while saying these words and saw the first
sign of animation pass over that ravaged face. He saw even its lips move
slightly; but there was no sound, and Carter looked away again.

"Perhaps you would have done better by telling me everything; but you
left me behind on my own to be your man here. I put my hand to the
work I could see before me. I am a sailor. There were two ships to look
after. And here they are both for you, fit to go or to stay, to fight or
to run, as you choose." He watched with bated breath the effort Lingard
had to make to utter the two words of the desired commendation:

"Well done!"

"And I am your man still," Carter added, impulsively, and hastened to
look away from Lingard, who had tried to smile at him and had failed.
Carter didn't know what to do next, remain in the cabin or leave that
unsupported strong man to himself. With a shyness completely foreign to
his character and which he could not understand himself, he suggested
in an engaging murmur and with an embarrassed assumption of his right to
give advice:

"Why not lie down for a bit, sir? I can attend to anything that may turn
up. You seem done up, sir."

He was facing Lingard, who stood on the other side of the table in a
leaning forward attitude propped up on rigid arms and stared fixedly at
him--perhaps? Carter felt on the verge of despair. This couldn't last.
He was relieved to see Lingard shake his head slightly.

"No, Mr. Carter. I think I will go on deck," said the Captain of the
famous brig Lightning, while his eyes roamed all over the cabin. Carter
stood aside at once, but it was some little time before Lingard made a
move.

The sun had sunk already, leaving that evening no trace of its glory on
a sky clear as crystal and on the waters without a ripple. All colour
seemed to have gone out of the world. The oncoming shadow rose as subtle
as a perfume from the black coast lying athwart the eastern semicircle;
and such was the silence within the horizon that one might have fancied
oneself come to the end of time. Black and toylike in the clear depths
and the final stillness of the evening the brig and the schooner lay
anchored in the middle of the main channel with their heads swung the
same way. Lingard, with his chin on his breast and his arms folded,
moved slowly here and there about the poop. Close and mute like his
shadow, Carter, at his elbow, followed his movements. He felt an anxious
solicitude. . . .

It was a sentiment perfectly new to him. He had never before felt this
sort of solicitude about himself or any other man. His personality was
being developed by new experience, and as he was very simple he received
the initiation with shyness and self-mistrust. He had noticed with
innocent alarm that Lingard had not looked either at the sky or over
the sea, neither at his own ship nor the schooner astern; not along the
decks, not aloft, not anywhere. He had looked at nothing! And somehow
Carter felt himself more lonely and without support than when he had
been left alone by that man in charge of two ships entangled amongst the
Shallows and environed by some sinister mystery. Since that man had come
back, instead of welcome relief Carter felt his responsibility rest on
his young shoulders with tenfold weight. His profound conviction was
that Lingard should be roused.

"Captain Lingard," he burst out in desperation; "you can't say I have
worried you very much since this morning when I received you at the
side, but I must be told something. What is it going to be with us?
Fight or run?"

Lingard stopped short and now there was no doubt in Carter's mind that
the Captain was looking at him. There was no room for any doubt before
that stern and enquiring gaze. "Aha!" thought Carter. "This has
startled him"; and feeling that his shyness had departed he pursued his
advantage. "For the fact of the matter is, sir, that, whatever happens,
unless I am to be your man you will have no officer. I had better tell
you at once that I have bundled that respectable, crazy, fat Shaw out of
the ship. He was upsetting all hands. Yesterday I told him to go and get
his dunnage together because I was going to send him aboard the yacht.
He couldn't have made more uproar about it if I had proposed to chuck
him overboard. I warned him that if he didn't go quietly I would have
him tied up like a sheep ready for slaughter. However, he went down the
ladder on his own feet, shaking his fist at me and promising to have me
hanged for a pirate some day. He can do no harm on board the yacht. And
now, sir, it's for you to give orders and not for me--thank God!"

Lingard turned away, abruptly. Carter didn't budge. After a moment he
heard himself called from the other side of the deck and obeyed with
alacrity.

"What's that story of a man you picked up on the coast last evening?"
asked Lingard in his gentlest tone. "Didn't you tell me something about
it when I came on board?"

"I tried to," said Carter, frankly. "But I soon gave it up. You didn't
seem to pay any attention to what I was saying. I thought you wanted to
be left alone for a bit. What can I know of your ways, yet, sir? Are you
aware, Captain Lingard, that since this morning I have been down five
times at the cabin door to look at you? There you sat. . . ."

He paused and Lingard said: "You have been five times down in the
cabin?"

"Yes. And the sixth time I made up my mind to make you take some notice
of me. I can't be left without orders. There are two ships to look
after, a lot of things to be done. . . ."

"There is nothing to be done," Lingard interrupted with a mere murmur
but in a tone which made Carter keep silent for a while.

"Even to know that much would have been something to go by," he ventured
at last. "I couldn't let you sit there with the sun getting pretty low
and a long night before us."

"I feel stunned yet," said Lingard, looking Carter straight in the face,
as if to watch the effect of that confession.

"Were you very near that explosion?" asked the young man with
sympathetic curiosity and seeking for some sign on Lingard's person.
But there was nothing. Not a single hair of the Captain's head seemed to
have been singed.

"Near," muttered Lingard. "It might have been my head." He pressed it
with both hands, then let them fall. "What about that man?" he asked,
brusquely. "Where did he come from? . . . I suppose he is dead now," he
added in an envious tone.

"No, sir. He must have as many lives as a cat," answered Carter. "I will
tell you how it was. As I said before I wasn't going to give you up,
dead or alive, so yesterday when the sun went down a little in the
afternoon I had two of our boats manned and pulled in shore, taking
soundings to find a passage if there was one. I meant to go back and
look for you with the brig or without the brig--but that doesn't
matter now. There were three or four floating logs in sight. One of the
Calashes in my boat made out something red on one of them. I thought it
was worth while to go and see what it was. It was that man's sarong. It
had got entangled among the branches and prevented him rolling off into
the water. I was never so glad, I assure you, as when we found out
that he was still breathing. If we could only nurse him back to life, I
thought, he could perhaps tell me a lot of things. The log on which he
hung had come out of the mouth of the creek and he couldn't have been
more than half a day on it by my calculation. I had him taken down the
main hatchway and put into a hammock in the 'tween-decks. He only just
breathed then, but some time during the night he came to himself and
got out of the hammock to lie down on a mat. I suppose he was more
comfortable that way. He recovered his speech only this morning and I
went down at once and told you of it, but you took no notice. I told you
also who he was but I don't know whether you heard me or not."

"I don't remember," said Lingard under his breath.

"They are wonderful, those Malays. This morning he was only half alive,
if that much, and now I understand he has been talking to Wasub for an
hour. Will you go down to see him, sir, or shall I send a couple of men
to carry him on deck?"

Lingard looked bewildered for a moment.

"Who on earth is he?" he asked.

"Why, it's that fellow whom you sent out, that night I met you, to catch
our first gig. What do they call him? Jaffir, I think. Hasn't he been
with you ashore, sir? Didn't he find you with the letter I gave him for
you? A most determined looking chap. I knew him again the moment we got
him off the log."

Lingard seized hold of the royal backstay within reach of his hand.
Jaffir! Jaffir! Faithful above all others; the messenger of supreme
moments; the reckless and devoted servant! Lingard felt a crushing sense
of despair. "No, I can't face this," he whispered to himself, looking
at the coast black as ink now before his eyes in the world's shadow that
was slowly encompassing the grey clearness of the Shallow Waters. "Send
Wasub to me. I am going down into the cabin."

He crossed over to the companion, then checking himself suddenly: "Was
there a boat from the yacht during the day?" he asked as if struck by
a sudden thought.--"No, sir," answered Carter. "We had no communication
with the yacht to-day."--"Send Wasub to me," repeated Lingard in a stern
voice as he went down the stairs.

The old serang coming in noiselessly saw his Captain as he had seen him
many times before, sitting under the gilt thunderbolts, apparently as
strong in his body, in his wealth, and in his knowledge of secret words
that have a power over men and elements, as ever. The old Malay squatted
down within a couple of feet from Lingard, leaned his back against
the satinwood panel of the bulkhead, then raising his old eyes with a
watchful and benevolent expression to the white man's face, clasped his
hands between his knees.

"Wasub, you have learned now everything. Is there no one left alive but
Jaffir? Are they all dead?"

"May you live!" answered Wasub; and Lingard whispered an appalled "All
dead!" to which Wasub nodded slightly twice. His cracked voice had a
lamenting intonation. "It is all true! It is all true! You are left
alone, Tuan; you are left alone!"

"It was their destiny," said Lingard at last, with forced calmness. "But
has Jaffir told you of the manner of this calamity? How is it that he
alone came out alive from it to be found by you?"

"He was told by his lord to depart and he obeyed," began Wasub, fixing
his eyes on the deck and speaking just loud enough to be heard by
Lingard, who, bending forward in his seat, shrank inwardly from every
word and yet would not have missed a single one of them for anything.

For the catastrophe had fallen on his head like a bolt from the blue in
the early morning hours of the day before. At the first break of dawn he
had been sent for to resume, his talk with Belarab. He had felt
suddenly Mrs. Travers remove her hand from his head. Her voice speaking
intimately into his ear: "Get up. There are some people coming," had
recalled him to himself. He had got up from the ground. The light was
dim, the air full of mist; and it was only gradually that he began to
make out forms above his head and about his feet: trees, houses, men
sleeping on the ground. He didn't recognize them. It was but a cruel
change of dream. Who could tell what was real in this world? He looked
about him, dazedly; he was still drunk with the deep draught of oblivion
he had conquered for himself. Yes--but it was she who had let him snatch
the cup. He looked down at the woman on the bench. She moved not. She
had remained like that, still for hours, giving him a waking dream
of rest without end, in an infinity of happiness without sound and
movement, without thought, without joy; but with an infinite ease of
content, like a world-embracing reverie breathing the air of sadness and
scented with love. For hours she had not moved.

"You are the most generous of women," he said. He bent over her. Her
eyes were wide open. Her lips felt cold. It did not shock him. After he
stood up he remained near her. Heat is a consuming thing, but she with
her cold lips seemed to him indestructible--and, perhaps, immortal!

Again he stooped, but this time it was only to kiss the fringe of her
head scarf. Then he turned away to meet the three men, who, coming round
the corner of the hut containing the prisoners, were approaching him
with measured steps. They desired his presence in the Council room.
Belarab was awake.

They also expressed their satisfaction at finding the white man awake,
because Belarab wanted to impart to him information of the greatest
importance. It seemed to Lingard that he had been awake ever since he
could remember. It was as to being alive that he felt not so sure.
He had no doubt of his existence; but was this life--this profound
indifference, this strange contempt for what his eyes could see, this
distaste for words, this unbelief in the importance of things and men?
He tried to regain possession of himself, his old self which had things
to do, words to speak as well as to hear. But it was too difficult. He
was seduced away by the tense feeling of existence far superior to
the mere consciousness of life, and which in its immensity of
contradictions, delight, dread, exultation and despair could not be
faced and yet was not to be evaded. There was no peace in it. But who
wanted peace? Surrender was better, the dreadful ease of slack limbs in
the sweep of an enormous tide and in a divine emptiness of mind. If this
was existence then he knew that he existed. And he knew that the
woman existed, too, in the sweep of the tide, without speech, without
movement, without heat! Indestructible--and, perhaps, immortal!



VII

With the sublime indifference of a man who has had a glimpse through the
open doors of Paradise and is no longer careful of mere life, Lingard
had followed Belarab's anxious messengers. The stockade was waking up
in a subdued resonance of voices. Men were getting up from the ground,
fires were being rekindled. Draped figures flitted in the mist amongst
the buildings; and through the mat wall of a bamboo house Lingard heard
the feeble wailing of a child. A day of mere life was beginning; but in
the Chief's great Council room several wax candles and a couple of cheap
European lamps kept the dawn at bay, while the morning mist which could
not be kept out made a faint reddish halo round every flame.

Belarab was not only awake, but he even looked like a man who had not
slept for a long time. The creator of the Shore of Refuge, the weary
Ruler of the Settlement, with his scorn of the unrest and folly of men,
was angry with his white friend who was always bringing his desires and
his troubles to his very door. Belarab did not want any one to die but
neither did he want any one in particular to live. What he was concerned
about was to preserve the mystery and the power of his melancholy
hesitations. These delicate things were menaced by Lingard's brusque
movements, by that passionate white man who believed in more than
one God and always seemed to doubt the power of Destiny. Belarab was
profoundly annoyed. He was also genuinely concerned, for he liked
Lingard. He liked him not only for his strength, which protected his
clear-minded scepticism from those dangers that beset all rulers, but he
liked him also for himself. That man of infinite hesitations, born from
a sort of mystic contempt for Allah's creation, yet believed absolutely
both in Lingard's power and in his boldness. Absolutely. And yet, in the
marvellous consistency of his temperament, now that the moment had come,
he dreaded to put both power and fortitude to the test.

Lingard could not know that some little time before the first break of
dawn one of Belarab's spies in the Settlement had found his way inside
the stockade at a spot remote from the lagoon, and that a very few
moments after Lingard had left the Chief in consequence of Jorgenson's
rockets, Belarab was listening to an amazing tale of Hassim and Immada's
capture and of Tengga's determination, very much strengthened by
that fact, to obtain possession of the Emma, either by force or by
negotiation, or by some crafty subterfuge in which the Rajah and
his sister could be made to play their part. In his mistrust of the
universe, which seemed almost to extend to the will of God himself,
Belarab was very much alarmed, for the material power of Daman's
piratical crowd was at Tengga's command; and who could tell whether this
Wajo Rajah would remain loyal in the circumstances? It was also very
characteristic of him whom the original settlers of the Shore of Refuge
called the Father of Safety, that he did not say anything of this to
Lingard, for he was afraid of rousing Lingard's fierce energy which
would even carry away himself and all his people and put the peace of so
many years to the sudden hazard of a battle.

Therefore Belarab set himself to persuade Lingard on general
considerations to deliver the white men, who really belonged to Daman,
to that supreme Chief of the Illanuns and by this simple proceeding
detach him completely from Tengga. Why should he, Belarab, go to war
against half the Settlement on their account? It was not necessary, it
was not reasonable. It would be even in a manner a sin to begin a strife
in a community of True Believers. Whereas with an offer like that in his
hand he could send an embassy to Tengga who would see there at once the
downfall of his purposes and the end of his hopes. At once! That moment!
. . . Afterward the question of a ransom could be arranged with Daman in
which he, Belarab, would mediate in the fullness of his recovered power,
without a rival and in the sincerity of his heart. And then, if need be,
he could put forth all his power against the chief of the sea-vagabonds
who would, as a matter of fact, be negotiating under the shadow of the
sword.

Belarab talked, low-voiced and dignified, with now and then a subtle
intonation, a persuasive inflexion or a half-melancholy smile in the
course of the argument. What encouraged him most was the changed aspect
of his white friend. The fierce power of his personality seemed to have
turned into a dream. Lingard listened, growing gradually inscrutable in
his continued silence, but remaining gentle in a sort of rapt patience
as if lapped in the wings of the Angel of Peace himself. Emboldened by
that transformation, Belarab's counsellors seated on the mats murmured
loudly their assent to the views of the Chief. Through the thickening
white mist of tropical lands, the light of the tropical day filtered
into the hall. One of the wise men got up from the floor and with
prudent fingers began extinguishing the waxlights one by one. He
hesitated to touch the lamps, the flames of which looked yellow and
cold. A puff of the morning breeze entered the great room, faint and
chill. Lingard, facing Belarab in a wooden armchair, with slack
limbs and in the divine emptiness of a mind enchanted by a glimpse of
Paradise, shuddered profoundly.

A strong voice shouted in the doorway without any ceremony and with a
sort of jeering accent:

"Tengga's boats are out in the mist."

Lingard half rose from his seat, Belarab himself could not repress a
start. Lingard's attitude was a listening one, but after a moment
of hesitation he ran out of the hall. The inside of the stockade was
beginning to buzz like a disturbed hive.

Outside Belarab's house Lingard slowed his pace. The mist still hung. A
great sustained murmur pervaded it and the blurred forms of men were all
moving outward from the centre toward the palisades. Somewhere amongst
the buildings a gong clanged. D'Alcacer's raised voice was heard:

"What is happening?"

Lingard was passing then close to the prisoners' house. There was a
group of armed men below the verandah and above their heads he saw Mrs.
Travers by the side of d'Alcacer. The fire by which Lingard had spent
the night was extinguished, its embers scattered, and the bench itself
lay overturned. Mrs. Travers must have run up on the verandah at the
first alarm. She and d'Alcacer up there seemed to dominate the tumult
which was now subsiding. Lingard noticed the scarf across Mrs. Travers'
face. D'Alcacer was bareheaded. He shouted again:

"What's the matter?"

"I am going to see," shouted Lingard back.

He resisted the impulse to join those two, dominate the tumult, let it
roll away from under his feet--the mere life of men, vain like a dream
and interfering with the tremendous sense of his own existence.
He resisted it, he could hardly have told why. Even the sense of
self-preservation had abandoned him. There was a throng of people
pressing close about him yet careful not to get in his way. Surprise,
concern, doubt were depicted on all those faces; but there were some who
observed that the great white man making his way to the lagoon side of
the stockade wore a fixed smile. He asked at large:

"Can one see any distance over the water?"

One of Belarab's headmen who was nearest to him answered:

"The mist has thickened. If you see anything, Tuan, it will be but a
shadow of things."

The four sides of the stockade had been manned by that time. Lingard,
ascending the banquette, looked out and saw the lagoon shrouded in
white, without as much as a shadow on it, and so still that not even the
sound of water lapping the shore reached his ears. He found himself in
profound accord with this blind and soundless peace.

"Has anything at all been seen?" he asked incredulously.

Four men were produced at once who had seen a dark mass of boats moving
in the light of the dawn. Others were sent for. He hardly listened to
them. His thought escaped him and he stood motionless, looking out into
the unstirring mist pervaded by the perfect silence. Presently Belarab
joined him, escorted by three grave, swarthy men, himself dark-faced,
stroking his short grey beard with impenetrable composure. He said to
Lingard, "Your white man doesn't fight," to which Lingard answered,
"There is nothing to fight against. What your people have seen, Belarab,
were indeed but shadows on the water." Belarab murmured, "You ought to
have allowed me to make friends with Daman last night."

A faint uneasiness was stealing into Lingard's breast.

A moment later d'Alcacer came up, inconspicuously watched over by two
men with lances, and to his anxious inquiry Lingard said: "I don't think
there is anything going on. Listen how still everything is. The only way
of bringing the matter to a test would be to persuade Belarab to let
his men march out and make an attack on Tengga's stronghold this moment.
Then we would learn something. But I couldn't persuade Belarab to march
out into this fog. Indeed, an expedition like this might end badly. I
myself don't believe that all Tengga's people are on the lagoon. . . .
Where is Mrs. Travers?"

The question made d'Alcacer start by its abruptness which revealed the
woman's possession of that man's mind. "She is with Don Martin, who is
better but feels very weak. If we are to be given up, he will have to
be carried out to his fate. I can depict to myself the scene. Don Martin
carried shoulder high surrounded by those barbarians with spears, and
Mrs. Travers with myself walking on each side of the stretcher. Mrs.
Travers has declared to me her intention to go out with us."

"Oh, she has declared her intention," murmured Lingard, absent-mindedly.

D'Alcacer felt himself completely abandoned by that man. And within
two paces of him he noticed the group of Belarab and his three swarthy
attendants in their white robes, preserving an air of serene detachment.
For the first time since the stranding on the coast d'Alcacer's heart
sank within him. "But perhaps," he went on, "this Moor may not in the
end insist on giving us up to a cruel death, Captain Lingard."

"He wanted to give you up in the middle of the night, a few hours ago,"
said Lingard, without even looking at d'Alcacer who raised his hands
a little and let them fall. Lingard sat down on the breech of a heavy
piece mounted on a naval carriage so as to command the lagoon. He folded
his arms on his breast. D'Alcacer asked, gently:

"We have been reprieved then?"

"No," said Lingard. "It's I who was reprieved."

A long silence followed. Along the whole line of the manned stockade the
whisperings had ceased. The vibrations of the gong had died out, too.
Only the watchers perched in the highest boughs of the big tree made a
slight rustle amongst the leaves.

"What are you thinking of, Captain Lingard?" d'Alcacer asked in a low
voice. Lingard did not change his position.

"I am trying to keep it off," he said in the same tone.

"What? Trying to keep thought off?"

"Yes."

"Is this the time for such experiments?" asked d'Alcacer.

"Why not? It's my reprieve. Don't grudge it to me, Mr. d'Alcacer."

"Upon my word I don't. But isn't it dangerous?"

"You will have to take your chance."

D'Alcacer had a moment of internal struggle. He asked himself whether he
should tell Lingard that Mrs. Travers had come to the stockade with some
sort of message from Jorgenson. He had it on the tip of his tongue
to advise Lingard to go and see Mrs. Travers and ask her point blank
whether she had anything to tell him; but before he could make up
his mind the voices of invisible men high up in the tree were heard
reporting the thinning of the fog. This caused a stir to run along the
four sides of the stockade.

Lingard felt the draught of air in his face, the motionless mist began
to drive over the palisades and, suddenly, the lagoon came into view
with a great blinding glitter of its wrinkled surface and the faint
sound of its wash rising all along the shore. A multitude of hands went
up to shade the eager eyes, and exclamations of wonder burst out from
many men at the sight of a crowd of canoes of various sizes and kinds
lying close together with the effect as of an enormous raft, a little
way off the side of the Emma. The excited voices rose higher and higher.
There was no doubt about Tengga's being on the lagoon. But what was
Jorgenson about? The Emma lay as if abandoned by her keeper and her
crew, while the mob of mixed boats seemed to be meditating an attack.

For all his determination to keep thought off to the very last possible
moment, Lingard could not defend himself from a sense of wonder and
fear. What was Jorgenson about? For a moment Lingard expected the side
of the Emma to wreath itself in puffs of smoke, but an age seemed to
elapse without the sound of a shot reaching his ears.

The boats were afraid to close. They were hanging off, irresolute; but
why did Jorgenson not put an end to their hesitation by a volley or
two of musketry if only over their heads? Through the anguish of his
perplexity Lingard found himself returning to life, to mere life with
its sense of pain and mortality, like a man awakened from a dream by a
stab in the breast. What did this silence of the Emma mean? Could she
have been already carried in the fog? But that was unthinkable. Some
sounds of resistance must have been heard. No, the boats hung off
because they knew with what desperate defence they would meet; and
perhaps Jorgenson knew very well what he was doing by holding his fire
to the very last moment and letting the craven hearts grow cold with
the fear of a murderous discharge that would have to be faced. What was
certain was that this was the time for Belarab to open the great gate
and let his men go out, display his power, sweep through the further end
of the Settlement, destroy Tengga's defences, do away once for all with
the absurd rivalry of that intriguing amateur boat-builder. Lingard
turned eagerly toward Belarab but saw the Chief busy looking across the
lagoon through a long glass resting on the shoulder of a stooping slave.
He was motionless like a carving. Suddenly he let go the long glass
which some ready hands caught as it fell and said to Lingard:

"No fight."

"How do you know?" muttered Lingard, astounded.

"There are three empty sampans alongside the ladder," said Belarab in a
just audible voice. "There is bad talk there."

"Talk? I don't understand," said Lingard, slowly.

But Belarab had turned toward his three attendants in white robes,
with shaven polls under skull-caps of plaited grass, with prayer beads
hanging from their wrists, and an air of superior calm on their dark
faces: companions of his desperate days, men of blood once and now
imperturbable in their piety and wisdom of trusted counsellors.

"This white man is being betrayed," he murmured to them with the
greatest composure.

D'Alcacer, uncomprehending, watched the scene: the Man of Fate puzzled
and fierce like a disturbed lion, the white-robed Moors, the multitude
of half-naked barbarians, squatting by the guns, standing by the
loopholes in the immobility of an arranged display. He saw Mrs. Travers
on the verandah of the prisoners' house, an anxious figure with a white
scarf over her head. Mr. Travers was no doubt too weak after his fit of
fever to come outside. If it hadn't been for that, all the whites would
have been in sight of each other at the very moment of the catastrophe
which was to give them back to the claims of their life, at the cost
of other lives sent violently out of the world. D'Alcacer heard Lingard
asking loudly for the long glass and saw Belarab make a sign with his
hand, when he felt the earth receive a violent blow from underneath.
While he staggered to it the heavens split over his head with a crash in
the lick of a red tongue of flame; and a sudden dreadful gloom fell all
round the stunned d'Alcacer, who beheld with terror the morning sun,
robbed of its rays, glow dull and brown through the sombre murk which
had taken possession of the universe. The Emma had blown up; and when
the rain of shattered timbers and mangled corpses falling into the
lagoon had ceased, the cloud of smoke hanging motionless under the livid
sun cast its shadow afar on the Shore of Refuge where all strife had
come to an end.

A great wail of terror ascended from the Settlement and was succeeded
by a profound silence. People could be seen bolting in unreasoning panic
away from the houses and into the fields. On the lagoon the raft of
boats had broken up. Some of them were sinking, others paddling away in
all directions. What was left above water of the Emma had burst into a
clear flame under the shadow of the cloud, the great smoky cloud that
hung solid and unstirring above the tops of the forest, visible for
miles up and down the coast and over the Shallows.

The first person to recover inside the stockade was Belarab himself.
Mechanically he murmured the exclamation of wonder, "God is great," and
looked at Lingard. But Lingard was not looking at him. The shock of the
explosion had robbed him of speech and movement. He stared at the Emma
blazing in a distant and insignificant flame under the sinister shadow
of the cloud created by Jorgenson's mistrust and contempt for the
life of men. Belarab turned away. His opinion had changed. He regarded
Lingard no longer as a betrayed man but the effect was the same. He was
no longer a man of any importance. What Belarab really wanted now was
to see all the white people clear out of the lagoon as soon as possible.
Presently he ordered the gate to be thrown open and his armed men poured
out to take possession of the Settlement. Later Tengga's houses were
set on fire and Belarab, mounting a fiery pony, issued forth to make a
triumphal progress surrounded by a great crowd of headmen and guards.

That night the white people left the stockade in a cortege of torch
bearers. Mr. Travers had to be carried down to the beach, where two of
Belarab's war-boats awaited their distinguished passengers. Mrs. Travers
passed through the gate on d'Alcacer's arm. Her face was half veiled.
She moved through the throng of spectators displayed in the torchlight
looking straight before her. Belarab, standing in front of a group of
headmen, pretended not to see the white people as they went by. With
Lingard he shook hands, murmuring the usual formulas of friendship; and
when he heard the great white man say, "You shall never see me again,"
he felt immensely relieved. Belarab did not want to see that white man
again, but as he responded to the pressure of Lingard's hand he had a
grave smile.

"God alone knows the future," he said.

Lingard walked to the beach by himself, feeling a stranger to all men
and abandoned by the All-Knowing God. By that time the first boat with
Mr. and Mrs. Travers had already got away out of the blood-red light
thrown by the torches upon the water. D'Alcacer and Lingard followed
in the second. Presently the dark shade of the creek, walled in by the
impenetrable forest, closed round them and the splash of the paddles
echoed in the still, damp air.

"How do you think this awful accident happened?" asked d'Alcacer, who
had been sitting silent by Lingard's side.

"What is an accident?" said Lingard with a great effort. "Where did you
hear of such a thing? Accident! Don't disturb me, Mr. d'Alcacer. I have
just come back to life and it has closed on me colder and darker than
the grave itself. Let me get used . . . I can't bear the sound of a
human voice yet."



VIII

And now, stoical in the cold and darkness of his regained life, Lingard
had to listen to the voice of Wasub telling him Jaffir's story. The
old serang's face expressed a profound dejection and there was infinite
sadness in the flowing murmur of his words.

"Yes, by Allah! They were all there: that tyrannical Tengga, noisy
like a fool; the Rajah Hassim, a ruler without a country; Daman, the
wandering chief, and the three Pangerans of the sea-robbers. They came
on board boldly, for Tuan Jorgenson had given them permission, and their
talk was that you, Tuan, were a willing captive in Belarab's stockade.
They said they had waited all night for a message of peace from you or
from Belarab. But there was nothing, and with the first sign of day they
put out on the lagoon to make friends with Tuan Jorgenson; for, they
said, you, Tuan, were as if you had not been, possessing no more power
than a dead man, the mere slave of these strange white people, and
Belarab's prisoner. Thus Tengga talked. God had taken from him all
wisdom and all fear. And then he must have thought he was safe while
Rajah Hassim and the lady Immada were on board. I tell you they sat
there in the midst of your enemies, captive! The lady Immada, with her
face covered, mourned to herself. The Rajah Hassim made a sign to Jaffir
and Jaffir came to stand by his side and talked to his lord. The main
hatch was open and many of the Illanuns crowded there to look down at
the goods that were inside the ship. They had never seen so much loot in
their lives. Jaffir and his lord could hear plainly Tuan Jorgenson and
Tengga talking together. Tengga discoursed loudly and his words were the
words of a doomed man, for he was asking Tuan Jorgenson to give up the
arms and everything that was on board the Emma to himself and to Daman.
And then, he said, 'We shall fight Belarab and make friends with these
strange white people by behaving generously to them and letting them
sail away unharmed to their own country. We don't want them here. You,
Tuan Jorgenson, are the only white man I care for.' They heard Tuan
Jorgenson say to Tengga: 'Now you have told me everything there is
in your mind you had better go ashore with your friends and return
to-morrow.' And Tengga asked: 'Why! would you fight me to-morrow rather
than live many days in peace with me?' and he laughed and slapped his
thigh. And Tuan Jorgenson answered:

"'No, I won't fight you. But even a spider will give the fly time to say
its prayers.'

"Tuan Jorgenson's voice sounded very strange and louder than ever
anybody had heard it before. O Rajah Laut, Jaffir and the white man had
been waiting, too, all night for some sign from you; a shot fired or a
signal-fire, lighted to strengthen their hearts. There had been nothing.
Rajah Hassim, whispering, ordered Jaffir to take the first opportunity
to leap overboard and take to you his message of friendship and
good-bye. Did the Rajah and Jaffir know what was coming? Who can tell?
But what else could they see than calamity for all Wajo men, whatever
Tuan Jorgenson had made up his mind to do? Jaffir prepared to obey his
lord, and yet with so many enemies' boats in the water he did not think
he would ever reach the shore; and as to yourself he was not at all sure
that you were still alive. But he said nothing of this to his Rajah.
Nobody was looking their way. Jaffir pressed his lord's hand to his
breast and waited his opportunity. The fog began to blow away and
presently everything was disclosed to the sight. Jorgenson was on his
feet, he was holding a lighted cigar between his fingers. Tengga was
sitting in front of him on one of the chairs the white people had used.
His followers were pressing round him, with Daman and Sentot, who were
muttering incantations; and even the Pangerans had moved closer to the
hatchway. Jaffir's opportunity had come but he lingered by the side
of his Rajah. In the clear air the sun shone with great force. Tuan
Jorgenson looked once more toward Belarab's stockade, O Rajah Laut! But
there was nothing there, not even a flag displayed that had not been
there before. Jaffir looked that way, too, and as he turned his head he
saw Tuan Jorgenson, in the midst of twenty spear-blades that could in an
instant have been driven into his breast, put the cigar in his mouth and
jump down the hatchway. At that moment Rajah Hassim gave Jaffir a push
toward the side and Jaffir leaped overboard.

"He was still in the water when all the world was darkened round him as
if the life of the sun had been blown out of it in a crash. A great wave
came along and washed him on shore, while pieces of wood, iron, and the
limbs of torn men were splashing round him in the water. He managed to
crawl out of the mud. Something had hit him while he was swimming and he
thought he would die. But life stirred in him. He had a message for you.
For a long time he went on crawling under the big trees on his hands
and knees, for there is no rest for a messenger till the message is
delivered. At last he found himself on the left bank of the creek.
And still he felt life stir in him. So he started to swim across, for if
you were in this world you were on the other side. While he swam he felt
his strength abandoning him. He managed to scramble on to a drifting log
and lay on it like one who is dead, till we pulled him into one of our
boats."

Wasub ceased. It seemed to Lingard that it was impossible for mortal
man to suffer more than he suffered in the succeeding moment of silence
crowded by the mute images as of universal destruction. He felt
himself gone to pieces as though the violent expression of Jorgenson's
intolerable mistrust of the life of men had shattered his soul, leaving
his body robbed of all power of resistance and of all fortitude, a prey
forever to infinite remorse and endless regrets.

"Leave me, Wasub," he said. "They are all dead--but I would sleep."

Wasub raised his dumb old eyes to the white man's face.

"Tuan, it is necessary that you should hear Jaffir," he said, patiently.

"Is he going to die?" asked Lingard in a low, cautious tone as though he
were afraid of the sound of his own voice.

"Who can tell?" Wasub's voice sounded more patient than ever. "There is
no wound on his body but, O Tuan, he does not wish to live."

"Abandoned by his God," muttered Lingard to himself.

Wasub waited a little before he went on, "And, Tuan, he has a message
for you."

"Of course. Well, I don't want to hear it."

"It is from those who will never speak to you again," Wasub persevered,
sadly. "It is a great trust. A Rajah's own words. It is difficult for
Jaffir to die. He keeps on muttering about a ring that was for you, and
that he let pass out of his care. It was a great talisman!"

"Yes. But it did not work this time. And if I go and tell Jaffir why he
will be able to tell his Rajah, O Wasub, since you say that he is going
to die. . . . I wonder where they will meet," he muttered to himself.

Once more Wasub raised his eyes to Lingard's face. "Paradise is the lot
of all True Believers," he whispered, firm in his simple faith.

The man who had been undone by a glimpse of Paradise exchanged a
profound look with the old Malay. Then he got up. On his passage to the
main hatchway the commander of the brig met no one on the decks, as if
all mankind had given him up except the old man who preceded him and
that other man dying in the deepening twilight, who was awaiting his
coming. Below, in the light of the hatchway, he saw a young Calash with
a broad yellow face and his wiry hair sticking up in stiff wisps through
the folds of his head-kerchief, holding an earthenware water-jar to the
lips of Jaffir extended on his back on a pile of mats.

A languid roll of the already glazed eyeballs, a mere stir of black
and white in the gathering dusk showed that the faithful messenger of
princes was aware of the presence of the man who had been so long known
to him and his people as the King of the Sea. Lingard knelt down close
to Jaffir's head, which rolled a little from side to side and then
became still, staring at a beam of the upper deck. Lingard bent his ear
to the dark lips. "Deliver your message" he said in a gentle tone.

"The Rajah wished to hold your hand once more," whispered Jaffir so
faintly that Lingard had to guess the words rather than hear them. "I
was to tell you," he went on--and stopped suddenly.

"What were you to tell me?"

"To forget everything," said Jaffir with a loud effort as if beginning a
long speech. After that he said nothing more till Lingard murmured, "And
the lady Immada?"

Jaffir collected all his strength. "She hoped no more," he uttered,
distinctly. "The order came to her while she mourned, veiled, apart. I
didn't even see her face."

Lingard swayed over the dying man so heavily that Wasub, standing near
by, hastened to catch him by the shoulder. Jaffir seemed unaware of
anything, and went on staring at the beam.

"Can you hear me, O Jaffir?" asked Lingard.

"I hear."

"I never had the ring. Who could bring it to me?"

"We gave it to the white woman--may Jehannum be her lot!"

"No! It shall be my lot," said Lingard with despairing force, while
Wasub raised both his hands in dismay. "For, listen, Jaffir, if she had
given the ring to me it would have been to one that was dumb, deaf, and
robbed of all courage."

It was impossible to say whether Jaffir had heard. He made no sound,
there was no change in his awful stare, but his prone body moved under
the cotton sheet as if to get further away from the white man. Lingard
got up slowly and making a sign to Wasub to remain where he was, went up
on deck without giving another glance to the dying man. Again it seemed
to him that he was pacing the quarter-deck of a deserted ship. The
mulatto steward, watching through the crack of the pantry door, saw the
Captain stagger into the cuddy and fling-to the door behind him with
a crash. For more than an hour nobody approached that closed door till
Carter coming down the companion stairs spoke without attempting to open
it.

"Are you there, sir?" The answer, "You may come in," comforted the young
man by its strong resonance. He went in.

"Well?"

"Jaffir is dead. This moment. I thought you would want to know."

Lingard looked persistently at Carter, thinking that now Jaffir was
dead there was no one left on the empty earth to speak to him a word of
reproach; no one to know the greatness of his intentions, the bond of
fidelity between him and Hassim and Immada, the depth of his affection
for those people, the earnestness of his visions, and the unbounded
trust that was his reward. By the mad scorn of Jorgenson flaming up
against the life of men, all this was as if it had never been. It had
become a secret locked up in his own breast forever.

"Tell Wasub to open one of the long-cloth bales in the hold, Mr. Carter,
and give the crew a cotton sheet to bury him decently according to their
faith. Let it be done to-night. They must have the boats, too. I suppose
they will want to take him on the sandbank."

"Yes, sir," said Carter.

"Let them have what they want, spades, torches. . . . Wasub will chant
the right words. Paradise is the lot of all True Believers. Do you
understand me, Mr. Carter? Paradise! I wonder what it will be for him!
Unless he gets messages to carry through the jungle, avoiding ambushes,
swimming in storms and knowing no rest, he won't like it."

Carter listened with an unmoved face. It seemed to him that the Captain
had forgotten his presence.

"And all the time he will be sleeping on that sandbank," Lingard began
again, sitting in his old place under the gilt thunderbolts suspended
over his head with his elbows on the table and his hands to his temples.
"If they want a board to set up at the grave let them have a piece of an
oak plank. It will stay there--till the next monsoon. Perhaps."

Carter felt uncomfortable before that tense stare which just missed
him and in that confined cabin seemed awful in its piercing and far-off
expression. But as he had not been dismissed he did not like to go away.

"Everything will be done as you wish it, sir," he said. "I suppose the
yacht will be leaving the first thing to-morrow morning, sir."

"If she doesn't we must give her a solid shot or two to liven her
up--eh, Mr. Carter?"

Carter did not know whether to smile or to look horrified. In the end he
did both, but as to saying anything he found it impossible. But Lingard
did not expect an answer.

"I believe you are going to stay with me, Mr. Carter?"

"I told you, sir, I am your man if you want me."

"The trouble is, Mr. Carter, that I am no longer the man to whom you
spoke that night in Carimata."

"Neither am I, sir, in a manner of speaking."

Lingard, relaxing the tenseness of his stare, looked at the young man,
thoughtfully.

"After all, it is the brig that will want you. She will never change.
The finest craft afloat in these seas. She will carry me about as she
did before, but . . ."

He unclasped his hands, made a sweeping gesture.

Carter gave all his naive sympathy to that man who had certainly rescued
the white people but seemed to have lost his own soul in the attempt.
Carter had heard something from Wasub. He had made out enough of this
story from the old serang's pidgin English to know that the Captain's
native friends, one of them a woman, had perished in a mysterious
catastrophe. But the why of it, and how it came about, remained still
quite incomprehensible to him. Of course, a man like the Captain would
feel terribly cut up. . . .

"You will be soon yourself again, sir," he said in the kindest possible
tone.

With the same simplicity Lingard shook his head. He was thinking of the
dead Jaffir with his last message delivered and untroubled now by all
these matters of the earth. He had been ordered to tell him to forget
everything. Lingard had an inward shudder. In the dismay of his heart he
might have believed his brig to lie under the very wing of the Angel of
Desolation--so oppressive, so final, and hopeless seemed the silence in
which he and Carter looked at each other, wistfully.

Lingard reached for a sheet of paper amongst several lying on the table,
took up a pen, hesitated a moment, and then wrote:

"Meet me at day-break on the sandbank."

He addressed the envelope to Mrs. Travers, Yacht Hermit, and pushed it
across the table.

"Send this on board the schooner at once, Mr. Carter. Wait a moment.
When our boats shove off for the sandbank have the forecastle gun fired.
I want to know when that dead man has left the ship."

He sat alone, leaning his head on his hand, listening, listening
endlessly, for the report of the gun. Would it never come? When it came
at last muffled, distant, with a slight shock through the body of the
brig he remained still with his head leaning on his hand but with a
distinct conviction, with an almost physical certitude, that under the
cotton sheet shrouding the dead man something of himself, too, had left
the ship.



IX

In a roomy cabin, furnished and fitted with austere comfort, Mr. Travers
reposed at ease in a low bed-place under a snowy white sheet and a light
silk coverlet, his head sunk in a white pillow of extreme purity. A
faint scent of lavender hung about the fresh linen. Though lying on his
back like a person who is seriously ill Mr. Travers was conscious
of nothing worse than a great fatigue. Mr. Travers' restfulness had
something faintly triumphant in it. To find himself again on board
his yacht had soothed his vanity and had revived his sense of his own
importance. He contemplated it in a distant perspective, restored to its
proper surroundings and unaffected by an adventure too extraordinary to
trouble a superior mind or even to remain in one's memory for any length
of time. He was not responsible. Like many men ambitious of
directing the affairs of a nation, Mr. Travers disliked the sense of
responsibility. He would not have been above evading it in case of need,
but with perverse loftiness he really, in his heart, scorned it. That
was the reason why he was able to lie at rest and enjoy a sense of
returning vigour. But he did not care much to talk as yet, and that was
why the silence in the stateroom had lasted for hours. The bulkhead lamp
had a green silk shade. It was unnecessary to admit for a moment the
existence of impudence or ruffianism. A discreet knocking at the cabin
door sounded deferential.

Mrs. Travers got up to see what was wanted, and returned without
uttering a single word to the folding armchair by the side of the
bed-place, with an envelope in her hand which she tore open in the
greenish light. Mr. Travers remained incurious but his wife handed to
him an unfolded sheet of paper which he condescended to hold up to his
eyes. It contained only one line of writing. He let the paper fall on
the coverlet and went on reposing as before. It was a sick man's repose.
Mrs. Travers in the armchair, with her hands on the arm-rests, had a
great dignity of attitude.

"I intend to go," she declared after a time.

"You intend to go," repeated Mr. Travers in a feeble, deliberate voice.
"Really, it doesn't matter what you decide to do. All this is of so
little importance. It seems to me that there can be no possible object."

"Perhaps not," she admitted. "But don't you think that the uttermost
farthing should always be paid?"

Mr. Travers' head rolled over on the pillow and gave a covertly scared
look at that outspoken woman. But it rolled back again at once and the
whole man remained passive, the very embodiment of helpless exhaustion.
Mrs. Travers noticed this, and had the unexpected impression that Mr.
Travers was not so ill as he looked. "He's making the most of it. It's
a matter of diplomacy," she thought. She thought this without irony,
bitterness, or disgust. Only her heart sank a little lower and she felt
that she could not remain in the cabin with that man for the rest of the
evening. For all life--yes! But not for that evening.

"It's simply monstrous," murmured the man, who was either very
diplomatic or very exhausted, in a languid manner. "There is something
abnormal in you."

Mrs. Travers got up swiftly.

"One comes across monstrous things. But I assure you that of all the
monsters that wait on what you would call a normal existence the one I
dread most is tediousness. A merciless monster without teeth or claws.
Impotent. Horrible!"

She left the stateroom, vanishing out of it with noiseless resolution.
No power on earth could have kept her in there for another minute. On
deck she found a moonless night with a velvety tepid feeling in the air,
and in the sky a mass of blurred starlight, like the tarnished tinsel of
a worn-out, very old, very tedious firmament. The usual routine of the
yacht had been already resumed, the awnings had been stretched aft, a
solitary round lamp had been hung as usual under the main boom. Out of
the deep gloom behind it d'Alcacer, a long, loose figure, lounged in the
dim light across the deck. D'Alcacer had got promptly in touch with
the store of cigarettes he owed to the Governor General's generosity. A
large, pulsating spark glowed, illuminating redly the design of his
lips under the fine dark moustache, the tip of his nose, his lean chin.
D'Alcacer reproached himself for an unwonted light-heartedness which
had somehow taken possession of him. He had not experienced that sort of
feeling for years. Reprehensible as it was he did not want anything to
disturb it. But as he could not run away openly from Mrs. Travers he
advanced to meet her.

"I do hope you have nothing to tell me," he said with whimsical
earnestness.

"I? No! Have you?"

He assured her he had not, and proffered a request. "Don't let us tell
each other anything, Mrs. Travers. Don't let us think of anything. I
believe it will be the best way to get over the evening." There was real
anxiety in his jesting tone.

"Very well," Mrs. Travers assented, seriously. "But in that case we had
better not remain together." She asked, then, d'Alcacer to go below and
sit with Mr. Travers who didn't like to be left alone. "Though he, too,
doesn't seem to want to be told anything," she added, parenthetically,
and went on: "But I must ask you something else, Mr. d'Alcacer. I
propose to sit down in this chair and go to sleep--if I can. Will you
promise to call me about five o'clock? I prefer not to speak to any one
on deck, and, moreover, I can trust you."

He bowed in silence and went away slowly. Mrs. Travers, turning her
head, perceived a steady light at the brig's yard-arm, very bright among
the tarnished stars. She walked aft and looked over the taffrail. It was
exactly like that other night. She half expected to hear presently the
low, rippling sound of an advancing boat. But the universe remained
without a sound. When she at last dropped into the deck chair she was
absolutely at the end of her power of thinking. "I suppose that's
how the condemned manage to get some sleep on the night before the
execution," she said to herself a moment before her eyelids closed as if
under a leaden hand.

She woke up, with her face wet with tears, out of a vivid dream of
Lingard in chain-mail armour and vaguely recalling a Crusader, but
bare-headed and walking away from her in the depths of an impossible
landscape. She hurried on to catch up with him but a throng of
barbarians with enormous turbans came between them at the last moment
and she lost sight of him forever in the flurry of a ghastly sand-storm.
What frightened her most was that she had not been able to see his face.
It was then that she began to cry over her hard fate. When she woke up
the tears were still rolling down her cheeks and she perceived in the
light of the deck-lamp d'Alcacer arrested a little way off.

"Did you have to speak to me?" she asked.

"No," said d'Alcacer. "You didn't give me time. When I came as far as
this I fancied I heard you sobbing. It must have been a delusion."

"Oh, no. My face is wet yet. It was a dream. I suppose it is five
o'clock. Thank you for being so punctual. I have something to do before
sunrise."

D'Alcacer moved nearer. "I know. You have decided to keep an appointment
on the sandbank. Your husband didn't utter twenty words in all these
hours but he managed to tell me that piece of news."

"I shouldn't have thought," she murmured, vaguely.

"He wanted me to understand that it had no importance," stated d'Alcacer
in a very serious tone.

"Yes. He knows what he is talking about," said Mrs. Travers in such
a bitter tone as to disconcert d'Alcacer for a moment. "I don't see a
single soul about the decks," Mrs. Travers continued, almost directly.

"The very watchmen are asleep," said d'Alcacer.

"There is nothing secret in this expedition, but I prefer not to call
any one. Perhaps you wouldn't mind pulling me off yourself in our small
boat."

It seemed to her that d'Alcacer showed some hesitation. She added: "It
has no importance, you know."

He bowed his assent and preceded her down the side in silence. When she
entered the boat he had the sculls ready and directly she sat down he
shoved off. It was so dark yet that but for the brig's yard-arm light he
could not have kept his direction. He pulled a very deliberate stroke,
looking over his shoulder frequently. It was Mrs. Travers who saw first
the faint gleam of the uncovered sandspit on the black, quiet water.

"A little more to the left," she said. "No, the other way. . . ."
D'Alcacer obeyed her directions but his stroke grew even slower than
before. She spoke again. "Don't you think that the uttermost farthing
should always be paid, Mr. d'Alcacer?"

D'Alcacer glanced over his shoulder, then: "It would be the only
honourable way. But it may be hard. Too hard for our common fearful
hearts."

"I am prepared for anything."

He ceased pulling for a moment . . . "Anything that may be found on
a sandbank," Mrs. Travers went on. "On an arid, insignificant, and
deserted sandbank."

D'Alcacer gave two strokes and ceased again.

"There is room for a whole world of suffering on a sandbank, for all the
bitterness and resentment a human soul may be made to feel."

"Yes, I suppose you would know," she whispered while he gave a stroke or
two and again glanced over his shoulder. She murmured the words:

"Bitterness, resentment," and a moment afterward became aware of the
keel of the boat running up on the sand. But she didn't move, and
d'Alcacer, too, remained seated on the thwart with the blades of his
sculls raised as if ready to drop them and back the dinghy out into deep
water at the first sign.

Mrs. Travers made no sign, but she asked, abruptly: "Mr. d'Alcacer, do
you think I shall ever come back?"

Her tone seemed to him to lack sincerity. But who could tell what
this abruptness covered--sincere fear or mere vanity? He asked himself
whether she was playing a part for his benefit, or only for herself.

"I don't think you quite understand the situation, Mrs. Travers. I
don't think you have a clear idea, either of his simplicity or of his
visionary's pride."

She thought, contemptuously, that there were other things which
d'Alcacer didn't know and surrendered to a sudden temptation to
enlighten him a little.

"You forget his capacity for passion and that his simplicity doesn't
know its own strength."

There was no mistaking the sincerity of that murmur. "She has felt it,"
d'Alcacer said to himself with absolute certitude. He wondered when,
where, how, on what occasion? Mrs. Travers stood up in the stern sheets
suddenly and d'Alcacer leaped on the sand to help her out of the boat.

"Hadn't I better hang about here to take you back again?" he suggested,
as he let go her hand.

"You mustn't!" she exclaimed, anxiously. "You must return to the yacht.
There will be plenty of light in another hour. I will come to this spot
and wave my handkerchief when I want to be taken off."

At their feet the shallow water slept profoundly, the ghostly gleam of
the sands baffled the eye by its lack of form. Far off, the growth of
bushes in the centre raised a massive black bulk against the stars to
the southward. Mrs. Travers lingered for a moment near the boat as if
afraid of the strange solitude of this lonely sandbank and of this lone
sea that seemed to fill the whole encircling universe of remote stars
and limitless shadows. "There is nobody here," she whispered to herself.

"He is somewhere about waiting for you, or I don't know the man,"
affirmed d'Alcacer in an undertone. He gave a vigorous shove which sent
the little boat into the water.

D'Alcacer was perfectly right. Lingard had come up on deck long before
Mrs. Travers woke up with her face wet with tears. The burial party had
returned hours before and the crew of the brig were plunged in
sleep, except for two watchmen, who at Lingard's appearance retreated
noiselessly from the poop. Lingard, leaning on the rail, fell into
a sombre reverie of his past. Reproachful spectres crowded the air,
animated and vocal, not in the articulate language of mortals but
assailing him with faint sobs, deep sighs, and fateful gestures. When he
came to himself and turned about they vanished, all but one dark shape
without sound or movement. Lingard looked at it with secret horror.

"Who's that?" he asked in a troubled voice.

The shadow moved closer: "It's only me, sir," said Carter, who had left
orders to be called directly the Captain was seen on deck.

"Oh, yes, I might have known," mumbled Lingard in some confusion. He
requested Carter to have a boat manned and when after a time the young
man told him that it was ready, he said "All right!" and remained
leaning on his elbow.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Carter after a longish silence, "but are
you going some distance?"

"No, I only want to be put ashore on the sandbank."

Carter was relieved to hear this, but also surprised. "There is nothing
living there, sir," he said.

"I wonder," muttered Lingard.

"But I am certain," Carter insisted. "The last of the women and children
belonging to those cut-throats were taken off by the sampans which
brought you and the yacht-party out."

He walked at Lingard's elbow to the gangway and listened to his orders.

"Directly there is enough light to see flags by, make a signal to the
schooner to heave short on her cable and loose her sails. If there
is any hanging back give them a blank gun, Mr. Carter. I will have no
shilly-shallying. If she doesn't go at the word, by heavens, I will
drive her out. I am still master here--for another day."

The overwhelming sense of immensity, of disturbing emptiness, which
affects those who walk on the sands in the midst of the sea, intimidated
Mrs. Travers. The world resembled a limitless flat shadow which was
motionless and elusive. Then against the southern stars she saw a human
form that isolated and lone appeared to her immense: the shape of a
giant outlined amongst the constellations. As it approached her
it shrank to common proportions, got clear of the stars, lost its
awesomeness, and became menacing in its ominous and silent advance. Mrs.
Travers hastened to speak.

"You have asked for me. I am come. I trust you will have no reason to
regret my obedience."

He walked up quite close to her, bent down slightly to peer into her
face. The first of the tropical dawn put its characteristic cold sheen
into the sky above the Shore of Refuge.

Mrs. Travers did not turn away her head.

"Are you looking for a change in me? No. You won't see it. Now I know
that I couldn't change even if I wanted to. I am made of clay that is
too hard."

"I am looking at you for the first time," said Lingard. "I never could
see you before. There were too many things, too many thoughts, too many
people. No, I never saw you before. But now the world is dead."

He grasped her shoulders, approaching his face close to hers. She never
flinched.

"Yes, the world is dead," she said. "Look your fill then. It won't be
for long."

He let her go as suddenly as though she had struck him. The cold white
light of the tropical dawn had crept past the zenith now and the expanse
of the shallow waters looked cold, too, without stir or ripple within
the enormous rim of the horizon where, to the west, a shadow lingered
still.

"Take my arm," he said.

She did so at once, and turning their backs on the two ships they began
to walk along the sands, but they had not made many steps when Mrs.
Travers perceived an oblong mound with a board planted upright at one
end. Mrs. Travers knew that part of the sands. It was here she used to
walk with her husband and d'Alcacer every evening after dinner,
while the yacht lay stranded and her boats were away in search of
assistance--which they had found--which they had found! This was
something that she had never seen there before. Lingard had suddenly
stopped and looked at it moodily. She pressed his arm to rouse him and
asked, "What is this?"

"This is a grave," said Lingard in a low voice, and still gazing at the
heap of sand. "I had him taken out of the ship last night. Strange," he
went on in a musing tone, "how much a grave big enough for one man only
can hold. His message was to forget everything."

"Never, never," murmured Mrs. Travers. "I wish I had been on board the
Emma. . . . You had a madman there," she cried out, suddenly. They moved
on again, Lingard looking at Mrs. Travers who was leaning on his arm.

"I wonder which of us two was mad," he said.

"I wonder you can bear to look at me," she murmured. Then Lingard spoke
again.

"I had to see you once more."

"That abominable Jorgenson," she whispered to herself.

"No, no, he gave me my chance--before he gave me up."

Mrs. Travers disengaged her arm and Lingard stopped, too, facing her in
a long silence.

"I could not refuse to meet you," said Mrs. Travers at last. "I could
not refuse you anything. You have all the right on your side and I don't
care what you do or say. But I wonder at my own courage when I think of
the confession I have to make." She advanced, laid her hand on Lingard's
shoulder and spoke earnestly. "I shuddered at the thought of meeting you
again. And now you must listen to my confession."

"Don't say a word," said Lingard in an untroubled voice and never taking
his eyes from her face. "I know already."

"You can't," she cried. Her hand slipped off his shoulder. "Then why
don't you throw me into the sea?" she asked, passionately. "Am I to live
on hating myself?"

"You mustn't!" he said with an accent of fear. "Haven't you understood
long ago that if you had given me that ring it would have been just the
same?"

"Am I to believe this? No, no! You are too generous to a mere sham. You
are the most magnanimous of men but you are throwing it away on me.
Do you think it is remorse that I feel? No. If it is anything it is
despair. But you must have known that--and yet you wanted to look at me
again."

"I told you I never had a chance before," said Lingard in an unmoved
voice. "It was only after I heard they gave you the ring that I felt the
hold you have got on me. How could I tell before? What has hate or love
to do with you and me? Hate. Love. What can touch you? For me you stand
above death itself; for I see now that as long as I live you will never
die."

They confronted each other at the southern edge of the sands as if
afloat on the open sea. The central ridge heaped up by the winds masked
from them the very mastheads of the two ships and the growing brightness
of the light only augmented the sense of their invincible solitude
in the awful serenity of the world. Mrs. Travers suddenly put her arm
across her eyes and averted her face.

Then he added:

"That's all."

Mrs. Travers let fall her arm and began to retrace her steps,
unsupported and alone. Lingard followed her on the edge of the sand
uncovered by the ebbing tide. A belt of orange light appeared in the
cold sky above the black forest of the Shore of Refuge and faded quickly
to gold that melted soon into a blinding and colourless glare. It was
not till after she had passed Jaffir's grave that Mrs. Travers stole a
backward glance and discovered that she was alone. Lingard had left her
to herself. She saw him sitting near the mound of sand, his back bowed,
his hands clasping his knees, as if he had obeyed the invincible call of
his great visions haunting the grave of the faithful messenger. Shading
her eyes with her hand Mrs. Travers watched the immobility of that man
of infinite illusions. He never moved, he never raised his head. It was
all over. He was done with her. She waited a little longer and then went
slowly on her way.

Shaw, now acting second mate of the yacht, came off with another hand
in a little boat to take Mrs. Travers on board. He stared at her like an
offended owl. How the lady could suddenly appear at sunrise waving her
handkerchief from the sandbank he could not understand. For, even if she
had managed to row herself off secretly in the dark, she could not have
sent the empty boat back to the yacht. It was to Shaw a sort of improper
miracle.

D'Alcacer hurried to the top of the side ladder and as they met on deck
Mrs. Travers astonished him by saying in a strangely provoking tone:

"You were right. I have come back." Then with a little laugh which
impressed d'Alcacer painfully she added with a nod downward, "and
Martin, too, was perfectly right. It was absolutely unimportant."

She walked on straight to the taffrail and d'Alcacer followed her aft,
alarmed at her white face, at her brusque movements, at the nervous way
in which she was fumbling at her throat. He waited discreetly till she
turned round and thrust out toward him her open palm on which he saw a
thick gold ring set with a large green stone.

"Look at this, Mr. d'Alcacer. This is the thing which I asked you
whether I should give up or conceal--the symbol of the last hour--the
call of the supreme minute. And he said it would have made no
difference! He is the most magnanimous of men and the uttermost farthing
has been paid. He has done with me. The most magnanimous . . . but there
is a grave on the sands by which I left him sitting with no glance
to spare for me. His last glance on earth! I am left with this thing.
Absolutely unimportant. A dead talisman." With a nervous jerk she flung
the ring overboard, then with a hurried entreaty to d'Alcacer, "Stay
here a moment. Don't let anybody come near us," she burst into tears and
turned her back on him.

Lingard returned on board his brig and in the early afternoon the
Lightning got under way, running past the schooner to give her a lead
through the maze of Shoals. Lingard was on deck but never looked once
at the following vessel. Directly both ships were in clear water he went
below saying to Carter: "You know what to do."

"Yes, sir," said Carter.

Shortly after his Captain had disappeared from the deck Carter laid the
main topsail to the mast. The Lightning lost her way while the schooner
with all her light kites abroad passed close under her stern holding on
her course. Mrs. Travers stood aft very rigid, gripping the rail with
both hands. The brim of her white hat was blown upward on one side and
her yachting skirt stirred in the breeze. By her side d'Alcacer waved
his hand courteously. Carter raised his cap to them.

During the afternoon he paced the poop with measured steps, with a pair
of binoculars in his hand. At last he laid the glasses down, glanced at
the compass-card and walked to the cabin skylight which was open.

"Just lost her, sir," he said. All was still down there. He raised his
voice a little:

"You told me to let you know directly I lost sight of the yacht."

The sound of a stifled groan reached the attentive Carter and a weary
voice said, "All right, I am coming."

When Lingard stepped out on the poop of the Lightning the open water
had turned purple already in the evening light, while to the east the
Shallows made a steely glitter all along the sombre line of the shore.
Lingard, with folded arms, looked over the sea. Carter approached him
and spoke quietly.

"The tide has turned and the night is coming on. Hadn't we better get
away from these Shoals, sir?"

Lingard did not stir.

"Yes, the night is coming on. You may fill the main topsail, Mr.
Carter," he said and he relapsed into silence with his eyes fixed in
the southern board where the shadows were creeping stealthily toward the
setting sun. Presently Carter stood at his elbow again.

"The brig is beginning to forge ahead, sir," he said in a warning tone.

Lingard came out of his absorption with a deep tremor of his powerful
frame like the shudder of an uprooted tree.

"How was the yacht heading when you lost sight of her?" he asked.

"South as near as possible," answered Carter. "Will you give me a course
to steer for the night, sir?"

Lingard's lips trembled before he spoke but his voice was calm.

"Steer north," he said.




                                   THE
                               SECRET AGENT
                              A SIMPLE TALE


                                    BY
                              JOSEPH CONRAD

                              SECOND EDITION

                              METHUEN & CO.,
                           36 ESSEX STREET W C.
                                  LONDON

                 _First Published_ . . . _September_ 1907

                  _Second Edition_ . . . _October_ 1907

                                    TO
                               H. G. WELLS

                   THE CHRONICLER OF MR LEWISHAMS LOVE
                     THE BIOGRAPHER OF KIPPS AND THE
                      HISTORIAN OF THE AGES TO COME

                   THIS SIMPLE TALE OF THE XIX CENTURY
                        IS AFFECTIONATELY OFFERED




CHAPTER I


Mr Verloc, going out in the morning, left his shop nominally in charge of
his brother-in-law.  It could be done, because there was very little
business at any time, and practically none at all before the evening.  Mr
Verloc cared but little about his ostensible business.  And, moreover,
his wife was in charge of his brother-in-law.

The shop was small, and so was the house.  It was one of those grimy
brick houses which existed in large quantities before the era of
reconstruction dawned upon London.  The shop was a square box of a place,
with the front glazed in small panes.  In the daytime the door remained
closed; in the evening it stood discreetly but suspiciously ajar.

The window contained photographs of more or less undressed dancing girls;
nondescript packages in wrappers like patent medicines; closed yellow
paper envelopes, very flimsy, and marked two-and-six in heavy black
figures; a few numbers of ancient French comic publications hung across a
string as if to dry; a dingy blue china bowl, a casket of black wood,
bottles of marking ink, and rubber stamps; a few books, with titles
hinting at impropriety; a few apparently old copies of obscure
newspapers, badly printed, with titles like _The Torch_, _The
Gong_rousing titles.  And the two gas jets inside the panes were always
turned low, either for economys sake or for the sake of the customers.

These customers were either very young men, who hung about the window for
a time before slipping in suddenly; or men of a more mature age, but
looking generally as if they were not in funds.  Some of that last kind
had the collars of their overcoats turned right up to their moustaches,
and traces of mud on the bottom of their nether garments, which had the
appearance of being much worn and not very valuable.  And the legs inside
them did not, as a general rule, seem of much account either.  With their
hands plunged deep in the side pockets of their coats, they dodged in
sideways, one shoulder first, as if afraid to start the bell going.

The bell, hung on the door by means of a curved ribbon of steel, was
difficult to circumvent.  It was hopelessly cracked; but of an evening,
at the slightest provocation, it clattered behind the customer with
impudent virulence.

It clattered; and at that signal, through the dusty glass door behind the
painted deal counter, Mr Verloc would issue hastily from the parlour at
the back.  His eyes were naturally heavy; he had an air of having
wallowed, fully dressed, all day on an unmade bed.  Another man would
have felt such an appearance a distinct disadvantage.  In a commercial
transaction of the retail order much depends on the sellers engaging and
amiable aspect.  But Mr Verloc knew his business, and remained
undisturbed by any sort of sthetic doubt about his appearance.  With a
firm, steady-eyed impudence, which seemed to hold back the threat of some
abominable menace, he would proceed to sell over the counter some object
looking obviously and scandalously not worth the money which passed in
the transaction: a small cardboard box with apparently nothing inside,
for instance, or one of those carefully closed yellow flimsy envelopes,
or a soiled volume in paper covers with a promising title.  Now and then
it happened that one of the faded, yellow dancing girls would get sold to
an amateur, as though she had been alive and young.

Sometimes it was Mrs Verloc who would appear at the call of the cracked
bell.  Winnie Verloc was a young woman with a full bust, in a tight
bodice, and with broad hips.  Her hair was very tidy.  Steady-eyed like
her husband, she preserved an air of unfathomable indifference behind the
rampart of the counter.  Then the customer of comparatively tender years
would get suddenly disconcerted at having to deal with a woman, and with
rage in his heart would proffer a request for a bottle of marking ink,
retail value sixpence (price in Verlocs shop one-and-sixpence), which,
once outside, he would drop stealthily into the gutter.

The evening visitorsthe men with collars turned up and soft hats rammed
downnodded familiarly to Mrs Verloc, and with a muttered greeting,
lifted up the flap at the end of the counter in order to pass into the
back parlour, which gave access to a passage and to a steep flight of
stairs.  The door of the shop was the only means of entrance to the house
in which Mr Verloc carried on his business of a seller of shady wares,
exercised his vocation of a protector of society, and cultivated his
domestic virtues.  These last were pronounced.  He was thoroughly
domesticated.  Neither his spiritual, nor his mental, nor his physical
needs were of the kind to take him much abroad.  He found at home the
ease of his body and the peace of his conscience, together with Mrs
Verlocs wifely attentions and Mrs Verlocs mothers deferential regard.

Winnies mother was a stout, wheezy woman, with a large brown face.  She
wore a black wig under a white cap.  Her swollen legs rendered her
inactive.  She considered herself to be of French descent, which might
have been true; and after a good many years of married life with a
licensed victualler of the more common sort, she provided for the years
of widowhood by letting furnished apartments for gentlemen near Vauxhall
Bridge Road in a square once of some splendour and still included in the
district of Belgravia.  This topographical fact was of some advantage in
advertising her rooms; but the patrons of the worthy widow were not
exactly of the fashionable kind.  Such as they were, her daughter Winnie
helped to look after them.  Traces of the French descent which the widow
boasted of were apparent in Winnie too.  They were apparent in the
extremely neat and artistic arrangement of her glossy dark hair.  Winnie
had also other charms: her youth; her full, rounded form; her clear
complexion; the provocation of her unfathomable reserve, which never went
so far as to prevent conversation, carried on on the lodgers part with
animation, and on hers with an equable amiability.  It must be that Mr
Verloc was susceptible to these fascinations.  Mr Verloc was an
intermittent patron.  He came and went without any very apparent reason.
He generally arrived in London (like the influenza) from the Continent,
only he arrived unheralded by the Press; and his visitations set in with
great severity.  He breakfasted in bed, and remained wallowing there with
an air of quiet enjoyment till noon every dayand sometimes even to a
later hour.  But when he went out he seemed to experience a great
difficulty in finding his way back to his temporary home in the
Belgravian square.  He left it late, and returned to it earlyas early as
three or four in the morning; and on waking up at ten addressed Winnie,
bringing in the breakfast tray, with jocular, exhausted civility, in the
hoarse, failing tones of a man who had been talking vehemently for many
hours together.  His prominent, heavy-lidded eyes rolled sideways
amorously and languidly, the bedclothes were pulled up to his chin, and
his dark smooth moustache covered his thick lips capable of much honeyed
banter.

In Winnies mothers opinion Mr Verloc was a very nice gentleman.  From
her lifes experience gathered in various business houses the good
woman had taken into her retirement an ideal of gentlemanliness as
exhibited by the patrons of private-saloon bars.  Mr Verloc approached
that ideal; he attained it, in fact.

Of course, well take over your furniture, mother, Winnie had remarked.

The lodging-house was to be given up.  It seems it would not answer to
carry it on.  It would have been too much trouble for Mr Verloc.  It
would not have been convenient for his other business.  What his business
was he did not say; but after his engagement to Winnie he took the
trouble to get up before noon, and descending the basement stairs, make
himself pleasant to Winnies mother in the breakfast-room downstairs
where she had her motionless being.  He stroked the cat, poked the fire,
had his lunch served to him there.  He left its slightly stuffy cosiness
with evident reluctance, but, all the same, remained out till the night
was far advanced.  He never offered to take Winnie to theatres, as such a
nice gentleman ought to have done.  His evenings were occupied.  His work
was in a way political, he told Winnie once.  She would have, he warned
her, to be very nice to his political friends.

And with her straight, unfathomable glance she answered that she would be
so, of course.

How much more he told her as to his occupation it was impossible for
Winnies mother to discover.  The married couple took her over with the
furniture.  The mean aspect of the shop surprised her.  The change from
the Belgravian square to the narrow street in Soho affected her legs
adversely.  They became of an enormous size.  On the other hand, she
experienced a complete relief from material cares.  Her son-in-laws
heavy good nature inspired her with a sense of absolute safety.  Her
daughters future was obviously assured, and even as to her son Stevie
she need have no anxiety.  She had not been able to conceal from herself
that he was a terrible encumbrance, that poor Stevie.  But in view of
Winnies fondness for her delicate brother, and of Mr Verlocs kind and
generous disposition, she felt that the poor boy was pretty safe in this
rough world.  And in her heart of hearts she was not perhaps displeased
that the Verlocs had no children.  As that circumstance seemed perfectly
indifferent to Mr Verloc, and as Winnie found an object of quasi-maternal
affection in her brother, perhaps this was just as well for poor Stevie.

For he was difficult to dispose of, that boy.  He was delicate and, in a
frail way, good-looking too, except for the vacant droop of his lower
lip.  Under our excellent system of compulsory education he had learned
to read and write, notwithstanding the unfavourable aspect of the lower
lip.  But as errand-boy he did not turn out a great success.  He forgot
his messages; he was easily diverted from the straight path of duty by
the attractions of stray cats and dogs, which he followed down narrow
alleys into unsavoury courts; by the comedies of the streets, which he
contemplated open-mouthed, to the detriment of his employers interests;
or by the dramas of fallen horses, whose pathos and violence induced him
sometimes to shriek pierceingly in a crowd, which disliked to be
disturbed by sounds of distress in its quiet enjoyment of the national
spectacle.  When led away by a grave and protecting policeman, it would
often become apparent that poor Stevie had forgotten his addressat least
for a time.  A brusque question caused him to stutter to the point of
suffocation.  When startled by anything perplexing he used to squint
horribly.  However, he never had any fits (which was encouraging); and
before the natural outbursts of impatience on the part of his father he
could always, in his childhoods days, run for protection behind the
short skirts of his sister Winnie.  On the other hand, he might have been
suspected of hiding a fund of reckless naughtiness.  When he had reached
the age of fourteen a friend of his late father, an agent for a foreign
preserved milk firm, having given him an opening as office-boy, he was
discovered one foggy afternoon, in his chiefs absence, busy letting off
fireworks on the staircase.  He touched off in quick succession a set of
fierce rockets, angry catherine wheels, loudly exploding squibsand the
matter might have turned out very serious.  An awful panic spread through
the whole building.  Wild-eyed, choking clerks stampeded through the
passages full of smoke, silk hats and elderly business men could be seen
rolling independently down the stairs.  Stevie did not seem to derive any
personal gratification from what he had done.  His motives for this
stroke of originality were difficult to discover.  It was only later on
that Winnie obtained from him a misty and confused confession.  It seems
that two other office-boys in the building had worked upon his feelings
by tales of injustice and oppression till they had wrought his compassion
to the pitch of that frenzy.  But his fathers friend, of course,
dismissed him summarily as likely to ruin his business.  After that
altruistic exploit Stevie was put to help wash the dishes in the basement
kitchen, and to black the boots of the gentlemen patronising the
Belgravian mansion.  There was obviously no future in such work.  The
gentlemen tipped him a shilling now and then.  Mr Verloc showed himself
the most generous of lodgers.  But altogether all that did not amount to
much either in the way of gain or prospects; so that when Winnie
announced her engagement to Mr Verloc her mother could not help
wondering, with a sigh and a glance towards the scullery, what would
become of poor Stephen now.

It appeared that Mr Verloc was ready to take him over together with his
wifes mother and with the furniture, which was the whole visible fortune
of the family.  Mr Verloc gathered everything as it came to his broad,
good-natured breast.  The furniture was disposed to the best advantage
all over the house, but Mrs Verlocs mother was confined to two back
rooms on the first floor.  The luckless Stevie slept in one of them.  By
this time a growth of thin fluffy hair had come to blur, like a golden
mist, the sharp line of his small lower jaw.  He helped his sister with
blind love and docility in her household duties.  Mr Verloc thought that
some occupation would be good for him.  His spare time he occupied by
drawing circles with compass and pencil on a piece of paper.  He applied
himself to that pastime with great industry, with his elbows spread out
and bowed low over the kitchen table.  Through the open door of the
parlour at the back of the shop Winnie, his sister, glanced at him from
time to time with maternal vigilance.




CHAPTER II


Such was the house, the household, and the business Mr Verloc left behind
him on his way westward at the hour of half-past ten in the morning.  It
was unusually early for him; his whole person exhaled the charm of almost
dewy freshness; he wore his blue cloth overcoat unbuttoned; his boots
were shiny; his cheeks, freshly shaven, had a sort of gloss; and even his
heavy-lidded eyes, refreshed by a night of peaceful slumber, sent out
glances of comparative alertness.  Through the park railings these
glances beheld men and women riding in the Row, couples cantering past
harmoniously, others advancing sedately at a walk, loitering groups of
three or four, solitary horsemen looking unsociable, and solitary women
followed at a long distance by a groom with a cockade to his hat and a
leather belt over his tight-fitting coat.  Carriages went bowling by,
mostly two-horse broughams, with here and there a victoria with the skin
of some wild beast inside and a womans face and hat emerging above the
folded hood.  And a peculiarly London sunagainst which nothing could be
said except that it looked bloodshotglorified all this by its stare.  It
hung at a moderate elevation above Hyde Park Corner with an air of
punctual and benign vigilance.  The very pavement under Mr Verlocs feet
had an old-gold tinge in that diffused light, in which neither wall, nor
tree, nor beast, nor man cast a shadow.  Mr Verloc was going westward
through a town without shadows in an atmosphere of powdered old gold.
There were red, coppery gleams on the roofs of houses, on the corners of
walls, on the panels of carriages, on the very coats of the horses, and
on the broad back of Mr Verlocs overcoat, where they produced a dull
effect of rustiness.  But Mr Verloc was not in the least conscious of
having got rusty.  He surveyed through the park railings the evidences of
the towns opulence and luxury with an approving eye.  All these people
had to be protected.  Protection is the first necessity of opulence and
luxury.  They had to be protected; and their horses, carriages, houses,
servants had to be protected; and the source of their wealth had to be
protected in the heart of the city and the heart of the country; the
whole social order favourable to their hygienic idleness had to be
protected against the shallow enviousness of unhygienic labour.  It had
toand Mr Verloc would have rubbed his hands with satisfaction had he not
been constitutionally averse from every superfluous exertion.  His
idleness was not hygienic, but it suited him very well.  He was in a
manner devoted to it with a sort of inert fanaticism, or perhaps rather
with a fanatical inertness.  Born of industrious parents for a life of
toil, he had embraced indolence from an impulse as profound as
inexplicable and as imperious as the impulse which directs a mans
preference for one particular woman in a given thousand.  He was too lazy
even for a mere demagogue, for a workman orator, for a leader of labour.
It was too much trouble.  He required a more perfect form of ease; or it
might have been that he was the victim of a philosophical unbelief in the
effectiveness of every human effort.  Such a form of indolence requires,
implies, a certain amount of intelligence.  Mr Verloc was not devoid of
intelligenceand at the notion of a menaced social order he would perhaps
have winked to himself if there had not been an effort to make in that
sign of scepticism.  His big, prominent eyes were not well adapted to
winking.  They were rather of the sort that closes solemnly in slumber
with majestic effect.

Undemonstrative and burly in a fat-pig style, Mr Verloc, without either
rubbing his hands with satisfaction or winking sceptically at his
thoughts, proceeded on his way.  He trod the pavement heavily with his
shiny boots, and his general get-up was that of a well-to-do mechanic in
business for himself.  He might have been anything from a picture-frame
maker to a lock-smith; an employer of labour in a small way.  But there
was also about him an indescribable air which no mechanic could have
acquired in the practice of his handicraft however dishonestly exercised:
the air common to men who live on the vices, the follies, or the baser
fears of mankind; the air of moral nihilism common to keepers of gambling
hells and disorderly houses; to private detectives and inquiry agents; to
drink sellers and, I should say, to the sellers of invigorating electric
belts and to the inventors of patent medicines.  But of that last I am
not sure, not having carried my investigations so far into the depths.
For all I know, the expression of these last may be perfectly diabolic.
I shouldnt be surprised.  What I want to affirm is that Mr Verlocs
expression was by no means diabolic.

Before reaching Knightsbridge, Mr Verloc took a turn to the left out of
the busy main thoroughfare, uproarious with the traffic of swaying
omnibuses and trotting vans, in the almost silent, swift flow of hansoms.
Under his hat, worn with a slight backward tilt, his hair had been
carefully brushed into respectful sleekness; for his business was with an
Embassy.  And Mr Verloc, steady like a rocka soft kind of rockmarched
now along a street which could with every propriety be described as
private.  In its breadth, emptiness, and extent it had the majesty of
inorganic nature, of matter that never dies.  The only reminder of
mortality was a doctors brougham arrested in august solitude close to
the curbstone.  The polished knockers of the doors gleamed as far as the
eye could reach, the clean windows shone with a dark opaque lustre.  And
all was still.  But a milk cart rattled noisily across the distant
perspective; a butcher boy, driving with the noble recklessness of a
charioteer at Olympic Games, dashed round the corner sitting high above a
pair of red wheels.  A guilty-looking cat issuing from under the stones
ran for a while in front of Mr Verloc, then dived into another basement;
and a thick police constable, looking a stranger to every emotion, as if
he too were part of inorganic nature, surging apparently out of a
lamp-post, took not the slightest notice of Mr Verloc.  With a turn to
the left Mr Verloc pursued his way along a narrow street by the side of a
yellow wall which, for some inscrutable reason, had No. 1 Chesham Square
written on it in black letters.  Chesham Square was at least sixty yards
away, and Mr Verloc, cosmopolitan enough not to be deceived by Londons
topographical mysteries, held on steadily, without a sign of surprise or
indignation.  At last, with business-like persistency, he reached the
Square, and made diagonally for the number 10.  This belonged to an
imposing carriage gate in a high, clean wall between two houses, of which
one rationally enough bore the number 9 and the other was numbered 37;
but the fact that this last belonged to Porthill Street, a street well
known in the neighbourhood, was proclaimed by an inscription placed above
the ground-floor windows by whatever highly efficient authority is
charged with the duty of keeping track of Londons strayed houses.  Why
powers are not asked of Parliament (a short act would do) for compelling
those edifices to return where they belong is one of the mysteries of
municipal administration.  Mr Verloc did not trouble his head about it,
his mission in life being the protection of the social mechanism, not its
perfectionment or even its criticism.

It was so early that the porter of the Embassy issued hurriedly out of
his lodge still struggling with the left sleeve of his livery coat.  His
waistcoat was red, and he wore knee-breeches, but his aspect was
flustered.  Mr Verloc, aware of the rush on his flank, drove it off by
simply holding out an envelope stamped with the arms of the Embassy, and
passed on.  He produced the same talisman also to the footman who opened
the door, and stood back to let him enter the hall.

A clear fire burned in a tall fireplace, and an elderly man standing with
his back to it, in evening dress and with a chain round his neck, glanced
up from the newspaper he was holding spread out in both hands before his
calm and severe face.  He didnt move; but another lackey, in brown
trousers and claw-hammer coat edged with thin yellow cord, approaching Mr
Verloc listened to the murmur of his name, and turning round on his heel
in silence, began to walk, without looking back once.  Mr Verloc, thus
led along a ground-floor passage to the left of the great carpeted
staircase, was suddenly motioned to enter a quite small room furnished
with a heavy writing-table and a few chairs.  The servant shut the door,
and Mr Verloc remained alone.  He did not take a seat.  With his hat and
stick held in one hand he glanced about, passing his other podgy hand
over his uncovered sleek head.

Another door opened noiselessly, and Mr Verloc immobilising his glance in
that direction saw at first only black clothes, the bald top of a head,
and a drooping dark grey whisker on each side of a pair of wrinkled
hands.  The person who had entered was holding a batch of papers before
his eyes and walked up to the table with a rather mincing step, turning
the papers over the while.  Privy Councillor Wurmt, Chancelier
dAmbassade, was rather short-sighted.  This meritorious official laying
the papers on the table, disclosed a face of pasty complexion and of
melancholy ugliness surrounded by a lot of fine, long dark grey hairs,
barred heavily by thick and bushy eyebrows.  He put on a black-framed
pince-nez upon a blunt and shapeless nose, and seemed struck by Mr
Verlocs appearance.  Under the enormous eyebrows his weak eyes blinked
pathetically through the glasses.

He made no sign of greeting; neither did Mr Verloc, who certainly knew
his place; but a subtle change about the general outlines of his
shoulders and back suggested a slight bending of Mr Verlocs spine under
the vast surface of his overcoat.  The effect was of unobtrusive
deference.

I have here some of your reports, said the bureaucrat in an
unexpectedly soft and weary voice, and pressing the tip of his forefinger
on the papers with force.  He paused; and Mr Verloc, who had recognised
his own handwriting very well, waited in an almost breathless silence.
We are not very satisfied with the attitude of the police here, the
other continued, with every appearance of mental fatigue.

The shoulders of Mr Verloc, without actually moving, suggested a shrug.
And for the first time since he left his home that morning his lips
opened.

Every country has its police, he said philosophically.  But as the
official of the Embassy went on blinking at him steadily he felt
constrained to add: Allow me to observe that I have no means of action
upon the police here.

What is desired, said the man of papers, is the occurrence of
something definite which should stimulate their vigilance.  That is
within your provinceis it not so?

Mr Verloc made no answer except by a sigh, which escaped him
involuntarily, for instantly he tried to give his face a cheerful
expression.  The official blinked doubtfully, as if affected by the dim
light of the room.  He repeated vaguely.

The vigilance of the policeand the severity of the magistrates.  The
general leniency of the judicial procedure here, and the utter absence of
all repressive measures, are a scandal to Europe.  What is wished for
just now is the accentuation of the unrestof the fermentation which
undoubtedly exists

Undoubtedly, undoubtedly, broke in Mr Verloc in a deep deferential bass
of an oratorical quality, so utterly different from the tone in which he
had spoken before that his interlocutor remained profoundly surprised.
It exists to a dangerous degree.  My reports for the last twelve months
make it sufficiently clear.

Your reports for the last twelve months, State Councillor Wurmt began
in his gentle and dispassionate tone, have been read by me.  I failed to
discover why you wrote them at all.

A sad silence reigned for a time.  Mr Verloc seemed to have swallowed his
tongue, and the other gazed at the papers on the table fixedly.  At last
he gave them a slight push.

The state of affairs you expose there is assumed to exist as the first
condition of your employment.  What is required at present is not
writing, but the bringing to light of a distinct, significant factI
would almost say of an alarming fact.

I need not say that all my endeavours shall be directed to that end, Mr
Verloc said, with convinced modulations in his conversational husky tone.
But the sense of being blinked at watchfully behind the blind glitter of
these eye-glasses on the other side of the table disconcerted him.  He
stopped short with a gesture of absolute devotion.  The useful,
hard-working, if obscure member of the Embassy had an air of being
impressed by some newly-born thought.

You are very corpulent, he said.

This observation, really of a psychological nature, and advanced with the
modest hesitation of an officeman more familiar with ink and paper than
with the requirements of active life, stung Mr Verloc in the manner of a
rude personal remark.  He stepped back a pace.

Eh?  What were you pleased to say? he exclaimed, with husky resentment.

The Chancelier dAmbassade entrusted with the conduct of this interview
seemed to find it too much for him.

I think, he said, that you had better see Mr Vladimir.  Yes, decidedly
I think you ought to see Mr Vladimir.  Be good enough to wait here, he
added, and went out with mincing steps.

At once Mr Verloc passed his hand over his hair.  A slight perspiration
had broken out on his forehead.  He let the air escape from his pursed-up
lips like a man blowing at a spoonful of hot soup.  But when the servant
in brown appeared at the door silently, Mr Verloc had not moved an inch
from the place he had occupied throughout the interview.  He had remained
motionless, as if feeling himself surrounded by pitfalls.

He walked along a passage lighted by a lonely gas-jet, then up a flight
of winding stairs, and through a glazed and cheerful corridor on the
first floor.  The footman threw open a door, and stood aside.  The feet
of Mr Verloc felt a thick carpet.  The room was large, with three
windows; and a young man with a shaven, big face, sitting in a roomy
arm-chair before a vast mahogany writing-table, said in French to the
Chancelier dAmbassade, who was going out with the papers in his hand:

You are quite right, mon cher.  Hes fatthe animal.

Mr Vladimir, First Secretary, had a drawing-room reputation as an
agreeable and entertaining man.  He was something of a favourite in
society.  His wit consisted in discovering droll connections between
incongruous ideas; and when talking in that strain he sat well forward of
his seat, with his left hand raised, as if exhibiting his funny
demonstrations between the thumb and forefinger, while his round and
clean-shaven face wore an expression of merry perplexity.

But there was no trace of merriment or perplexity in the way he looked at
Mr Verloc.  Lying far back in the deep arm-chair, with squarely spread
elbows, and throwing one leg over a thick knee, he had with his smooth
and rosy countenance the air of a preternaturally thriving baby that will
not stand nonsense from anybody.

You understand French, I suppose? he said.

Mr Verloc stated huskily that he did.  His whole vast bulk had a forward
inclination.  He stood on the carpet in the middle of the room, clutching
his hat and stick in one hand; the other hung lifelessly by his side.  He
muttered unobtrusively somewhere deep down in his throat something about
having done his military service in the French artillery.  At once, with
contemptuous perversity, Mr Vladimir changed the language, and began to
speak idiomatic English without the slightest trace of a foreign accent.

Ah!  Yes.  Of course.  Lets see.  How much did you get for obtaining
the design of the improved breech-block of their new field-gun?

Five years rigorous confinement in a fortress, Mr Verloc answered
unexpectedly, but without any sign of feeling.

You got off easily, was Mr Vladimirs comment.  And, anyhow, it served
you right for letting yourself get caught.  What made you go in for that
sort of thingeh?

Mr Verlocs husky conversational voice was heard speaking of youth, of a
fatal infatuation for an unworthy

Aha!  Cherchez la femme, Mr Vladimir deigned to interrupt, unbending,
but without affability; there was, on the contrary, a touch of grimness
in his condescension.  How long have you been employed by the Embassy
here? he asked.

Ever since the time of the late Baron Stott-Wartenheim, Mr Verloc
answered in subdued tones, and protruding his lips sadly, in sign of
sorrow for the deceased diplomat.  The First Secretary observed this play
of physiognomy steadily.

Ah! ever since.  Well!  What have you got to say for yourself? he asked
sharply.

Mr Verloc answered with some surprise that he was not aware of having
anything special to say.  He had been summoned by a letterAnd he plunged
his hand busily into the side pocket of his overcoat, but before the
mocking, cynical watchfulness of Mr Vladimir, concluded to leave it
there.

Bah! said that latter.  What do you mean by getting out of condition
like this?  You havent got even the physique of your profession.  Youa
member of a starving proletariatnever!  Youa desperate socialist or
anarchistwhich is it?

Anarchist, stated Mr Verloc in a deadened tone.

Bosh! went on Mr Vladimir, without raising his voice.  You startled
old Wurmt himself.  You wouldnt deceive an idiot.  They all are that
by-the-by, but you seem to me simply impossible.  So you began your
connection with us by stealing the French gun designs.  And you got
yourself caught.  That must have been very disagreeable to our
Government.  You dont seem to be very smart.

Mr Verloc tried to exculpate himself huskily.

As Ive had occasion to observe before, a fatal infatuation for an
unworthy

Mr Vladimir raised a large white, plump hand.  Ah, yes.  The unlucky
attachmentof your youth.  She got hold of the money, and then sold you
to the policeeh?

The doleful change in Mr Verlocs physiognomy, the momentary drooping of
his whole person, confessed that such was the regrettable case.  Mr
Vladimirs hand clasped the ankle reposing on his knee.  The sock was of
dark blue silk.

You see, that was not very clever of you.  Perhaps you are too
susceptible.

Mr Verloc intimated in a throaty, veiled murmur that he was no longer
young.

Oh!  Thats a failing which age does not cure, Mr Vladimir remarked,
with sinister familiarity.  But no!  You are too fat for that.  You
could not have come to look like this if you had been at all susceptible.
Ill tell you what I think is the matter: you are a lazy fellow.  How
long have you been drawing pay from this Embassy?

Eleven years, was the answer, after a moment of sulky hesitation.
Ive been charged with several missions to London while His Excellency
Baron Stott-Wartenheim was still Ambassador in Paris.  Then by his
Excellencys instructions I settled down in London.  I am English.

You are!  Are you?  Eh?

A natural-born British subject, Mr Verloc said stolidly.  But my
father was French, and so

Never mind explaining, interrupted the other.  I daresay you could
have been legally a Marshal of France and a Member of Parliament in
Englandand then, indeed, you would have been of some use to our
Embassy.

This flight of fancy provoked something like a faint smile on Mr Verlocs
face.  Mr Vladimir retained an imperturbable gravity.

But, as Ive said, you are a lazy fellow; you dont use your
opportunities.  In the time of Baron Stott-Wartenheim we had a lot of
soft-headed people running this Embassy.  They caused fellows of your
sort to form a false conception of the nature of a secret service fund.
It is my business to correct this misapprehension by telling you what the
secret service is not.  It is not a philanthropic institution.  Ive had
you called here on purpose to tell you this.

Mr Vladimir observed the forced expression of bewilderment on Verlocs
face, and smiled sarcastically.

I see that you understand me perfectly.  I daresay you are intelligent
enough for your work.  What we want now is activityactivity.

On repeating this last word Mr Vladimir laid a long white forefinger on
the edge of the desk.  Every trace of huskiness disappeared from Verlocs
voice.  The nape of his gross neck became crimson above the velvet collar
of his overcoat.  His lips quivered before they came widely open.

If youll only be good enough to look up my record, he boomed out in
his great, clear oratorical bass, youll see I gave a warning only three
months ago, on the occasion of the Grand Duke Romualds visit to Paris,
which was telegraphed from here to the French police, and

Tut, tut! broke out Mr Vladimir, with a frowning grimace.  The French
police had no use for your warning.  Dont roar like this.  What the
devil do you mean?

With a note of proud humility Mr Verloc apologised for forgetting
himself.  His voice,famous for years at open-air meetings and at
workmens assemblies in large halls, had contributed, he said, to his
reputation of a good and trustworthy comrade.  It was, therefore, a part
of his usefulness.  It had inspired confidence in his principles.  I was
always put up to speak by the leaders at a critical moment, Mr Verloc
declared, with obvious satisfaction.  There was no uproar above which he
could not make himself heard, he added; and suddenly he made a
demonstration.

Allow me, he said.  With lowered forehead, without looking up, swiftly
and ponderously he crossed the room to one of the French windows.  As if
giving way to an uncontrollable impulse, he opened it a little.  Mr
Vladimir, jumping up amazed from the depths of the arm-chair, looked over
his shoulder; and below, across the courtyard of the Embassy, well beyond
the open gate, could be seen the broad back of a policeman watching idly
the gorgeous perambulator of a wealthy baby being wheeled in state across
the Square.

Constable! said Mr Verloc, with no more effort than if he were
whispering; and Mr Vladimir burst into a laugh on seeing the policeman
spin round as if prodded by a sharp instrument.  Mr Verloc shut the
window quietly, and returned to the middle of the room.

With a voice like that, he said, putting on the husky conversational
pedal, I was naturally trusted.  And I knew what to say, too.

Mr Vladimir, arranging his cravat, observed him in the glass over the
mantelpiece.

I daresay you have the social revolutionary jargon by heart well
enough, he said contemptuously.  Vox et. . . You havent ever studied
Latinhave you?

No, growled Mr Verloc.  You did not expect me to know it.  I belong to
the million.  Who knows Latin?  Only a few hundred imbeciles who arent
fit to take care of themselves.

For some thirty seconds longer Mr Vladimir studied in the mirror the
fleshy profile, the gross bulk, of the man behind him.  And at the same
time he had the advantage of seeing his own face, clean-shaved and round,
rosy about the gills, and with the thin sensitive lips formed exactly for
the utterance of those delicate witticisms which had made him such a
favourite in the very highest society.  Then he turned, and advanced into
the room with such determination that the very ends of his quaintly
old-fashioned bow necktie seemed to bristle with unspeakable menaces.
The movement was so swift and fierce that Mr Verloc, casting an oblique
glance, quailed inwardly.

Aha!  You dare be impudent, Mr Vladimir began, with an amazingly
guttural intonation not only utterly un-English, but absolutely
un-European, and startling even to Mr Verlocs experience of cosmopolitan
slums.  You dare!  Well, I am going to speak plain English to you.
Voice wont do.  We have no use for your voice.  We dont want a voice.
We want factsstartling factsdamn you, he added, with a sort of
ferocious discretion, right into Mr Verlocs face.

Dont you try to come over me with your Hyperborean manners, Mr Verloc
defended himself huskily, looking at the carpet.  At this his
interlocutor, smiling mockingly above the bristling bow of his necktie,
switched the conversation into French.

You give yourself for an agent provocateur.  The proper business of an
agent provocateur is to provoke.  As far as I can judge from your
record kept here, you have done nothing to earn your money for the last
three years.

Nothing! exclaimed Verloc, stirring not a limb, and not raising his
eyes, but with the note of sincere feeling in his tone.  I have several
times prevented what might have been

There is a proverb in this country which says prevention is better than
cure, interrupted Mr Vladimir, throwing himself into the arm-chair.  It
is stupid in a general way.  There is no end to prevention.  But it is
characteristic.  They dislike finality in this country.  Dont you be too
English.  And in this particular instance, dont be absurd.  The evil is
already here.  We dont want preventionwe want cure.

He paused, turned to the desk, and turning over some papers lying there,
spoke in a changed business-like tone, without looking at Mr Verloc.

You know, of course, of the International Conference assembled in
Milan?

Mr Verloc intimated hoarsely that he was in the habit of reading the
daily papers.  To a further question his answer was that, of course, he
understood what he read.  At this Mr Vladimir, smiling faintly at the
documents he was still scanning one after another, murmured As long as
it is not written in Latin, I suppose.

Or Chinese, added Mr Verloc stolidly.

Hm.  Some of your revolutionary friends effusions are written in a
_charabia_ every bit as incomprehensible as Chinese  Mr Vladimir let
fall disdainfully a grey sheet of printed matter.  What are all these
leaflets headed F. P., with a hammer, pen, and torch crossed?  What does
it mean, this F. P.?  Mr Verloc approached the imposing writing-table.

The Future of the Proletariat.  Its a society, he explained, standing
ponderously by the side of the arm-chair, not anarchist in principle,
but open to all shades of revolutionary opinion.

Are you in it?

One of the Vice-Presidents, Mr Verloc breathed out heavily; and the
First Secretary of the Embassy raised his head to look at him.

Then you ought to be ashamed of yourself, he said incisively.  Isnt
your society capable of anything else but printing this prophetic bosh in
blunt type on this filthy paper eh?  Why dont you do something?  Look
here.  Ive this matter in hand now, and I tell you plainly that you will
have to earn your money.  The good old Stott-Wartenheim times are over.
No work, no pay.

Mr Verloc felt a queer sensation of faintness in his stout legs.  He
stepped back one pace, and blew his nose loudly.

He was, in truth, startled and alarmed.  The rusty London sunshine
struggling clear of the London mist shed a lukewarm brightness into the
First Secretarys private room; and in the silence Mr Verloc heard
against a window-pane the faint buzzing of a flyhis first fly of the
yearheralding better than any number of swallows the approach of spring.
The useless fussing of that tiny energetic organism affected unpleasantly
this big man threatened in his indolence.

In the pause Mr Vladimir formulated in his mind a series of disparaging
remarks concerning Mr Verlocs face and figure.  The fellow was
unexpectedly vulgar, heavy, and impudently unintelligent.  He looked
uncommonly like a master plumber come to present his bill.  The First
Secretary of the Embassy, from his occasional excursions into the field
of American humour, had formed a special notion of that class of mechanic
as the embodiment of fraudulent laziness and incompetency.

This was then the famous and trusty secret agent, so secret that he was
never designated otherwise but by the symbol [delta] in the late Baron
Stott-Wartenheims official, semi-official, and confidential
correspondence; the celebrated agent [delta], whose warnings had the
power to change the schemes and the dates of royal, imperial, grand ducal
journeys, and sometimes caused them to be put off altogether!  This
fellow!  And Mr Vladimir indulged mentally in an enormous and derisive
fit of merriment, partly at his own astonishment, which he judged naive,
but mostly at the expense of the universally regretted Baron
Stott-Wartenheim.  His late Excellency, whom the august favour of his
Imperial master had imposed as Ambassador upon several reluctant
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, had enjoyed in his lifetime a fame for an
owlish, pessimistic gullibility.  His Excellency had the social
revolution on the brain.  He imagined himself to be a diplomatist set
apart by a special dispensation to watch the end of diplomacy, and pretty
nearly the end of the world, in a horrid democratic upheaval.  His
prophetic and doleful despatches had been for years the joke of Foreign
Offices.  He was said to have exclaimed on his deathbed (visited by his
Imperial friend and master): Unhappy Europe!  Thou shalt perish by the
moral insanity of thy children!  He was fated to be the victim of the
first humbugging rascal that came along, thought Mr Vladimir, smiling
vaguely at Mr Verloc.

You ought to venerate the memory of Baron Stott-Wartenheim, he
exclaimed suddenly.

The lowered physiognomy of Mr Verloc expressed a sombre and weary
annoyance.

Permit me to observe to you, he said, that I came here because I was
summoned by a peremptory letter.  I have been here only twice before in
the last eleven years, and certainly never at eleven in the morning.  It
isnt very wise to call me up like this.  There is just a chance of being
seen.  And that would be no joke for me.

Mr Vladimir shrugged his shoulders.

It would destroy my usefulness, continued the other hotly.

Thats your affair, murmured Mr Vladimir, with soft brutality.  When
you cease to be useful you shall cease to be employed.  Yes.  Right off.
Cut short.  You shall Mr Vladimir, frowning, paused, at a loss for a
sufficiently idiomatic expression, and instantly brightened up, with a
grin of beautifully white teeth.  You shall be chucked, he brought out
ferociously.

Once more Mr Verloc had to react with all the force of his will against
that sensation of faintness running down ones legs which once upon a
time had inspired some poor devil with the felicitous expression: My
heart went down into my boots.  Mr Verloc, aware of the sensation,
raised his head bravely.

Mr Vladimir bore the look of heavy inquiry with perfect serenity.

What we want is to administer a tonic to the Conference in Milan, he
said airily.  Its deliberations upon international action for the
suppression of political crime dont seem to get anywhere.  England lags.
This country is absurd with its sentimental regard for individual
liberty.  Its intolerable to think that all your friends have got only
to come over to

In that way I have them all under my eye, Mr Verloc interrupted
huskily.

It would be much more to the point to have them all under lock and key.
England must be brought into line.  The imbecile bourgeoisie of this
country make themselves the accomplices of the very people whose aim is
to drive them out of their houses to starve in ditches.  And they have
the political power still, if they only had the sense to use it for their
preservation.  I suppose you agree that the middle classes are stupid?

Mr Verloc agreed hoarsely.

They are.

They have no imagination.  They are blinded by an idiotic vanity.  What
they want just now is a jolly good scare.  This is the psychological
moment to set your friends to work.  I have had you called here to
develop to you my idea.

And Mr Vladimir developed his idea from on high, with scorn and
condescension, displaying at the same time an amount of ignorance as to
the real aims, thoughts, and methods of the revolutionary world which
filled the silent Mr Verloc with inward consternation.  He confounded
causes with effects more than was excusable; the most distinguished
propagandists with impulsive bomb throwers; assumed organisation where in
the nature of things it could not exist; spoke of the social
revolutionary party one moment as of a perfectly disciplined army, where
the word of chiefs was supreme, and at another as if it had been the
loosest association of desperate brigands that ever camped in a mountain
gorge.  Once Mr Verloc had opened his mouth for a protest, but the
raising of a shapely, large white hand arrested him.  Very soon he became
too appalled to even try to protest.  He listened in a stillness of dread
which resembled the immobility of profound attention.

A series of outrages, Mr Vladimir continued calmly, executed here in
this country; not only _planned_ herethat would not dothey would not
mind.  Your friends could set half the Continent on fire without
influencing the public opinion here in favour of a universal repressive
legislation.  They will not look outside their backyard here.

Mr Verloc cleared his throat, but his heart failed him, and he said
nothing.

These outrages need not be especially sanguinary, Mr Vladimir went on,
as if delivering a scientific lecture, but they must be sufficiently
startlingeffective.  Let them be directed against buildings, for
instance.  What is the fetish of the hour that all the bourgeoisie
recogniseeh, Mr Verloc?

Mr Verloc opened his hands and shrugged his shoulders slightly.

You are too lazy to think, was Mr Vladimirs comment upon that gesture.
Pay attention to what I say.  The fetish of to-day is neither royalty
nor religion.  Therefore the palace and the church should be left alone.
You understand what I mean, Mr Verloc?

The dismay and the scorn of Mr Verloc found vent in an attempt at levity.

Perfectly.  But what of the Embassies?  A series of attacks on the
various Embassies, he began; but he could not withstand the cold,
watchful stare of the First Secretary.

You can be facetious, I see, the latter observed carelessly.  Thats
all right.  It may enliven your oratory at socialistic congresses.  But
this room is no place for it.  It would be infinitely safer for you to
follow carefully what I am saying.  As you are being called upon to
furnish facts instead of cock-and-bull stories, you had better try to
make your profit off what I am taking the trouble to explain to you.  The
sacrosanct fetish of to-day is science.  Why dont you get some of your
friends to go for that wooden-faced panjandrumeh?  Is it not part of
these institutions which must be swept away before the F. P. comes
along?

Mr Verloc said nothing.  He was afraid to open his lips lest a groan
should escape him.

This is what you should try for.  An attempt upon a crowned head or on a
president is sensational enough in a way, but not so much as it used to
be.  It has entered into the general conception of the existence of all
chiefs of state.  Its almost conventionalespecially since so many
presidents have been assassinated.  Now let us take an outrage uponsay a
church.  Horrible enough at first sight, no doubt, and yet not so
effective as a person of an ordinary mind might think.  No matter how
revolutionary and anarchist in inception, there would be fools enough to
give such an outrage the character of a religious manifestation.  And
that would detract from the especial alarming significance we wish to
give to the act.  A murderous attempt on a restaurant or a theatre would
suffer in the same way from the suggestion of non-political passion: the
exasperation of a hungry man, an act of social revenge.  All this is used
up; it is no longer instructive as an object lesson in revolutionary
anarchism.  Every newspaper has ready-made phrases to explain such
manifestations away.  I am about to give you the philosophy of bomb
throwing from my point of view; from the point of view you pretend to
have been serving for the last eleven years.  I will try not to talk
above your head.  The sensibilities of the class you are attacking are
soon blunted.  Property seems to them an indestructible thing.  You cant
count upon their emotions either of pity or fear for very long.  A bomb
outrage to have any influence on public opinion now must go beyond the
intention of vengeance or terrorism.  It must be purely destructive.  It
must be that, and only that, beyond the faintest suspicion of any other
object.  You anarchists should make it clear that you are perfectly
determined to make a clean sweep of the whole social creation.  But how
to get that appallingly absurd notion into the heads of the middle
classes so that there should be no mistake?  Thats the question.  By
directing your blows at something outside the ordinary passions of
humanity is the answer.  Of course, there is art.  A bomb in the National
Gallery would make some noise.  But it would not be serious enough.  Art
has never been their fetish.  Its like breaking a few back windows in a
mans house; whereas, if you want to make him really sit up, you must try
at least to raise the roof.  There would be some screaming of course, but
from whom?  Artistsart critics and such likepeople of no account.
Nobody minds what they say.  But there is learningscience.  Any imbecile
that has got an income believes in that.  He does not know why, but he
believes it matters somehow.  It is the sacrosanct fetish.  All the
damned professors are radicals at heart.  Let them know that their great
panjandrum has got to go too, to make room for the Future of the
Proletariat.  A howl from all these intellectual idiots is bound to help
forward the labours of the Milan Conference.  They will be writing to the
papers.  Their indignation would be above suspicion, no material
interests being openly at stake, and it will alarm every selfishness of
the class which should be impressed.  They believe that in some
mysterious way science is at the source of their material prosperity.
They do.  And the absurd ferocity of such a demonstration will affect
them more profoundly than the mangling of a whole streetor theatrefull
of their own kind.  To that last they can always say: Oh! its mere
class hate.  But what is one to say to an act of destructive ferocity so
absurd as to be incomprehensible, inexplicable, almost unthinkable; in
fact, mad?  Madness alone is truly terrifying, inasmuch as you cannot
placate it either by threats, persuasion, or bribes.  Moreover, I am a
civilised man.  I would never dream of directing you to organise a mere
butchery, even if I expected the best results from it.  But I wouldnt
expect from a butchery the result I want.  Murder is always with us.  It
is almost an institution.  The demonstration must be against
learningscience.  But not every science will do.  The attack must have
all the shocking senselessness of gratuitous blasphemy.  Since bombs are
your means of expression, it would be really telling if one could throw a
bomb into pure mathematics.  But that is impossible.  I have been trying
to educate you; I have expounded to you the higher philosophy of your
usefulness, and suggested to you some serviceable arguments.  The
practical application of my teaching interests _you_ mostly.  But from
the moment I have undertaken to interview you I have also given some
attention to the practical aspect of the question.  What do you think of
having a go at astronomy?

For sometime already Mr Verlocs immobility by the side of the arm-chair
resembled a state of collapsed comaa sort of passive insensibility
interrupted by slight convulsive starts, such as may be observed in the
domestic dog having a nightmare on the hearthrug.  And it was in an
uneasy doglike growl that he repeated the word:

Astronomy.

He had not recovered thoroughly as yet from that state of bewilderment
brought about by the effort to follow Mr Vladimirs rapid incisive
utterance.  It had overcome his power of assimilation.  It had made him
angry.  This anger was complicated by incredulity.  And suddenly it
dawned upon him that all this was an elaborate joke.  Mr Vladimir
exhibited his white teeth in a smile, with dimples on his round, full
face posed with a complacent inclination above the bristling bow of his
neck-tie.  The favourite of intelligent society women had assumed his
drawing-room attitude accompanying the delivery of delicate witticisms.
Sitting well forward, his white hand upraised, he seemed to hold
delicately between his thumb and forefinger the subtlety of his
suggestion.

There could be nothing better.  Such an outrage combines the greatest
possible regard for humanity with the most alarming display of ferocious
imbecility.  I defy the ingenuity of journalists to persuade their public
that any given member of the proletariat can have a personal grievance
against astronomy.  Starvation itself could hardly be dragged in
thereeh?  And there are other advantages.  The whole civilised world has
heard of Greenwich.  The very boot-blacks in the basement of Charing
Cross Station know something of it.  See?

The features of Mr Vladimir, so well known in the best society by their
humorous urbanity, beamed with cynical self-satisfaction, which would
have astonished the intelligent women his wit entertained so exquisitely.
Yes, he continued, with a contemptuous smile, the blowing up of the
first meridian is bound to raise a howl of execration.

A difficult business, Mr Verloc mumbled, feeling that this was the only
safe thing to say.

What is the matter?  Havent you the whole gang under your hand?  The
very pick of the basket?  That old terrorist Yundt is here.  I see him
walking about Piccadilly in his green havelock almost every day.  And
Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostleyou dont mean to say you dont
know where he is?  Because if you dont, I can tell you, Mr Vladimir
went on menacingly.  If you imagine that you are the only one on the
secret fund list, you are mistaken.

This perfectly gratuitous suggestion caused Mr Verloc to shuffle his feet
slightly.

And the whole Lausanne loteh?  Havent they been flocking over here at
the first hint of the Milan Conference?  This is an absurd country.

It will cost money, Mr Verloc said, by a sort of instinct.

That cock wont fight, Mr Vladimir retorted, with an amazingly genuine
English accent.  Youll get your screw every month, and no more till
something happens.  And if nothing happens very soon you wont get even
that.  Whats your ostensible occupation?  What are you supposed to live
by?

I keep a shop, answered Mr Verloc.

A shop!  What sort of shop?

Stationery, newspapers.  My wife

Your what? interrupted Mr Vladimir in his guttural Central Asian tones.

My wife.  Mr Verloc raised his husky voice slightly.  I am married.

That be damned for a yarn, exclaimed the other in unfeigned
astonishment.  Married!  And you a professed anarchist, too!  What is
this confounded nonsense?  But I suppose its merely a manner of
speaking.  Anarchists dont marry.  Its well known.  They cant.  It
would be apostasy.

My wife isnt one, Mr Verloc mumbled sulkily.  Moreover, its no
concern of yours.

Oh yes, it is, snapped Mr Vladimir.  I am beginning to be convinced
that you are not at all the man for the work youve been employed on.
Why, you must have discredited yourself completely in your own world by
your marriage.  Couldnt you have managed without?  This is your virtuous
attachmenteh?  What with one sort of attachment and another you are
doing away with your usefulness.

Mr Verloc, puffing out his cheeks, let the air escape violently, and that
was all.  He had armed himself with patience.  It was not to be tried
much longer.  The First Secretary became suddenly very curt, detached,
final.

You may go now, he said.  A dynamite outrage must be provoked.  I give
you a month.  The sittings of the Conference are suspended.  Before it
reassembles again something must have happened here, or your connection
with us ceases.

He changed the note once more with an unprincipled versatility.

Think over my philosophy, MrMrVerloc, he said, with a sort of
chaffing condescension, waving his hand towards the door.  Go for the
first meridian.  You dont know the middle classes as well as I do.
Their sensibilities are jaded.  The first meridian.  Nothing better, and
nothing easier, I should think.

He had got up, and with his thin sensitive lips twitching humorously,
watched in the glass over the mantelpiece Mr Verloc backing out of the
room heavily, hat and stick in hand.  The door closed.

The footman in trousers, appearing suddenly in the corridor, let Mr
Verloc another way out and through a small door in the corner of the
courtyard.  The porter standing at the gate ignored his exit completely;
and Mr Verloc retraced the path of his mornings pilgrimage as if in a
dreaman angry dream.  This detachment from the material world was so
complete that, though the mortal envelope of Mr Verloc had not hastened
unduly along the streets, that part of him to which it would be
unwarrantably rude to refuse immortality, found itself at the shop door
all at once, as if borne from west to east on the wings of a great wind.
He walked straight behind the counter, and sat down on a wooden chair
that stood there.  No one appeared to disturb his solitude.  Stevie, put
into a green baize apron, was now sweeping and dusting upstairs, intent
and conscientious, as though he were playing at it; and Mrs Verloc,
warned in the kitchen by the clatter of the cracked bell, had merely come
to the glazed door of the parlour, and putting the curtain aside a
little, had peered into the dim shop.  Seeing her husband sitting there
shadowy and bulky, with his hat tilted far back on his head, she had at
once returned to her stove.  An hour or more later she took the green
baize apron off her brother Stevie, and instructed him to wash his hands
and face in the peremptory tone she had used in that connection for
fifteen years or soever since she had, in fact, ceased to attend to the
boys hands and face herself.  She spared presently a glance away from
her dishing-up for the inspection of that face and those hands which
Stevie, approaching the kitchen table, offered for her approval with an
air of self-assurance hiding a perpetual residue of anxiety.  Formerly
the anger of the father was the supremely effective sanction of these
rites, but Mr Verlocs placidity in domestic life would have made all
mention of anger incredible even to poor Stevies nervousness.  The
theory was that Mr Verloc would have been inexpressibly pained and
shocked by any deficiency of cleanliness at meal times.  Winnie after the
death of her father found considerable consolation in the feeling that
she need no longer tremble for poor Stevie.  She could not bear to see
the boy hurt.  It maddened her.  As a little girl she had often faced
with blazing eyes the irascible licensed victualler in defence of her
brother.  Nothing now in Mrs Verlocs appearance could lead one to
suppose that she was capable of a passionate demonstration.

She finished her dishing-up.  The table was laid in the parlour.  Going
to the foot of the stairs, she screamed out Mother!  Then opening the
glazed door leading to the shop, she said quietly Adolf!  Mr Verloc had
not changed his position; he had not apparently stirred a limb for an
hour and a half.  He got up heavily, and came to his dinner in his
overcoat and with his hat on, without uttering a word.  His silence in
itself had nothing startlingly unusual in this household, hidden in the
shades of the sordid street seldom touched by the sun, behind the dim
shop with its wares of disreputable rubbish.  Only that day Mr Verlocs
taciturnity was so obviously thoughtful that the two women were impressed
by it.  They sat silent themselves, keeping a watchful eye on poor
Stevie, lest he should break out into one of his fits of loquacity.  He
faced Mr Verloc across the table, and remained very good and quiet,
staring vacantly.  The endeavour to keep him from making himself
objectionable in any way to the master of the house put no inconsiderable
anxiety into these two womens lives.  That boy, as they alluded to him
softly between themselves, had been a source of that sort of anxiety
almost from the very day of his birth.  The late licensed victuallers
humiliation at having such a very peculiar boy for a son manifested
itself by a propensity to brutal treatment; for he was a person of fine
sensibilities, and his sufferings as a man and a father were perfectly
genuine.  Afterwards Stevie had to be kept from making himself a nuisance
to the single gentlemen lodgers, who are themselves a queer lot, and are
easily aggrieved.  And there was always the anxiety of his mere existence
to face.  Visions of a workhouse infirmary for her child had haunted the
old woman in the basement breakfast-room of the decayed Belgravian house.
If you had not found such a good husband, my dear, she used to say to
her daughter, I dont know what would have become of that poor boy.

Mr Verloc extended as much recognition to Stevie as a man not
particularly fond of animals may give to his wifes beloved cat; and this
recognition, benevolent and perfunctory, was essentially of the same
quality.  Both women admitted to themselves that not much more could be
reasonably expected.  It was enough to earn for Mr Verloc the old womans
reverential gratitude.  In the early days, made sceptical by the trials
of friendless life, she used sometimes to ask anxiously: You dont
think, my dear, that Mr Verloc is getting tired of seeing Stevie about?
To this Winnie replied habitually by a slight toss of her head.  Once,
however, she retorted, with a rather grim pertness: Hell have to get
tired of me first.  A long silence ensued.  The mother, with her feet
propped up on a stool, seemed to be trying to get to the bottom of that
answer, whose feminine profundity had struck her all of a heap.  She had
never really understood why Winnie had married Mr Verloc.  It was very
sensible of her, and evidently had turned out for the best, but her girl
might have naturally hoped to find somebody of a more suitable age.
There had been a steady young fellow, only son of a butcher in the next
street, helping his father in business, with whom Winnie had been walking
out with obvious gusto.  He was dependent on his father, it is true; but
the business was good, and his prospects excellent.  He took her girl to
the theatre on several evenings.  Then just as she began to dread to hear
of their engagement (for what could she have done with that big house
alone, with Stevie on her hands), that romance came to an abrupt end, and
Winnie went about looking very dull.  But Mr Verloc, turning up
providentially to occupy the first-floor front bedroom, there had been no
more question of the young butcher.  It was clearly providential.




CHAPTER III


 . . . All idealisation makes life poorer.  To beautify it is to take
away its character of complexityit is to destroy it.  Leave that to the
moralists, my boy.  History is made by men, but they do not make it in
their heads.  The ideas that are born in their consciousness play an
insignificant part in the march of events.  History is dominated and
determined by the tool and the productionby the force of economic
conditions.  Capitalism has made socialism, and the laws made by the
capitalism for the protection of property are responsible for anarchism.
No one can tell what form the social organisation may take in the future.
Then why indulge in prophetic phantasies?  At best they can only
interpret the mind of the prophet, and can have no objective value.
Leave that pastime to the moralists, my boy.

Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle, was speaking in an even voice, a
voice that wheezed as if deadened and oppressed by the layer of fat on
his chest.  He had come out of a highly hygienic prison round like a tub,
with an enormous stomach and distended cheeks of a pale, semi-transparent
complexion, as though for fifteen years the servants of an outraged
society had made a point of stuffing him with fattening foods in a damp
and lightless cellar.  And ever since he had never managed to get his
weight down as much as an ounce.

It was said that for three seasons running a very wealthy old lady had
sent him for a cure to Marienbadwhere he was about to share the public
curiosity once with a crowned headbut the police on that occasion
ordered him to leave within twelve hours.  His martyrdom was continued by
forbidding him all access to the healing waters.  But he was resigned
now.

With his elbow presenting no appearance of a joint, but more like a bend
in a dummys limb, thrown over the back of a chair, he leaned forward
slightly over his short and enormous thighs to spit into the grate.

Yes!  I had the time to think things out a little, he added without
emphasis.  Society has given me plenty of time for meditation.

On the other side of the fireplace, in the horse-hair arm-chair where Mrs
Verlocs mother was generally privileged to sit, Karl Yundt giggled
grimly, with a faint black grimace of a toothless mouth.  The terrorist,
as he called himself, was old and bald, with a narrow, snow-white wisp of
a goatee hanging limply from his chin.  An extraordinary expression of
underhand malevolence survived in his extinguished eyes.  When he rose
painfully the thrusting forward of a skinny groping hand deformed by
gouty swellings suggested the effort of a moribund murderer summoning all
his remaining strength for a last stab.  He leaned on a thick stick,
which trembled under his other hand.

I have always dreamed, he mouthed fiercely, of a band of men absolute
in their resolve to discard all scruples in the choice of means, strong
enough to give themselves frankly the name of destroyers, and free from
the taint of that resigned pessimism which rots the world.  No pity for
anything on earth, including themselves, and death enlisted for good and
all in the service of humanitythats what I would have liked to see.

His little bald head quivered, imparting a comical vibration to the wisp
of white goatee.  His enunciation would have been almost totally
unintelligible to a stranger.  His worn-out passion, resembling in its
impotent fierceness the excitement of a senile sensualist, was badly
served by a dried throat and toothless gums which seemed to catch the tip
of his tongue.  Mr Verloc, established in the corner of the sofa at the
other end of the room, emitted two hearty grunts of assent.

The old terrorist turned slowly his head on his skinny neck from side to
side.

And I could never get as many as three such men together.  So much for
your rotten pessimism, he snarled at Michaelis, who uncrossed his thick
legs, similar to bolsters, and slid his feet abruptly under his chair in
sign of exasperation.

He a pessimist!  Preposterous!  He cried out that the charge was
outrageous.  He was so far from pessimism that he saw already the end of
all private property coming along logically, unavoidably, by the mere
development of its inherent viciousness.  The possessors of property had
not only to face the awakened proletariat, but they had also to fight
amongst themselves.  Yes.  Struggle, warfare, was the condition of
private ownership.  It was fatal.  Ah! he did not depend upon emotional
excitement to keep up his belief, no declamations, no anger, no visions
of blood-red flags waving, or metaphorical lurid suns of vengeance rising
above the horizon of a doomed society.  Not he!  Cold reason, he boasted,
was the basis of his optimism.  Yes, optimism

His laborious wheezing stopped, then, after a gasp or two, he added:

Dont you think that, if I had not been the optimist I am, I could not
have found in fifteen years some means to cut my throat?  And, in the
last instance, there were always the walls of my cell to dash my head
against.

The shortness of breath took all fire, all animation out of his voice;
his great, pale cheeks hung like filled pouches, motionless, without a
quiver; but in his blue eyes, narrowed as if peering, there was the same
look of confident shrewdness, a little crazy in its fixity, they must
have had while the indomitable optimist sat thinking at night in his
cell.  Before him, Karl Yundt remained standing, one wing of his faded
greenish havelock thrown back cavalierly over his shoulder.  Seated in
front of the fireplace, Comrade Ossipon, ex-medical student, the
principal writer of the F. P. leaflets, stretched out his robust legs,
keeping the soles of his boots turned up to the glow in the grate.  A
bush of crinkly yellow hair topped his red, freckled face, with a
flattened nose and prominent mouth cast in the rough mould of the negro
type.  His almond-shaped eyes leered languidly over the high cheek-bones.
He wore a grey flannel shirt, the loose ends of a black silk tie hung
down the buttoned breast of his serge coat; and his head resting on the
back of his chair, his throat largely exposed, he raised to his lips a
cigarette in a long wooden tube, puffing jets of smoke straight up at the
ceiling.

Michaelis pursued his idea_the_ idea of his solitary reclusionthe
thought vouchsafed to his captivity and growing like a faith revealed in
visions.  He talked to himself, indifferent to the sympathy or hostility
of his hearers, indifferent indeed to their presence, from the habit he
had acquired of thinking aloud hopefully in the solitude of the four
whitewashed walls of his cell, in the sepulchral silence of the great
blind pile of bricks near a river, sinister and ugly like a colossal
mortuary for the socially drowned.

He was no good in discussion, not because any amount of argument could
shake his faith, but because the mere fact of hearing another voice
disconcerted him painfully, confusing his thoughts at oncethese thoughts
that for so many years, in a mental solitude more barren than a waterless
desert, no living voice had ever combatted, commented, or approved.

No one interrupted him now, and he made again the confession of his
faith, mastering him irresistible and complete like an act of grace: the
secret of fate discovered in the material side of life; the economic
condition of the world responsible for the past and shaping the future;
the source of all history, of all ideas, guiding the mental development
of mankind and the very impulses of their passion

A harsh laugh from Comrade Ossipon cut the tirade dead short in a sudden
faltering of the tongue and a bewildered unsteadiness of the apostles
mildly exalted eyes.  He closed them slowly for a moment, as if to
collect his routed thoughts.  A silence fell; but what with the two
gas-jets over the table and the glowing grate the little parlour behind
Mr Verlocs shop had become frightfully hot.  Mr Verloc, getting off the
sofa with ponderous reluctance, opened the door leading into the kitchen
to get more air, and thus disclosed the innocent Stevie, seated very good
and quiet at a deal table, drawing circles, circles, circles; innumerable
circles, concentric, eccentric; a coruscating whirl of circles that by
their tangled multitude of repeated curves, uniformity of form, and
confusion of intersecting lines suggested a rendering of cosmic chaos,
the symbolism of a mad art attempting the inconceivable.  The artist
never turned his head; and in all his souls application to the task his
back quivered, his thin neck, sunk into a deep hollow at the base of the
skull, seemed ready to snap.

Mr Verloc, after a grunt of disapproving surprise, returned to the sofa.
Alexander Ossipon got up, tall in his threadbare blue serge suit under
the low ceiling, shook off the stiffness of long immobility, and strolled
away into the kitchen (down two steps) to look over Stevies shoulder.
He came back, pronouncing oracularly: Very good.  Very characteristic,
perfectly typical.

Whats very good? grunted inquiringly Mr Verloc, settled again in the
corner of the sofa.  The other explained his meaning negligently, with a
shade of condescension and a toss of his head towards the kitchen:

Typical of this form of degeneracythese drawings, I mean.

You would call that lad a degenerate, would you? mumbled Mr Verloc.

Comrade Alexander Ossiponnicknamed the Doctor, ex-medical student
without a degree; afterwards wandering lecturer to working-mens
associations upon the socialistic aspects of hygiene; author of a popular
quasi-medical study (in the form of a cheap pamphlet seized promptly by
the police) entitled The Corroding Vices of the Middle Classes; special
delegate of the more or less mysterious Red Committee, together with Karl
Yundt and Michaelis for the work of literary propagandaturned upon the
obscure familiar of at least two Embassies that glance of insufferable,
hopelessly dense sufficiency which nothing but the frequentation of
science can give to the dulness of common mortals.

Thats what he may be called scientifically.  Very good type too,
altogether, of that sort of degenerate.  Its enough to glance at the
lobes of his ears.  If you read Lombroso

Mr Verloc, moody and spread largely on the sofa, continued to look down
the row of his waistcoat buttons; but his cheeks became tinged by a faint
blush.  Of late even the merest derivative of the word science (a term in
itself inoffensive and of indefinite meaning) had the curious power of
evoking a definitely offensive mental vision of Mr Vladimir, in his body
as he lived, with an almost supernatural clearness.  And this phenomenon,
deserving justly to be classed amongst the marvels of science, induced in
Mr Verloc an emotional state of dread and exasperation tending to express
itself in violent swearing.  But he said nothing.  It was Karl Yundt who
was heard, implacable to his last breath.

Lombroso is an ass.

Comrade Ossipon met the shock of this blasphemy by an awful, vacant
stare.  And the other, his extinguished eyes without gleams blackening
the deep shadows under the great, bony forehead, mumbled, catching the
tip of his tongue between his lips at every second word as though he were
chewing it angrily:

Did you ever see such an idiot?  For him the criminal is the prisoner.
Simple, is it not?  What about those who shut him up thereforced him in
there?  Exactly.  Forced him in there.  And what is crime?  Does he know
that, this imbecile who has made his way in this world of gorged fools by
looking at the ears and teeth of a lot of poor, luckless devils?  Teeth
and ears mark the criminal?  Do they?  And what about the law that marks
him still betterthe pretty branding instrument invented by the overfed
to protect themselves against the hungry?  Red-hot applications on their
vile skinshey?  Cant you smell and hear from here the thick hide of the
people burn and sizzle?  Thats how criminals are made for your Lombrosos
to write their silly stuff about.

The knob of his stick and his legs shook together with passion, whilst
the trunk, draped in the wings of the havelock, preserved his historic
attitude of defiance.  He seemed to sniff the tainted air of social
cruelty, to strain his ear for its atrocious sounds.  There was an
extraordinary force of suggestion in this posturing.  The all but
moribund veteran of dynamite wars had been a great actor in his
timeactor on platforms, in secret assemblies, in private interviews.
The famous terrorist had never in his life raised personally as much as
his little finger against the social edifice.  He was no man of action;
he was not even an orator of torrential eloquence, sweeping the masses
along in the rushing noise and foam of a great enthusiasm.  With a more
subtle intention, he took the part of an insolent and venomous evoker of
sinister impulses which lurk in the blind envy and exasperated vanity of
ignorance, in the suffering and misery of poverty, in all the hopeful and
noble illusions of righteous anger, pity, and revolt.  The shadow of his
evil gift clung to him yet like the smell of a deadly drug in an old vial
of poison, emptied now, useless, ready to be thrown away upon the
rubbish-heap of things that had served their time.

Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle, smiled vaguely with his glued
lips; his pasty moon face drooped under the weight of melancholy assent.
He had been a prisoner himself.  His own skin had sizzled under the
red-hot brand, he murmured softly.  But Comrade Ossipon, nicknamed the
Doctor, had got over the shock by that time.

You dont understand, he began disdainfully, but stopped short,
intimidated by the dead blackness of the cavernous eyes in the face
turned slowly towards him with a blind stare, as if guided only by the
sound.  He gave the discussion up, with a slight shrug of the shoulders.

Stevie, accustomed to move about disregarded, had got up from the kitchen
table, carrying off his drawing to bed with him.  He had reached the
parlour door in time to receive in full the shock of Karl Yundts
eloquent imagery.  The sheet of paper covered with circles dropped out of
his fingers, and he remained staring at the old terrorist, as if rooted
suddenly to the spot by his morbid horror and dread of physical pain.
Stevie knew very well that hot iron applied to ones skin hurt very much.
His scared eyes blazed with indignation: it would hurt terribly.  His
mouth dropped open.

Michaelis by staring unwinkingly at the fire had regained that sentiment
of isolation necessary for the continuity of his thought.  His optimism
had begun to flow from his lips.  He saw Capitalism doomed in its cradle,
born with the poison of the principle of competition in its system.  The
great capitalists devouring the little capitalists, concentrating the
power and the tools of production in great masses, perfecting industrial
processes, and in the madness of self-aggrandisement only preparing,
organising, enriching, making ready the lawful inheritance of the
suffering proletariat.  Michaelis pronounced the great word
Patienceand his clear blue glance, raised to the low ceiling of Mr
Verlocs parlour, had a character of seraphic trustfulness.  In the
doorway Stevie, calmed, seemed sunk in hebetude.

Comrade Ossipons face twitched with exasperation.

Then its no use doing anythingno use whatever.

I dont say that, protested Michaelis gently.  His vision of truth had
grown so intense that the sound of a strange voice failed to rout it this
time.  He continued to look down at the red coals.  Preparation for the
future was necessary, and he was willing to admit that the great change
would perhaps come in the upheaval of a revolution.  But he argued that
revolutionary propaganda was a delicate work of high conscience.  It was
the education of the masters of the world.  It should be as careful as
the education given to kings.  He would have it advance its tenets
cautiously, even timidly, in our ignorance of the effect that may be
produced by any given economic change upon the happiness, the morals, the
intellect, the history of mankind.  For history is made with tools, not
with ideas; and everything is changed by economic conditionsart,
philosophy, love, virtuetruth itself!

The coals in the grate settled down with a slight crash; and Michaelis,
the hermit of visions in the desert of a penitentiary, got up
impetuously.  Round like a distended balloon, he opened his short, thick
arms, as if in a pathetically hopeless attempt to embrace and hug to his
breast a self-regenerated universe.  He gasped with ardour.

The future is as certain as the pastslavery, feudalism, individualism,
collectivism.  This is the statement of a law, not an empty prophecy.

The disdainful pout of Comrade Ossipons thick lips accentuated the negro
type of his face.

Nonsense, he said calmly enough.  There is no law and no certainty.
The teaching propaganda be hanged.  What the people knows does not
matter, were its knowledge ever so accurate.  The only thing that matters
to us is the emotional state of the masses.  Without emotion there is no
action.

He paused, then added with modest firmness:

I am speaking now to you scientificallyscientificallyEh?  What did you
say, Verloc?

Nothing, growled from the sofa Mr Verloc, who, provoked by the
abhorrent sound, had merely muttered a Damn.

The venomous spluttering of the old terrorist without teeth was heard.

Do you know how I would call the nature of the present economic
conditions?  I would call it cannibalistic.  Thats what it is!  They are
nourishing their greed on the quivering flesh and the warm blood of the
peoplenothing else.

Stevie swallowed the terrifying statement with an audible gulp, and at
once, as though it had been swift poison, sank limply in a sitting
posture on the steps of the kitchen door.

Michaelis gave no sign of having heard anything.  His lips seemed glued
together for good; not a quiver passed over his heavy cheeks.  With
troubled eyes he looked for his round, hard hat, and put it on his round
head.  His round and obese body seemed to float low between the chairs
under the sharp elbow of Karl Yundt.  The old terrorist, raising an
uncertain and clawlike hand, gave a swaggering tilt to a black felt
sombrero shading the hollows and ridges of his wasted face.  He got in
motion slowly, striking the floor with his stick at every step.  It was
rather an affair to get him out of the house because, now and then, he
would stop, as if to think, and did not offer to move again till impelled
forward by Michaelis.  The gentle apostle grasped his arm with brotherly
care; and behind them, his hands in his pockets, the robust Ossipon
yawned vaguely.  A blue cap with a patent leather peak set well at the
back of his yellow bush of hair gave him the aspect of a Norwegian sailor
bored with the world after a thundering spree.  Mr Verloc saw his guests
off the premises, attending them bareheaded, his heavy overcoat hanging
open, his eyes on the ground.

He closed the door behind their backs with restrained violence, turned
the key, shot the bolt.  He was not satisfied with his friends.  In the
light of Mr Vladimirs philosophy of bomb throwing they appeared
hopelessly futile.  The part of Mr Verloc in revolutionary politics
having been to observe, he could not all at once, either in his own home
or in larger assemblies, take the initiative of action.  He had to be
cautious.  Moved by the just indignation of a man well over forty,
menaced in what is dearest to himhis repose and his securityhe asked
himself scornfully what else could have been expected from such a lot,
this Karl Yundt, this Michaelisthis Ossipon.

Pausing in his intention to turn off the gas burning in the middle of the
shop, Mr Verloc descended into the abyss of moral reflections.  With the
insight of a kindred temperament he pronounced his verdict.  A lazy
lotthis Karl Yundt, nursed by a blear-eyed old woman, a woman he had
years ago enticed away from a friend, and afterwards had tried more than
once to shake off into the gutter.  Jolly lucky for Yundt that she had
persisted in coming up time after time, or else there would have been no
one now to help him out of the bus by the Green Park railings, where
that spectre took its constitutional crawl every fine morning.  When that
indomitable snarling old witch died the swaggering spectre would have to
vanish toothere would be an end to fiery Karl Yundt.  And Mr Verlocs
morality was offended also by the optimism of Michaelis, annexed by his
wealthy old lady, who had taken lately to sending him to a cottage she
had in the country.  The ex-prisoner could moon about the shady lanes for
days together in a delicious and humanitarian idleness.  As to Ossipon,
that beggar was sure to want for nothing as long as there were silly
girls with savings-bank books in the world.  And Mr Verloc,
temperamentally identical with his associates, drew fine distinctions in
his mind on the strength of insignificant differences.  He drew them with
a certain complacency, because the instinct of conventional
respectability was strong within him, being only overcome by his dislike
of all kinds of recognised laboura temperamental defect which he shared
with a large proportion of revolutionary reformers of a given social
state.  For obviously one does not revolt against the advantages and
opportunities of that state, but against the price which must be paid for
the same in the coin of accepted morality, self-restraint, and toil.  The
majority of revolutionists are the enemies of discipline and fatigue
mostly.  There are natures too, to whose sense of justice the price
exacted looms up monstrously enormous, odious, oppressive, worrying,
humiliating, extortionate, intolerable.  Those are the fanatics.  The
remaining portion of social rebels is accounted for by vanity, the mother
of all noble and vile illusions, the companion of poets, reformers,
charlatans, prophets, and incendiaries.

Lost for a whole minute in the abyss of meditation, Mr Verloc did not
reach the depth of these abstract considerations.  Perhaps he was not
able.  In any case he had not the time.  He was pulled up painfully by
the sudden recollection of Mr Vladimir, another of his associates, whom
in virtue of subtle moral affinities he was capable of judging correctly.
He considered him as dangerous.  A shade of envy crept into his thoughts.
Loafing was all very well for these fellows, who knew not Mr Vladimir,
and had women to fall back upon; whereas he had a woman to provide for

At this point, by a simple association of ideas, Mr Verloc was brought
face to face with the necessity of going to bed some time or other that
evening.  Then why not go nowat once?  He sighed.  The necessity was not
so normally pleasurable as it ought to have been for a man of his age and
temperament.  He dreaded the demon of sleeplessness, which he felt had
marked him for its own.  He raised his arm, and turned off the flaring
gas-jet above his head.

A bright band of light fell through the parlour door into the part of the
shop behind the counter.  It enabled Mr Verloc to ascertain at a glance
the number of silver coins in the till.  These were but few; and for the
first time since he opened his shop he took a commercial survey of its
value.  This survey was unfavourable.  He had gone into trade for no
commercial reasons.  He had been guided in the selection of this peculiar
line of business by an instinctive leaning towards shady transactions,
where money is picked up easily.  Moreover, it did not take him out of
his own spherethe sphere which is watched by the police.  On the
contrary, it gave him a publicly confessed standing in that sphere, and
as Mr Verloc had unconfessed relations which made him familiar with yet
careless of the police, there was a distinct advantage in such a
situation.  But as a means of livelihood it was by itself insufficient.

He took the cash-box out of the drawer, and turning to leave the shop,
became aware that Stevie was still downstairs.

What on earth is he doing there?  Mr Verloc asked himself.  Whats the
meaning of these antics?  He looked dubiously at his brother-in-law, but
he did not ask him for information.  Mr Verlocs intercourse with Stevie
was limited to the casual mutter of a morning, after breakfast, My
boots, and even that was more a communication at large of a need than a
direct order or request.  Mr Verloc perceived with some surprise that he
did not know really what to say to Stevie.  He stood still in the middle
of the parlour, and looked into the kitchen in silence.  Nor yet did he
know what would happen if he did say anything.  And this appeared very
queer to Mr Verloc in view of the fact, borne upon him suddenly, that he
had to provide for this fellow too.  He had never given a moments
thought till then to that aspect of Stevies existence.

Positively he did not know how to speak to the lad.  He watched him
gesticulating and murmuring in the kitchen.  Stevie prowled round the
table like an excited animal in a cage.  A tentative Hadnt you better
go to bed now? produced no effect whatever; and Mr Verloc, abandoning
the stony contemplation of his brother-in-laws behaviour, crossed the
parlour wearily, cash-box in hand.  The cause of the general lassitude he
felt while climbing the stairs being purely mental, he became alarmed by
its inexplicable character.  He hoped he was not sickening for anything.
He stopped on the dark landing to examine his sensations.  But a slight
and continuous sound of snoring pervading the obscurity interfered with
their clearness.  The sound came from his mother-in-laws room.  Another
one to provide for, he thoughtand on this thought walked into the
bedroom.

Mrs Verloc had fallen asleep with the lamp (no gas was laid upstairs)
turned up full on the table by the side of the bed.  The light thrown
down by the shade fell dazzlingly on the white pillow sunk by the weight
of her head reposing with closed eyes and dark hair done up in several
plaits for the night.  She woke up with the sound of her name in her
ears, and saw her husband standing over her.

Winnie!  Winnie!

At first she did not stir, lying very quiet and looking at the cash-box
in Mr Verlocs hand.  But when she understood that her brother was
capering all over the place downstairs she swung out in one sudden
movement on to the edge of the bed.  Her bare feet, as if poked through
the bottom of an unadorned, sleeved calico sack buttoned tightly at neck
and wrists, felt over the rug for the slippers while she looked upward
into her husbands face.

I dont know how to manage him, Mr Verloc explained peevishly.  Wont
do to leave him downstairs alone with the lights.

She said nothing, glided across the room swiftly, and the door closed
upon her white form.

Mr Verloc deposited the cash-box on the night table, and began the
operation of undressing by flinging his overcoat on to a distant chair.
His coat and waistcoat followed.  He walked about the room in his
stockinged feet, and his burly figure, with the hands worrying nervously
at his throat, passed and repassed across the long strip of looking-glass
in the door of his wifes wardrobe.  Then after slipping his braces off
his shoulders he pulled up violently the venetian blind, and leaned his
forehead against the cold window-panea fragile film of glass stretched
between him and the enormity of cold, black, wet, muddy, inhospitable
accumulation of bricks, slates, and stones, things in themselves unlovely
and unfriendly to man.

Mr Verloc felt the latent unfriendliness of all out of doors with a force
approaching to positive bodily anguish.  There is no occupation that
fails a man more completely than that of a secret agent of police.  Its
like your horse suddenly falling dead under you in the midst of an
uninhabited and thirsty plain.  The comparison occurred to Mr Verloc
because he had sat astride various army horses in his time, and had now
the sensation of an incipient fall.  The prospect was as black as the
window-pane against which he was leaning his forehead.  And suddenly the
face of Mr Vladimir, clean-shaved and witty, appeared enhaloed in the
glow of its rosy complexion like a sort of pink seal, impressed on the
fatal darkness.

This luminous and mutilated vision was so ghastly physically that Mr
Verloc started away from the window, letting down the venetian blind with
a great rattle.  Discomposed and speechless with the apprehension of more
such visions, he beheld his wife re-enter the room and get into bed in a
calm business-like manner which made him feel hopelessly lonely in the
world.  Mrs Verloc expressed her surprise at seeing him up yet.

I dont feel very well, he muttered, passing his hands over his moist
brow.

Giddiness?

Yes.  Not at all well.

Mrs Verloc, with all the placidity of an experienced wife, expressed a
confident opinion as to the cause, and suggested the usual remedies; but
her husband, rooted in the middle of the room, shook his lowered head
sadly.

Youll catch cold standing there, she observed.

Mr Verloc made an effort, finished undressing, and got into bed.  Down
below in the quiet, narrow street measured footsteps approached the
house, then died away unhurried and firm, as if the passer-by had started
to pace out all eternity, from gas-lamp to gas-lamp in a night without
end; and the drowsy ticking of the old clock on the landing became
distinctly audible in the bedroom.

Mrs Verloc, on her back, and staring at the ceiling, made a remark.

Takings very small to-day.

Mr Verloc, in the same position, cleared his throat as if for an
important statement, but merely inquired:

Did you turn off the gas downstairs?

Yes; I did, answered Mrs Verloc conscientiously.  That poor boy is in
a very excited state to-night, she murmured, after a pause which lasted
for three ticks of the clock.

Mr Verloc cared nothing for Stevies excitement, but he felt horribly
wakeful, and dreaded facing the darkness and silence that would follow
the extinguishing of the lamp.  This dread led him to make the remark
that Stevie had disregarded his suggestion to go to bed.  Mrs Verloc,
falling into the trap, started to demonstrate at length to her husband
that this was not impudence of any sort, but simply excitement.
There was no young man of his age in London more willing and docile than
Stephen, she affirmed; none more affectionate and ready to please, and
even useful, as long as people did not upset his poor head.  Mrs Verloc,
turning towards her recumbent husband, raised herself on her elbow, and
hung over him in her anxiety that he should believe Stevie to be a useful
member of the family.  That ardour of protecting compassion exalted
morbidly in her childhood by the misery of another child tinged her
sallow cheeks with a faint dusky blush, made her big eyes gleam under the
dark lids.  Mrs Verloc then looked younger; she looked as young as Winnie
used to look, and much more animated than the Winnie of the Belgravian
mansion days had ever allowed herself to appear to gentlemen lodgers.  Mr
Verlocs anxieties had prevented him from attaching any sense to what his
wife was saying.  It was as if her voice were talking on the other side
of a very thick wall.  It was her aspect that recalled him to himself.

He appreciated this woman, and the sentiment of this appreciation,
stirred by a display of something resembling emotion, only added another
pang to his mental anguish.  When her voice ceased he moved uneasily, and
said:

I havent been feeling well for the last few days.

He might have meant this as an opening to a complete confidence; but Mrs
Verloc laid her head on the pillow again, and staring upward, went on:

That boy hears too much of what is talked about here.  If I had known
they were coming to-night I would have seen to it that he went to bed at
the same time I did.  He was out of his mind with something he overheard
about eating peoples flesh and drinking blood.  Whats the good of
talking like that?

There was a note of indignant scorn in her voice.  Mr Verloc was fully
responsive now.

Ask Karl Yundt, he growled savagely.

Mrs Verloc, with great decision, pronounced Karl Yundt a disgusting old
man.  She declared openly her affection for Michaelis.  Of the robust
Ossipon, in whose presence she always felt uneasy behind an attitude of
stony reserve, she said nothing whatever.  And continuing to talk of that
brother, who had been for so many years an object of care and fears:

He isnt fit to hear whats said here.  He believes its all true.  He
knows no better.  He gets into his passions over it.

Mr Verloc made no comment.

He glared at me, as if he didnt know who I was, when I went downstairs.
His heart was going like a hammer.  He cant help being excitable.  I
woke mother up, and asked her to sit with him till he went to sleep.  It
isnt his fault.  Hes no trouble when hes left alone.

Mr Verloc made no comment.

I wish he had never been to school, Mrs Verloc began again brusquely.
Hes always taking away those newspapers from the window to read.  He
gets a red face poring over them.  We dont get rid of a dozen numbers in
a month.  They only take up room in the front window.  And Mr Ossipon
brings every week a pile of these F. P. tracts to sell at a halfpenny
each.  I wouldnt give a halfpenny for the whole lot.  Its silly
readingthats what it is.  Theres no sale for it.  The other day Stevie
got hold of one, and there was a story in it of a German soldier officer
tearing half-off the ear of a recruit, and nothing was done to him for
it.  The brute!  I couldnt do anything with Stevie that afternoon.  The
story was enough, too, to make ones blood boil.  But whats the use of
printing things like that?  We arent German slaves here, thank God.
Its not our businessis it?

Mr Verloc made no reply.

I had to take the carving knife from the boy, Mrs Verloc continued, a
little sleepily now.  He was shouting and stamping and sobbing.  He
cant stand the notion of any cruelty.  He would have stuck that officer
like a pig if he had seen him then.  Its true, too!  Some people dont
deserve much mercy.  Mrs Verlocs voice ceased, and the expression of
her motionless eyes became more and more contemplative and veiled during
the long pause.  Comfortable, dear? she asked in a faint, far-away
voice.  Shall I put out the light now?

The dreary conviction that there was no sleep for him held Mr Verloc mute
and hopelessly inert in his fear of darkness.  He made a great effort.

Yes.  Put it out, he said at last in a hollow tone.




CHAPTER IV


Most of the thirty or so little tables covered by red cloths with a white
design stood ranged at right angles to the deep brown wainscoting of the
underground hall.  Bronze chandeliers with many globes depended from the
low, slightly vaulted ceiling, and the fresco paintings ran flat and dull
all round the walls without windows, representing scenes of the chase and
of outdoor revelry in medival costumes.  Varlets in green jerkins
brandished hunting knives and raised on high tankards of foaming beer.

Unless I am very much mistaken, you are the man who would know the
inside of this confounded affair, said the robust Ossipon, leaning over,
his elbows far out on the table and his feet tucked back completely under
his chair.  His eyes stared with wild eagerness.

An upright semi-grand piano near the door, flanked by two palms in pots,
executed suddenly all by itself a valse tune with aggressive virtuosity.
The din it raised was deafening.  When it ceased, as abruptly as it had
started, the be-spectacled, dingy little man who faced Ossipon behind a
heavy glass mug full of beer emitted calmly what had the sound of a
general proposition.

In principle what one of us may or may not know as to any given fact
cant be a matter for inquiry to the others.

Certainly not, Comrade Ossipon agreed in a quiet undertone.  In
principle.

With his big florid face held between his hands he continued to stare
hard, while the dingy little man in spectacles coolly took a drink of
beer and stood the glass mug back on the table.  His flat, large ears
departed widely from the sides of his skull, which looked frail enough
for Ossipon to crush between thumb and forefinger; the dome of the
forehead seemed to rest on the rim of the spectacles; the flat cheeks, of
a greasy, unhealthy complexion, were merely smudged by the miserable
poverty of a thin dark whisker.  The lamentable inferiority of the whole
physique was made ludicrous by the supremely self-confident bearing of
the individual.  His speech was curt, and he had a particularly
impressive manner of keeping silent.

Ossipon spoke again from between his hands in a mutter.

Have you been out much to-day?

No.  I stayed in bed all the morning, answered the other.  Why?

Oh!  Nothing, said Ossipon, gazing earnestly and quivering inwardly
with the desire to find out something, but obviously intimidated by the
little mans overwhelming air of unconcern.  When talking with this
comradewhich happened but rarelythe big Ossipon suffered from a sense
of moral and even physical insignificance.  However, he ventured another
question.  Did you walk down here?

No; omnibus, the little man answered readily enough.  He lived far away
in Islington, in a small house down a shabby street, littered with straw
and dirty paper, where out of school hours a troop of assorted children
ran and squabbled with a shrill, joyless, rowdy clamour.  His single back
room, remarkable for having an extremely large cupboard, he rented
furnished from two elderly spinsters, dressmakers in a humble way with a
clientele of servant girls mostly.  He had a heavy padlock put on the
cupboard, but otherwise he was a model lodger, giving no trouble, and
requiring practically no attendance.  His oddities were that he insisted
on being present when his room was being swept, and that when he went out
he locked his door, and took the key away with him.

Ossipon had a vision of these round black-rimmed spectacles progressing
along the streets on the top of an omnibus, their self-confident glitter
falling here and there on the walls of houses or lowered upon the heads
of the unconscious stream of people on the pavements.  The ghost of a
sickly smile altered the set of Ossipons thick lips at the thought of
the walls nodding, of people running for life at the sight of those
spectacles.  If they had only known!  What a panic!  He murmured
interrogatively: Been sitting long here?

An hour or more, answered the other negligently, and took a pull at the
dark beer.  All his movementsthe way he grasped the mug, the act of
drinking, the way he set the heavy glass down and folded his armshad a
firmness, an assured precision which made the big and muscular Ossipon,
leaning forward with staring eyes and protruding lips, look the picture
of eager indecision.

An hour, he said.  Then it may be you havent heard yet the news Ive
heard just nowin the street.  Have you?

The little man shook his head negatively the least bit.  But as he gave
no indication of curiosity Ossipon ventured to add that he had heard it
just outside the place.  A newspaper boy had yelled the thing under his
very nose, and not being prepared for anything of that sort, he was very
much startled and upset.  He had to come in there with a dry mouth.  I
never thought of finding you here, he added, murmuring steadily, with
his elbows planted on the table.

I come here sometimes, said the other, preserving his provoking
coolness of demeanour.

Its wonderful that you of all people should have heard nothing of it,
the big Ossipon continued.  His eyelids snapped nervously upon the
shining eyes.  You of all people, he repeated tentatively.  This
obvious restraint argued an incredible and inexplicable timidity of the
big fellow before the calm little man, who again lifted the glass mug,
drank, and put it down with brusque and assured movements.  And that was
all.

Ossipon after waiting for something, word or sign, that did not come,
made an effort to assume a sort of indifference.

Do you, he said, deadening his voice still more, give your stuff to
anybody whos up to asking you for it?

My absolute rule is never to refuse anybodyas long as I have a pinch by
me, answered the little man with decision.

Thats a principle? commented Ossipon.

Its a principle.

And you think its sound?

The large round spectacles, which gave a look of staring self-confidence
to the sallow face, confronted Ossipon like sleepless, unwinking orbs
flashing a cold fire.

Perfectly.  Always.  Under every circumstance.  What could stop me?  Why
should I not?  Why should I think twice about it?

Ossipon gasped, as it were, discreetly.

Do you mean to say you would hand it over to a teck if one came to ask
you for your wares?

The other smiled faintly.

Let them come and try it on, and you will see, he said.  They know me,
but I know also every one of them.  They wont come near menot they.

His thin livid lips snapped together firmly.  Ossipon began to argue.

But they could send someonerig a plant on you.  Dont you see?  Get the
stuff from you in that way, and then arrest you with the proof in their
hands.

Proof of what?  Dealing in explosives without a licence perhaps.  This
was meant for a contemptuous jeer, though the expression of the thin,
sickly face remained unchanged, and the utterance was negligent.  I
dont think theres one of them anxious to make that arrest.  I dont
think they could get one of them to apply for a warrant.  I mean one of
the best.  Not one.

Why? Ossipon asked.

Because they know very well I take care never to part with the last
handful of my wares.  Ive it always by me.  He touched the breast of
his coat lightly.  In a thick glass flask, he added.

So I have been told, said Ossipon, with a shade of wonder in his voice.
But I didnt know if

They know, interrupted the little man crisply, leaning against the
straight chair back, which rose higher than his fragile head.  I shall
never be arrested.  The game isnt good enough for any policeman of them
all.  To deal with a man like me you require sheer, naked, inglorious
heroism.  Again his lips closed with a self-confident snap.  Ossipon
repressed a movement of impatience.

Or recklessnessor simply ignorance, he retorted.  Theyve only to get
somebody for the job who does not know you carry enough stuff in your
pocket to blow yourself and everything within sixty yards of you to
pieces.

I never affirmed I could not be eliminated, rejoined the other.  But
that wouldnt be an arrest.  Moreover, its not so easy as it looks.

Bah! Ossipon contradicted.  Dont be too sure of that.  Whats to
prevent half-a-dozen of them jumping upon you from behind in the street?
With your arms pinned to your sides you could do nothingcould you?

Yes; I could.  I am seldom out in the streets after dark, said the
little man impassively, and never very late.  I walk always with my
right hand closed round the india-rubber ball which I have in my trouser
pocket.  The pressing of this ball actuates a detonator inside the flask
I carry in my pocket.  Its the principle of the pneumatic instantaneous
shutter for a camera lens.  The tube leads up

With a swift disclosing gesture he gave Ossipon a glimpse of an
india-rubber tube, resembling a slender brown worm, issuing from the
armhole of his waistcoat and plunging into the inner breast pocket of his
jacket.  His clothes, of a nondescript brown mixture, were threadbare and
marked with stains, dusty in the folds, with ragged button-holes.  The
detonator is partly mechanical, partly chemical, he explained, with
casual condescension.

It is instantaneous, of course? murmured Ossipon, with a slight
shudder.

Far from it, confessed the other, with a reluctance which seemed to
twist his mouth dolorously.  A full twenty seconds must elapse from the
moment I press the ball till the explosion takes place.

Phew! whistled Ossipon, completely appalled.  Twenty seconds!
Horrors!  You mean to say that you could face that?  I should go crazy

Wouldnt matter if you did.  Of course, its the weak point of this
special system, which is only for my own use.  The worst is that the
manner of exploding is always the weak point with us.  I am trying to
invent a detonator that would adjust itself to all conditions of action,
and even to unexpected changes of conditions.  A variable and yet
perfectly precise mechanism.  A really intelligent detonator.

Twenty seconds, muttered Ossipon again.  Ough!  And then

With a slight turn of the head the glitter of the spectacles seemed to
gauge the size of the beer saloon in the basement of the renowned Silenus
Restaurant.

Nobody in this room could hope to escape, was the verdict of that
survey.  Nor yet this couple going up the stairs now.

The piano at the foot of the staircase clanged through a mazurka with
brazen impetuosity, as though a vulgar and impudent ghost were showing
off.  The keys sank and rose mysteriously.  Then all became still.  For a
moment Ossipon imagined the overlighted place changed into a dreadful
black hole belching horrible fumes choked with ghastly rubbish of smashed
brickwork and mutilated corpses.  He had such a distinct perception of
ruin and death that he shuddered again.  The other observed, with an air
of calm sufficiency:

In the last instance it is character alone that makes for ones safety.
There are very few people in the world whose character is as well
established as mine.

I wonder how you managed it, growled Ossipon.

Force of personality, said the other, without raising his voice; and
coming from the mouth of that obviously miserable organism the assertion
caused the robust Ossipon to bite his lower lip.  Force of personality,
he repeated, with ostentatious calm.  I have the means to make myself
deadly, but that by itself, you understand, is absolutely nothing in the
way of protection.  What is effective is the belief those people have in
my will to use the means.  Thats their impression.  It is absolute.
Therefore I am deadly.

There are individuals of character amongst that lot too, muttered
Ossipon ominously.

Possibly.  But it is a matter of degree obviously, since, for instance,
I am not impressed by them.  Therefore they are inferior.  They cannot be
otherwise.  Their character is built upon conventional morality.  It
leans on the social order.  Mine stands free from everything artificial.
They are bound in all sorts of conventions.  They depend on life, which,
in this connection, is a historical fact surrounded by all sorts of
restraints and considerations, a complex organised fact open to attack at
every point; whereas I depend on death, which knows no restraint and
cannot be attacked.  My superiority is evident.

This is a transcendental way of putting it, said Ossipon, watching the
cold glitter of the round spectacles.  Ive heard Karl Yundt say much
the same thing not very long ago.

Karl Yundt, mumbled the other contemptuously, the delegate of the
International Red Committee, has been a posturing shadow all his life.
There are three of you delegates, arent there?  I wont define the other
two, as you are one of them.  But what you say means nothing.  You are
the worthy delegates for revolutionary propaganda, but the trouble is not
only that you are as unable to think independently as any respectable
grocer or journalist of them all, but that you have no character
whatever.

Ossipon could not restrain a start of indignation.

But what do you want from us? he exclaimed in a deadened voice.  What
is it you are after yourself?

A perfect detonator, was the peremptory answer.  What are you making
that face for?  You see, you cant even bear the mention of something
conclusive.

I am not making a face, growled the annoyed Ossipon bearishly.

You revolutionists, the other continued, with leisurely
self-confidence, are the slaves of the social convention, which is
afraid of you; slaves of it as much as the very police that stands up in
the defence of that convention.  Clearly you are, since you want to
revolutionise it.  It governs your thought, of course, and your action
too, and thus neither your thought nor your action can ever be
conclusive.  He paused, tranquil, with that air of close, endless
silence, then almost immediately went on.  You are not a bit better than
the forces arrayed against youthan the police, for instance.  The other
day I came suddenly upon Chief Inspector Heat at the corner of Tottenham
Court Road.  He looked at me very steadily.  But I did not look at him.
Why should I give him more than a glance?  He was thinking of many
thingsof his superiors, of his reputation, of the law courts, of his
salary, of newspapersof a hundred things.  But I was thinking of my
perfect detonator only.  He meant nothing to me.  He was as insignificant
asI cant call to mind anything insignificant enough to compare him
withexcept Karl Yundt perhaps.  Like to like.  The terrorist and the
policeman both come from the same basket.  Revolution, legalitycounter
moves in the same game; forms of idleness at bottom identical.  He plays
his little gameso do you propagandists.  But I dont play; I work
fourteen hours a day, and go hungry sometimes.  My experiments cost money
now and again, and then I must do without food for a day or two.  Youre
looking at my beer.  Yes.  I have had two glasses already, and shall have
another presently.  This is a little holiday, and I celebrate it alone.
Why not?  Ive the grit to work alone, quite alone, absolutely alone.
Ive worked alone for years.

Ossipons face had turned dusky red.

At the perfect detonatoreh? he sneered, very low.

Yes, retorted the other.  It is a good definition.  You couldnt find
anything half so precise to define the nature of your activity with all
your committees and delegations.  It is I who am the true propagandist.

We wont discuss that point, said Ossipon, with an air of rising above
personal considerations.  I am afraid Ill have to spoil your holiday
for you, though.  Theres a man blown up in Greenwich Park this morning.

How do you know?

They have been yelling the news in the streets since two oclock.  I
bought the paper, and just ran in here.  Then I saw you sitting at this
table.  Ive got it in my pocket now.

He pulled the newspaper out.  It was a good-sized rosy sheet, as if
flushed by the warmth of its own convictions, which were optimistic.  He
scanned the pages rapidly.

Ah!  Here it is.  Bomb in Greenwich Park.  There isnt much so far.
Half-past eleven.  Foggy morning.  Effects of explosion felt as far as
Romney Road and Park Place.  Enormous hole in the ground under a tree
filled with smashed roots and broken branches.  All round fragments of a
mans body blown to pieces.  Thats all.  The rests mere newspaper gup.
No doubt a wicked attempt to blow up the Observatory, they say.  Hm.
Thats hardly credible.

He looked at the paper for a while longer in silence, then passed it to
the other, who after gazing abstractedly at the print laid it down
without comment.

It was Ossipon who spoke firststill resentful.

The fragments of only _one_ man, you note.  Ergo: blew _himself_ up.
That spoils your day off for youdont it?  Were you expecting that sort
of move?  I hadnt the slightest ideanot the ghost of a notion of
anything of the sort being planned to come off herein this country.
Under the present circumstances its nothing short of criminal.

The little man lifted his thin black eyebrows with dispassionate scorn.

Criminal!  What is that?  What _is_ crime?  What can be the meaning of
such an assertion?

How am I to express myself?  One must use the current words, said
Ossipon impatiently.  The meaning of this assertion is that this
business may affect our position very adversely in this country.  Isnt
that crime enough for you?  I am convinced you have been giving away some
of your stuff lately.

Ossipon stared hard.  The other, without flinching, lowered and raised
his head slowly.

You have! burst out the editor of the F. P. leaflets in an intense
whisper.  No!  And are you really handing it over at large like this,
for the asking, to the first fool that comes along?

Just so!  The condemned social order has not been built up on paper and
ink, and I dont fancy that a combination of paper and ink will ever put
an end to it, whatever you may think.  Yes, I would give the stuff with
both hands to every man, woman, or fool that likes to come along.  I know
what you are thinking about.  But I am not taking my cue from the Red
Committee.  I would see you all hounded out of here, or arrestedor
beheaded for that matterwithout turning a hair.  What happens to us as
individuals is not of the least consequence.

He spoke carelessly, without heat, almost without feeling, and Ossipon,
secretly much affected, tried to copy this detachment.

If the police here knew their business they would shoot you full of
holes with revolvers, or else try to sand-bag you from behind in broad
daylight.

The little man seemed already to have considered that point of view in
his dispassionate self-confident manner.

Yes, he assented with the utmost readiness.  But for that they would
have to face their own institutions.  Do you see?  That requires uncommon
grit.  Grit of a special kind.

Ossipon blinked.

I fancy thats exactly what would happen to you if you were to set up
your laboratory in the States.  They dont stand on ceremony with their
institutions there.

I am not likely to go and see.  Otherwise your remark is just, admitted
the other.  They have more character over there, and their character is
essentially anarchistic.  Fertile ground for us, the Statesvery good
ground.  The great Republic has the root of the destructive matter in
her.  The collective temperament is lawless.  Excellent.  They may shoot
us down, but

You are too transcendental for me, growled Ossipon, with moody concern.

Logical, protested the other.  There are several kinds of logic.  This
is the enlightened kind.  America is all right.  It is this country that
is dangerous, with her idealistic conception of legality.  The social
spirit of this people is wrapped up in scrupulous prejudices, and that is
fatal to our work.  You talk of England being our only refuge!  So much
the worse.  Capua!  What do we want with refuges?  Here you talk, print,
plot, and do nothing.  I daresay its very convenient for such Karl
Yundts.

He shrugged his shoulders slightly, then added with the same leisurely
assurance: To break up the superstition and worship of legality should
be our aim.  Nothing would please me more than to see Inspector Heat and
his likes take to shooting us down in broad daylight with the approval of
the public.  Half our battle would be won then; the disintegration of the
old morality would have set in in its very temple.  That is what you
ought to aim at.  But you revolutionists will never understand that.  You
plan the future, you lose yourselves in reveries of economical systems
derived from what is; whereas whats wanted is a clean sweep and a clear
start for a new conception of life.  That sort of future will take care
of itself if you will only make room for it.  Therefore I would shovel my
stuff in heaps at the corners of the streets if I had enough for that;
and as I havent, I do my best by perfecting a really dependable
detonator.

Ossipon, who had been mentally swimming in deep waters, seized upon the
last word as if it were a saving plank.

Yes.  Your detonators.  I shouldnt wonder if it werent one of your
detonators that made a clean sweep of the man in the park.

A shade of vexation darkened the determined sallow face confronting
Ossipon.

My difficulty consists precisely in experimenting practically with the
various kinds.  They must be tried after all.  Besides

Ossipon interrupted.

Who could that fellow be?  I assure you that we in London had no
knowledgeCouldnt you describe the person you gave the stuff to?

The other turned his spectacles upon Ossipon like a pair of searchlights.

Describe him, he repeated slowly.  I dont think there can be the
slightest objection now.  I will describe him to you in one wordVerloc.

Ossipon, whom curiosity had lifted a few inches off his seat, dropped
back, as if hit in the face.

Verloc!  Impossible.

The self-possessed little man nodded slightly once.

Yes.  Hes the person.  You cant say that in this case I was giving my
stuff to the first fool that came along.  He was a prominent member of
the group as far as I understand.

Yes, said Ossipon.  Prominent.  No, not exactly.  He was the centre
for general intelligence, and usually received comrades coming over here.
More useful than important.  Man of no ideas.  Years ago he used to speak
at meetingsin France, I believe.  Not very well, though.  He was trusted
by such men as Latorre, Moser and all that old lot.  The only talent he
showed really was his ability to elude the attentions of the police
somehow.  Here, for instance, he did not seem to be looked after very
closely.  He was regularly married, you know.  I suppose its with her
money that he started that shop.  Seemed to make it pay, too.

Ossipon paused abruptly, muttered to himself I wonder what that woman
will do now? and fell into thought.

The other waited with ostentatious indifference.  His parentage was
obscure, and he was generally known only by his nickname of Professor.
His title to that designation consisted in his having been once assistant
demonstrator in chemistry at some technical institute.  He quarrelled
with the authorities upon a question of unfair treatment.  Afterwards he
obtained a post in the laboratory of a manufactory of dyes.  There too he
had been treated with revolting injustice.  His struggles, his
privations, his hard work to raise himself in the social scale, had
filled him with such an exalted conviction of his merits that it was
extremely difficult for the world to treat him with justicethe standard
of that notion depending so much upon the patience of the individual.
The Professor had genius, but lacked the great social virtue of
resignation.

Intellectually a nonentity, Ossipon pronounced aloud, abandoning
suddenly the inward contemplation of Mrs Verlocs bereaved person and
business.  Quite an ordinary personality.  You are wrong in not keeping
more in touch with the comrades, Professor, he added in a reproving
tone.  Did he say anything to yougive you some idea of his intentions?
I hadnt seen him for a month.  It seems impossible that he should be
gone.

He told me it was going to be a demonstration against a building, said
the Professor.  I had to know that much to prepare the missile.  I
pointed out to him that I had hardly a sufficient quantity for a
completely destructive result, but he pressed me very earnestly to do my
best.  As he wanted something that could be carried openly in the hand, I
proposed to make use of an old one-gallon copal varnish can I happened to
have by me.  He was pleased at the idea.  It gave me some trouble,
because I had to cut out the bottom first and solder it on again
afterwards.  When prepared for use, the can enclosed a wide-mouthed,
well-corked jar of thick glass packed around with some wet clay and
containing sixteen ounces of X2 green powder.  The detonator was
connected with the screw top of the can.  It was ingeniousa combination
of time and shock.  I explained the system to him.  It was a thin tube of
tin enclosing a

Ossipons attention had wandered.

What do you think has happened? he interrupted.

Cant tell.  Screwed the top on tight, which would make the connection,
and then forgot the time.  It was set for twenty minutes.  On the other
hand, the time contact being made, a sharp shock would bring about the
explosion at once.  He either ran the time too close, or simply let the
thing fall.  The contact was made all rightthats clear to me at any
rate.  The systems worked perfectly.  And yet you would think that a
common fool in a hurry would be much more likely to forget to make the
contact altogether.  I was worrying myself about that sort of failure
mostly.  But there are more kinds of fools than one can guard against.
You cant expect a detonator to be absolutely fool-proof.

He beckoned to a waiter.  Ossipon sat rigid, with the abstracted gaze of
mental travail.  After the man had gone away with the money he roused
himself, with an air of profound dissatisfaction.

Its extremely unpleasant for me, he mused.  Karl has been in bed with
bronchitis for a week.  Theres an even chance that he will never get up
again.  Michaeliss luxuriating in the country somewhere.  A fashionable
publisher has offered him five hundred pounds for a book.  It will be a
ghastly failure.  He has lost the habit of consecutive thinking in
prison, you know.

The Professor on his feet, now buttoning his coat, looked about him with
perfect indifference.

What are you going to do? asked Ossipon wearily.  He dreaded the blame
of the Central Red Committee, a body which had no permanent place of
abode, and of whose membership he was not exactly informed.  If this
affair eventuated in the stoppage of the modest subsidy allotted to the
publication of the F. P. pamphlets, then indeed he would have to regret
Verlocs inexplicable folly.

Solidarity with the extremest form of action is one thing, and silly
recklessness is another, he said, with a sort of moody brutality.  I
dont know what came to Verloc.  Theres some mystery there.  However,
hes gone.  You may take it as you like, but under the circumstances the
only policy for the militant revolutionary group is to disclaim all
connection with this damned freak of yours.  How to make the disclaimer
convincing enough is what bothers me.

The little man on his feet, buttoned up and ready to go, was no taller
than the seated Ossipon.  He levelled his spectacles at the latters face
point-blank.

You might ask the police for a testimonial of good conduct.  They know
where every one of you slept last night.  Perhaps if you asked them they
would consent to publish some sort of official statement.

No doubt they are aware well enough that we had nothing to do with
this, mumbled Ossipon bitterly.  What they will say is another thing.
He remained thoughtful, disregarding the short, owlish, shabby figure
standing by his side.  I must lay hands on Michaelis at once, and get
him to speak from his heart at one of our gatherings.  The public has a
sort of sentimental regard for that fellow.  His name is known.  And I am
in touch with a few reporters on the big dailies.  What he would say
would be utter bosh, but he has a turn of talk that makes it go down all
the same.

Like treacle, interjected the Professor, rather low, keeping an
impassive expression.

The perplexed Ossipon went on communing with himself half audibly, after
the manner of a man reflecting in perfect solitude.

Confounded ass!  To leave such an imbecile business on my hands.  And I
dont even know if

He sat with compressed lips.  The idea of going for news straight to the
shop lacked charm.  His notion was that Verlocs shop might have been
turned already into a police trap.  They will be bound to make some
arrests, he thought, with something resembling virtuous indignation, for
the even tenor of his revolutionary life was menaced by no fault of his.
And yet unless he went there he ran the risk of remaining in ignorance of
what perhaps it would be very material for him to know.  Then he
reflected that, if the man in the park had been so very much blown to
pieces as the evening papers said, he could not have been identified.
And if so, the police could have no special reason for watching Verlocs
shop more closely than any other place known to be frequented by marked
anarchistsno more reason, in fact, than for watching the doors of the
Silenus.  There would be a lot of watching all round, no matter where he
went.  Still

I wonder what I had better do now? he muttered, taking counsel with
himself.

A rasping voice at his elbow said, with sedate scorn:

Fasten yourself upon the woman for all shes worth.

After uttering these words the Professor walked away from the table.
Ossipon, whom that piece of insight had taken unawares, gave one
ineffectual start, and remained still, with a helpless gaze, as though
nailed fast to the seat of his chair.  The lonely piano, without as much
as a music stool to help it, struck a few chords courageously, and
beginning a selection of national airs, played him out at last to the
tune of Blue Bells of Scotland.  The painfully detached notes grew
faint behind his back while he went slowly upstairs, across the hall, and
into the street.

In front of the great doorway a dismal row of newspaper sellers standing
clear of the pavement dealt out their wares from the gutter.  It was a
raw, gloomy day of the early spring; and the grimy sky, the mud of the
streets, the rags of the dirty men, harmonised excellently with the
eruption of the damp, rubbishy sheets of paper soiled with printers ink.
The posters, maculated with filth, garnished like tapestry the sweep of
the curbstone.  The trade in afternoon papers was brisk, yet, in
comparison with the swift, constant march of foot traffic, the effect was
of indifference, of a disregarded distribution.  Ossipon looked hurriedly
both ways before stepping out into the cross-currents, but the Professor
was already out of sight.




CHAPTER V


The Professor had turned into a street to the left, and walked along,
with his head carried rigidly erect, in a crowd whose every individual
almost overtopped his stunted stature.  It was vain to pretend to himself
that he was not disappointed.  But that was mere feeling; the stoicism of
his thought could not be disturbed by this or any other failure.  Next
time, or the time after next, a telling stroke would be
deliveredsomething really startlinga blow fit to open the first crack
in the imposing front of the great edifice of legal conceptions
sheltering the atrocious injustice of society.  Of humble origin, and
with an appearance really so mean as to stand in the way of his
considerable natural abilities, his imagination had been fired early by
the tales of men rising from the depths of poverty to positions of
authority and affluence.  The extreme, almost ascetic purity of his
thought, combined with an astounding ignorance of worldly conditions, had
set before him a goal of power and prestige to be attained without the
medium of arts, graces, tact, wealthby sheer weight of merit alone.  On
that view he considered himself entitled to undisputed success.  His
father, a delicate dark enthusiast with a sloping forehead, had been an
itinerant and rousing preacher of some obscure but rigid Christian secta
man supremely confident in the privileges of his righteousness.  In the
son, individualist by temperament, once the science of colleges had
replaced thoroughly the faith of conventicles, this moral attitude
translated itself into a frenzied puritanism of ambition.  He nursed it
as something secularly holy.  To see it thwarted opened his eyes to the
true nature of the world, whose morality was artificial, corrupt, and
blasphemous.  The way of even the most justifiable revolutions is
prepared by personal impulses disguised into creeds.  The Professors
indignation found in itself a final cause that absolved him from the sin
of turning to destruction as the agent of his ambition.  To destroy
public faith in legality was the imperfect formula of his pedantic
fanaticism; but the subconscious conviction that the framework of an
established social order cannot be effectually shattered except by some
form of collective or individual violence was precise and correct.  He
was a moral agentthat was settled in his mind.  By exercising his agency
with ruthless defiance he procured for himself the appearances of power
and personal prestige.  That was undeniable to his vengeful bitterness.
It pacified its unrest; and in their own way the most ardent of
revolutionaries are perhaps doing no more but seeking for peace in common
with the rest of mankindthe peace of soothed vanity, of satisfied
appetites, or perhaps of appeased conscience.

Lost in the crowd, miserable and undersized, he meditated confidently on
his power, keeping his hand in the left pocket of his trousers, grasping
lightly the india-rubber ball, the supreme guarantee of his sinister
freedom; but after a while he became disagreeably affected by the sight
of the roadway thronged with vehicles and of the pavement crowded with
men and women.  He was in a long, straight street, peopled by a mere
fraction of an immense multitude; but all round him, on and on, even to
the limits of the horizon hidden by the enormous piles of bricks, he felt
the mass of mankind mighty in its numbers.  They swarmed numerous like
locusts, industrious like ants, thoughtless like a natural force, pushing
on blind and orderly and absorbed, impervious to sentiment, to logic, to
terror too perhaps.

That was the form of doubt he feared most.  Impervious to fear!  Often
while walking abroad, when he happened also to come out of himself, he
had such moments of dreadful and sane mistrust of mankind.  What if
nothing could move them?  Such moments come to all men whose ambition
aims at a direct grasp upon humanityto artists, politicians, thinkers,
reformers, or saints.  A despicable emotional state this, against which
solitude fortifies a superior character; and with severe exultation the
Professor thought of the refuge of his room, with its padlocked cupboard,
lost in a wilderness of poor houses, the hermitage of the perfect
anarchist.  In order to reach sooner the point where he could take his
omnibus, he turned brusquely out of the populous street into a narrow and
dusky alley paved with flagstones.  On one side the low brick houses had
in their dusty windows the sightless, moribund look of incurable
decayempty shells awaiting demolition.  From the other side life had not
departed wholly as yet.  Facing the only gas-lamp yawned the cavern of a
second-hand furniture dealer, where, deep in the gloom of a sort of
narrow avenue winding through a bizarre forest of wardrobes, with an
undergrowth tangle of table legs, a tall pier-glass glimmered like a pool
of water in a wood.  An unhappy, homeless couch, accompanied by two
unrelated chairs, stood in the open.  The only human being making use of
the alley besides the Professor, coming stalwart and erect from the
opposite direction, checked his swinging pace suddenly.

Hallo! he said, and stood a little on one side watchfully.

The Professor had already stopped, with a ready half turn which brought
his shoulders very near the other wall.  His right hand fell lightly on
the back of the outcast couch, the left remained purposefully plunged
deep in the trousers pocket, and the roundness of the heavy rimmed
spectacles imparted an owlish character to his moody, unperturbed face.

It was like a meeting in a side corridor of a mansion full of life.  The
stalwart man was buttoned up in a dark overcoat, and carried an umbrella.
His hat, tilted back, uncovered a good deal of forehead, which appeared
very white in the dusk.  In the dark patches of the orbits the eyeballs
glimmered piercingly.  Long, drooping moustaches, the colour of ripe
corn, framed with their points the square block of his shaved chin.

I am not looking for you, he said curtly.

The Professor did not stir an inch.  The blended noises of the enormous
town sank down to an inarticulate low murmur.  Chief Inspector Heat of
the Special Crimes Department changed his tone.

Not in a hurry to get home? he asked, with mocking simplicity.

The unwholesome-looking little moral agent of destruction exulted
silently in the possession of personal prestige, keeping in check this
man armed with the defensive mandate of a menaced society.  More
fortunate than Caligula, who wished that the Roman Senate had only one
head for the better satisfaction of his cruel lust, he beheld in that one
man all the forces he had set at defiance: the force of law, property,
oppression, and injustice.  He beheld all his enemies, and fearlessly
confronted them all in a supreme satisfaction of his vanity.  They stood
perplexed before him as if before a dreadful portent.  He gloated
inwardly over the chance of this meeting affirming his superiority over
all the multitude of mankind.

It was in reality a chance meeting.  Chief Inspector Heat had had a
disagreeably busy day since his department received the first telegram
from Greenwich a little before eleven in the morning.  First of all, the
fact of the outrage being attempted less than a week after he had assured
a high official that no outbreak of anarchist activity was to be
apprehended was sufficiently annoying.  If he ever thought himself safe
in making a statement, it was then.  He had made that statement with
infinite satisfaction to himself, because it was clear that the high
official desired greatly to hear that very thing.  He had affirmed that
nothing of the sort could even be thought of without the department being
aware of it within twenty-four hours; and he had spoken thus in his
consciousness of being the great expert of his department.  He had gone
even so far as to utter words which true wisdom would have kept back.
But Chief Inspector Heat was not very wiseat least not truly so.  True
wisdom, which is not certain of anything in this world of contradictions,
would have prevented him from attaining his present position.  It would
have alarmed his superiors, and done away with his chances of promotion.
His promotion had been very rapid.

There isnt one of them, sir, that we couldnt lay our hands on at any
time of night and day.  We know what each of them is doing hour by hour,
he had declared.  And the high official had deigned to smile.  This was
so obviously the right thing to say for an officer of Chief Inspector
Heats reputation that it was perfectly delightful.  The high official
believed the declaration, which chimed in with his idea of the fitness of
things.  His wisdom was of an official kind, or else he might have
reflected upon a matter not of theory but of experience that in the
close-woven stuff of relations between conspirator and police there occur
unexpected solutions of continuity, sudden holes in space and time.  A
given anarchist may be watched inch by inch and minute by minute, but a
moment always comes when somehow all sight and touch of him are lost for
a few hours, during which something (generally an explosion) more or less
deplorable does happen.  But the high official, carried away by his sense
of the fitness of things, had smiled, and now the recollection of that
smile was very annoying to Chief Inspector Heat, principal expert in
anarchist procedure.

This was not the only circumstance whose recollection depressed the usual
serenity of the eminent specialist.  There was another dating back only
to that very morning.  The thought that when called urgently to his
Assistant Commissioners private room he had been unable to conceal his
astonishment was distinctly vexing.  His instinct of a successful man had
taught him long ago that, as a general rule, a reputation is built on
manner as much as on achievement.  And he felt that his manner when
confronted with the telegram had not been impressive.  He had opened his
eyes widely, and had exclaimed Impossible! exposing himself thereby to
the unanswerable retort of a finger-tip laid forcibly on the telegram
which the Assistant Commissioner, after reading it aloud, had flung on
the desk.  To be crushed, as it were, under the tip of a forefinger was
an unpleasant experience.  Very damaging, too!  Furthermore, Chief
Inspector Heat was conscious of not having mended matters by allowing
himself to express a conviction.

One thing I can tell you at once: none of our lot had anything to do
with this.

He was strong in his integrity of a good detective, but he saw now that
an impenetrably attentive reserve towards this incident would have served
his reputation better.  On the other hand, he admitted to himself that it
was difficult to preserve ones reputation if rank outsiders were going
to take a hand in the business.  Outsiders are the bane of the police as
of other professions.  The tone of the Assistant Commissioners remarks
had been sour enough to set ones teeth on edge.

And since breakfast Chief Inspector Heat had not managed to get anything
to eat.

Starting immediately to begin his investigation on the spot, he had
swallowed a good deal of raw, unwholesome fog in the park.  Then he had
walked over to the hospital; and when the investigation in Greenwich was
concluded at last he had lost his inclination for food.  Not accustomed,
as the doctors are, to examine closely the mangled remains of human
beings, he had been shocked by the sight disclosed to his view when a
waterproof sheet had been lifted off a table in a certain apartment of
the hospital.

Another waterproof sheet was spread over that table in the manner of a
table-cloth, with the corners turned up over a sort of mounda heap of
rags, scorched and bloodstained, half concealing what might have been an
accumulation of raw material for a cannibal feast.  It required
considerable firmness of mind not to recoil before that sight.  Chief
Inspector Heat, an efficient officer of his department, stood his ground,
but for a whole minute he did not advance.  A local constable in uniform
cast a sidelong glance, and said, with stolid simplicity:

Hes all there.  Every bit of him.  It was a job.

He had been the first man on the spot after the explosion.  He mentioned
the fact again.  He had seen something like a heavy flash of lightning in
the fog.  At that time he was standing at the door of the King William
Street Lodge talking to the keeper.  The concussion made him tingle all
over.  He ran between the trees towards the Observatory.  As fast as my
legs would carry me, he repeated twice.

Chief Inspector Heat, bending forward over the table in a gingerly and
horrified manner, let him run on.  The hospital porter and another man
turned down the corners of the cloth, and stepped aside.  The Chief
Inspectors eyes searched the gruesome detail of that heap of mixed
things, which seemed to have been collected in shambles and rag shops.

You used a shovel, he remarked, observing a sprinkling of small gravel,
tiny brown bits of bark, and particles of splintered wood as fine as
needles.

Had to in one place, said the stolid constable.  I sent a keeper to
fetch a spade.  When he heard me scraping the ground with it he leaned
his forehead against a tree, and was as sick as a dog.

The Chief Inspector, stooping guardedly over the table, fought down the
unpleasant sensation in his throat.  The shattering violence of
destruction which had made of that body a heap of nameless fragments
affected his feelings with a sense of ruthless cruelty, though his reason
told him the effect must have been as swift as a flash of lightning.  The
man, whoever he was, had died instantaneously; and yet it seemed
impossible to believe that a human body could have reached that state of
disintegration without passing through the pangs of inconceivable agony.
No physiologist, and still less of a metaphysician, Chief Inspector Heat
rose by the force of sympathy, which is a form of fear, above the vulgar
conception of time.  Instantaneous!  He remembered all he had ever read
in popular publications of long and terrifying dreams dreamed in the
instant of waking; of the whole past life lived with frightful intensity
by a drowning man as his doomed head bobs up, streaming, for the last
time.  The inexplicable mysteries of conscious existence beset Chief
Inspector Heat till he evolved a horrible notion that ages of atrocious
pain and mental torture could be contained between two successive winks
of an eye.  And meantime the Chief Inspector went on, peering at the
table with a calm face and the slightly anxious attention of an indigent
customer bending over what may be called the by-products of a butchers
shop with a view to an inexpensive Sunday dinner.  All the time his
trained faculties of an excellent investigator, who scorns no chance of
information, followed the self-satisfied, disjointed loquacity of the
constable.

A fair-haired fellow, the last observed in a placid tone, and paused.
The old woman who spoke to the sergeant noticed a fair-haired fellow
coming out of Maze Hill Station.  He paused.  And he was a fair-haired
fellow.  She noticed two men coming out of the station after the uptrain
had gone on, he continued slowly.  She couldnt tell if they were
together.  She took no particular notice of the big one, but the other
was a fair, slight chap, carrying a tin varnish can in one hand.  The
constable ceased.

Know the woman? muttered the Chief Inspector, with his eyes fixed on
the table, and a vague notion in his mind of an inquest to be held
presently upon a person likely to remain for ever unknown.

Yes.  Shes housekeeper to a retired publican, and attends the chapel in
Park Place sometimes, the constable uttered weightily, and paused, with
another oblique glance at the table.

Then suddenly: Well, here he isall of him I could see.  Fair.
Slightslight enough.  Look at that foot there.  I picked up the legs
first, one after another.  He was that scattered you didnt know where to
begin.

The constable paused; the least flicker of an innocent self-laudatory
smile invested his round face with an infantile expression.

Stumbled, he announced positively.  I stumbled once myself, and
pitched on my head too, while running up.  Them roots do stick out all
about the place.  Stumbled against the root of a tree and fell, and that
thing he was carrying must have gone off right under his chest, I
expect.

The echo of the words Person unknown repeating itself in his inner
consciousness bothered the Chief Inspector considerably.  He would have
liked to trace this affair back to its mysterious origin for his own
information.  He was professionally curious.  Before the public he would
have liked to vindicate the efficiency of his department by establishing
the identity of that man.  He was a loyal servant.  That, however,
appeared impossible.  The first term of the problem was unreadablelacked
all suggestion but that of atrocious cruelty.

Overcoming his physical repugnance, Chief Inspector Heat stretched out
his hand without conviction for the salving of his conscience, and took
up the least soiled of the rags.  It was a narrow strip of velvet with a
larger triangular piece of dark blue cloth hanging from it.  He held it
up to his eyes; and the police constable spoke.

Velvet collar.  Funny the old woman should have noticed the velvet
collar.  Dark blue overcoat with a velvet collar, she has told us.  He
was the chap she saw, and no mistake.  And here he is all complete,
velvet collar and all.  I dont think I missed a single piece as big as a
postage stamp.

At this point the trained faculties of the Chief Inspector ceased to hear
the voice of the constable.  He moved to one of the windows for better
light.  His face, averted from the room, expressed a startled intense
interest while he examined closely the triangular piece of broad-cloth.
By a sudden jerk he detached it, and _only_ after stuffing it into his
pocket turned round to the room, and flung the velvet collar back on the
table

Cover up, he directed the attendants curtly, without another look, and,
saluted by the constable, carried off his spoil hastily.

A convenient train whirled him up to town, alone and pondering deeply, in
a third-class compartment.  That singed piece of cloth was incredibly
valuable, and he could not defend himself from astonishment at the casual
manner it had come into his possession.  It was as if Fate had thrust
that clue into his hands.  And after the manner of the average man, whose
ambition is to command events, he began to mistrust such a gratuitous and
accidental successjust because it seemed forced upon him.  The practical
value of success depends not a little on the way you look at it.  But
Fate looks at nothing.  It has no discretion.  He no longer considered it
eminently desirable all round to establish publicly the identity of the
man who had blown himself up that morning with such horrible
completeness.  But he was not certain of the view his department would
take.  A department is to those it employs a complex personality with
ideas and even fads of its own.  It depends on the loyal devotion of its
servants, and the devoted loyalty of trusted servants is associated with
a certain amount of affectionate contempt, which keeps it sweet, as it
were.  By a benevolent provision of Nature no man is a hero to his valet,
or else the heroes would have to brush their own clothes.  Likewise no
department appears perfectly wise to the intimacy of its workers.  A
department does not know so much as some of its servants.  Being a
dispassionate organism, it can never be perfectly informed.  It would not
be good for its efficiency to know too much.  Chief Inspector Heat got
out of the train in a state of thoughtfulness entirely untainted with
disloyalty, but not quite free of that jealous mistrust which so often
springs on the ground of perfect devotion, whether to women or to
institutions.

It was in this mental disposition, physically very empty, but still
nauseated by what he had seen, that he had come upon the Professor.
Under these conditions which make for irascibility in a sound, normal
man, this meeting was specially unwelcome to Chief Inspector Heat.  He
had not been thinking of the Professor; he had not been thinking of any
individual anarchist at all.  The complexion of that case had somehow
forced upon him the general idea of the absurdity of things human, which
in the abstract is sufficiently annoying to an unphilosophical
temperament, and in concrete instances becomes exasperating beyond
endurance.  At the beginning of his career Chief Inspector Heat had been
concerned with the more energetic forms of thieving.  He had gained his
spurs in that sphere, and naturally enough had kept for it, after his
promotion to another department, a feeling not very far removed from
affection.  Thieving was not a sheer absurdity.  It was a form of human
industry, perverse indeed, but still an industry exercised in an
industrious world; it was work undertaken for the same reason as the work
in potteries, in coal mines, in fields, in tool-grinding shops.  It was
labour, whose practical difference from the other forms of labour
consisted in the nature of its risk, which did not lie in ankylosis, or
lead poisoning, or fire-damp, or gritty dust, but in what may be briefly
defined in its own special phraseology as Seven years hard.  Chief
Inspector Heat was, of course, not insensible to the gravity of moral
differences.  But neither were the thieves he had been looking after.
They submitted to the severe sanctions of a morality familiar to Chief
Inspector Heat with a certain resignation.

They were his fellow-citizens gone wrong because of imperfect education,
Chief Inspector Heat believed; but allowing for that difference, he could
understand the mind of a burglar, because, as a matter of fact, the mind
and the instincts of a burglar are of the same kind as the mind and the
instincts of a police officer.  Both recognise the same conventions, and
have a working knowledge of each others methods and of the routine of
their respective trades.  They understand each other, which is
advantageous to both, and establishes a sort of amenity in their
relations.  Products of the same machine, one classed as useful and the
other as noxious, they take the machine for granted in different ways,
but with a seriousness essentially the same.  The mind of Chief Inspector
Heat was inaccessible to ideas of revolt.  But his thieves were not
rebels.  His bodily vigour, his cool inflexible manner, his courage and
his fairness, had secured for him much respect and some adulation in the
sphere of his early successes.  He had felt himself revered and admired.
And Chief Inspector Heat, arrested within six paces of the anarchist
nick-named the Professor, gave a thought of regret to the world of
thievessane, without morbid ideals, working by routine, respectful of
constituted authorities, free from all taint of hate and despair.

After paying this tribute to what is normal in the constitution of
society (for the idea of thieving appeared to his instinct as normal as
the idea of property), Chief Inspector Heat felt very angry with himself
for having stopped, for having spoken, for having taken that way at all
on the ground of it being a short cut from the station to the
headquarters.  And he spoke again in his big authoritative voice, which,
being moderated, had a threatening character.

You are not wanted, I tell you, he repeated.

The anarchist did not stir.  An inward laugh of derision uncovered not
only his teeth but his gums as well, shook him all over, without the
slightest sound.  Chief Inspector Heat was led to add, against his better
judgment:

Not yet.  When I want you I will know where to find you.

Those were perfectly proper words, within the tradition and suitable to
his character of a police officer addressing one of his special flock.
But the reception they got departed from tradition and propriety.  It was
outrageous.  The stunted, weakly figure before him spoke at last.

Ive no doubt the papers would give you an obituary notice then.  You
know best what that would be worth to you.  I should think you can
imagine easily the sort of stuff that would be printed.  But you may be
exposed to the unpleasantness of being buried together with me, though I
suppose your friends would make an effort to sort us out as much as
possible.

With all his healthy contempt for the spirit dictating such speeches, the
atrocious allusiveness of the words had its effect on Chief Inspector
Heat.  He had too much insight, and too much exact information as well,
to dismiss them as rot.  The dusk of this narrow lane took on a sinister
tint from the dark, frail little figure, its back to the wall, and
speaking with a weak, self-confident voice.  To the vigorous, tenacious
vitality of the Chief Inspector, the physical wretchedness of that being,
so obviously not fit to live, was ominous; for it seemed to him that if
he had the misfortune to be such a miserable object he would not have
cared how soon he died.  Life had such a strong hold upon him that a
fresh wave of nausea broke out in slight perspiration upon his brow.  The
murmur of town life, the subdued rumble of wheels in the two invisible
streets to the right and left, came through the curve of the sordid lane
to his ears with a precious familiarity and an appealing sweetness.  He
was human.  But Chief Inspector Heat was also a man, and he could not let
such words pass.

All this is good to frighten children with, he said.  Ill have you
yet.

It was very well said, without scorn, with an almost austere quietness.

Doubtless, was the answer; but theres no time like the present,
believe me.  For a man of real convictions this is a fine opportunity of
self-sacrifice.  You may not find another so favourable, so humane.
There isnt even a cat near us, and these condemned old houses would make
a good heap of bricks where you stand.  Youll never get me at so little
cost to life and property, which you are paid to protect.

You dont know who youre speaking to, said Chief Inspector Heat
firmly.  If I were to lay my hands on you now I would be no better than
yourself.

Ah!  The game!

You may be sure our side will win in the end.  It may yet be necessary
to make people believe that some of you ought to be shot at sight like
mad dogs.  Then that will be the game.  But Ill be damned if I know what
yours is.  I dont believe you know yourselves.  Youll never get
anything by it.

Meantime its you who get something from itso far.  And you get it
easily, too.  I wont speak of your salary, but havent you made your
name simply by not understanding what we are after?

What are you after, then? asked Chief Inspector Heat, with scornful
haste, like a man in a hurry who perceives he is wasting his time.

The perfect anarchist answered by a smile which did not part his thin
colourless lips; and the celebrated Chief Inspector felt a sense of
superiority which induced him to raise a warning finger.

Give it upwhatever it is, he said in an admonishing tone, but not so
kindly as if he were condescending to give good advice to a cracksman of
repute.  Give it up.  Youll find we are too many for you.

The fixed smile on the Professors lips wavered, as if the mocking spirit
within had lost its assurance.  Chief Inspector Heat went on:

Dont you believe me eh?  Well, youve only got to look about you.  We
are.  And anyway, youre not doing it well.  Youre always making a mess
of it.  Why, if the thieves didnt know their work better they would
starve.

The hint of an invincible multitude behind that mans back roused a
sombre indignation in the breast of the Professor.  He smiled no longer
his enigmatic and mocking smile.  The resisting power of numbers, the
unattackable stolidity of a great multitude, was the haunting fear of his
sinister loneliness.  His lips trembled for some time before he managed
to say in a strangled voice:

I am doing my work better than youre doing yours.

Thatll do now, interrupted Chief Inspector Heat hurriedly; and the
Professor laughed right out this time.  While still laughing he moved on;
but he did not laugh long.  It was a sad-faced, miserable little man who
emerged from the narrow passage into the bustle of the broad
thoroughfare.  He walked with the nerveless gait of a tramp going on,
still going on, indifferent to rain or sun in a sinister detachment from
the aspects of sky and earth.  Chief Inspector Heat, on the other hand,
after watching him for a while, stepped out with the purposeful briskness
of a man disregarding indeed the inclemencies of the weather, but
conscious of having an authorised mission on this earth and the moral
support of his kind.  All the inhabitants of the immense town, the
population of the whole country, and even the teeming millions struggling
upon the planet, were with himdown to the very thieves and mendicants.
Yes, the thieves themselves were sure to be with him in his present work.
The consciousness of universal support in his general activity heartened
him to grapple with the particular problem.

The problem immediately before the Chief Inspector was that of managing
the Assistant Commissioner of his department, his immediate superior.
This is the perennial problem of trusty and loyal servants; anarchism
gave it its particular complexion, but nothing more.  Truth to say, Chief
Inspector Heat thought but little of anarchism.  He did not attach undue
importance to it, and could never bring himself to consider it seriously.
It had more the character of disorderly conduct; disorderly without the
human excuse of drunkenness, which at any rate implies good feeling and
an amiable leaning towards festivity.  As criminals, anarchists were
distinctly no classno class at all.  And recalling the Professor, Chief
Inspector Heat, without checking his swinging pace, muttered through his
teeth:

Lunatic.

Catching thieves was another matter altogether.  It had that quality of
seriousness belonging to every form of open sport where the best man wins
under perfectly comprehensible rules.  There were no rules for dealing
with anarchists.  And that was distasteful to the Chief Inspector.  It
was all foolishness, but that foolishness excited the public mind,
affected persons in high places, and touched upon international
relations.  A hard, merciless contempt settled rigidly on the Chief
Inspectors face as he walked on.  His mind ran over all the anarchists
of his flock.  Not one of them had half the spunk of this or that burglar
he had known.  Not halfnot one-tenth.

At headquarters the Chief Inspector was admitted at once to the Assistant
Commissioners private room.  He found him, pen in hand, bent over a
great table bestrewn with papers, as if worshipping an enormous double
inkstand of bronze and crystal.  Speaking tubes resembling snakes were
tied by the heads to the back of the Assistant Commissioners wooden
arm-chair, and their gaping mouths seemed ready to bite his elbows.  And
in this attitude he raised only his eyes, whose lids were darker than his
face and very much creased.  The reports had come in: every anarchist had
been exactly accounted for.

After saying this he lowered his eyes, signed rapidly two single sheets
of paper, and only then laid down his pen, and sat well back, directing
an inquiring gaze at his renowned subordinate.  The Chief Inspector stood
it well, deferential but inscrutable.

I daresay you were right, said the Assistant Commissioner, in telling
me at first that the London anarchists had nothing to do with this.  I
quite appreciate the excellent watch kept on them by your men.  On the
other hand, this, for the public, does not amount to more than a
confession of ignorance.

The Assistant Commissioners delivery was leisurely, as it were cautious.
His thought seemed to rest poised on a word before passing to another, as
though words had been the stepping-stones for his intellect picking its
way across the waters of error.  Unless you have brought something
useful from Greenwich, he added.

The Chief Inspector began at once the account of his investigation in a
clear matter-of-fact manner.  His superior turning his chair a little,
and crossing his thin legs, leaned sideways on his elbow, with one hand
shading his eyes.  His listening attitude had a sort of angular and
sorrowful grace.  Gleams as of highly burnished silver played on the
sides of his ebony black head when he inclined it slowly at the end.

Chief Inspector Heat waited with the appearance of turning over in his
mind all he had just said, but, as a matter of fact, considering the
advisability of saying something more.  The Assistant Commissioner cut
his hesitation short.

You believe there were two men? he asked, without uncovering his eyes.

The Chief Inspector thought it more than probable.  In his opinion, the
two men had parted from each other within a hundred yards from the
Observatory walls.  He explained also how the other man could have got
out of the park speedily without being observed.  The fog, though not
very dense, was in his favour.  He seemed to have escorted the other to
the spot, and then to have left him there to do the job single-handed.
Taking the time those two were seen coming out of Maze Hill Station by
the old woman, and the time when the explosion was heard, the Chief
Inspector thought that the other man might have been actually at the
Greenwich Park Station, ready to catch the next train up, at the moment
his comrade was destroying himself so thoroughly.

Very thoroughlyeh? murmured the Assistant Commissioner from under the
shadow of his hand.

The Chief Inspector in a few vigorous words described the aspect of the
remains.  The coroners jury will have a treat, he added grimly.

The Assistant Commissioner uncovered his eyes.

We shall have nothing to tell them, he remarked languidly.

He looked up, and for a time watched the markedly non-committal attitude
of his Chief Inspector.  His nature was one that is not easily accessible
to illusions.  He knew that a department is at the mercy of its
subordinate officers, who have their own conceptions of loyalty.  His
career had begun in a tropical colony.  He had liked his work there.  It
was police work.  He had been very successful in tracking and breaking up
certain nefarious secret societies amongst the natives.  Then he took his
long leave, and got married rather impulsively.  It was a good match from
a worldly point of view, but his wife formed an unfavourable opinion of
the colonial climate on hearsay evidence.  On the other hand, she had
influential connections.  It was an excellent match.  But he did not like
the work he had to do now.  He felt himself dependent on too many
subordinates and too many masters.  The near presence of that strange
emotional phenomenon called public opinion weighed upon his spirits, and
alarmed him by its irrational nature.  No doubt that from ignorance he
exaggerated to himself its power for good and evilespecially for evil;
and the rough east winds of the English spring (which agreed with his
wife) augmented his general mistrust of mens motives and of the
efficiency of their organisation.  The futility of office work especially
appalled him on those days so trying to his sensitive liver.

He got up, unfolding himself to his full height, and with a heaviness of
step remarkable in so slender a man, moved across the room to the window.
The panes streamed with rain, and the short street he looked down into
lay wet and empty, as if swept clear suddenly by a great flood.  It was a
very trying day, choked in raw fog to begin with, and now drowned in cold
rain.  The flickering, blurred flames of gas-lamps seemed to be
dissolving in a watery atmosphere.  And the lofty pretensions of a
mankind oppressed by the miserable indignities of the weather appeared as
a colossal and hopeless vanity deserving of scorn, wonder, and
compassion.

Horrible, horrible! thought the Assistant Commissioner to himself, with
his face near the window-pane.  We have been having this sort of thing
now for ten days; no, a fortnighta fortnight.  He ceased to think
completely for a time.  That utter stillness of his brain lasted about
three seconds.  Then he said perfunctorily: You have set inquiries on
foot for tracing that other man up and down the line?

He had no doubt that everything needful had been done.  Chief Inspector
Heat knew, of course, thoroughly the business of man-hunting.  And these
were the routine steps, too, that would be taken as a matter of course by
the merest beginner.  A few inquiries amongst the ticket collectors and
the porters of the two small railway stations would give additional
details as to the appearance of the two men; the inspection of the
collected tickets would show at once where they came from that morning.
It was elementary, and could not have been neglected.  Accordingly the
Chief Inspector answered that all this had been done directly the old
woman had come forward with her deposition.  And he mentioned the name of
a station.  Thats where they came from, sir, he went on.  The porter
who took the tickets at Maze Hill remembers two chaps answering to the
description passing the barrier.  They seemed to him two respectable
working men of a superior sortsign painters or house decorators.  The
big man got out of a third-class compartment backward, with a bright tin
can in his hand.  On the platform he gave it to carry to the fair young
fellow who followed him.  All this agrees exactly with what the old woman
told the police sergeant in Greenwich.

The Assistant Commissioner, still with his face turned to the window,
expressed his doubt as to these two men having had anything to do with
the outrage.  All this theory rested upon the utterances of an old
charwoman who had been nearly knocked down by a man in a hurry.  Not a
very substantial authority indeed, unless on the ground of sudden
inspiration, which was hardly tenable.

Frankly now, could she have been really inspired? he queried, with
grave irony, keeping his back to the room, as if entranced by the
contemplation of the towns colossal forms half lost in the night.  He
did not even look round when he heard the mutter of the word
Providential from the principal subordinate of his department, whose
name, printed sometimes in the papers, was familiar to the great public
as that of one of its zealous and hard-working protectors.  Chief
Inspector Heat raised his voice a little.

Strips and bits of bright tin were quite visible to me, he said.
Thats a pretty good corroboration.

And these men came from that little country station, the Assistant
Commissioner mused aloud, wondering.  He was told that such was the name
on two tickets out of three given up out of that train at Maze Hill.  The
third person who got out was a hawker from Gravesend well known to the
porters.  The Chief Inspector imparted that information in a tone of
finality with some ill humour, as loyal servants will do in the
consciousness of their fidelity and with the sense of the value of their
loyal exertions.  And still the Assistant Commissioner did not turn away
from the darkness outside, as vast as a sea.

Two foreign anarchists coming from that place, he said, apparently to
the window-pane.  Its rather unaccountable.

Yes, sir.  But it would be still more unaccountable if that Michaelis
werent staying in a cottage in the neighbourhood.

At the sound of that name, falling unexpectedly into this annoying
affair, the Assistant Commissioner dismissed brusquely the vague
remembrance of his daily whist party at his club.  It was the most
comforting habit of his life, in a mainly successful display of his skill
without the assistance of any subordinate.  He entered his club to play
from five to seven, before going home to dinner, forgetting for those two
hours whatever was distasteful in his life, as though the game were a
beneficent drug for allaying the pangs of moral discontent.  His partners
were the gloomily humorous editor of a celebrated magazine; a silent,
elderly barrister with malicious little eyes; and a highly martial,
simple-minded old Colonel with nervous brown hands.  They were his club
acquaintances merely.  He never met them elsewhere except at the
card-table.  But they all seemed to approach the game in the spirit of
co-sufferers, as if it were indeed a drug against the secret ills of
existence; and every day as the sun declined over the countless roofs of
the town, a mellow, pleasurable impatience, resembling the impulse of a
sure and profound friendship, lightened his professional labours.  And
now this pleasurable sensation went out of him with something resembling
a physical shock, and was replaced by a special kind of interest in his
work of social protectionan improper sort of interest, which may be
defined best as a sudden and alert mistrust of the weapon in his hand.




CHAPTER VI


The lady patroness of Michaelis, the ticket-of-leave apostle of
humanitarian hopes, was one of the most influential and distinguished
connections of the Assistant Commissioners wife, whom she called Annie,
and treated still rather as a not very wise and utterly inexperienced
young girl.  But she had consented to accept him on a friendly footing,
which was by no means the case with all of his wifes influential
connections.  Married young and splendidly at some remote epoch of the
past, she had had for a time a close view of great affairs and even of
some great men.  She herself was a great lady.  Old now in the number of
her years, she had that sort of exceptional temperament which defies time
with scornful disregard, as if it were a rather vulgar convention
submitted to by the mass of inferior mankind.  Many other conventions
easier to set aside, alas! failed to obtain her recognition, also on
temperamental groundseither because they bored her, or else because they
stood in the way of her scorns and sympathies.  Admiration was a
sentiment unknown to her (it was one of the secret griefs of her most
noble husband against her)first, as always more or less tainted with
mediocrity, and next as being in a way an admission of inferiority.  And
both were frankly inconceivable to her nature.  To be fearlessly
outspoken in her opinions came easily to her, since she judged solely
from the standpoint of her social position.  She was equally untrammelled
in her actions; and as her tactfulness proceeded from genuine humanity,
her bodily vigour remained remarkable and her superiority was serene and
cordial, three generations had admired her infinitely, and the last she
was likely to see had pronounced her a wonderful woman.  Meantime
intelligent, with a sort of lofty simplicity, and curious at heart, but
not like many women merely of social gossip, she amused her age by
attracting within her ken through the power of her great, almost
historical, social prestige everything that rose above the dead level of
mankind, lawfully or unlawfully, by position, wit, audacity, fortune or
misfortune.  Royal Highnesses, artists, men of science, young statesmen,
and charlatans of all ages and conditions, who, unsubstantial and light,
bobbing up like corks, show best the direction of the surface currents,
had been welcomed in that house, listened to, penetrated, understood,
appraised, for her own edification.  In her own words, she liked to watch
what the world was coming to.  And as she had a practical mind her
judgment of men and things, though based on special prejudices, was
seldom totally wrong, and almost never wrong-headed.  Her drawing-room
was probably the only place in the wide world where an Assistant
Commissioner of Police could meet a convict liberated on a
ticket-of-leave on other than professional and official ground.  Who had
brought Michaelis there one afternoon the Assistant Commissioner did not
remember very well.  He had a notion it must have been a certain Member
of Parliament of illustrious parentage and unconventional sympathies,
which were the standing joke of the comic papers.  The notabilities and
even the simple notorieties of the day brought each other freely to that
temple of an old womans not ignoble curiosity.  You never could guess
whom you were likely to come upon being received in semi-privacy within
the faded blue silk and gilt frame screen, making a cosy nook for a couch
and a few arm-chairs in the great drawing-room, with its hum of voices
and the groups of people seated or standing in the light of six tall
windows.

Michaelis had been the object of a revulsion of popular sentiment, the
same sentiment which years ago had applauded the ferocity of the life
sentence passed upon him for complicity in a rather mad attempt to rescue
some prisoners from a police van.  The plan of the conspirators had been
to shoot down the horses and overpower the escort.  Unfortunately, one of
the police constables got shot too.  He left a wife and three small
children, and the death of that man aroused through the length and
breadth of a realm for whose defence, welfare, and glory men die every
day as matter of duty, an outburst of furious indignation, of a raging
implacable pity for the victim.  Three ring-leaders got hanged.
Michaelis, young and slim, locksmith by trade, and great frequenter of
evening schools, did not even know that anybody had been killed, his part
with a few others being to force open the door at the back of the special
conveyance.  When arrested he had a bunch of skeleton keys in one pocket,
a heavy chisel in another, and a short crowbar in his hand: neither more
nor less than a burglar.  But no burglar would have received such a heavy
sentence.  The death of the constable had made him miserable at heart,
but the failure of the plot also.  He did not conceal either of these
sentiments from his empanelled countrymen, and that sort of compunction
appeared shockingly imperfect to the crammed court.  The judge on passing
sentence commented feelingly upon the depravity and callousness of the
young prisoner.

That made the groundless fame of his condemnation; the fame of his
release was made for him on no better grounds by people who wished to
exploit the sentimental aspect of his imprisonment either for purposes of
their own or for no intelligible purpose.  He let them do so in the
innocence of his heart and the simplicity of his mind.  Nothing that
happened to him individually had any importance.  He was like those
saintly men whose personality is lost in the contemplation of their
faith.  His ideas were not in the nature of convictions.  They were
inaccessible to reasoning.  They formed in all their contradictions and
obscurities an invincible and humanitarian creed, which he confessed
rather than preached, with an obstinate gentleness, a smile of pacific
assurance on his lips, and his candid blue eyes cast down because the
sight of faces troubled his inspiration developed in solitude.  In that
characteristic attitude, pathetic in his grotesque and incurable obesity
which he had to drag like a galley slaves bullet to the end of his days,
the Assistant Commissioner of Police beheld the ticket-of-leave apostle
filling a privileged arm-chair within the screen.  He sat there by the
head of the old ladys couch, mild-voiced and quiet, with no more
self-consciousness than a very small child, and with something of a
childs charmthe appealing charm of trustfulness.  Confident of the
future, whose secret ways had been revealed to him within the four walls
of a well-known penitentiary, he had no reason to look with suspicion
upon anybody.  If he could not give the great and curious lady a very
definite idea as to what the world was coming to, he had managed without
effort to impress her by his unembittered faith, by the sterling quality
of his optimism.

A certain simplicity of thought is common to serene souls at both ends of
the social scale.  The great lady was simple in her own way.  His views
and beliefs had nothing in them to shock or startle her, since she judged
them from the standpoint of her lofty position.  Indeed, her sympathies
were easily accessible to a man of that sort.  She was not an exploiting
capitalist herself; she was, as it were, above the play of economic
conditions.  And she had a great capacity of pity for the more obvious
forms of common human miseries, precisely because she was such a complete
stranger to them that she had to translate her conception into terms of
mental suffering before she could grasp the notion of their cruelty.  The
Assistant Commissioner remembered very well the conversation between
these two.  He had listened in silence.  It was something as exciting in
a way, and even touching in its foredoomed futility, as the efforts at
moral intercourse between the inhabitants of remote planets.  But this
grotesque incarnation of humanitarian passion appealed somehow, to ones
imagination.  At last Michaelis rose, and taking the great ladys
extended hand, shook it, retained it for a moment in his great cushioned
palm with unembarrassed friendliness, and turned upon the semi-private
nook of the drawing-room his back, vast and square, and as if distended
under the short tweed jacket.  Glancing about in serene benevolence, he
waddled along to the distant door between the knots of other visitors.
The murmur of conversations paused on his passage.  He smiled innocently
at a tall, brilliant girl, whose eyes met his accidentally, and went out
unconscious of the glances following him across the room.  Michaelis
first appearance in the world was a successa success of esteem unmarred
by a single murmur of derision.  The interrupted conversations were
resumed in their proper tone, grave or light.  Only a well-set-up,
long-limbed, active-looking man of forty talking with two ladies near a
window remarked aloud, with an unexpected depth of feeling: Eighteen
stone, I should say, and not five foot six.  Poor fellow!  Its
terribleterrible.

The lady of the house, gazing absently at the Assistant Commissioner,
left alone with her on the private side of the screen, seemed to be
rearranging her mental impressions behind her thoughtful immobility of a
handsome old face.  Men with grey moustaches and full, healthy, vaguely
smiling countenances approached, circling round the screen; two mature
women with a matronly air of gracious resolution; a clean-shaved
individual with sunken cheeks, and dangling a gold-mounted eyeglass on a
broad black ribbon with an old-world, dandified effect.  A silence
deferential, but full of reserves, reigned for a moment, and then the
great lady exclaimed, not with resentment, but with a sort of protesting
indignation:

And that officially is supposed to be a revolutionist!  What nonsense.
She looked hard at the Assistant Commissioner, who murmured
apologetically:

Not a dangerous one perhaps.

Not dangerousI should think not indeed.  He is a mere believer.  Its
the temperament of a saint, declared the great lady in a firm tone.
And they kept him shut up for twenty years.  One shudders at the
stupidity of it.  And now they have let him out everybody belonging to
him is gone away somewhere or dead.  His parents are dead; the girl he
was to marry has died while he was in prison; he has lost the skill
necessary for his manual occupation.  He told me all this himself with
the sweetest patience; but then, he said, he had had plenty of time to
think out things for himself.  A pretty compensation!  If thats the
stuff revolutionists are made of some of us may well go on their knees to
them, she continued in a slightly bantering voice, while the banal
society smiles hardened on the worldly faces turned towards her with
conventional deference.  The poor creature is obviously no longer in a
position to take care of himself.  Somebody will have to look after him a
little.

He should be recommended to follow a treatment of some sort, the
soldierly voice of the active-looking man was heard advising earnestly
from a distance.  He was in the pink of condition for his age, and even
the texture of his long frock coat had a character of elastic soundness,
as if it were a living tissue.  The man is virtually a cripple, he
added with unmistakable feeling.

Other voices, as if glad of the opening, murmured hasty compassion.
Quite startling, Monstrous, Most painful to see.  The lank man,
with the eyeglass on a broad ribbon, pronounced mincingly the word
Grotesque, whose justness was appreciated by those standing near him.
They smiled at each other.

The Assistant Commissioner had expressed no opinion either then or later,
his position making it impossible for him to ventilate any independent
view of a ticket-of-leave convict.  But, in truth, he shared the view of
his wifes friend and patron that Michaelis was a humanitarian
sentimentalist, a little mad, but upon the whole incapable of hurting a
fly intentionally.  So when that name cropped up suddenly in this vexing
bomb affair he realised all the danger of it for the ticket-of-leave
apostle, and his mind reverted at once to the old ladys well-established
infatuation.  Her arbitrary kindness would not brook patiently any
interference with Michaelis freedom.  It was a deep, calm, convinced
infatuation.  She had not only felt him to be inoffensive, but she had
said so, which last by a confusion of her absolutist mind became a sort
of incontrovertible demonstration.  It was as if the monstrosity of the
man, with his candid infants eyes and a fat angelic smile, had
fascinated her.  She had come to believe almost his theory of the future,
since it was not repugnant to her prejudices.  She disliked the new
element of plutocracy in the social compound, and industrialism as a
method of human development appeared to her singularly repulsive in its
mechanical and unfeeling character.  The humanitarian hopes of the mild
Michaelis tended not towards utter destruction, but merely towards the
complete economic ruin of the system.  And she did not really see where
was the moral harm of it.  It would do away with all the multitude of the
parvenus, whom she disliked and mistrusted, not because they had
arrived anywhere (she denied that), but because of their profound
unintelligence of the world, which was the primary cause of the crudity
of their perceptions and the aridity of their hearts.  With the
annihilation of all capital they would vanish too; but universal ruin
(providing it was universal, as it was revealed to Michaelis) would leave
the social values untouched.  The disappearance of the last piece of
money could not affect people of position.  She could not conceive how it
could affect her position, for instance.  She had developed these
discoveries to the Assistant Commissioner with all the serene
fearlessness of an old woman who had escaped the blight of indifference.
He had made for himself the rule to receive everything of that sort in a
silence which he took care from policy and inclination not to make
offensive.  He had an affection for the aged disciple of Michaelis, a
complex sentiment depending a little on her prestige, on her personality,
but most of all on the instinct of flattered gratitude.  He felt himself
really liked in her house.  She was kindness personified.  And she was
practically wise too, after the manner of experienced women.  She made
his married life much easier than it would have been without her
generously full recognition of his rights as Annies husband.  Her
influence upon his wife, a woman devoured by all sorts of small
selfishnesses, small envies, small jealousies, was excellent.
Unfortunately, both her kindness and her wisdom were of unreasonable
complexion, distinctly feminine, and difficult to deal with.  She
remained a perfect woman all along her full tale of years, and not as
some of them do becomea sort of slippery, pestilential old man in
petticoats.  And it was as of a woman that he thought of herthe
specially choice incarnation of the feminine, wherein is recruited the
tender, ingenuous, and fierce bodyguard for all sorts of men who talk
under the influence of an emotion, true or fraudulent; for preachers,
seers, prophets, or reformers.

Appreciating the distinguished and good friend of his wife, and himself,
in that way, the Assistant Commissioner became alarmed at the convict
Michaelis possible fate.  Once arrested on suspicion of being in some
way, however remote, a party to this outrage, the man could hardly escape
being sent back to finish his sentence at least.  And that would kill
him; he would never come out alive.  The Assistant Commissioner made a
reflection extremely unbecoming his official position without being
really creditable to his humanity.

If the fellow is laid hold of again, he thought, she will never
forgive me.

The frankness of such a secretly outspoken thought could not go without
some derisive self-criticism.  No man engaged in a work he does not like
can preserve many saving illusions about himself.  The distaste, the
absence of glamour, extend from the occupation to the personality.  It is
only when our appointed activities seem by a lucky accident to obey the
particular earnestness of our temperament that we can taste the comfort
of complete self-deception.  The Assistant Commissioner did not like his
work at home.  The police work he had been engaged on in a distant part
of the globe had the saving character of an irregular sort of warfare or
at least the risk and excitement of open-air sport.  His real abilities,
which were mainly of an administrative order, were combined with an
adventurous disposition.  Chained to a desk in the thick of four millions
of men, he considered himself the victim of an ironic fatethe same, no
doubt, which had brought about his marriage with a woman exceptionally
sensitive in the matter of colonial climate, besides other limitations
testifying to the delicacy of her natureand her tastes.  Though he
judged his alarm sardonically he did not dismiss the improper thought
from his mind.  The instinct of self-preservation was strong within him.
On the contrary, he repeated it mentally with profane emphasis and a
fuller precision: Damn it!  If that infernal Heat has his way the
fellowll die in prison smothered in his fat, and shell never forgive
me.

His black, narrow figure, with the white band of the collar under the
silvery gleams on the close-cropped hair at the back of the head,
remained motionless.  The silence had lasted such a long time that Chief
Inspector Heat ventured to clear his throat.  This noise produced its
effect.  The zealous and intelligent officer was asked by his superior,
whose back remained turned to him immovably:

You connect Michaelis with this affair?

Chief Inspector Heat was very positive, but cautious.

Well, sir, he said, we have enough to go upon.  A man like that has no
business to be at large, anyhow.

You will want some conclusive evidence, came the observation in a
murmur.

Chief Inspector Heat raised his eyebrows at the black, narrow back, which
remained obstinately presented to his intelligence and his zeal.

There will be no difficulty in getting up sufficient evidence against
_him_, he said, with virtuous complacency.  You may trust me for that,
sir, he added, quite unnecessarily, out of the fulness of his heart; for
it seemed to him an excellent thing to have that man in hand to be thrown
down to the public should it think fit to roar with any special
indignation in this case.  It was impossible to say yet whether it would
roar or not.  That in the last instance depended, of course, on the
newspaper press.  But in any case, Chief Inspector Heat, purveyor of
prisons by trade, and a man of legal instincts, did logically believe
that incarceration was the proper fate for every declared enemy of the
law.  In the strength of that conviction he committed a fault of tact.
He allowed himself a little conceited laugh, and repeated:

Trust me for that, sir.

This was too much for the forced calmness under which the Assistant
Commissioner had for upwards of eighteen months concealed his irritation
with the system and the subordinates of his office.  A square peg forced
into a round hole, he had felt like a daily outrage that long established
smooth roundness into which a man of less sharply angular shape would
have fitted himself, with voluptuous acquiescence, after a shrug or two.
What he resented most was just the necessity of taking so much on trust.
At the little laugh of Chief Inspector Heats he spun swiftly on his
heels, as if whirled away from the window-pane by an electric shock.  He
caught on the latters face not only the complacency proper to the
occasion lurking under the moustache, but the vestiges of experimental
watchfulness in the round eyes, which had been, no doubt, fastened on his
back, and now met his glance for a second before the intent character of
their stare had the time to change to a merely startled appearance.

The Assistant Commissioner of Police had really some qualifications for
his post.  Suddenly his suspicion was awakened.  It is but fair to say
that his suspicions of the police methods (unless the police happened to
be a semi-military body organised by himself) was not difficult to
arouse.  If it ever slumbered from sheer weariness, it was but lightly;
and his appreciation of Chief Inspector Heats zeal and ability, moderate
in itself, excluded all notion of moral confidence.  Hes up to
something, he exclaimed mentally, and at once became angry.  Crossing
over to his desk with headlong strides, he sat down violently.  Here I
am stuck in a litter of paper, he reflected, with unreasonable
resentment, supposed to hold all the threads in my hands, and yet I can
but hold what is put in my hand, and nothing else.  And they can fasten
the other ends of the threads where they please.

He raised his head, and turned towards his subordinate a long, meagre
face with the accentuated features of an energetic Don Quixote.

Now what is it youve got up your sleeve?

The other stared.  He stared without winking in a perfect immobility of
his round eyes, as he was used to stare at the various members of the
criminal class when, after being duly cautioned, they made their
statements in the tones of injured innocence, or false simplicity, or
sullen resignation.  But behind that professional and stony fixity there
was some surprise too, for in such a tone, combining nicely the note of
contempt and impatience, Chief Inspector Heat, the right-hand man of the
department, was not used to be addressed.  He began in a procrastinating
manner, like a man taken unawares by a new and unexpected experience.

What Ive got against that man Michaelis you mean, sir?

The Assistant Commissioner watched the bullet head; the points of that
Norse rovers moustache, falling below the line of the heavy jaw; the
whole full and pale physiognomy, whose determined character was marred by
too much flesh; at the cunning wrinkles radiating from the outer corners
of the eyesand in that purposeful contemplation of the valuable and
trusted officer he drew a conviction so sudden that it moved him like an
inspiration.

I have reason to think that when you came into this room, he said in
measured tones, it was not Michaelis who was in your mind; not
principallyperhaps not at all.

You have reason to think, sir? muttered Chief Inspector Heat, with
every appearance of astonishment, which up to a certain point was genuine
enough.  He had discovered in this affair a delicate and perplexing side,
forcing upon the discoverer a certain amount of insinceritythat sort of
insincerity which, under the names of skill, prudence, discretion, turns
up at one point or another in most human affairs.  He felt at the moment
like a tight-rope artist might feel if suddenly, in the middle of the
performance, the manager of the Music Hall were to rush out of the proper
managerial seclusion and begin to shake the rope.  Indignation, the sense
of moral insecurity engendered by such a treacherous proceeding joined to
the immediate apprehension of a broken neck, would, in the colloquial
phrase, put him in a state.  And there would be also some scandalised
concern for his art too, since a man must identify himself with something
more tangible than his own personality, and establish his pride
somewhere, either in his social position, or in the quality of the work
he is obliged to do, or simply in the superiority of the idleness he may
be fortunate enough to enjoy.

Yes, said the Assistant Commissioner; I have.  I do not mean to say
that you have not thought of Michaelis at all.  But you are giving the
fact youve mentioned a prominence which strikes me as not quite candid,
Inspector Heat.  If that is really the track of discovery, why havent
you followed it up at once, either personally or by sending one of your
men to that village?

Do you think, sir, I have failed in my duty there? the Chief Inspector
asked, in a tone which he sought to make simply reflective.  Forced
unexpectedly to concentrate his faculties upon the task of preserving his
balance, he had seized upon that point, and exposed himself to a rebuke;
for, the Assistant Commissioner frowning slightly, observed that this was
a very improper remark to make.

But since youve made it, he continued coldly, Ill tell you that this
is not my meaning.

He paused, with a straight glance of his sunken eyes which was a full
equivalent of the unspoken termination and you know it.  The head of
the so-called Special Crimes Department debarred by his position from
going out of doors personally in quest of secrets locked up in guilty
breasts, had a propensity to exercise his considerable gifts for the
detection of incriminating truth upon his own subordinates.  That
peculiar instinct could hardly be called a weakness.  It was natural.  He
was a born detective.  It had unconsciously governed his choice of a
career, and if it ever failed him in life it was perhaps in the one
exceptional circumstance of his marriagewhich was also natural.  It fed,
since it could not roam abroad, upon the human material which was brought
to it in its official seclusion.  We can never cease to be ourselves.

His elbow on the desk, his thin legs crossed, and nursing his cheek in
the palm of his meagre hand, the Assistant Commissioner in charge of the
Special Crimes branch was getting hold of the case with growing interest.
His Chief Inspector, if not an absolutely worthy foeman of his
penetration, was at any rate the most worthy of all within his reach.  A
mistrust of established reputations was strictly in character with the
Assistant Commissioners ability as detector.  His memory evoked a
certain old fat and wealthy native chief in the distant colony whom it
was a tradition for the successive Colonial Governors to trust and make
much of as a firm friend and supporter of the order and legality
established by white men; whereas, when examined sceptically, he was
found out to be principally his own good friend, and nobody elses.  Not
precisely a traitor, but still a man of many dangerous reservations in
his fidelity, caused by a due regard for his own advantage, comfort, and
safety.  A fellow of some innocence in his naive duplicity, but none the
less dangerous.  He took some finding out.  He was physically a big man,
too, and (allowing for the difference of colour, of course) Chief
Inspector Heats appearance recalled him to the memory of his superior.
It was not the eyes nor yet the lips exactly.  It was bizarre.  But does
not Alfred Wallace relate in his famous book on the Malay Archipelago
how, amongst the Aru Islanders, he discovered in an old and naked savage
with a sooty skin a peculiar resemblance to a dear friend at home?

For the first time since he took up his appointment the Assistant
Commissioner felt as if he were going to do some real work for his
salary.  And that was a pleasurable sensation.  Ill turn him inside out
like an old glove, thought the Assistant Commissioner, with his eyes
resting pensively upon Chief Inspector Heat.

No, that was not my thought, he began again.  There is no doubt about
you knowing your businessno doubt at all; and thats precisely why I
He stopped short, and changing his tone: What could you bring up against
Michaelis of a definite nature?  I mean apart from the fact that the two
men under suspicionyoure certain there were two of themcame last from
a railway station within three miles of the village where Michaelis is
living now.

This by itself is enough for us to go upon, sir, with that sort of man,
said the Chief Inspector, with returning composure.  The slight approving
movement of the Assistant Commissioners head went far to pacify the
resentful astonishment of the renowned officer.  For Chief Inspector Heat
