
  [12] If we had any business with the reasons of this, I might
    perhaps be able to show you some metaphysical ones for the
    enjoyment, by truly artistical minds, of the changes wrought by
    light and shade and perspective in patterned surfaces; but this is
    at present not to the point; and all that you need to know is that
    the drawing of such things is good exercise, and moreover a kind of
    exercise which Titian, Veronese, Tintoret, Giorgione, and Turner,
    all enjoyed, and strove to excel in.

  [13] The use of acquiring this habit of execution is that you may be
    able, when you begin to color, to let one hue be seen in minute
    portions, gleaming between the touches of another.

  [14] William Hunt, of the Old Water-color Society.

  [15] At Marlborough House, [in 1857] among the four principal
    examples of Turner's later water-color drawing, perhaps the most
    neglected was that of fishing-boats and fish at sunset. It is one of
    his most wonderful works, though unfinished. If you examine the
    larger white fishing-boat sail, you will find it has a little spark
    of pure white in its right-hand upper corner, about as large as a
    minute pin's head, and that all the surface of the sail is gradated
    to that focus. Try to copy this sail once or twice, and you will
    begin to understand Turner's work. Similarly, the wing of the Cupid
    in Correggio's large picture in the National Gallery is focused to
    two little grains of white at the top of it. The points of light on
    the white flower in the wreath round the head of the dancing
    child-faun, in Titian's Bacchus and Ariadne, exemplify the same
    thing.

  [16] I shall not henceforward number the exercises recommended; as
    they are distinguished only by increasing difficulty of subject, not
    by difference of method.

  [17] If you understand the principle of the stereoscope you will
    know why; if not, it does not matter; trust me for the truth of the
    statement, as I cannot explain the principle without diagrams and
    much loss of time. See, however, Note 1, in Appendix I.

  [18] The plates marked with a star are peculiarly desirable. See
    note at the end of Appendix I. The letters mean as follows:--

    _a_ stands for architecture, including distant grouping of towns,
         cottages, etc.
    _c_ clouds, including mist and aërial effects.
    _f_ foliage.
    _g_ ground, including low hills, when not rocky.
    _l_ effects of light.
    _m_ mountains, or bold rocky ground.
    _p_ power of general arrangement and effect.
    _q_ quiet water.
    _r_ running or rough water; or rivers, even if calm, when their
         line of flow is beautifully marked.

    _From the England Series._

    _a c f r._ Arundel.                   _a f p._ Lancaster.
      _a f l._ Ashby de la Zouche.      _c l m r._ Lancaster Sands.*
    _a l q r._ Barnard Castle.*           _a g f._ Launceston.*
      _f m r._ Bolton Abbey.            _c f l r._ Leicester Abbey.
      _f g r._ Buckfastleigh.*              _f r._ Ludlow.
      _a l p._ Caernarvon.                _a f l._ Margate.
      _c l q._ Castle Upnor.              _a l q._ Orford.
      _a f l._ Colchester.                  _c p._ Plymouth.
        _l q._ Cowes.                         _f._ Powis Castle.
      _c f p._ Dartmouth Cove.*           _l m q._ Prudhoe Castle.
      _c l q._ Flint Castle.*           _f l m r._ Chain Bridge over
    _a f g l._ Knaresborough.*                      Tees.*
        _m r._ High Force of Tees.*         _m q._ Ulleswater.
      _a f q._ Trematon.                    _f m._ Valle Crucis.

    _From the Keepsake._

      _m p q._ Arona.                         _p._ St. Germain en Laye.
        _l m._ Drachenfels.*              _l p q._ Florence.
        _f l._ Marly.*                      _l m._ Ballyburgh Ness.*

    _From the Bible Series._

        _f m._ Mount Lebanon.             _a c g._ Joppa.
          _m._ Rock of Moses at         _c l p q._ Solomon's Pools.*
                Sinai.                      _a l._ Santa Saba.
      _a l m._ Jericho.                     _a l._ Pool of Bethesda.

    _From Scott's Works._

        _p r._ Melrose.*                    _c m._ Glencoe.
        _f r._ Dryburgh.*                   _c m._ Loch Coriskin.*


        _a l._ Caerlaverock.

    _From the Rivers of France._

        _a q._ Château of Amboise, with     _a p._ Rouen Cathedral.
                large bridge on right.      _f p._ Pont de l'Arche.
      _l p r._ Rouen, looking down the    _f l p._ View on the Seine,
                river, poplars on right.*           with avenue.
      _a l p._ Rouen, with cathedral      _a c p._ Bridge of Meulan.
                and rainbow, avenue     _c g p r._ Caudebec.*
                on left.

  [19] As _well_;--not as minutely: the diamond cuts finer lines on
    the steel than you can draw on paper with your pen; but you must be
    able to get tones as even, and touches as firm.

  [20] See, for account of these plates, the Appendix on "Works to be
    studied."

  [21] See Note 2 in Appendix I.

  [22] This sketch is not of a tree standing on its head, though it
    looks like it. You will find it explained presently.




LETTER II.

SKETCHING FROM NATURE.


102. MY DEAR READER,--The work we have already gone through together
has, I hope, enabled you to draw with fair success either rounded and
simple masses, like stones, or complicated arrangements of form, like
those of leaves; provided only these masses or complexities will stay
quiet for you to copy, and do not extend into quantity so great as to
baffle your patience. But if we are now to go out to the fields, and to
draw anything like a complete landscape, neither of these conditions
will any more be observed for us. The clouds will not wait while we copy
their heaps or clefts; the shadows will escape from us as we try to
shape them, each, in its stealthy minute march, still leaving light
where its tremulous edge had rested the moment before, and involving in
eclipse objects that had seemed safe from its influence; and instead of
the small clusters of leaves which we could reckon point by point,
embarrassing enough even though numerable, we have now leaves as little
to be counted as the sands of the sea, and restless, perhaps, as its
foam.

103. In all that we have to do now, therefore, direct imitation becomes
more or less impossible. It is always to be aimed at so far as it _is_
possible; and when you have time and opportunity, some portions of a
landscape may, as you gain greater skill, be rendered with an
approximation almost to mirrored portraiture. Still, whatever skill you
may reach, there will always be need of judgment to choose, and of speed
to seize, certain things that are principal or fugitive; and you must
give more and more effort daily to the observance of characteristic
points, and the attainment of concise methods.

104. I have directed your attention early to foliage for two reasons.
First, that it is always accessible as a study; and secondly, that its
modes of growth present simple examples of the importance of leading or
governing lines. It is by seizing these leading lines, when we cannot
seize all, that likeness and expression are given to a portrait, and
grace and a kind of vital truth to the rendering of every natural form.
I call it vital truth, because these chief lines are always expressive
of the past history and present action of the thing. They show in a
mountain, first, how it was built or heaped up; and secondly, how it is
now being worn away, and from what quarter the wildest storms strike it.
In a tree, they show what kind of fortune it has had to endure from its
childhood: how troublesome trees have come in its way, and pushed it
aside, and tried to strangle or starve it; where and when kind trees
have sheltered it, and grown up lovingly together with it, bending as it
bent; what winds torment it most; what boughs of it behave best, and
bear most fruit; and so on. In a wave or cloud, these leading lines show
the run of the tide and of the wind, and the sort of change which the
water or vapor is at any moment enduring in its form, as it meets shore,
or counter-wave, or melting sunshine. Now remember, nothing
distinguishes great men from inferior men more than their always,
whether in life or in art, _knowing the way things are going_. Your
dunce thinks they are standing still, and draws them all fixed; your
wise man sees the change or changing in them, and draws them so,--the
animal in its motion, the tree in its growth, the cloud in its course,
the mountain in its wearing away. Try always, whenever you look at a
form, to see the lines in it which have had power over its past fate and
will have power over its futurity. Those are its _awful_ lines; see that
you seize on those, whatever else you miss. Thus, the leafage in Fig. 16
(p. 63) grew round the root of a stone pine, on the brow of a crag at
Sestri near Genoa, and all the sprays of it are thrust away in their
first budding by the great rude root, and spring out in every direction
round it, as water splashes when a heavy stone is thrown into it. Then,
when they have got clear of the root, they begin to bend up again; some
of them, being little stone pines themselves, have a great notion of
growing upright, if they can; and this struggle of theirs to recover
their straight road towards the sky, after being obliged to grow
sideways in their early years, is the effort that will mainly influence
their future destiny, and determine if they are to be crabbed, forky
pines, striking from that rock of Sestri, whose clefts nourish them,
with bared red lightning of angry arms towards the sea; or if they are
to be goodly and solemn pines, with trunks like pillars of temples, and
the purple burning of their branches sheathed in deep globes of cloudy
green. Those, then, are their fateful lines; see that you give that
spring and resilience, whatever you leave ungiven: depend upon it, their
chief beauty is in these.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.]

105. So in trees in general, and bushes, large or small, you will notice
that, though the boughs spring irregularly and at various angles, there
is a tendency in all to stoop less and less as they near the top of the
tree. This structure, typified in the simplest possible terms at _c_,
Fig. 17, is common to all trees that I know of, and it gives them a
certain plumy character, and aspect of unity in the hearts of their
branches which are essential to their beauty. The stem does not merely
send off a wild branch here and there to take its own way, but all the
branches share in one great fountain-like impulse; each has a curve and
a path to take, which fills a definite place, and each terminates all
its minor branches at its outer extremity, so as to form a greater outer
curve, whose character and proportion are peculiar for each species.
That is to say, the general type or idea of a tree is not as _a_, Fig.
17, but as _b_, in which, observe, the boughs all carry their minor
divisions right out to the bounding curve; not but that smaller
branches, by thousands, terminate in the heart of the tree, but the idea
and main purpose in every branch are to carry all its child branches
well out to the air and light, and let each of them, however small, take
its part in filling the united flow of the bounding curve, so that the
type of each separate bough is again not _a_, but _b_, Fig. 18;
approximating, that is to say, so far to the structure of a plant of
broccoli as to throw the great mass of spray and leafage out to a
rounded surface. Therefore beware of getting into a careless habit of
drawing boughs with successive sweeps of the pen or brush, one hanging
to the other, as in Fig. 19. If you look at the tree-boughs in any
painting of Wilson's you will see this structure, and nearly every other
that is to be avoided, in their intensest types. You will also notice
that Wilson never conceives a tree as a round mass, but flat, as if it
had been pressed and dried. Most people in drawing pines seem to fancy,
in the same way, that the boughs come out only on two sides of the
trunk, instead of all round it: always, therefore, take more pains in
trying to draw the boughs of trees that grow _towards_ you than those
that go off to the sides; anybody can draw the latter, but the
foreshortened ones are not so easy. It will help you in drawing them to
observe that in most trees the ramification of each branch, though not
of the tree itself, is more or less flattened, and approximates, in its
position, to the look of a hand held out to receive something, or
shelter something. If you take a looking-glass, and hold your hand
before it slightly hollowed, with the palm upwards, and the fingers
open, as if you were going to support the base of some great bowl,
larger than you could easily hold; and sketch your hand as you see it in
the glass with the points of the fingers towards you; it will materially
help you in understanding the way trees generally hold out their hands:
and if then you will turn yours with its palm downwards, as if you were
going to try to hide something, but with the fingers expanded, you will
get a good type of the action of the lower boughs in cedars and such
other spreading trees.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

106. Fig. 20 will give you a good idea of the simplest way in which
these and other such facts can be rapidly expressed; if you copy it
carefully, you will be surprised to find how the touches all group
together, in expressing the plumy toss of the tree branches, and the
springing of the bushes out of the bank, and the undulation of the
ground: note the careful drawing of the footsteps made by the climbers
of the little mound on the left.[23] It is facsimilëd from an etching of
Turner's, and is as good an example as you can have of the use of pure
and firm lines; it will also show you how the particular action in
foliage, or anything else to which you wish to direct attention, may be
intensified by the adjuncts. The tall and upright trees are made to look
more tall and upright still, because their line is continued below by
the figure of the farmer with his stick; and the rounded bushes on the
bank are made to look more rounded because their line is continued in
one broad sweep by the black dog and the boy climbing the wall. These
figures are placed entirely with this object, as we shall see more fully
hereafter when we come to talk about composition; but, if you please,
we will not talk about that yet awhile. What I have been telling you
about the beautiful lines and action of foliage has nothing to do with
composition, but only with fact, and the brief and expressive
representation of fact. But there will be no harm in your looking
forward, if you like to do so, to the account, in Letter III. of the
"Law of Radiation," and reading what is said there about tree growth:
indeed it would in some respects have been better to have said it here
than there, only it would have broken up the account of the principles
of composition somewhat awkwardly.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

107. Now, although the lines indicative of action are not always quite
so manifest in other things as in trees, a little attention will soon
enable you to see that there are such lines in everything. In an old
house roof, a bad observer and bad draughtsman will only see and draw
the spotty irregularity of tiles or slates all over; but a good
draughtsman will see all the bends of the under timbers, where they are
weakest and the weight is telling on them most, and the tracks of the
run of the water in time of rain, where it runs off fastest, and where
it lies long and feeds the moss; and he will be careful, however few
slates he draws, to mark the way they bend together towards those
hollows (which have the future fate of the roof in them), and crowd
gradually together at the top of the gable, partly diminishing in
perspective, partly, perhaps, diminished on purpose (they are so in most
English old houses) by the slate-layer. So in ground, there is always
the direction of the run of the water to be noticed, which rounds the
earth and cuts it into hollows; and, generally, in any bank or height
worth drawing, a trace of bedded or other internal structure besides.
Figure 20 will give you some idea of the way in which such facts may be
expressed by a few lines. Do you not feel the depression in the ground
all down the hill where the footsteps are, and how the people always
turn to the left at the top, losing breath a little, and then how the
water runs down in that other hollow towards the valley, behind the
roots of the trees?

108. Now, I want you in your first sketches from Nature to aim
exclusively at understanding and representing these vital facts of form;
using the pen--not now the steel, but the quill--firmly and steadily,
never scrawling with it, but saying to yourself before you lay on a
single touch,--"_that_ leaf is the main one, _that_ bough is the guiding
one, and this touch, _so_ long, _so_ broad, means that part of
it,"--point or side or knot, as the case may be. Resolve always, as you
look at the thing, what you will take, and what miss of it, and never
let your hand run away with you, or get into any habit or method of
touch. If you want a continuous line, your hand should pass calmly from
one end of it to the other without a tremor; if you want a shaking and
broken line, your hand should shake, or break off, as easily as a
musician's finger shakes or stops on a note: only remember this, that
there is no general way of doing _any_ thing; no recipe can be given you
for so much as the drawing of a cluster of grass. The grass may be
ragged and stiff, or tender and flowing; sunburnt and sheep-bitten, or
rank and languid; fresh or dry; lustrous or dull: look at it, and try to
draw it as it is, and don't think how somebody "told you to _do_ grass."
So a stone may be round or angular, polished or rough, cracked all over
like an ill-glazed teacup, or as united and broad as the breast of
Hercules. It may be as flaky as a wafer, as powdery as a field
puff-ball; it may be knotted like a ship's hawser, or kneaded like
hammered iron, or knit like a Damascus saber, or fused like a glass
bottle, or crystallized like hoar-frost, or veined like a forest leaf:
look at it, and don't try to remember how anybody told you to "do a
stone."

109. As soon as you find that your hand obeys you thoroughly, and that
you can render any form with a firmness and truth approaching that of
Turner's or Dürer's work,[24] you must add a simple but equally careful
light and shade to your pen drawing, so as to make each study as
complete as possible; for which you must prepare yourself thus. Get, if
you have the means, a good impression of one plate of Turner's Liber
Studiorum; if possible, one of the subjects named in the note
below.[25] If you cannot obtain, or even borrow for a little while, any
of these engravings, you must use a photograph instead (how, I will tell
you presently); but, if you can get the Turner, it will be best. You
will see that it is composed of a firm etching in line, with mezzotint
shadow laid over it. You must first copy the etched part of it
accurately; to which end put the print against the window, and trace
slowly with the greatest care every black line; retrace this on smooth
drawing-paper; and, finally, go over the whole with your pen, looking at
the original plate always, so that if you err at all, it may be on the
right side, not making a line which is too curved or too straight
already in the tracing, more curved or more straight, as you go over it.
And in doing this, never work after you are tired, nor to "get the thing
done," for if it is badly done, it will be of no use to you. The true
zeal and patience of a quarter of an hour are better than the sulky and
inattentive labor of a whole day. If you have not made the touches right
at the first going over with the pen, retouch them delicately, with
little ink in your pen, thickening or reinforcing them as they need: you
cannot give too much care to the facsimile. Then keep this etched
outline by you in order to study at your ease the way in which Turner
uses his line as preparatory for the subsequent shadow;[26] it is only
in getting the two separate that you will be able to reason on this.
Next, copy once more, though for the fourth time, any part of this
etching which you like, and put on the light and shade with the brush,
and any brown color that matches that of the plate;[27] working it with
the point of the brush as delicately as if you were drawing with pencil,
and dotting and cross-hatching as lightly as you can touch the paper,
till you get the gradations of Turner's engraving.

110. In this exercise, as in the former one, a quarter of an inch worked
to close resemblance of the copy is worth more than the whole subject
carelessly done. Not that in drawing afterwards from Nature you are to
be obliged to finish every gradation in this way, but that, once having
fully accomplished the drawing _something_ rightly, you will
thenceforward feel and aim at a higher perfection than you could
otherwise have conceived, and the brush will obey you, and bring out
quickly and clearly the loveliest results, with a submissiveness which
it would have wholly refused if you had not put it to severest work.
Nothing is more strange in art than the way that chance and materials
seem to favor you, when once you have thoroughly conquered them. Make
yourself quite independent of chance, get your result in spite of it,
and from that day forward all things will somehow fall as you would have
them. Show the camel's hair, and the color in it, that no bending nor
blotting is of any use to escape your will; that the touch and the shade
_shall_ finally be right, if it costs you a year's toil; and from that
hour of corrective conviction, said camel's hair will bend itself to all
your wishes, and no blot will dare to transgress its appointed border.
If you cannot obtain a print from the Liber Studiorum, get a
photograph[28] of some general landscape subject, with high hills and a
village or picturesque town, in the middle distance, and some calm water
of varied character (a stream with stones in it, if possible), and copy
any part of it you like, in this same brown color, working, as I have
just directed you to do from the Liber, a great deal with the point of
the brush. You are under a twofold disadvantage here, however; first,
there are portions in every photograph too delicately done for you at
present to be at all able to copy; and, secondly, there are portions
always more obscure or dark than there would be in the real scene, and
involved in a mystery which you will not be able, as yet, to decipher.
Both these characters will be advantageous to you for future study,
after you have gained experience, but they are a little against you in
early attempts at tinting; still you must fight through the difficulty,
and get the power of producing delicate gradations with brown or gray,
like those of the photograph.

111. Now observe; the perfection of work would be tinted shadow, like
photography, without any obscurity or exaggerated darkness; and as long
as your effect depends in anywise on visible lines, your art is not
perfect, though it may be first-rate of its kind. But to get complete
results in tints merely, requires both long time and consummate skill;
and you will find that a few well-put pen lines, with a tint dashed over
or under them, get more expression of facts than you could reach in any
other way, by the same expenditure of time. The use of the Liber
Studiorum print to you is chiefly as an example of the simplest
shorthand of this kind, a shorthand which is yet capable of dealing with
the most subtle natural effects; for the firm etching gets at the
expression of complicated details, as leaves, masonry, textures of
ground, etc., while the overlaid tint enables you to express the most
tender distances of sky, and forms of playing light, mist, or cloud.
Most of the best drawings by the old masters are executed on this
principle, the touches of the pen being useful also to give a look of
transparency to shadows, which could not otherwise be attained but by
great finish of tinting; and if you have access to any ordinarily good
public gallery, or can make friends of any printsellers who have folios
either of old drawings, or facsimiles of them, you will not be at a loss
to find some example of this unity of pen with tinting. Multitudes of
photographs also are now taken from the best drawings by the old
masters, and I hope that our Mechanics' Institutes and other societies
organized with a view to public instruction, will not fail to possess
themselves of examples of these, and to make them accessible to students
of drawing in the vicinity; a single print from Turner's Liber, to show
the unison of tint with pen etching, and the "St. Catherine,"
photographed by Thurston Thompson from Raphael's drawing in the Louvre,
to show the unity of the soft tinting of the stump with chalk, would be
all that is necessary, and would, I believe, be in many cases more
serviceable than a larger collection, and certainly than a whole gallery
of second-rate prints. Two such examples are peculiarly desirable,
because all other modes of drawing, with pen separately, or chalk
separately, or color separately, may be seen by the poorest student in
any cheap illustrated book, or in shop windows. But this unity of
tinting with line he cannot generally see but by some special inquiry,
and in some out of the way places he could not find a single example of
it. Supposing that this should be so in your own case, and that you
cannot meet with any example of this kind, try to make the matter out
alone, thus:

112. Take a small and simple photograph; allow yourself half an hour to
express its subjects with the pen only, using some permanent liquid
color instead of ink, outlining its buildings or trees firmly, and
laying in the deeper shadows, as you have been accustomed to do in your
bolder pen drawings; then, when this etching is dry, take your sepia or
gray, and tint it over, getting now the finer gradations of the
photograph; and, finally taking out the higher lights with penknife or
blotting paper. You will soon find what can be done in this way; and by
a series of experiments you may ascertain for yourself how far the pen
may be made serviceable to reinforce shadows, mark characters of
texture, outline unintelligible masses, and so on. The more time you
have, the more delicate you may make the pen drawing, blending it with
the tint; the less you have, the more distinct you must keep the two.
Practice in this way from one photograph, allowing yourself sometimes
only a quarter of an hour for the whole thing, sometimes an hour,
sometimes two or three hours; in each case drawing the whole subject in
full depth of light and shade, but with such degree of finish in the
parts as is possible in the given time. And this exercise, observe, you
will do well to repeat frequently, whether you can get prints and
drawings as well as photographs, or not.

113. And now at last, when you can copy a piece of Liber Studiorum, or
its photographic substitute, faithfully, you have the complete means in
your power of working from Nature on all subjects that interest you,
which you should do in four different ways.

First. When you have full time, and your subject is one that will stay
quiet for you, make perfect light and shade studies, or as nearly
perfect as you can, with gray or brown color of any kind, reinforced and
defined with the pen.

114. Secondly. When your time is short, or the subject is so rich in
detail that you feel you cannot complete it intelligibly in light and
shade, make a hasty study of the effect, and give the rest of the time
to a Düreresque expression of the details. If the subject seems to you
interesting, and there are points about it which you cannot understand,
try to get five spare minutes to go close up to it, and make a nearer
memorandum; not that you are ever to bring the details of this nearer
sketch into the farther one, but that you may thus perfect your
experience of the aspect of things, and know that such and such a look
of a tower or cottage at five hundred yards off means _that_ sort of
tower or cottage near; while, also, this nearer sketch will be useful to
prevent any future misinterpretation of your own work. If you have time,
however far your light and shade study in the distance may have been
carried, it is always well, for these reasons, to make also your
Düreresque and your near memoranda; for if your light and shade drawing
be good, much of the interesting detail must be lost in it, or
disguised.

115. Your hasty study of effect may be made most easily and quickly with
a soft pencil, dashed over when done with one tolerably deep tone of
gray, which will fix the pencil. While this fixing color is wet, take
out the higher lights with the dry brush; and, when it is quite dry,
scratch out the highest lights with the penknife. Five minutes,
carefully applied, will do much by these means. Of course the paper is
to be white. I do not like studies on gray paper so well; for you can
get more gradation by the taking off your wet tint, and laying it on
cunningly a little darker here and there, than you can with body-color
white, unless you are consummately skillful. There is no objection to
your making your Düreresque memoranda on gray or yellow paper, and
touching or relieving them with white; only, do not depend much on your
white touches, nor make the sketch for their sake.

116. Thirdly. When you have neither time for careful study nor for
Düreresque detail, sketch the outline with pencil, then dash in the
shadows with the brush boldly, trying to do as much as you possibly can
at once, and to get a habit of expedition and decision; laying more
color again and again into the tints as they dry, using every expedient
which your practice has suggested to you of carrying out your
chiaroscuro in the manageable and moist material, taking the color off
here with the dry brush, scratching out lights in it there with the
wooden handle of the brush, rubbing it in with your fingers, drying it
off with your sponge, etc. Then, when the color is in, take your pen and
mark the outline characters vigorously, in the manner of the Liber
Studiorum. This kind of study is very convenient for carrying away
pieces of effect which depend not so much on refinement as on
complexity, strange shapes of involved shadows, sudden effects of sky,
etc.; and it is most useful as a safeguard against any too servile or
slow habits which the minute copying may induce in you; for although the
endeavor to obtain velocity merely for velocity's sake, and dash for
display's sake, is as baneful as it is despicable; there are a velocity
and a dash which not only are compatible with perfect drawing, but
obtain certain results which cannot be had otherwise. And it is
perfectly safe for you to study occasionally for speed and decision,
while your continual course of practice is such as to insure your
retaining an accurate judgment and a tender touch. Speed, under such
circumstances, is rather fatiguing than tempting; and you will find
yourself always beguiled rather into elaboration than negligence.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

117. Fourthly. You will find it of great use, whatever kind of landscape
scenery you are passing through, to get into the habit of making
memoranda of the shapes of shadows. You will find that many objects of
no essential interest in themselves, and neither deserving a finished
study, nor a Düreresque one, may yet become of singular value in
consequence of the fantastic shapes of their shadows; for it happens
often, in distant effect, that the shadow is by much a more important
element than the substance. Thus, in the Alpine bridge, Fig. 21, seen
within a few yards of it, as in the figure, the arrangement of timbers
to which the shadows are owing is perceptible; but at half a mile's
distance, in bright sunlight, the timbers would not be seen; and a good
painter's expression of the bridge would be merely the large spot, and
the crossed bars, of pure gray; wholly without indication of their
cause, as in Fig. 22 _a_; and if we saw it at still greater distances,
it would appear, as in Fig. 22 _b_ and _c_, diminishing at last to a
strange, unintelligible, spider-like spot of gray on the light
hill-side. A perfectly great painter, throughout his distances,
continually reduces his objects to these shadow abstracts; and the
singular, and to many persons unaccountable, effect of the confused
touches in Turner's distances, is owing chiefly to this thorough
accuracy and intense meaning of the shadow abstracts.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

118. Studies of this kind are easily made, when you are in haste, with
an F. or HB. pencil: it requires some hardness of the point to insure
your drawing delicately enough when the forms of the shadows are very
subtle; they are sure to be so somewhere, and are generally so
everywhere. The pencil is indeed a very precious instrument after you
are master of the pen and brush, for the pencil, cunningly used, is
both, and will draw a line with the precision of the one and the
gradation of the other; nevertheless, it is so unsatisfactory to see the
sharp touches, on which the best of the detail depends, getting
gradually deadened by time, or to find the places where force was wanted
look shiny, and like a fire-grate, that I should recommend rather the
steady use of the pen, or brush, and color, whenever time admits of it;
keeping only a small memorandum-book in the breast-pocket, with its
well-cut, sheathed pencil, ready for notes on passing opportunities: but
never being without this.

119. Thus much, then, respecting the manner in which you are at first to
draw from Nature. But it may perhaps be serviceable to you, if I also
note one or two points respecting your choice of subjects for study, and
the best special methods of treating some of them; for one of by no
means the least difficulties which you have at first to encounter is a
peculiar instinct, common, as far as I have noticed, to all beginners,
to fix on exactly the most unmanageable feature in the given scene.
There are many things in every landscape which can be drawn, if at all,
only by the most accomplished artists; and I have noticed that it is
nearly always these which a beginner will dash at; or, if not these, it
will be something which, though pleasing to him in itself, is unfit for
a picture, and in which, when he has drawn it, he will have little
pleasure. As some slight protection against this evil genius of
beginners, the following general warnings may be useful:

120. (1.) Do not draw things that you love, on account of their
associations; or at least do not draw them because you love them; but
merely when you cannot get anything else to draw. If you try to draw
places that you love, you are sure to be always entangled amongst neat
brick walls, iron railings, gravel walks, greenhouses, and quickset
hedges; besides that you will be continually led into some endeavor to
make your drawing pretty, or complete, which will be fatal to your
progress. You need never hope to get on, if you are the least anxious
that the drawing you are actually at work upon should look nice when it
is done. All you have to care about is to make it _right_, and to learn
as much in doing it as possible. So then, though when you are sitting in
your friend's parlor, or in your own, and have nothing else to do, you
may draw anything that is there, for practice; even the fire-irons or
the pattern on the carpet: be sure that it _is_ for practice, and not
because it is a beloved carpet, or a friendly poker and tongs, nor
because you wish to please your friend by drawing her room.

121. Also, never make presents of your drawings. Of course I am
addressing you as a beginner--a time may come when your work will be
precious to everybody; but be resolute not to give it away till you know
that it is worth something (as soon as it is worth anything you will
know that it is so). If any one asks you for a present of a drawing,
send them a couple of cakes of color and a piece of Bristol board: those
materials are, for the present, of more value in that form than if you
had spread the one over the other.

The main reason for this rule is, however, that its observance will much
protect you from the great danger of trying to make your drawings
pretty.

122. (2.) Never, by choice, draw anything polished; especially if
complicated in form. Avoid all brass rods and curtain ornaments,
chandeliers, plate, glass, and fine steel. A shining knob of a piece of
furniture does not matter if it comes in your way; but do not fret
yourself if it will not look right, and choose only things that do not
shine.

(3.) Avoid all very neat things. They are exceedingly difficult to draw,
and very ugly when drawn. Choose rough, worn, and clumsy-looking things
as much as possible; for instance, you cannot have a more difficult or
profitless study than a newly painted Thames wherry, nor a better study
than an old empty coal-barge, lying ashore at low tide: in general,
everything that you think very ugly will be good for you to draw.

(4.) Avoid, as much as possible, studies in which one thing is seen
through another. You will constantly find a thin tree standing before
your chosen cottage, or between you and the turn of the river; its near
branches all entangled with the distance. It is intensely difficult to
represent this; and though, when the tree _is_ there, you must not
imaginarily cut it down, but do it as well as you can, yet always look
for subjects that fall into definite masses, not into network; that is,
rather for a cottage with a dark tree beside it, than for one with a
thin tree in front of it, rather for a mass of wood, soft, blue, and
rounded, than for a ragged copse, or confusion of intricate stems.

(5.) Avoid, as far as possible, country divided by hedges. Perhaps
nothing in the whole compass of landscape is so utterly unpicturesque
and unmanageable as the ordinary English patchwork of field and hedge,
with trees dotted over it in independent spots, gnawed straight at the
cattle line.

Still, do not be discouraged if you find you have chosen ill, and that
the subject overmasters you. It is much better that it should, than that
you should think you had entirely mastered _it_. But at first, and even
for some time, you must be prepared for very discomfortable failure;
which, nevertheless, will not be without some wholesome result.

123. As, however, I have told you what most definitely to avoid, I may,
perhaps, help you a little by saying what to seek. In general, all banks
are beautiful things, and will reward work better than large landscapes.
If you live in a lowland country, you must look for places where the
ground is broken to the river's edges, with decayed posts, or roots of
trees; or, if by great good luck there should be such things within your
reach, for remnants of stone quays or steps, mossy mill-dams, etc.
Nearly every other mile of road in chalk country will present beautiful
bits of broken bank at its sides; better in form and color than high
chalk cliffs. In woods, one or two trunks, with the flowery ground
below, are at once the richest and easiest kind of study: a not very
thick trunk, say nine inches or a foot in diameter, with ivy running up
it sparingly, is an easy, and always a rewarding subject.

124. Large nests of buildings in the middle distance are always
beautiful, when drawn carefully, provided they are not modern rows of
pattern cottages, or villas with Ionic and Doric porticoes. Any old
English village, or cluster of farmhouses, drawn with all its ins and
outs, and haystacks, and palings, is sure to be lovely; much more a
French one. French landscape is generally as much superior to English as
Swiss landscape is to French; in some respects, the French is
incomparable. Such scenes as that avenue on the Seine, which I have
recommended you to buy the engraving of, admit no rivalship in their
expression of graceful rusticity and cheerful peace, and in the beauty
of component lines.

In drawing villages, take great pains with the gardens; a rustic garden
is in every way beautiful. If you have time, draw all the rows of
cabbages, and hollyhocks, and broken fences, and wandering eglantines,
and bossy roses; you cannot have better practice, nor be kept by
anything in purer thoughts.

Make intimate friends with all the brooks in your neighborhood, and
study them ripple by ripple.

Village churches in England are not often good subjects; there is a
peculiar meanness about most of them and awkwardness of line. Old
manor-houses are often pretty. Ruins are usually, with us, too prim, and
cathedrals too orderly. I do not think there is a single cathedral in
England from which it is possible to obtain _one_ subject for an
impressive drawing. There is always some discordant civility, or jarring
vergerism about them.

125. If you live in a mountain or hill country, your only danger is
redundance of subject. Be resolved, in the first place, to draw a piece
of rounded rock, with its variegated lichens, quite rightly, getting its
complete roundings, and all the patterns of the lichen in true local
color. Till you can do this, it is of no use your thinking of sketching
among hills; but when once you have done this, the forms of distant
hills will be comparatively easy.

126. When you have practiced for a little time from such of these
subjects as may be accessible to you, you will certainly find
difficulties arising which will make you wish more than ever for a
master's help: these difficulties will vary according to the character
of your own mind (one question occurring to one person, and one to
another), so that it is impossible to anticipate them all; and it would
make this too large a book if I answered all that I _can_ anticipate;
you must be content to work on, in good hope that Nature will, in her
own time, interpret to you much for herself; that farther experience on
your own part will make some difficulties disappear; and that others
will be removed by the occasional observation of such artists' work as
may come in your way. Nevertheless, I will not close this letter without
a few general remarks, such as may be useful to you after you are
somewhat advanced in power; and these remarks may, I think, be
conveniently arranged under three heads, having reference to the drawing
of vegetation, water, and skies.

127. And, first, of vegetation. You may think, perhaps, we have said
enough about trees already; yet if you have done as you were bid, and
tried to draw them frequently enough, and carefully enough, you will be
ready by this time to hear a little more of them. You will also
recollect that we left our question, respecting the mode of expressing
intricacy of leafage, partly unsettled in the first letter. I left it so
because I wanted you to learn the real structure of leaves, by drawing
them for yourself, before I troubled you with the most subtle
considerations as to method in drawing them. And by this time, I
imagine, you must have found out two principal things, universal facts,
about leaves; namely, that they always, in the main tendencies of their
lines, indicate a beautiful divergence of growth, according to the law
of radiation, already referred to;[29] and the second, that this
divergence is never formal, but carried out with endless variety of
individual line. I must now press both these facts on your attention a
little farther.

128. You may, perhaps, have been surprised that I have not yet spoken of
the works of J. D. Harding, especially if you happen to have met with
the passages referring to them in Modern Painters, in which they are
highly praised. They are deservedly praised, for they are the only
works by a modern[30] draughtsman which express in any wise the energy
of trees, and the laws of growth, of which we have been speaking. There
are no lithographic sketches which, for truth of general character,
obtained with little cost of time, at all rival Harding's. Calame,
Robert, and the other lithographic landscape sketchers are altogether
inferior in power, though sometimes a little deeper in meaning. But you
must not take even Harding for a model, though you may use his works for
occasional reference; and if you can afford to buy his Lessons on
Trees,[31] it will be serviceable to you in various ways, and will at
present help me to explain the point under consideration. And it is well
that I should illustrate this point by reference to Harding's works,
because their great influence on young students renders it desirable
that their real character should be thoroughly understood.

129. You will find, first, in the titlepage of the Lessons on Trees, a
pretty wood-cut, in which the tree stems are drawn with great truth, and
in a very interesting arrangement of lines. Plate 1 is not quite worthy
of Mr. Harding, tending too much to make his pupil, at starting, think
everything depends on black dots; still, the main lines are good, and
very characteristic of tree growth. Then, in Plate 2, we come to the
point at issue. The first examples in that plate are given to the pupil
that he may practice from them till his hand gets into the habit of
arranging lines freely in a similar manner; and they are stated by Mr.
Harding to be universal in application; "all outlines expressive of
foliage," he says, "are but modifications of them." They consist of
groups of lines, more or less resembling our Fig. 23 below; and the
characters especially insisted upon are, that they "tend at their inner
ends to a common center;" that "their ends terminate in [are inclosed
by] ovoid curves;" and that "the outer ends are most emphatic."

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

130. Now, as thus expressive of the great laws of radiation and
inclosure, the main principle of this method of execution confirms, in a
very interesting way, our conclusions respecting foliage composition.
The reason of the last rule, that the outer end of the line is to be
most emphatic, does not indeed at first appear; for the line at one end
of a natural leaf is not more emphatic than the line at the other: but
ultimately, in Harding's method, this darker part of the touch stands
more or less for the shade at the outer extremity of the leaf mass; and,
as Harding uses these touches, they express as much of tree character as
any mere habit of touch _can_ express. But, unfortunately, there is
another law of tree growth, quite as fixed as the law of radiation,
which this and all other conventional modes of execution wholly lose
sight of. This second law is, that the radiating tendency shall be
carried out only as a ruling spirit in reconcilement with perpetual
individual caprice on the part of the separate leaves. So that the
moment a touch is monotonous, it must be also false, the liberty of the
leaf individually being just as essential a truth, as its unity of
growth with its companions in the radiating group.

131. It does not matter how small or apparently symmetrical the cluster
may be, nor how large or vague. You can hardly have a more formal one
than _b_ in Fig. 9, p. 47, nor a less formal one than this shoot of
Spanish chestnut, shedding its leaves, Fig. 24; but in either of them,
even the general reader, unpracticed in any of the previously
recommended exercises, must see that there are wandering lines mixed
with the radiating ones, and radiating lines with the wild ones: and if
he takes the pen, and tries to copy either of these examples, he will
find that neither play of hand to left nor to right, neither a free
touch nor a firm touch, nor any learnable or describable touch
whatsoever, will enable him to produce, currently, a resemblance of it;
but that he must either draw it slowly or give it up. And (which makes
the matter worse still) though gathering the bough, and putting it close
to you, or seeing a piece of near foliage against the sky, you may draw
the entire outline of the leaves, yet if the spray has light upon it,
and is ever so little a way off, you will miss, as we have seen, a point
of a leaf here, and an edge there; some of the surfaces will be confused
by glitter, and some spotted with shade; and if you look carefully
through this confusion for the edges or dark stems which you really
_can_ see and put only those down, the result will be neither like Fig.
9 nor Fig. 24, but such an interrupted and puzzling piece of work as
Fig. 25.[32]

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

132. Now, it is in the perfect acknowledgment and expression of these
_three_ laws that all good drawing of landscape consists. There is,
first, the organic unity; the law, whether of radiation, or parallelism,
or concurrent action, which rules the masses of herbs and trees, of
rocks, and clouds, and waves; secondly, the individual liberty of the
members subjected to these laws of unity; and, lastly, the mystery under
which the separate character of each is more or less concealed.

I say, first, there must be observance of the ruling organic law. This
is the first distinction between good artists and bad artists. Your
common sketcher or bad painter puts his leaves on the trees as if they
were moss tied to sticks; he cannot see the lines of action or growth;
he scatters the shapeless clouds over his sky, not perceiving the sweeps
of associated curves which the real clouds are following as they fly;
and he breaks his mountain side into rugged fragments, wholly
unconscious of the lines of force with which the real rocks have risen,
or of the lines of couch in which they repose. On the contrary, it is
the main delight of the great draughtsman to trace these laws of
government; and his tendency to error is always in the exaggeration of
their authority rather than in its denial.

133. Secondly, I say, we have to show the individual character and
liberty of the separate leaves, clouds, or rocks. And herein the great
masters separate themselves finally from the inferior ones; for if the
men of inferior genius ever express law at all, it is by the sacrifice
of individuality. Thus, Salvator Rosa has great perception of the sweep
of foliage and rolling of clouds, but never draws a single leaflet or
mist wreath accurately. Similarly, Gainsborough, in his landscape, has
great feeling for masses of form and harmony of color; but in the detail
gives nothing but meaningless touches; not even so much as the species
of tree, much less the variety of its leafage, being ever discernible.
Now, although both these expressions of government and individuality are
essential to masterly work, the individuality is the _more_ essential,
and the more difficult of attainment; and, therefore, that attainment
separates the great masters _finally_ from the inferior ones. It is the
more essential, because, in these matters of beautiful arrangement in
visible things, the same rules hold that hold in moral things. It is a
lamentable and unnatural thing to see a number of men subject to no
government, actuated by no ruling principle, and associated by no common
affection: but it would be a more lamentable thing still, were it
possible, to see a number of men so oppressed into assimilation as to
have no more any individual hope or character, no differences in aim, no
dissimilarities of passion, no irregularities of judgment; a society in
which no man could help another, since none would be feebler than
himself; no man admire another, since none would be stronger than
himself; no man be grateful to another, since by none he could be
relieved; no man reverence another, since by none he could be
instructed; a society in which every soul would be as the syllable of a
stammerer instead of the word of a speaker, in which every man would
walk as in a frightful dream, seeing specters of himself, in everlasting
multiplication, gliding helplessly around him in a speechless darkness.
Therefore it is that perpetual difference, play, and change in groups of
form are more essential to them even than their being subdued by some
great gathering law: the law is needful to them for their perfection and
their power, but the difference is needful to them for their life.

134. And here it may be noted in passing, that, if you enjoy the pursuit
of analogies and types, and have any ingenuity of judgment in discerning
them, you may always accurately ascertain what are the noble characters
in a piece of painting by merely considering what are the noble
characters of man in his association with his fellows. What grace of
manner and refinement of habit are in society, grace of line and
refinement of form are in the association of visible objects. What
advantage or harm there may be in sharpness, ruggedness, or quaintness
in the dealings or conversations of men; precisely that relative degree
of advantage or harm there is in them as elements of pictorial
composition. What power is in liberty or relaxation to strengthen or
relieve human souls; that power precisely in the same relative degree,
play and laxity of line have to strengthen or refresh the expression of
a picture. And what goodness or greatness we can conceive to arise in
companies of men, from chastity of thought, regularity of life,
simplicity of custom, and balance of authority; precisely that kind of
goodness and greatness may be given to a picture by the purity of its
color, the severity of its forms, and the symmetry of its masses.

135. You need not be in the least afraid of pushing these analogies too
far. They cannot be pushed too far; they are so precise and complete,
that the farther you pursue them, the clearer, the more certain, the
more useful you will find them. They will not fail you in one
particular, or in any direction of inquiry. There is no moral vice, no
moral virtue, which has not its _precise_ prototype in the art of
painting; so that you may at your will illustrate the moral habit by the
art, or the art by the moral habit. Affection and discord, fretfulness,
and quietness, feebleness and firmness, luxury and purity, pride and
modesty, and all other such habits, and every conceivable modification
and mingling of them, may be illustrated, with mathematical exactness,
by conditions of line and color; and not merely these definable vices
and virtues, but also every conceivable shade of human character and
passion, from the righteous or unrighteous majesty of the king to the
innocent or faultful simplicity of the shepherd boy.

136. The pursuit of this subject belongs properly, however, to the
investigation of the higher branches of composition, matters which it
would be quite useless to treat of in this book; and I only allude to
them here, in order that you may understand how the utmost noblenesses
of art are concerned in this minute work, to which I have set you in
your beginning of it. For it is only by the closest attention, and the
most noble execution, that it is possible to express these varieties of
individual character, on which all excellence of portraiture depends,
whether of masses of mankind, or of groups of leaves.

137. Now you will be able to understand, among other matters, wherein
consists the excellence, and wherein the shortcoming, of the
tree-drawing of Harding. It is excellent in so far as it fondly
observes, with more truth than any other work of the kind, the great
laws of growth and action in trees: it fails,--and observe, not in a
minor, but in the principal point,--because it cannot rightly render any
one individual detail or incident of foliage. And in this it fails, not
from mere carelessness or incompletion, but of necessity; the true
drawing of detail being for evermore impossible to a hand which has
contracted a _habit_ of execution. The noble draughtsman draws a leaf,
and stops, and says calmly,--That leaf is of such and such a character;
I will give him a friend who will entirely suit him: then he considers
what his friend ought to be, and having determined, he draws his friend.
This process may be as quick as lightning when the master is great--one
of the sons of the giants; or it may be slow and timid: but the process
is always gone through; no touch or form is ever added to another by a
good painter without a mental determination and affirmation. But when
the hand has got into a habit, leaf No. 1 necessitates leaf No. 2; you
cannot stop, your hand is as a horse with the bit in its teeth; or
rather is, for the time, a machine, throwing out leaves to order and
pattern, all alike. You must stop that hand of yours, however painfully;
make it understand that it is not to have its own way any more, that it
shall never more slip from one touch to another without orders;
otherwise it is not you who are the master, but your fingers. You may
therefore study Harding's drawing, and take pleasure in it;[33] and you
may properly admire the dexterity which applies the habit of the hand
so well, and produces results on the whole so satisfactory: but you must
never copy it; otherwise your progress will be at once arrested. The
utmost you can ever hope to do would be a sketch in Harding's manner,
but of far inferior dexterity; for he has given his life's toil to gain
his dexterity, and you, I suppose, have other things to work at besides
drawing. You would also incapacitate yourself from ever understanding
what truly great work was, or what Nature was; but, by the earnest and
complete study of facts, you will gradually come to understand the one
and love the other more and more, whether you can draw well yourself or
not.

138. I have yet to say a few words respecting the third law above
stated, that of mystery; the law, namely, that nothing is ever seen
perfectly, but only by fragments, and under various conditions of
obscurity.[34] This last fact renders the visible objects of Nature
complete as a type of the human nature. We have, observe, first,
Subordination; secondly, Individuality; lastly, and this not the least
essential character, Incomprehensibility; a perpetual lesson, in every
serrated point and shining vein which escapes or deceives our sight
among the forest leaves, how little we may hope to discern clearly, or
judge justly, the rents and veins of the human heart; how much of all
that is round us, in men's actions or spirits, which we at first think
we understand, a closer and more loving watchfulness would show to be
full of mystery, never to be either fathomed or withdrawn.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

139. The expression of this final character in landscape has never been
completely reached by any except Turner; nor can you hope to reach it at
all until you have given much time to the practice of art. Only try
always when you are sketching any object with a view to completion in
light and shade, to draw only those parts of it which you really see
definitely; preparing for the after development of the forms by
chiaroscuro. It is this preparation by isolated touches for a future
arrangement of superimposed light and shade which renders the etchings
of the Liber Studiorum so inestimable as examples, and so peculiar. The
character exists more or less in them exactly in proportion to the pains
that Turner has taken. Thus the Æsacus and Hesperie was wrought out with
the greatest possible care; and the principal branch on the near tree is
etched as in Fig. 26. The work looks at first like a scholar's instead
of a master's; but when the light and shade are added, every touch falls
into its place, and a perfect expression of grace and complexity
results. Nay, even before the light and shade are added, you ought to be
able to see that these irregular and broken lines, especially where the
expression is given of the way the stem loses itself in the leaves, are
more true than the monotonous though graceful leaf-drawing which, before
Turner's time, had been employed, even by the best masters, in their
distant masses. Fig. 27 is sufficiently characteristic of the manner of
the old wood-cuts after Titian; in which, you see, the leaves are too
much of one shape, like bunches of fruit; and the boughs too completely
seen, besides being somewhat soft and leathery in aspect, owing to the
want of angles in their outline. By great men like Titian, this somewhat
conventional structure was only given in haste to distant masses; and
their exquisite delineation of the foreground, kept their
conventionalism from degeneracy: but in the drawings of the Carracci and
other derivative masters, the conventionalism prevails everywhere, and
sinks gradually into scrawled work, like Fig. 28, about the worst which
it is possible to get into the habit of using, though an ignorant person
might perhaps suppose it more "free," and therefore better than Fig. 26.
Note also, that in noble outline drawing, it does not follow that a
bough is wrongly drawn, because it looks contracted unnaturally
somewhere, as in Fig. 26, just above the foliage. Very often the
muscular action which is to be expressed by the line runs into the
middle of the branch, and the actual outline of the branch at that place
may be dimly seen, or not at all; and it is then only by the future
shade that its actual shape, or the cause of its disappearance, will be
indicated.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

140. One point more remains to be noted about trees, and I have done. In
the minds of our ordinary water-color artists a distant tree seems only
to be conceived as a flat green blot, grouping pleasantly with other
masses, and giving cool color to the landscape, but differing no wise,
in texture, from the blots of other shapes which these painters use to
express stones, or water, or figures. But as soon as you have drawn
trees carefully a little while, you will be impressed, and impressed
more strongly the better you draw them, with the idea of their
_softness_ of surface. A distant tree is not a flat and even piece of
color, but a more or less globular mass of a downy or bloomy texture,
partly passing into a misty vagueness. I find, practically, this lovely
softness of far-away trees the most difficult of all characters to
reach, because it cannot be got by mere scratching or roughening the
surface, but is always associated with such delicate expressions of form
and growth as are only imitable by very careful drawing. The penknife
passed lightly _over_ this careful drawing will do a good deal; but you
must accustom yourself, from the beginning, to aim much at this softness
in the lines of the drawing itself, by crossing them delicately, and
more or less effacing and confusing the edges. You must invent,
according to the character of tree, various modes of execution adapted
to express its texture; but always keep this character of softness in
your mind, and in your scope of aim; for in most landscapes it is the
intention of Nature that the tenderness and transparent infinitude of
her foliage should be felt, even at the far distance, in the most
distinct opposition to the solid masses and flat surfaces of rocks or
buildings.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]

141. II. We were, in the second place, to consider a little the modes of
representing water, of which important feature of landscape I have
hardly said anything yet.

Water is expressed, in common drawings, by conventional lines, whose
horizontality is supposed to convey the idea of its surface. In
paintings, white dashes or bars of light are used for the same purpose.

But these and all other such expedients are vain and absurd. A piece of
calm water always contains a picture in itself, an exquisite reflection
of the objects above it. If you give the time necessary to draw these
reflections, disturbing them here and there as you see the breeze or
current disturb them, you will get the effect of the water; but if you
have not patience to draw the reflections, no expedient will give you a
true effect. The picture in the pool needs nearly as much delicate
drawing as the picture above the pool; except only that if there be the
least motion on the water, the horizontal lines of the images will be
diffused and broken, while the vertical ones will remain decisive, and
the oblique ones decisive in proportion to their steepness.

142. A few close studies will soon teach you this: the only thing you
need to be told is to watch carefully the lines of disturbance on the
surface, as when a bird swims across it, or a fish rises, or the current
plays round a stone, reed, or other obstacle. Take the greatest pains to
get the _curves_ of these lines true; the whole value of your careful
drawing of the reflections may be lost by your admitting a single false
curve of ripple from a wild duck's breast. And (as in other subjects) if
you are dissatisfied with your result, always try for more unity and
delicacy: if your reflections are only soft and gradated enough, they
are nearly sure to give you a pleasant effect.[35] When you are taking
pains, work the softer reflections, where they are drawn out by motion
in the water, with touches as nearly horizontal as may be; but when you
are in a hurry, indicate the place and play of the images with vertical
lines. The actual construction of a calm elongated reflection is with
horizontal lines: but it is often impossible to draw the descending
shades delicately enough with a horizontal touch; and it is best always
when you are in a hurry, and sometimes when you are not, to use the
vertical touch. When the ripples are large, the reflections become
shaken, and must be drawn with bold undulatory descending lines.

143. I need not, I should think, tell you that it is of the greatest
possible importance to draw the curves of the shore rightly. Their
perspective is, if not more subtle, at least more stringent than that of
any other lines in Nature. It will not be detected by the general
observer, if you miss the curve of a branch, or the sweep of a cloud, or
the perspective of a building;[36] but every intelligent spectator will
feel the difference between a rightly-drawn bend of shore or shingle,
and a false one. _Absolutely_ right, in difficult river perspectives
seen from heights, I believe no one but Turner ever has been yet; and
observe, there is NO rule for them. To develop the curve mathematically
would require a knowledge of the exact quantity of water in the river,
the shape of its bed, and the hardness of the rock or shore; and even
with these data, the problem would be one which no mathematician could
solve but approximatively. The instinct of the eye can do it; nothing
else.

144. If, after a little study from Nature, you get puzzled by the great
differences between the aspect of the reflected image and that of the
object casting it; and if you wish to know the law of reflection, it is
simply this: Suppose all the objects above the water _actually_ reversed
(not in appearance, but in fact) beneath the water, and precisely the
same in form and in relative position, only all topsy-turvy. Then,
whatever you could see, from the place in which you stand, of the solid
objects so reversed under the water, you will see in the reflection,
always in the true perspective of the solid objects so reversed.

If you cannot quite understand this in looking at water, take a mirror,
lay it horizontally on the table, put some books and papers upon it, and
draw them and their reflections; moving them about, and watching how
their reflections alter, and chiefly how their reflected colors and
shades differ from their own colors and shades, by being brought into
other oppositions. This difference in chiaroscuro is a more important
character in water-painting than mere difference in form.

145. When you are drawing shallow or muddy water, you will see shadows
on the bottom, or on the surface, continually modifying the reflections;
and in a clear mountain stream, the most wonderful complications of
effect resulting from the shadows and reflections of the stones in it,
mingling with the aspect of the stones themselves seen through the
water. Do not be frightened at the complexity; but, on the other hand,
do not hope to render it hastily. Look at it well, making out everything
that you see, and distinguishing each component part of the effect.
There will be, first, the stones seen through the water, distorted
always by refraction, so that, if the general structure of the stone
shows straight parallel lines above the water, you may be sure they will
be bent where they enter it; then the reflection of the part of the
stone above the water crosses and interferes with the part that is seen
through it, so that you can hardly tell which is which; and wherever the
reflection is darkest, you will see through the water best,[37] and
_vice versâ_. Then the real shadow of the stone crosses both these
images, and where that shadow falls, it makes the water more reflective,
and where the sunshine falls, you will see more of the surface of the
water, and of any dust or motes that may be floating on it: but whether
you are to see, at the same spot, most of the bottom of the water, or of
the reflection of the objects above, depends on the position of the eye.
The more you look down into the water, the better you see objects
through it; the more you look along it, the eye being low, the more you
see the reflection of objects above it. Hence the color of a given space
of surface in a stream will entirely change while you stand still in the
same spot, merely as you stoop or raise your head; and thus the colors
with which water is painted are an indication of the position of the
spectator, and connected inseparably with the perspective of the shores.
The most beautiful of all results that I know in mountain streams is
when the water is shallow, and the stones at the bottom are rich
reddish-orange and black, and the water is seen at an angle which
exactly divides the visible colors between those of the stones and that
of the sky, and the sky is of clear, full blue. The resulting purple,
obtained by the blending of the blue and the orange-red, broken by the
play of innumerable gradations in the stones, is indescribably lovely.

146. All this seems complicated enough already; but if there be a strong
color in the clear water itself, as of green or blue in the Swiss lakes,
all these phenomena are doubly involved; for the darker reflections now
become of the color of the water. The reflection of a black gondola, for
instance, at Venice, is never black, but pure dark green. And, farther,
the color of the water itself is of three kinds: one, seen on the
surface, is a kind of milky bloom; the next is seen where the waves let
light through them, at their edges; and the third, shown as a change of
color on the objects seen through the water. Thus, the same wave that
makes a white object look of a clear blue, when seen through it, will
take a red or violet-colored bloom on its surface, and will be made pure
emerald green by transmitted sunshine through its edges. With all this,
however, you are not much concerned at present, but I tell it you partly
as a preparation for what we have afterwards to say about color, and
partly that you may approach lakes and streams with reverence,[38] and
study them as carefully as other things, not hoping to express them by a
few horizontal dashes of white, or a few tremulous blots.[39] Not but
that much may be done by tremulous blots, when you know precisely what
you mean by them, as you will see by many of the Turner sketches, which
are now framed at the National Gallery; but you must have painted water
many and many a day--yes, and all day long--before you can hope to do
anything like those.

147. III. Lastly. You may perhaps wonder why, before passing to the
clouds, I say nothing special about _ground_.[40] But there is too much
to be said about that to admit of my saying it here. You will find the
principal laws of its structure examined at length in the fourth volume
of Modern Painters; and if you can get that volume, and copy carefully
Plate 21, which I have etched after Turner with great pains, it will
give you as much help as you need in the linear expression of
ground-surface. Strive to get the retirement and succession of masses in
irregular ground: much may be done in this way by careful watching of
the perspective diminutions of its herbage, as well as by contour; and
much also by shadows. If you draw the shadows of leaves and tree trunks
on any undulating ground with entire carefulness, you will be surprised
to find how much they explain of the form and distance of the earth on
which they fall.

148. Passing then to skies, note that there is this great peculiarity
about sky subject, as distinguished from earth subject;--that the
clouds, not being much liable to man's interference, are always
beautifully arranged. You cannot be sure of this in any other features
of landscape. The rock on which the effect of a mountain scene
especially depends is always precisely that which the roadmaker blasts
or the landlord quarries; and the spot of green which Nature left with a
special purpose by her dark forest sides, and finished with her most
delicate grasses, is always that which the farmer plows or builds upon.
But the clouds, though we can hide them with smoke, and mix them with
poison, cannot be quarried nor built over, and they are always therefore
gloriously arranged; so gloriously, that unless you have notable powers
of memory you need not hope to approach the effect of any sky that
interests you. For both its grace and its glow depend upon the united
influence of every cloud within its compass: they all move and burn
together in a marvelous harmony; not a cloud of them is out of its
appointed place, or fails of its part in the choir: and if you are not
able to recollect (which in the case of a complicated sky it is
impossible you should) precisely the form and position of all the clouds
at a given moment, you cannot draw the sky at all; for the clouds will
not fit if you draw one part of them three or four minutes before
another.

149. You must try therefore to help what memory you have, by sketching
at the utmost possible speed the whole range of the clouds; marking, by
any shorthand or symbolic work you can hit upon, the peculiar character
of each, as transparent, or fleecy, or linear, or undulatory; giving
afterwards such completion to the parts as your recollection will enable
you to do. This, however, only when the sky is interesting from its
general aspect; at other times, do not try to draw all the sky, but a
single cloud: sometimes a round cumulus will stay five or six minutes
quite steady enough to let you mark out his principal masses; and one or
two white or crimson lines which cross the sunrise will often stay
without serious change for as long. And in order to be the readier in
drawing them, practice occasionally drawing lumps of cotton, which will
teach you better than any other stable thing the kind of softness there
is in clouds. For you will find when you have made a few genuine studies
of sky, and then look at any ancient or modern painting, that ordinary
artists have always fallen into one of two faults: either, in rounding
the clouds, they make them as solid and hard-edged as a heap of stones
tied up in a sack, or they represent them not as rounded at all, but as
vague wreaths of mist or flat lights in the sky; and think they have
done enough in leaving a little white paper between dashes of blue, or
in taking an irregular space out with the sponge. Now clouds are not as
solid as flour-sacks; but, on the other hand, they are neither spongy
nor flat. They are definite and very beautiful forms of sculptured mist;
sculptured is a perfectly accurate word; they are not more _drifted_
into form than they are _carved_ into form, the warm air around them
cutting them into shape by absorbing the visible vapor beyond certain
limits; hence their angular and fantastic outlines, as different from a
swollen, spherical, or globular formation, on the one hand, as from that
of flat films or shapeless mists on the other. And the worst of all is,
that while these forms are difficult enough to draw on any terms,
especially considering that they never stay quiet, they must be drawn
also at greater disadvantage of light and shade than any others, the
force of light in clouds being wholly unattainable by art; so that if we
put shade enough to express their form as positively as it is expressed
in reality, we must make them painfully too dark on the dark sides.
Nevertheless, they are so beautiful, if you in the least succeed with
them, that you will hardly, I think, lose courage.

150. Outline them often with the pen, as you can catch them here and
there; one of the chief uses of doing this will be, not so much the
memorandum so obtained, as the lesson you will get respecting the
softness of the cloud-outlines. You will always find yourself at a loss
to see where the outline really is; and when drawn it will always look
hard and false, and will assuredly be either too round or too square,
however often you alter it, merely passing from the one fault to the
other and back again, the real cloud striking an inexpressible mean
between roundness and squareness in all its coils or battlements. I
speak at present, of course, only of the cumulus cloud: the lighter
wreaths and flakes of the upper sky cannot be outlined;--they can only
be sketched, like locks of hair, by many lines of the pen. Firmly
developed bars of cloud on the horizon are in general easy enough, and
may be drawn with decision. When you have thus accustomed yourself a
little to the placing and action of clouds, try to work out their light
and shade, just as carefully as you do that of other things, looking
exclusively for examples of treatment to the vignettes in Rogers's Italy
and Poems, and to the Liber Studiorum, unless you have access to some
examples of Turner's own work. No other artist ever yet drew the sky:
even Titian's clouds, and Tintoret's, are conventional. The clouds in
the "Ben Arthur," "Source of Arveron," and "Calais Pier," are among the
best of Turner's storm studies; and of the upper clouds, the vignettes
to Rogers's Poems furnish as many examples as you need.

151. And now, as our first lesson was taken from the sky, so, for the
present, let our last be. I do not advise you to be in any haste to
master the contents of my next letter. If you have any real talent for
drawing, you will take delight in the discoveries of natural loveliness,
which the studies I have already proposed will lead you into, among the
fields and hills; and be assured that the more quietly and
single-heartedly you take each step in the art, the quicker, on the
whole, will your progress be. I would rather, indeed, have discussed the
subjects of the following letter at greater length, and in a separate
work addressed to more advanced students; but as there are one or two
things to be said on composition which may set the young artist's mind
somewhat more at rest, or furnish him with defense from the urgency of
ill-advisers, I will glance over the main heads of the matter here;
trusting that my doing so may not beguile you, my dear reader, from your
serious work, or lead you to think me, in occupying part of this book
with talk not altogether relevant to it, less entirely or

                                           Faithfully yours,

                                                         J. RUSKIN.


FOOTNOTES:

  [23] It is meant, I believe, for "Salt Hill."

  [24] I do not mean that you can approach Turner or Dürer in their
    strength, that is to say, in their imagination or power of design.
    But you may approach them, by perseverance, in truth of manner.

  [25] The following are the most desirable plates:--

    Grande Chartreuse.               Little Devil's Bridge.
    Æsacus and Hesperie.             River Wye (_not_ Wye and Severn).
    Cephalus and Procris.            Holy Island.
    Source of Arveron.               Clyde.
    Ben Arthur.                      Lauffenburg.
    Watermill.                       Blair Athol.
    Hindhead Hill.                   Alps from Grenoble.
    Hedging and Ditching.            Raglan. (Subject with quiet brook,
    Dumblane Abbey.                   trees, and castle on the right.)
    Morpeth.
    Calais Pier.
    Pembury Mill.

    If you cannot get one of these, any of the others will be
    serviceable, except only the twelve following, which are quite
    useless:--

      1. Scene in Italy, with goats on a walled road, and trees above.
      2. Interior of church.
      3. Scene with bridge, and trees above; figures on left, one playing
          a pipe.
      4. Scene with figure playing on tambourine.
      5. Scene on Thames with high trees, and a square tower of a church
          seen through them.
      6. Fifth Plague of Egypt.
      7. Tenth Plague of Egypt.
      8. Rivaulx Abbey.
      9. Wye and Severn.
     10. Scene with castle in center, cows under trees on the left.
     11. Martello Towers.
     12. Calm.

    It is very unlikely that you should meet with one of the original
    etchings; if you should, it will be a drawing-master in itself
    alone, for it is not only equivalent to a pen-and-ink drawing by
    Turner, but to a very careful one; only observe, the Source of
    Arveron, Raglan, and Dumblane were not etched by Turner; and the
    etchings of those three are not good for separate study, though it
    is deeply interesting to see how Turner, apparently provoked at the
    failure of the beginnings in the Arveron and Raglan, took the plates
    up himself, and either conquered or brought into use the bad etching
    by his marvelous engraving. The Dumblane was, however, well etched
    by Mr. Lupton, and beautifully engraved by him. The finest Turner
    etching is of an aqueduct with a stork standing in a mountain
    stream, not in the published series; and next to it, are the
    unpublished etchings of the Via Mala and Crowhurst. Turner seems to
    have been so fond of these plates that he kept retouching and
    finishing them, and never made up his mind to let them go. The Via
    Mala is certainly, in the state in which Turner left it, the finest
    of the whole series: its etching is, as I said, the best after that
    of the aqueduct. Figure 20, above, is part of another fine
    unpublished etching, "Windsor, from Salt Hill." Of the published
    etchings, the finest are the Ben Arthur, Æsacus, Cephalus, and Stone
    Pines, with the Girl washing at a Cistern; the three latter are the
    more generally instructive. Hindhead Hill, Isis, Jason, and Morpeth,
    are also very desirable.

  [26] You will find more notice of this point in the account of
    Harding's tree-drawing, a little farther on.

  [27] The impressions vary so much in color that no brown can be
    specified.

  [28] You had better get such a photograph, even though you have a
    Liber print as well.

  [29] See the closing letter in this volume.

  [30] [In 1857.]

  [31] If you are not acquainted with Harding's works, (an unlikely
    supposition, considering their popularity,) and cannot meet with the
    one in question, the diagrams given here will enable you to
    understand all that is needful for our purposes.

  [32] I draw this figure (a young shoot of oak) in outline only, it
    being impossible to express the refinements of shade in distant
    foliage in a wood-cut.

  [33] His lithographic sketches, those for instance in the Park and
    the Forest, and his various lessons on foliage, possess greater
    merit than the more ambitious engravings in his Principles and
    Practice of Art. There are many useful remarks, however, dispersed
    through this latter work.

  [34] On this law you do well, if you can get access to it, to look
    at the fourth chapter of the fourth volume of Modern Painters.

  [35] See Note 3 in Appendix I.

  [36] The student may hardly at first believe that the perspective of
    buildings is of little consequence; but he will find it so
    ultimately. See the remarks on this point in the Preface.

  [37] See Note 4 in Appendix I.

  [38] See Note 5 in Appendix I.

  [39] It is a useful piece of study to dissolve some Prussian blue in
    water, so as to make the liquid definitely blue: fill a large white
    basin with the solution, and put anything you like to float on it,
    or lie in it; walnut shells, bits of wood, leaves of flowers, etc.
    Then study the effects of the reflections, and of the stems of the
    flowers or submerged portions of the floating objects, as they
    appear through the blue liquid; noting especially how, as you lower
    your head and look along the surface, you see the reflections
    clearly; and how, as you raise your head, you lose the reflections,
    and see the submerged stems clearly.

  [40] Respecting Architectural Drawing, see the notice of the works
    of Prout in the Appendix.




LETTER III.

ON COLOR AND COMPOSITION.


152. MY DEAR READER,--If you have been obedient, and have hitherto done
all that I have told you, I trust it has not been without much subdued
remonstrance, and some serious vexation. For I should be sorry if, when
you were led by the course of your study to observe closely such things
as are beautiful in color, you had not longed to paint them, and felt
considerable difficulty in complying with your restriction to the use of
black, or blue, or gray. You _ought_ to love color, and to think nothing
quite beautiful or perfect without it; and if you really do love it, for
its own sake, and are not merely desirous to color because you think
painting a finer thing than drawing, there is some chance you may color
well. Nevertheless, you need not hope ever to produce anything more than
pleasant helps to memory, or useful and suggestive sketches in color,
unless you mean to be wholly an artist. You may, in the time which other
vocations leave at your disposal, produce finished, beautiful, and
masterly drawings in light and shade. But to color well, requires your
life. It cannot be done cheaper. The difficulty of doing right is
increased--not twofold nor threefold, but a thousandfold, and more--by
the addition of color to your work. For the chances are more than a
thousand to one against your being right both in form and color with a
given touch: it is difficult enough to be right in form, if you attend
to that only; but when you have to attend, at the same moment, to a much
more subtle thing than the form, the difficulty is strangely
increased,--and multiplied almost to infinity by this great fact, that,
while form is absolute, so that you can say at the moment you draw any
line that it is either right or wrong, color is wholly _relative_. Every
hue throughout your work is altered by every touch that you add in other
places; so that what was warm a minute ago, becomes cold when you have
put a hotter color in another place, and what was in harmony when you
left it, becomes discordant as you set other colors beside it; so that
every touch must be laid, not with a view to its effect at the time, but
with a view to its effect in futurity, the result upon it of all that is
afterwards to be done being previously considered. You may easily
understand that, this being so, nothing but the devotion of life, and
great genius besides, can make a colorist.

153. But though you cannot produce finished colored drawings of any
value, you may give yourself much pleasure, and be of great use to other
people, by occasionally sketching with a view to color only; and
preserving distinct statements of certain color facts--as that the
harvest moon at rising was of such and such a red, and surrounded by
clouds of such and such a rosy gray; that the mountains at evening were
in truth so deep in purple; and the waves by the boat's side were indeed
of that incredible green. This only, observe, if you have an eye for
color; but you may presume that you have this, if you enjoy color.

154. And, though of course you should always give as much form to your
subject as your attention to its color will admit of, remember that the
whole value of what you are about depends, in a colored sketch, on the
color merely. If the color is wrong, everything is wrong: just as, if
you are singing, and sing false notes, it does not matter how true the
words are. If you sing at all, you must sing sweetly; and if you color
at all, you must color rightly. Give up all the form, rather than the
slightest part of the color: just as, if you felt yourself in danger of
a false note, you would give up the word, and sing a meaningless sound,
if you felt that so you could save the note. Never mind though your
houses are all tumbling down,--though your clouds are mere blots, and
your trees mere knobs, and your sun and moon like crooked
sixpences,--so only that trees, clouds, houses, and sun or moon, are of
the right colors. Of course, the discipline you have gone through will
enable you to hint something of form, even in the fastest sweep of the
brush; but do not let the thought of form hamper you in the least, when
you begin to make colored memoranda. If you want the form of the
subject, draw it in black and white. If you want its color, take its
color, and be sure you _have_ it, and not a spurious, treacherous,
half-measured piece of mutual concession, with the colors all wrong, and
the forms still anything but right. It is best to get into the habit of
considering the colored work merely as supplementary to your other
studies; making your careful drawings of the subject first, and then a
colored memorandum separately, as shapeless as you like, but faithful in
hue, and entirely minding its own business. This principle, however,
bears chiefly on large and distant subjects: in foregrounds and near
studies, the color cannot be had without a good deal of definition of
form. For if you do not map the mosses on the stones accurately, you
will not have the right quantity of color in each bit of moss pattern,
and then none of the colors will look right; but it always simplifies
the work much if you are clear as to your point of aim, and satisfied,
when necessary, to fail of all but that.

155. Now, of course, if I were to enter into detail respecting coloring,
which is the beginning and end of a painter's craft, I should need to
make this a work in three volumes instead of three letters, and to
illustrate it in the costliest way. I only hope, at present, to set you
pleasantly and profitably to work, leaving you, within the tethering of
certain leading-strings, to gather what advantages you can from the
works of art of which every year brings a greater number within your
reach;--and from the instruction which, every year, our rising artists
will be more ready to give kindly, and better able to give wisely.

156. And, first, of materials. Use hard cake colors, not moist colors:
grind a sufficient quantity of each on your palette every morning,
keeping a separate plate, large and deep, for colors to be used in
broad washes, and wash both plate and palette every evening, so as to be
able always to get good and pure color when you need it; and force
yourself into cleanly and orderly habits about your colors. The two best
colorists of modern times, Turner and Rossetti,[41] afford us, I am
sorry to say, no confirmation of this precept by their practice. Turner
was, and Rossetti is, as slovenly in all their procedures as men can
well be; but the result of this was, with Turner, that the colors have
altered in all his pictures, and in many of his drawings; and the result
of it with Rossetti is, that though his colors are safe, he has
sometimes to throw aside work that was half done, and begin over again.
William Hunt, of the Old Water-color, is very neat in his practice; so,
I believe, is Mulready; so is John Lewis; and so are the leading
Pre-Raphaelites, Rossetti only excepted. And there can be no doubt about
the goodness of the advice, if it were only for this reason, that the
more particular you are about your colors the more you will get into a
deliberate and methodical habit in using them, and all true speed in
coloring comes of this deliberation.

157. Use Chinese white, well ground, to mix with your colors in order to
pale them, instead of a quantity of water. You will thus be able to
shape your masses more quietly, and play the colors about with more
ease; they will not damp your paper so much, and you will be able to go
on continually, and lay forms of passing cloud and other fugitive or
delicately shaped lights, otherwise unattainable except by time.

158. This mixing of white with the pigments, so as to render them
opaque, constitutes body-color drawing as opposed to transparent-color
drawing, and you will, perhaps, have it often said to you that this
body-color is "illegitimate." It is just as legitimate as oil-painting,
being, so far as handling is concerned, the same process, only without
its uncleanliness, its unwholesomeness, or its inconvenience; for oil
will not dry quickly, nor carry safely, nor give the same effects of
atmosphere without tenfold labor. And if you hear it said that the
body-color looks chalky or opaque, and, as is very likely, think so
yourself, be yet assured of this, that though certain effects of glow
and transparencies of gloom are not to be reached without transparent
color, those glows and glooms are _not_ the noblest aim of art. After
many years' study of the various results of fresco and oil painting in
Italy, and of body-color and transparent color in England, I am now
entirely convinced that the greatest things that are to be done in art
must be done in dead color. The habit of depending on varnish or on
lucid tints for transparency, makes the painter comparatively lose sight
of the nobler translucence which is obtained by breaking various colors
amidst each other: and even when, as by Correggio, exquisite play of hue
is joined with exquisite transparency, the delight in the depth almost
always leads the painter into mean and false chiaroscuro; it leads him
to like dark backgrounds instead of luminous ones,[42] and to enjoy, in
general, quality of color more than grandeur of composition, and
confined light rather than open sunshine: so that the really greatest
thoughts of the greatest men have always, so far as I remember, been
reached in dead color, and the noblest oil pictures of Tintoret and
Veronese are those which are likest frescoes.

159. Besides all this, the fact is, that though sometimes a little
chalky and coarse-looking body-color is, in a sketch, infinitely liker
Nature than transparent color: the bloom and mist of distance are
accurately and instantly represented by the film of opaque blue (_quite_
accurately, I think, by nothing else); and for ground, rocks, and
buildings, the earthy and solid surface is, of course, always truer than
the most finished and carefully wrought work in transparent tints can
ever be.

160. Against one thing, however, I must steadily caution you. All kinds
of color are equally illegitimate, if you think they will allow you to
alter at your pleasure, or blunder at your ease. There is _no_ vehicle
or method of color which admits of alteration or repentance; you must be
right at once, or never; and you might as well hope to catch a rifle
bullet in your hand, and put it straight, when it was going wrong, as to
recover a tint once spoiled. The secret of all good color in oil, water,
or anything else, lies primarily in that sentence spoken to me by
Mulready: "Know what you have to do." The process may be a long one,
perhaps: you may have to ground with one color; to touch it with
fragments of a second; to crumble a third into the interstices; a fourth
into the interstices of the third; to glaze the whole with a fifth; and
to re-enforce in points with a sixth: but whether you have one, or ten,
or twenty processes to go through, you must go _straight_ through them
knowingly and foreseeingly all the way; and if you get the thing once
wrong, there is no hope for you but in washing or scraping boldly down
to the white ground, and beginning again.

161. The drawing in body-color will tend to teach you all this, more
than any other method, and above all it will prevent you from falling
into the pestilent habit of sponging to get texture; a trick which has
nearly ruined our modern water-color school of art. There are sometimes
places in which a skillful artist will roughen his paper a little to get
certain conditions of dusty color with more ease than he could
otherwise; and sometimes a skillfully rased piece of paper will, in the
midst of transparent tints, answer nearly the purpose of chalky
body-color in representing the surfaces of rocks or building. But
artifices of this kind are always treacherous in a tyro's hands,
tempting him to trust in them: and you had better always work on white
or gray paper as smooth as silk;[43] and never disturb the surface of
your color or paper, except finally to scratch out the very highest
lights if you are using transparent colors.

162. I have said above that body-color drawing will teach you the use of
color better than working with merely transparent tints; but this is not
because the process is an easier one, but because it is a more complete
one, and also because it involves some working with transparent tints in
the best way. You are not to think that because you use body-color you
may make any kind of mess that you like, and yet get out of it. But you
are to avail yourself of the characters of your material, which enable
you most nearly to imitate the processes of Nature. Thus, suppose you
have a red rocky cliff to sketch, with blue clouds floating over it. You
paint your cliff first firmly, then take your blue, mixing it to such a
tint (and here is a great part of the skill needed) that when it is laid
over the red, in the thickness required for the effect of the mist, the
warm rock-color showing through the blue cloud-color, may bring it to
exactly the hue you want (your upper tint, therefore, must be mixed
colder than you want it); then you lay it on, varying it as you strike
it, getting the forms of the mist at once, and, if it be rightly done,
with exquisite quality of color, from the warm tint's showing through
and between the particles of the other. When it is dry, you may add a
little color to retouch the edges where they want shape, or heighten the
lights where they want roundness, or put another tone over the whole:
but you can take none away. If you touch or disturb the surface, or by
any untoward accident mix the under and upper colors together, all is
lost irrecoverably. Begin your drawing from the ground again if you
like, or throw it into the fire if you like. But do not waste time in
trying to mend it.[44]

163. This discussion of the relative merits of transparent and opaque
color has, however, led us a little beyond the point where we should
have begun; we must go back to our palette, if you please. Get a cake of
each of the hard colors named in the note below[45] and try experiments
on their simple combinations, by mixing each color with every other. If
you like to do it in an orderly way, you may prepare a squared piece of
pasteboard, and put the pure colors in columns at the top and side; the
mixed tints being given at the intersections, thus (the letters standing
for colors):

      b       c      d      e      f     etc.
    a a b    a c    a d    a e    a f
    b --     b c    b d    b e    b f
    c --     --     c d    c e    c f
    d --     --     --     d e    d f
    e --     --     --     --     e f
    etc.

This will give you some general notion of the characters of mixed tints
of two colors only, and it is better in practice to confine yourself as
much as possible to these, and to get more complicated colors, either by
putting the third _over_ the first blended tint, or by putting the third
into its interstices. Nothing but watchful practice will teach you the
effects that colors have on each other when thus put over, or beside,
each other.

164. When you have got a little used to the principal combinations,
place yourself at a window which the sun does not shine in at,
commanding some simple piece of landscape: outline this landscape
roughly; then take a piece of white cardboard, cut out a hole in it
about the size of a large pea; and supposing R is the room, _a d_ the
window, and you are sitting at _a_, Fig. 29, hold this cardboard a
little outside of the window, upright, and in the direction _b d_,
parallel to the side of the window, or a little turned, so as to catch
more light, as at _a d_, never turned as at _c d_, or the paper will be
dark. Then you will see the landscape, bit by bit, through the circular
hole. Match the colors of each important bit as nearly as you can,
mixing your tints with white, beside the aperture. When matched, put a
touch of the same tint at the top of your paper, writing under it: "dark
tree color," "hill color," "field color," as the case may be. Then wash
the tint away from beside the opening, and the cardboard will be ready
to match another piece of the landscape.[46] When you have got the
colors of the principal masses thus indicated, lay on a piece of each in
your sketch in its right place, and then proceed to complete the sketch
in harmony with them, by your eye.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

165. In the course of your early experiments, you will be much struck by
two things: the first, the inimitable brilliancy of light in sky and in
sunlighted things; and the second, that among the tints which you can
imitate, those which you thought the darkest will continually turn out
to be in reality the lightest. Darkness of objects is estimated by us,
under ordinary circumstances, much more by knowledge than by sight;
thus, a cedar or Scotch fir, at 200 yards off, will be thought of darker
green than an elm or oak near us; because we know by experience that the
peculiar color they exhibit, at that distance, is the _sign_ of darkness
of foliage. But when we try them through the cardboard, the near oak
will be found, indeed, rather dark green, and the distant cedar,
perhaps, pale gray-purple. The quantity of purple and gray in Nature is,
by the way, another somewhat surprising subject of discovery.

166. Well, having ascertained thus your principal tints, you may proceed
to fill up your sketch; in doing which observe these following
particulars:

(1.) Many portions of your subject appeared through the aperture in the
paper brighter than the paper, as sky, sunlighted grass, etc. Leave
these portions, for the present, white; and proceed with the parts of
which you can match the tints.

(2.) As you tried your subject with the cardboard, you must have
observed how many changes of hue took place over small spaces. In
filling up your work, try to educate your eye to perceive these
differences of hue without the help of the cardboard, and lay them
deliberately, like a mosaic-worker, as separate colors, preparing each
carefully on your palette, and laying it as if it were a patch of
colored cloth, cut out, to be fitted neatly by its edge to the next
patch; so that the _fault_ of your work may be, not a slurred or misty
look, but a patched bed-cover look, as if it had all been cut out with
scissors. For instance, in drawing the trunk of a birch tree, there will
be probably white high lights, then a pale rosy gray round them on the
light side, then a (probably greenish) deeper gray on the dark side,
varied by reflected colors, and, over all, rich black strips of bark and
brown spots of moss. Lay first the rosy gray, leaving white for the high
lights _and for the spots of moss_, and not touching the dark side. Then
lay the gray for the dark side, fitting it well up to the rosy gray of
the light, leaving also in this darker gray the white paper in the
places for the black and brown moss; then prepare the moss colors
separately for each spot, and lay each in the white place left for it.
Not one grain of white, except that purposely left for the high lights,
must be visible when the work is done, even through a magnifying-glass,
so cunningly must you fit the edges to each other. Finally, take your
background colors, and put them on each side of the tree trunk, fitting
them carefully to its edge.

167. Fine work you would make of this, wouldn't you, if you had not
learned to draw first, and could not now draw a good outline for the
stem, much less terminate a color mass in the outline you wanted?

Your work will look very odd for some time, when you first begin to
paint in this way, and before you can modify it, as I shall tell you
presently how; but never mind; it is of the greatest possible importance
that you should practice this separate laying on of the hues, for all
good coloring finally depends on it. It is, indeed, often necessary, and
sometimes desirable, to lay one color and form boldly over another:
thus, in laying leaves on blue sky, it is impossible always in large
pictures, or when pressed for time, to fill in the blue through the
interstices of the leaves; and the great Venetians constantly lay their
blue ground first, and then, having let it dry, strike the golden brown
over it in the form of the leaf, leaving the under blue to shine through
the gold, and subdue it to the olive-green they want. But in the most
precious and perfect work each leaf is inlaid, and the blue worked round
it; and, whether you use one or other mode of getting your result, it is
equally necessary to be absolute and decisive in your laying the color.
Either your ground must be laid firmly first, and then your upper color
struck upon it in perfect form, forever, thenceforward, unalterable; or
else the two colors must be individually put in their places, and led up
to each other till they meet at their appointed border, equally,
thenceforward, unchangeable. Either process, you see, involves absolute
decision. If you once begin to slur, or change, or sketch, or try this
way and that with your color, it is all over with it and with you. You
will continually see bad copyists trying to imitate the Venetians, by
daubing their colors about, and retouching, and finishing, and
softening: when every touch and every added hue only lead them farther
into chaos. There is a dog between two children in a Veronese in the
Louvre, which gives the copyists much employment. He has a dark ground
behind him, which Veronese has painted first, and then when it was dry,
or nearly so, struck the locks of the dog's white hair over it with some
half-dozen curling sweeps of his brush, right at once, and forever. Had
one line or hair of them gone wrong, it would have been wrong forever;
no retouching could have mended it. The poor copyists daub in first some
background, and then some dog's hair; then retouch the background, then
the hair; work for hours at it, expecting it always to come right
to-morrow--"when it is finished." They _may_ work for centuries at it,
and they will never do it. If they can do it with Veronese's allowance
of work, half a dozen sweeps of the hand over the dark background, well;
if not, they may ask the dog himself whether it will ever come right,
and get true answer from him--on Launce's conditions: "If he say 'ay,'
it will; if he say 'no,' it will; if he shake his tail and say nothing,
it will."

168. (3.) Whenever you lay on a mass of color, be sure that however
large it may be, or however small, it shall be gradated. No color exists
in Nature under ordinary circumstances without gradation. If you do not
see this, it is the fault of your inexperience: you will see it in due
time, if you practice enough. But in general you may see it at once. In
the birch trunk, for instance, the rosy gray _must_ be gradated by the
roundness of the stem till it meets the shaded side; similarly the
shaded side is gradated by reflected light. Accordingly, whether by
adding water, or white paint, or by unequal force of touch (this you
will do at pleasure, according to the texture you wish to produce), you
must, in every tint you lay on, make it a little paler at one part than
another, and get an even gradation between the two depths. This is very
like laying down a formal law or recipe for you; but you will find it is
merely the assertion of a natural fact. It is not indeed physically
impossible to meet with an ungradated piece of color, but it is so
supremely improbable, that you had better get into the habit of asking
yourself invariably, when you are going to copy a tint--not "Is that
gradated?" but "Which way is that gradated?" and at least in ninety-nine
out of a hundred instances, you will be able to answer decisively after
a careful glance, though the gradation may have been so subtle that you
did not see it at first. And it does not matter how small the touch of
color may be, though not larger than the smallest pin's head, if one
part of it is not darker than the rest, it is a bad touch; for it is not
merely because the natural fact is so, that your color should be
gradated; the preciousness and pleasantness of the color itself depends
more on this than on any other of its qualities, for gradation is to
colors just what curvature is to lines, both being felt to be beautiful
by the pure instinct of every human mind, and both, considered as types,
expressing the law of gradual change and progress in the human soul
itself. What the difference is in mere beauty between a gradated and
ungradated color, may be seen easily by laying an even tint of
rose-color on paper, and putting a rose leaf beside it. The victorious
beauty of the rose as compared with other flowers, depends wholly on the
delicacy and quantity of its color gradations, all other flowers being
either less rich in gradation, not having so many folds of leaf; or less
tender, being patched and veined instead of flushed.

169. (4.) But observe, it is not enough in general that color should be
gradated by being made merely paler or darker at one place than another.
Generally color changes as it diminishes, and is not merely darker at
one spot, but also purer at one spot than anywhere else. It does not in
the least follow that the darkest spots should be the purest; still less
so that the lightest should be the purest. Very often the two gradations
more or less cross each other, one passing in one direction from
paleness to darkness, another in another direction from purity to
dullness, but there will almost always be both of them, however
reconciled; and you must never be satisfied with a piece of color until
you have got both: that is to say, every piece of blue that you lay on
must be _quite_ blue only at some given spot, nor that a large spot; and
must be gradated from that into less pure blue,--grayish blue, or
greenish blue, or purplish blue,--over all the rest of the space it
occupies. And this you must do in one of three ways: either, while the
color is wet, mix with it the color which is to subdue it, adding
gradually a little more and a little more; or else, when the color is
quite dry, strike a gradated touch of another color over it, leaving
only a point of the first tint visible; or else, lay the subduing tints
on in small touches, as in the exercise of tinting the chess-board. Of
each of these methods I have something to tell you separately; but that
is distinct from the subject of gradation, which I must not quit without
once more pressing upon you the preëminent necessity of introducing it
everywhere. I have profound dislike of anything like habit of hand, and
yet, in this one instance, I feel almost tempted to encourage you to get
into a habit of never touching paper with color, without securing a
gradation. You will not, in Turner's largest oil pictures, perhaps six
or seven feet long by four or five high, find one spot of color as large
as a grain of wheat ungradated: and you will find in practice, that
brilliancy of hue, and vigor of light, and even the aspect of
transparency in shade, are essentially dependent on this character
alone; hardness, coldness, and opacity resulting far more from
_equality_ of color than from nature of color. Give me some mud off a
city crossing, some ocher out of a gravel pit, a little whitening, and
some coal-dust, and I will paint you a luminous picture, if you give me
time to gradate my mud, and subdue my dust: but though you had the red
of the ruby, the blue of the gentian, snow for the light, and amber for
the gold, you cannot paint a luminous picture, if you keep the masses of
those colors unbroken in purity, and unvarying in depth.

170. (5.) Next, note the three processes by which gradation and other
characters are to be obtained:

A. Mixing while the color is wet.

You may be confused by my first telling you to lay on the hues in
separate patches, and then telling you to mix hues together as you lay
them on: but the separate masses are to be laid, when colors distinctly
oppose each other at a given limit; the hues to be mixed, when they
palpitate one through the other, or fade one into the other. It is
better to err a little on the distinct side. Thus I told you to paint
the dark and light sides of the birch trunk separately, though, in
reality, the two tints change, as the trunk turns away from the light,
gradually one into the other; and, after being laid separately on, will
need some farther touching to harmonize them: but they do so in a very
narrow space, marked distinctly all the way up the trunk, and it is
easier and safer, therefore, to keep them separate at first. Whereas it
often happens that the whole beauty of two colors will depend on the one
being continued well through the other, and playing in the midst of it:
blue and green often do so in water; blue and gray, or purple and
scarlet, in sky: in hundreds of such instances the most beautiful and
truthful results may be obtained by laying one color into the other
while wet; judging wisely how far it will spread, or blending it with
the brush in somewhat thicker consistence of wet body-color; only
observe, never mix in this way two _mixtures_; let the color you lay
into the other be always a simple, not a compound tint.

171. B. Laying one color over another.

If you lay on a solid touch of vermilion, and after it is quite dry,
strike a little very wet carmine quickly over it, you will obtain a much
more brilliant red than by mixing the carmine and vermilion. Similarly,
if you lay a dark color first, and strike a little blue or white
body-color lightly over it, you will get a more beautiful gray than by
mixing the color and the blue or white. In very perfect painting,
artifices of this kind are continually used; but I would not have you
trust much to them: they are apt to make you think too much of quality
of color. I should like you to depend on little more than the dead
colors, simply laid on, only observe always this, that the _less_ color
you do the work with, the better it will always be:[47] so that if you
had laid a red color, and you want a purple one above, do not mix the
purple on your palette and lay it on so thick as to overpower the red,
but take a little thin blue from your palette, and lay it lightly over
the red, so as to let the red be seen through, and thus produce the
required purple; and if you want a green hue over a blue one, do not lay
a quantity of green on the blue, but a _little_ yellow, and so on,
always bringing the under color into service as far as you possibly can.
If, however, the color beneath is wholly opposed to the one you have to
lay on, as, suppose, if green is to be laid over scarlet, you must
either remove the required parts of the under color daintily first with
your knife, or with water; or else, lay solid white over it massively,
and leave that to dry, and then glaze the white with the upper color.
This is better, in general, than laying the upper color itself so thick
as to conquer the ground, which, in fact, if it be a transparent color,
you cannot do. Thus, if you have to strike warm boughs and leaves of
trees over blue sky, and they are too intricate to have their places
left for them in laying the blue, it is better to lay them first in
solid white, and then glaze with sienna and ocher, than to mix the
sienna and white; though, of course, the process is longer and more
troublesome. Nevertheless, if the forms of touches required are very
delicate, the after glazing is impossible. You must then mix the warm
color thick at once, and so use it: and this is often necessary for
delicate grasses, and such other fine threads of light in foreground
work.

172. C. Breaking one color in small points through or over another.

This is the most important of all processes in good modern[48] oil and
water-color painting, but you need not hope to attain very great skill
in it. To do it well is very laborious, and requires such skill and
delicacy of hand as can only be acquired by unceasing practice. But you
will find advantage in noting the following points:

173. (_a._) In distant effects of rich subject, wood, or rippled water,
or broken clouds, much may be done by touches or crumbling dashes of
rather dry color, with other colors afterwards put cunningly into the
interstices. The more you practice this, when the subject evidently
calls for it, the more your eye will enjoy the higher qualities of
color. The process is, in fact, the carrying out of the principle of
separate colors to the utmost possible refinement; using atoms of color
in juxtaposition, instead of large spaces. And note, in filling up
minute interstices of this kind, that if you want the color you fill
them with to show brightly, it is better to put a rather positive point
of it, with a little white left beside or round it in the interstice,
than to put a pale tint of the color over the whole interstice. Yellow
or orange will hardly show, if pale, in small spaces; but they show
brightly in firm touches, however small, with white beside them.

174. (_b._) If a color is to be darkened by superimposed portions of
another, it is, in many cases, better to lay the uppermost color in
rather vigorous small touches, like finely chopped straw, over the under
one, than to lay it on as a tint, for two reasons: the first, that the
play of the two colors together is pleasant to the eye; the second, that
much expression of form may be got by wise administration of the upper
dark touches. In distant mountains they may be made pines of, or broken
crags, or villages, or stones, or whatever you choose; in clouds they
may indicate the direction of the rain, the roll and outline of the
cloud masses; and in water, the minor waves. All noble effects of dark
atmosphere are got in good water-color drawing by these two expedients,
interlacing the colors, or retouching the lower one with fine darker
drawing in an upper. Sponging and washing for dark atmospheric effect is
barbarous, and mere tyro's work, though it is often useful for passages
of delicate atmospheric light.

175. (_c._) When you have time, practice the production of mixed tints
by interlaced touches of the pure colors out of which they are formed,
and use the process at the parts of your sketches where you wish to get
rich and luscious effects. Study the works of William Hunt, of the Old
Water-color Society, in this respect, continually, and make frequent
memoranda of the variegations in flowers; not painting the flower
completely, but laying the ground color of one petal, and painting the
spots on it with studious precision: a series of single petals of
lilies, geraniums, tulips, etc., numbered with proper reference to their
position in the flower, will be interesting to you on many grounds
besides those of art. Be careful to get the gradated distribution of the
spots well followed in the calceolarias, foxgloves, and the like; and
work out the odd, indefinite hues of the spots themselves with minute
grains of pure interlaced color, otherwise you will never get their
richness or bloom. You will be surprised to find as you do this, first,
the universality of the law of gradation we have so much insisted upon;
secondly, that Nature is just as economical of _her_ fine colors as I
have told you to be of yours. You would think, by the way she paints,
that her colors cost her something enormous; she will only give you a
single pure touch, just where the petal turns into light; but down in
the bell all is subdued, and under the petal all is subdued, even in the
showiest flower. What you thought was bright blue is, when you look
close, only dusty gray, or green, or purple, or every color in the world
at once, only a single gleam or streak of pure blue in the center of it.
And so with all her colors. Sometimes I have really thought her
miserliness intolerable: in a gentian, for instance, the way she
economizes her ultramarine down in the bell is a little too bad.[49]

176. Next, respecting general tone. I said, just now, that, for the sake
of students, my tax should not be laid on black or on white pigments;
but if you mean to be a colorist, you must lay a tax on them yourself
when you begin to use true color; that is to say, you must use them
little, and make of them much. There is no better test of your color
tones being good, than your having made the white in your picture
precious, and the black conspicuous.

177. I say, first, the white precious. I do not mean merely glittering
or brilliant: it is easy to scratch white seagulls out of black clouds,
and dot clumsy foliage with chalky dew; but when white is well managed,
it ought to be strangely delicious,--tender as well as bright,--like
inlaid mother of pearl, or white roses washed in milk. The eye ought to
seek it for rest, brilliant though it may be; and to feel it as a space
of strange, heavenly paleness in the midst of the flushing of the
colors. This effect you can only reach by general depth of middle tint,
by absolutely refusing to allow any white to exist except where you need
it, and by keeping the white itself subdued by gray, except at a few
points of chief luster.

178. Secondly, you must make the black conspicuous. However small a
point of black may be, it ought to catch the eye, otherwise your work is
too heavy in the shadow. All the ordinary shadows should be of some
_color_,--never black, nor approaching black, they should be evidently
and always of a luminous nature, and the black should look strange among
them; never occurring except in a black object, or in small points
indicative of intense shade in the very center of masses of shadow.
Shadows of absolutely negative gray, however, may be beautifully used
with white, or with gold; but still though the black thus, in subdued
strength, becomes spacious, it should always be conspicuous; the
spectator should notice this gray neutrality with some wonder, and
enjoy, all the more intensely on account of it, the gold color and the
white which it relieves. Of all the great colorists Velasquez is the
greatest master of the black chords. His black is more precious than
most other people's crimson.

179. It is not, however, only white and black which you must make
valuable; you must give rare worth to every color you use; but the white
and black ought to separate themselves quaintly from the rest, while the
other colors should be continually passing one into the other, being all
evidently companions in the same gay world; while the white, black, and
neutral gray should stand monkishly aloof in the midst of them. You may
melt your crimson into purple, your purple into blue, and your blue into
green, but you must not melt any of them into black. You should,
however, try, as I said, to give preciousness to all your colors; and
this especially by never using a grain more than will just do the work,
and giving each hue the highest value by opposition. All fine coloring,
like fine drawing, is delicate; and so delicate that if, at last, you
_see_ the color you are putting on, you are putting on too much. You
ought to feel a change wrought in the general tone, by touches of color
which individually are too pale to be seen; and if there is one atom of
any color in the whole picture which is unnecessary to it, that atom
hurts it.

180. Notice also that nearly all good compound colors are _odd_ colors.
You shall look at a hue in a good painter's work ten minutes before you
know what to call it. You thought it was brown, presently you feel that
it is red; next that there is, somehow, yellow in it; presently
afterwards that there is blue in it. If you try to copy it you will
always find your color too warm or too cold--no color in the box will
seem to have an affinity with it; and yet it will be as pure as if it
were laid at a single touch with a single color.

181. As to the choice and harmony of colors in general, if you cannot
choose and harmonize them by instinct, you will never do it at all. If
you need examples of utterly harsh and horrible color, you may find
plenty given in treatises upon coloring, to illustrate the laws of
harmony; and if you want to color beautifully, color as best pleases
yourself at _quiet times_, not so as to catch the eye, nor look as if it
were clever or difficult to color in that way, but so that the color may
be pleasant to you when you are happy or thoughtful. Look much at the
morning and evening sky, and much at simple flowers--dog-roses,
wood-hyacinths, violets, poppies, thistles, heather, and such like,--as
Nature arranges them in the woods and fields. If ever any scientific
person tells you that two colors are "discordant," make a note of the
two colors, and put them together whenever you can. I have actually
heard people say that blue and green were discordant; the two colors
which Nature seems to intend never to be separated, and never to be
felt, either of them, in its full beauty without the other!--a peacock's
neck, or a blue sky through green leaves, or a blue wave with green
lights through it, being precisely the loveliest things, next to clouds
at sunrise, in this colored world of ours. If you have a good eye for
colors, you will soon find out how constantly Nature puts purple and
green together, purple and scarlet, green and blue, yellow and neutral
gray, and the like; and how she strikes these color-concords for general
tones, and then works into them with innumerable subordinate ones; and
you will gradually come to like what she does, and find out new and
beautiful chords of color in her work every day. If you enjoy them,
depend upon it you will paint them to a certain point right: or, at
least, if you do not enjoy them, you are certain to paint them wrong. If
color does not give you intense pleasure, let it alone; depend upon it,
you are only tormenting the eyes and senses of people who feel color,
whenever you touch it; and that is unkind and improper.

182. You will find, also, your power of coloring depend much on your
state of health and right balance of mind; when you are fatigued or ill
you will not see colors well, and when you are ill-tempered you will not
choose them well: thus, though not infallibly a test of character in
individuals, color power is a great sign of mental health in nations;
when they are in a state of intellectual decline, their coloring always
gets dull.[50] You must also take great care not to be misled by
affected talk about colors from people who have not the gift of it:
numbers are eager and voluble about it who probably never in all their
lives received one genuine color-sensation. The modern religionists of
the school of Overbeck are just like people who eat slate-pencil and
chalk, and assure everybody that they are nicer and purer than
strawberries and plums.

183. Take care also never to be misled into any idea that color can help
or display _form_; color[51] always disguises form, and is meant to do
so.

184. It is a favorite dogma among modern writers on color that "warm
colors" (reds and yellows) "approach," or express nearness, and "cold
colors" (blue and gray) "retire," or express distance. So far is this
from being the case, that no expression of distance in the world is so
great as that of the gold and orange in twilight sky. Colors, as such,
are ABSOLUTELY inexpressive respecting distance. It is their quality (as
depth, delicacy, etc.) which expresses distance, not their tint. A blue
bandbox set on the same shelf with a yellow one will not look an inch
farther off, but a red or orange cloud, in the upper sky, will always
appear to be beyond a blue cloud close to us, as it is in reality. It is
quite true that in certain objects, blue is a _sign_ of distance; but
that is not because blue is a retiring color, but because the mist in
the air is blue, and therefore any warm color which has not strength of
light enough to pierce the mist is lost or subdued in its blue: but blue
is no more, on this account, a "retiring color," than brown is a
retiring color, because, when stones are seen through brown water, the
deeper they lie the browner they look; or than yellow is a retiring
color, because, when objects are seen through a London fog, the farther
off they are the yellower they look. Neither blue, nor yellow, nor red,
can have, as such, the smallest power of expressing either nearness or
distance: they express them only under the peculiar circumstances which
render them at the moment, or in that place, _signs_ of nearness or
distance. Thus, vivid orange in an orange is a sign of nearness, for if
you put the orange a great way off, its color will not look so bright;
but vivid orange in sky is a sign of distance, because you cannot get
the color of orange in a cloud near you. So purple in a violet or a
hyacinth is a sign of nearness, because the closer you look at them the
more purple you see. But purple in a mountain is a sign of distance,
because a mountain close to you is not purple, but green or gray. It
may, indeed, be generally assumed that a tender or pale color will more
or less express distance, and a powerful or dark color nearness; but
even this is not always so. Heathery hills will usually give a pale and
tender purple near, and an intense and dark purple far away; the rose
color of sunset on snow is pale on the snow at your feet, deep and full
on the snow in the distance; and the green of a Swiss lake is pale in
the clear waves on the beach, but intense as an emerald in the sunstreak
six miles from shore. And in any case, when the foreground is in strong
light, with much water about it, or white surface, casting intense
reflections, all its colors may be perfectly delicate, pale, and faint;
while the distance, when it is in shadow, may relieve the whole
foreground with intense darks of purple, blue green, or ultramarine
blue. So that, on the whole, it is quite hopeless and absurd to expect
any help from laws of "aërial perspective." Look for the natural
effects, and set them down as fully as you can, and as faithfully, and
_never_ alter a color because it won't look in its right place. Put the
color strong, if it be strong, though far off; faint, if it be faint,
though close to you. Why should you suppose that Nature always means you
to know exactly how far one thing is from another? She certainly intends
you always to enjoy her coloring, but she does not wish you always to
measure her space. You would be hard put to it, every time you painted
the sun setting, if you had to express his 95,000,000 miles of distance
in "aërial perspective."

185. There is, however, I think, one law about distance, which has some
claims to be considered a constant one: namely, that dullness and
heaviness of color are more or less indicative of nearness. All distant
color is _pure_ color: it may not be bright, but it is clear and lovely,
not opaque nor soiled; for the air and light coming between us and any
earthy or imperfect color, purify or harmonize it; hence a bad colorist
is peculiarly incapable of expressing distance. I do not of course mean
that you are to use bad colors in your foreground by way of making it
come forward; but only that a failure in color, there, will not put it
out of its place; while a failure in color in the distance will at once
do away with its remoteness; your dull-colored foreground will still be
a foreground, though ill-painted; but your ill-painted distance will not
be merely a dull distance,--it will be no distance at all.

186. I have only one thing more to advise you, namely, never to color
petulantly or hurriedly. You will not, indeed, be able, if you attend
properly to your coloring, to get anything like the quantity of form you
could in a chiaroscuro sketch; nevertheless, if you do not dash or rush
at your work, nor do it lazily, you may always get enough form to be
satisfactory. An extra quarter of an hour, distributed in quietness
over the course of the whole study, may just make the difference between
a quite intelligible drawing, and a slovenly and obscure one. If you
determine well beforehand what outline each piece of color is to have,
and, when it is on the paper, guide it without nervousness, as far as
you can, into the form required; and then, after it is dry, consider
thoroughly what touches are needed to complete it, before laying one of
them on; you will be surprised to find how masterly the work will soon
look, as compared with a hurried or ill-considered sketch. In no process
that I know of--least of all in sketching--can time be really gained by
precipitation. It is gained only by caution; and gained in all sorts of
ways; for not only truth of form, but force of light, is always added by
an intelligent and shapely laying of the shadow colors. You may often
make a simple flat tint, rightly gradated and edged, express a
complicated piece of subject without a single retouch. The two Swiss
cottages, for instance, with their balconies, and glittering windows,
and general character of shingly eaves, are expressed in Fig. 30 with
one tint of gray, and a few dispersed spots and lines of it; all of
which you ought to be able to lay on without more than thrice dipping
your brush, and without a single touch after the tint is dry.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

187. Here, then, for I cannot without colored illustrations tell you
more, I must leave you to follow out the subject for yourself, with
such help as you may receive from the water-color drawings accessible to
you; or from any of the little treatises on their art which have been
published lately by our water-color painters.[52] But do not trust much
to works of this kind. You may get valuable hints from them as to
mixture of colors; and here and there you will find a useful artifice or
process explained; but nearly all such books are written only to help
idle amateurs to a meretricious skill, and they are full of precepts and
principles which may, for the most part, be interpreted by their
_precise_ negatives, and then acted upon with advantage. Most of them
praise boldness, when the only safe attendant spirit of a beginner is
caution;--advise velocity, when the first condition of success is
deliberation;--and plead for generalization, when all the foundations of
power must be laid in knowledge of speciality.

      *       *       *       *       *

188. And now, in the last place, I have a few things to tell you
respecting that dangerous nobleness of consummate art,--COMPOSITION. For
though it is quite unnecessary for you yet awhile to attempt it, and it
_may_ be inexpedient for you to attempt it at all, you ought to know
what it means, and to look for and enjoy it in the art of others.

Composition means, literally and simply, putting several things
together, so as to make _one_ thing out of them; the nature and goodness
of which they all have a share in producing. Thus a musician composes an
air, by putting notes together in certain relations; a poet composes a
poem, by putting thoughts and words in pleasant order; and a painter a
picture, by putting thoughts, forms, and colors in pleasant order.

In all these cases, observe, an intended unity must be the result of
composition. A pavior cannot be said to compose the heap of stones which
he empties from his cart, nor the sower the handful of seed which he
scatters from his hand. It is the essence of composition that
everything should be in a determined place, perform an intended part,
and act, in that part, advantageously for everything that is connected
with it.

189. Composition, understood in this pure sense, is the type, in the
arts of mankind, of the Providential government of the world.[53] It is
an exhibition, in the order given to notes, or colors, or forms, of the
advantage of perfect fellowship, discipline, and contentment. In a
well-composed air, no note, however short or low, can be spared, but the
least is as necessary as the greatest: no note, however prolonged, is
tedious; but the others prepare for, and are benefited by, its duration:
no note, however high, is tyrannous; the others prepare for, and are
benefited by, its exaltation: no note, however low, is overpowered; the
others prepare for, and sympathize with, its humility: and the result
is, that each and every note has a value in the position assigned to it,
which, by itself, it never possessed, and of which, by separation from
the others, it would instantly be deprived.

190. Similarly, in a good poem, each word and thought enhances the value
of those which precede and follow it; and every syllable has a
loveliness which depends not so much on its abstract sound as on its
position. Look at the same word in a dictionary, and you will hardly
recognize it.

Much more in a great picture; every line and color is so arranged as to
advantage the rest. None are inessential, however slight; and none are
independent, however forcible. It is not enough that they truly
represent natural objects; but they must fit into certain places, and
gather into certain harmonious groups: so that, for instance, the red
chimney of a cottage is not merely set in its place as a chimney, but
that it may affect, in a certain way pleasurable to the eye, the pieces
of green or blue in other parts of the picture; and we ought to see that
the work is masterly, merely by the positions and quantities of these
patches of green, red, and blue, even at a distance which renders it
perfectly impossible to determine what the colors represent: or to see
whether the red is a chimney, or an old woman's cloak; and whether the
blue is smoke, sky, or water.

191. It seems to be appointed, in order to remind us, in all we do, of
the great laws of Divine government and human polity, that composition
in the arts should strongly affect every order of mind, however
unlearned or thoughtless. Hence the popular delight in rhythm and meter,
and in simple musical melodies. But it is also appointed that _power_ of
composition in the fine arts should be an exclusive attribute of great
intellect. All men can more or less copy what they see, and, more or
less, remember it: powers of reflection and investigation are also
common to us all, so that the decision of inferiority in these rests
only on questions of _degree_. A. has a better memory than B., and C.
reflects more profoundly than D. But the gift of composition is not
given _at all_ to more than one man in a thousand; in its highest range,
it does not occur above three or four times in a century.

192. It follows, from these general truths, that it is impossible to
give rules which will enable you to compose. You might much more easily
receive rules to enable you to be witty. If it were possible to be witty
by rule, wit would cease to be either admirable or amusing: if it were
possible to compose melody by rule, Mozart and Cimarosa need not have
been born: if it were possible to compose pictures by rule, Titian and
Veronese would be ordinary men. The essence of composition lies
precisely in the fact of its being unteachable, in its being the
operation of an individual mind of range and power exalted above others.

But though no one can _invent_ by rule, there are some simple laws of
arrangement which it is well for you to know, because, though they will
not enable you to produce a good picture, they will often assist you to
set forth what goodness may be in your work in a more telling way than
you could have done otherwise; and by tracing them in the work of good
composers, you may better understand the grasp of their imagination,
and the power it possesses over their materials. I shall briefly state
the chief of these laws.


1. THE LAW OF PRINCIPALITY.

193. The great object of composition being always to secure unity; that
is, to make out of many things one whole; the first mode in which this
can be effected is, by determining that _one_ feature shall be more
important than all the rest, and that the others shall group with it in
subordinate positions.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.]

This is the simplest law of ordinary ornamentation. Thus the group of
two leaves, _a_, Fig. 31, is unsatisfactory, because it has no leading
leaf; but that at _b_ _is_ prettier, because it has a head or master
leaf; and _c_ more satisfactory still, because the subordination of the
other members to this head leaf is made more manifest by their gradual
loss of size as they fall back from it. Hence part of the pleasure we
have in the Greek honeysuckle ornament, and such others.

194. Thus, also, good pictures have always one light larger and brighter
than the other lights, or one figure more prominent than the other
figures, or one mass of color dominant over all the other masses; and in
general you will find it much benefit your sketch if you manage that
there shall be one light on the cottage wall, or one blue cloud in the
sky, which may attract the eye as leading light, or leading gloom, above
all others. But the observance of the rule is often so cunningly
concealed by the great composers, that its force is hardly at first
traceable; and you will generally find they are vulgar pictures in which
the law is strikingly manifest.

195. This may be simply illustrated by musical melody: for instance, in
such phrases as this--

[Illustration]

one note (here the upper G) rules the whole passage, and has the full
energy of it concentrated in itself. Such passages, corresponding to
completely subordinated compositions in painting, are apt to be
wearisome if often repeated. But, in such a phrase as this--

[Illustration]

it is very difficult to say which is the principal note. The A in the
last bar is slightly dominant, but there is a very equal current of
power running through the whole; and such passages rarely weary. And
this principle holds through vast scales of arrangement; so that in the
grandest compositions, such as Paul Veronese's Marriage in Cana, or
Raphaels Disputa, it is not easy to fix at once on the principal figure;
and very commonly the figure which is really chief does not catch the
eye at first, but is gradually felt to be more and more conspicuous as
we gaze. Thus in Titian's grand composition of the Cornaro Family, the
figure meant to be principal is a youth of fifteen or sixteen, whose
portrait it was evidently the painter's object to make as interesting as
possible. But a grand Madonna, and a St. George with a drifting banner,
and many figures more, occupy the center of the picture, and first
catch the eye; little by little we are led away from them to a gleam of
pearly light in the lower corner, and find that, from the head which it
shines upon, we can turn our eyes no more.

196. As, in every good picture, nearly all laws of design are more or
less exemplified, it will, on the whole, be an easier way of explaining
them to analyze one composition thoroughly, than to give instances from
various works. I shall therefore take one of Turner's simplest; which
will allow us, so to speak, easily to decompose it, and illustrate each
law by it as we proceed.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

Fig. 32 is a rude sketch of the arrangement of the whole subject; the
old bridge over the Moselle at Coblentz, the town of Coblentz on the
right, Ehrenbreitstein on the left. The leading or master feature is, of
course, the tower on the bridge. It is kept from being _too_ principal
by an important group on each side of it; the boats, on the right, and
Ehrenbreitstein beyond. The boats are large in mass, and more forcible
in color, but they are broken into small divisions, while the tower is
simple, and therefore it still leads. Ehrenbreitstein is noble in its
mass, but so reduced by aërial perspective of color that it cannot
contend with the tower, which therefore holds the eye, and becomes the
key of the picture. We shall see presently how the very objects which
seem at first to contend with it for the mastery are made, occultly, to
increase its preëminence.


2. THE LAW OF REPETITION.

197. Another important means of expressing unity is to mark some kind of
sympathy among the different objects, and perhaps the pleasantest,
because most surprising, kind of sympathy, is when one group imitates or
repeats another; not in the way of balance or symmetry, but
subordinately, like a far-away and broken echo of it. Prout has insisted
much on this law in all his writings on composition; and I think it is
even more authoritatively present in the minds of most great composers
than the law of principality.[54] It is quite curious to see the pains
that Turner sometimes takes to echo an important passage of color; in
the Pembroke Castle for instance, there are two fishing-boats, one with
a red, and another with a white sail. In a line with them, on the beach,
are two fish in precisely the same relative positions; one red and one
white. It is observable that he uses the artifice chiefly in pictures
where he wishes to obtain an expression of repose: in my notice of the
plate of Scarborough, in the series of the Harbors of England, I have
already had occasion to dwell on this point; and I extract in the
note[55] one or two sentences which explain the principle. In the
composition I have chosen for our illustration, this reduplication is
employed to a singular extent. The tower, or leading feature, is first
repeated by the low echo of it to the left; put your finger over this
lower tower, and see how the picture is spoiled. Then the spires of
Coblentz are all arranged in couples (how they are arranged in reality
does not matter; when we are composing a great picture, we must play the
towers about till they come right, as fearlessly as if they were
chessmen instead of cathedrals). The dual arrangement of these towers
would have been too easily seen, were it not for the little one which
pretends to make a triad of the last group on the right, but is so faint
as hardly to be discernible: it just takes off the attention from the
artifice, helped in doing so by the mast at the head of the boat, which,
however, has instantly its own duplicate put at the stern.[56] Then
there is the large boat near, and its echo beyond it. That echo is
divided into two again, and each of those two smaller boats has two
figures in it; while two figures are also sitting together on the great
rudder that lies half in the water, and half aground. Then, finally, the
great mass of Ehrenbreitstein, which appears at first to have no
answering form, has almost its _facsimile_ in the bank on which the girl
is sitting; this bank is as absolutely essential to the completion of
the picture as any object in the whole series. All this is done to
deepen the effect of repose.

198. Symmetry, or the balance of parts or masses in nearly equal
opposition, is one of the conditions of treatment under the law of
Repetition. For the opposition, in a symmetrical object, is of like
things reflecting each other: it is not the balance of contrary natures
(like that of day and night), but of like natures or like forms; one
side of a leaf being set like the reflection of the other in water.

Symmetry in Nature is, however, never formal nor accurate. She takes the
greatest care to secure some difference between the corresponding things
or parts of things; and an approximation to accurate symmetry is only
permitted in animals, because their motions secure perpetual difference
between the balancing parts. Stand before a mirror; hold your arms in
precisely the same position at each side, your head upright, your body
straight; divide your hair exactly in the middle and get it as nearly as
you can into exactly the same shape over each ear; and you will see the
effect of accurate symmetry: you will see, no less, how all grace and
power in the human form result from the interference of motion and life
with symmetry, and from the reconciliation of its balance with its
changefulness. Your position, as seen in the mirror, is the highest type
of symmetry as understood by modern architects.

199. In many sacred compositions, living symmetry, the balance of
harmonious opposites, is one of the profoundest sources of their power:
almost any works of the early painters, Angelico, Perugino, Giotto,
etc., will furnish you with notable instances of it. The Madonna of
Perugino in the National Gallery, with the angel Michael on one side and
Raphael on the other, is as beautiful an example as you can have.

In landscape, the principle of balance is more or less carried out, in
proportion to the wish of the painter to express disciplined calmness.
In bad compositions, as in bad architecture, it is formal, a tree on one
side answering a tree on the other; but in good compositions, as in
graceful statues, it is always easy and sometimes hardly traceable. In
the Coblentz, however, you cannot have much difficulty in seeing how the
boats on one side of the tower and the figures on the other are set in
nearly equal balance; the tower, as a central mass, uniting both.


3. THE LAW OF CONTINUITY.

200. Another important and pleasurable way of expressing unity, is by
giving some orderly succession to a number of objects more or less
similar. And this succession is most interesting when it is connected
with some gradual change in the aspect or character of the objects. Thus
the succession of the pillars of a cathedral aisle is most interesting
when they retire in perspective, becoming more and more obscure in
distance: so the succession of mountain promontories one behind another,
on the flanks of a valley; so the succession of clouds, fading farther
and farther towards the horizon; each promontory and each cloud being of
different shape, yet all evidently following in a calm and appointed
order. If there be no change at all in the shape or size of the objects,
there is no continuity; there is only repetition--monotony. It is the
change in shape which suggests the idea of their being individually free,
and able to escape, if they like, from the law that rules them, and yet
submitting to it.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.]

201. I will leave our chosen illustrative composition for a moment to
take up another, still more expressive of this law. It is one of
Turner's most tender studies, a sketch on Calais Sands at sunset; so
delicate in the expression of wave and cloud, that it is of no use for
me to try to reach it with any kind of outline in a wood-cut; but the
rough sketch, Fig. 33, is enough to give an idea of its arrangement.
The aim of the painter has been to give the intensest expression of
repose, together with the enchanted, lulling, monotonous motion of cloud
and wave. All the clouds are moving in innumerable ranks after the sun,
meeting towards that point in the horizon where he has set; and the
tidal waves gain in winding currents upon the sand, with that stealthy
haste in which they cross each other so quietly, at their edges; just
folding one over another as they meet, like a little piece of ruffled
silk, and leaping up a little as two children kiss and clap their hands,
and then going on again, each in its silent hurry, drawing pointed
arches on the sand as their thin edges intersect in parting. But all
this would not have been enough expressed without the line of the old
pier-timbers, black with weeds, strained and bent by the storm waves,
and now seeming to stoop in following one another, like dark ghosts
escaping slowly from the cruelty of the pursuing sea.

202. I need not, I hope, point out to the reader the illustration of
this law of continuance in the subject chosen for our general
illustration. It was simply that gradual succession of the retiring
arches of the bridge which induced Turner to paint the subject at all;
and it was this same principle which led him always to seize on subjects
including long bridges wherever he could find them; but especially,
observe, unequal bridges, having the highest arch at one side rather
than at the center. There is a reason for this, irrespective of general
laws of composition, and connected with the nature of rivers, which I
may as well stop a minute to tell you about, and let you rest from the
study of composition.

203. All rivers, small or large, agree in one character, they like to
lean a little on one side: they cannot bear to have their channels
deepest in the middle, but will always, if they can, have one bank to
sun themselves upon, and another to get cool under; one shingly shore to
play over, where they may be shallow, and foolish, and childlike, and
another steep shore, under which they can pause, and purify themselves,
and get their strength of waves fully together for due occasion. Rivers
in this way are just like wise men, who keep one side of their life for
play, and another for work; and can be brilliant, and chattering, and
transparent, when they are at ease, and yet take deep counsel on the
other side when they set themselves to their main purpose. And rivers
are just in this divided, also, like wicked and good men: the good
rivers have serviceable deep places all along their banks, that ships
can sail in; but the wicked rivers go scooping irregularly under their
banks until they get full of strangling eddies, which no boat can row
over without being twisted against the rocks; and pools like wells,
which no one can get out of but the water-kelpie that lives at the
bottom; but, wicked or good, the rivers all agree in having two kinds of
sides. Now the natural way in which a village stone-mason therefore
throws a bridge over a strong stream is, of course, to build a great
door to let the cat through, and little doors to let the kittens
through; a great arch for the great current, to give it room in flood
time, and little arches for the little currents along the shallow shore.
This, even without any prudential respect for the floods of the great
current, he would do in simple economy of work and stone; for the
smaller your arches are, the less material you want on their flanks. Two
arches over the same span of river, supposing the butments are at the
same depth, are cheaper than one, and that by a great deal; so that,
where the current is shallow, the village mason makes his arches many
and low: as the water gets deeper, and it becomes troublesome to build
his piers up from the bottom, he throws his arches wider; at last he
comes to the deep stream, and, as he cannot build at the bottom of that,
he throws his largest arch over it with a leap, and with another little
one or so gains the opposite shore. Of course as arches are wider they
must be higher, or they will not stand; so the roadway must rise as the
arches widen. And thus we have the general type of bridge, with its
highest and widest arch towards one side, and a train of minor arches
running over the flat shore on the other: usually a steep bank at the
river-side next the large arch; always, of course, a flat shore on the
side of the small ones: and the bend of the river assuredly concave
towards this flat, cutting round, with a sweep into the steep bank; or,
if there is no steep bank, still assuredly cutting into the shore at the
steep end of the bridge.

Now this kind of bridge, sympathizing, as it does, with the spirit of
the river, and marking the nature of the thing it has to deal with and
conquer, is the ideal of a bridge; and all endeavors to do the thing in
a grand engineer's manner, with a level roadway and equal arches, are
barbarous; not only because all monotonous forms are ugly in themselves,
but because the mind perceives at once that there has been cost
uselessly thrown away for the sake of formality.[57]

[Illustration: FIG. 34.]

204. Well, to return to our continuity. We see that the Turnerian bridge
in Fig. 32 is of the absolutely perfect type, and is still farther
interesting by having its main arch crowned by a watch-tower. But as I
want you to note especially what perhaps was not the case in the real
bridge, but is entirely Turner's doing, you will find that though the
arches diminish gradually, not one is _regularly_ diminished--they are
all of different shapes and sizes: you cannot see this clearly in Fig.
32, but in the larger diagram, Fig. 34, over leaf, you will with ease.
This is indeed also part of the ideal of a bridge, because the lateral
currents near the shore are of course irregular in size, and a simple
builder would naturally vary his arches accordingly; and also, if the
bottom was rocky, build his piers where the rocks came. But it is not as
a part of bridge ideal, but as a necessity of all noble composition,
that this irregularity is introduced by Turner. It at once raises the
object thus treated from the lower or vulgar unity of rigid law to the
greater unity of clouds, and waves, and trees, and human souls, each
different, each obedient, and each in harmonious service.


4. THE LAW OF CURVATURE.

205. There is, however, another point to be noticed in this bridge of
Turner's. Not only does it slope away unequally at its sides, but it
slopes in a gradual though very subtle curve. And if you substitute a
straight line for this curve (drawing one with a rule from the base of
the tower on each side to the ends of the bridge, in Fig. 34, and
effacing the curve), you will instantly see that the design has suffered
grievously. You may ascertain, by experiment, that all beautiful objects
whatsoever are thus terminated by delicately curved lines, except where
the straight line is indispensable to their use or stability; and that
when a complete system of straight lines, throughout the form, is
necessary to that stability, as in crystals, the beauty, if any exists,
is in color and transparency, not in form. Cut out the shape of any
crystal you like, in white wax or wood, and put it beside a white lily,
and you will feel the force of the curvature in its purity, irrespective
of added color, or other interfering elements of beauty.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.]

206. Well, as curves are more beautiful than straight lines, it is
necessary to a good composition that its continuities of object, mass,
or color should be, if possible, in curves, rather than straight lines
or angular ones. Perhaps one of the simplest and prettiest examples of a
graceful continuity of this kind is in the line traced at any moment by
the corks of a net as it is being drawn: nearly every person is more or
less attracted by the beauty of the dotted line. Now, it is almost
always possible, not only to secure such a continuity in the arrangement
or boundaries of objects which, like these bridge arches or the corks of
the net, are actually connected with each other, but--and this is a
still more noble and interesting kind of continuity--among features
which appear at first entirely separate. Thus the towers of
Ehrenbreitstein, on the left, in Fig. 32, appear at first independent of
each other; but when I give their profile, on a larger scale, Fig. 35,
the reader may easily perceive that there is a subtle cadence and
harmony among them. The reason of this is, that they are all bounded by
one grand curve, traced by the dotted line; out of the seven towers,
four precisely touch this curve, the others only falling hack from it
here and there to keep the eye from discovering it too easily.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.]

207. And it is not only always possible to obtain continuities of this
kind: it is, in drawing large forests or mountain forms, essential to
truth. The towers of Ehrenbreitstein might or might not in reality fall
into such a curve, but assuredly the basalt rock on which they stand
did; for all mountain forms not cloven into absolute precipice, nor
covered by straight slopes of shales, are more or less governed by these
great curves, it being one of the aims of Nature in all her work to
produce them. The reader must already know this, if he has been able to
sketch at all among mountains; if not, let him merely draw for himself,
carefully, the outlines of any low hills accessible to him, where they
are tolerably steep, or of the woods which grow on them. The steeper
shore of the Thames at Maidenhead, or any of the downs at Brighton or
Dover, or, even nearer, about Croydon (as Addington Hills), is easily
accessible to a Londoner; and he will soon find not only how constant,
but how graceful the curvature is. Graceful curvature is distinguished
from ungraceful by two characters; first in its moderation, that is to
say, its close approach to straightness in some part of its course;[58]
and, secondly, by its variation, that is to say, its never remaining
equal in degree at different parts of its course.

208. This variation is itself twofold in all good curves.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.]

A. There is, first, a steady change through the whole line, from less to
more curvature, or more to less, so that _no_ part of the line is a
segment of a circle, or can be drawn by compasses in any way whatever.
Thus, in Fig. 36, _a_ is a bad curve because it is part of a circle, and
is therefore monotonous throughout; but _b_ is a good curve, because it
continually changes its direction as it proceeds.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.]

The _first_ difference between good and bad drawing of tree boughs
consists in observance of this fact. Thus, when I put leaves on the line
_b_, as in Fig. 37, you can immediately feel the springiness of
character dependent on the changefulness of the curve. You may put
leaves on the other line for yourself, but you will find you cannot make
a right tree spray of it. For _all_ tree boughs, large or small, as well
as all noble natural lines whatsoever, agree in this character; and it
is a point of primal necessity that your eye should always seize and
your hand trace it. Here are two more portions of good curves, with
leaves put on them at the extremities instead of the flanks, Fig. 38;
and two showing the arrangement of masses of foliage seen a little
farther off, Fig. 39, which you may in like manner amuse yourself by
turning into segments of circles--you will see with what result. I hope
however you have beside you, by this time, many good studies of tree
boughs carefully made, in which you may study variations of curvature in
their most complicated and lovely forms.[59]

[Illustration: FIG. 39.]

[Illustration: FIG. 40.]

209. B. Not only does every good curve vary in general tendency, but it
is modulated, as it proceeds, by myriads of subordinate curves. Thus the
outlines of a tree trunk are never as at _a_, Fig. 40, but as at _b_. So
also in waves, clouds, and all other nobly formed masses. Thus another
essential difference between good and bad drawing, or good and bad
sculpture, depends on the quantity and refinement of minor curvatures
carried, by good work, into the great lines. Strictly speaking, however,
this is not variation in large curves, but composition of large curves
out of small ones; it is an increase in the quantity of the beautiful
element, but not a change in its nature.


5. THE LAW OF RADIATION.

210. We have hitherto been concerned only with the binding of our
various objects into beautiful lines or processions. The next point we
have to consider is, how we may unite these lines or processions
themselves, so as to make groups of _them_.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.]

[Illustration: FIG. 42.]

Now, there are two kinds of harmonies of lines. One in which, moving
more or less side by side, they variously, but evidently with consent,
retire from or approach each other, intersect or oppose each other;
currents of melody in music, for different voices, thus approach and
cross, fall and rise, in harmony; so the waves of the sea, as they
approach the shore, flow into one another or cross, but with a great
unity through all; and so various lines of composition often flow
harmoniously through and across each other in a picture. But the most
simple and perfect connection of lines is by radiation; that is, by
their all springing from one point, or closing towards it; and this
harmony is often, in Nature almost always, united with the other; as the
boughs of trees, though they intersect and play amongst each other
irregularly, indicate by their general tendency their origin from one
root. An essential part of the beauty of all vegetable form is in this
radiation; it is seen most simply in a single flower or leaf, as in a
convolvulus bell, or chestnut leaf; but more beautifully in the
complicated arrangements of the large boughs and sprays. For a leaf is
only a flat piece of radiation; but the tree throws its branches on all
sides, and even in every profile view of it, which presents a radiation
more or less correspondent to that of its leaves, it is more beautiful,
because varied by the freedom of the separate branches. I believe it has
been ascertained that, in all trees, the angle at which, in their
leaves, the lateral ribs are set on their central rib is approximately
the same at which the branches leave the great stem; and thus each
section of the tree would present a kind of magnified view of its own
leaf, were it not for the interfering force of gravity on the masses of
foliage. This force in proportion to their age, and the lateral
leverage upon them, bears them downwards at the extremities, so that, as
before noticed, the lower the bough grows on the stem, the more it
droops (Fig. 17, p. 67); besides this, nearly all beautiful trees have a
tendency to divide into two or more principal masses, which give a
prettier and more complicated symmetry than if one stem ran all the way
up the center. Fig. 41 may thus be considered the simplest type of tree
radiation, as opposed to leaf radiation. In this figure, however, all
secondary ramification is unrepresented, for the sake of simplicity; but
if we take one half of such a tree, and merely give two secondary
branches to each main branch (as represented in the general branch
structure shown at _b_, Fig. 18, p. 68), we shall have the form Fig. 42.
This I consider the perfect general type of tree structure; and it is
curiously connected with certain forms of Greek, Byzantine, and Gothic
ornamentation, into the discussion of which, however, we must not enter
here. It will be observed, that both in Figs. 41 and 42 all the branches
so spring from the main stem as very nearly to suggest their united
radiation from the root R. This is by no means universally the case; but
if the branches do not bend towards a point in the root, they at least
converge to some point or other. In the examples in Fig. 43, the
mathematical center of curvature, _a_, is thus, in one case, on the
ground, at some distance from the root, and in the other, near the top
of the tree. Half, only, of each tree is given, for the sake of
clearness: Fig. 44 gives both sides of another example, in which the
origins of curvature are below the root. As the positions of such points
may be varied without end, and as the arrangement of the lines is also
farther complicated by the fact of the boughs springing for the most
part in a spiral order round the tree, and at proportionate distances,
the systems of curvature which regulate the form of vegetation are quite
infinite. Infinite is a word easily said, and easily written, and people
do not always mean it when they say it; in this case I _do_ mean it: the
number of systems is incalculable, and even to furnish anything like a
representative number of types, I should have to give several hundreds
of figures such as Fig. 44.[60]

[Illustration: FIG. 43.]

[Illustration: FIG. 44.]

[Illustration: FIG. 45.]

211. Thus far, however, we have only been speaking of the great
relations of stem and branches. The forms of the branches themselves are
regulated by still more subtle laws, for they occupy an intermediate
position between the form of the tree and of the leaf. The leaf has a
flat ramification; the tree a completely rounded one; the bough is
neither rounded nor flat, but has a structure exactly balanced between
the two, in a half-flattened, half-rounded flake, closely resembling in
shape one of the thick leaves of an artichoke or the flake of a fir
cone; by combination forming the solid mass of the tree, as the leaves
compose the artichoke head. I have before pointed out to you the general
resemblance of these branch flakes to an extended hand; but they may be
more accurately represented by the ribs of a boat. If you can imagine a
very broad-headed and flattened boat applied by its keel to the end of a
main branch,[61] as in Fig. 45, the lines which its ribs will take,
supposing them outside of its timbers instead of inside, and the general
contour of it, as seen in different directions, from above and below,
will give you the closest approximation to the perspectives and
foreshortenings of a well-grown branch-flake. Fig. 25 above, p. 89, is
an unharmed and unrestrained shoot of healthy young oak; and, if you
compare it with Fig. 45, you will understand at once the action of the
lines of leafage; the boat only failing as a type in that its ribs are
too nearly parallel to each other at the sides, while the bough sends
all its ramification well forwards, rounding to the head, that it may
accomplish its part in the outer form of the whole tree, yet always
securing the compliance with the great universal law that the branches
nearest the root bend most back; and, of course, throwing _some_ always
back as well as forwards; the appearance of reversed action being much
increased, and rendered more striking and beautiful, by perspective.
Fig. 25 shows the perspective of such a bough as it is seen from below;
Fig. 46 gives rudely the look it would have from above.

[Illustration: FIG. 46.]

212. You may suppose, if you have not already discovered, what
subtleties of perspective and light and shade are involved in the
drawing of these branch-flakes, as you see them in different directions
and actions; now raised, now depressed: touched on the edges by the
wind, or lifted up and bent back so as to show all the white under
surfaces of the leaves shivering in light, as the bottom of a boat rises
white with spray at the surge-crest; or drooping in quietness towards
the dew of the grass beneath them in windless mornings, or bowed down
under oppressive grace of deep-charged snow. Snow time, by the way, is
one of the best for practice in the placing of tree masses; but you will
only be able to understand them thoroughly by beginning with a single
bough and a few leaves placed tolerably even, as in Fig. 38, p. 149.
First one with three leaves, a central and two lateral ones, as at _a_;
then with five, as at _b_, and so on; directing your whole attention to
the expression, both by contour and light and shade, of the boat-like
arrangements, which, in your earlier studies, will have been a good deal
confused, partly owing to your inexperience, and partly to the depth of
shade, or absolute blackness of mass required in those studies.

213. One thing more remains to be noted, and I will let you out of the
wood. You see that in every generally representative figure I have
surrounded the radiating branches with a dotted line: such lines do
indeed terminate every vegetable form; and you see that they are
themselves beautiful curves, which, according to their flow, and the
width or narrowness of the spaces they inclose, characterize the species
of tree or leaf, and express its free or formal action, its grace of
youth or weight of age. So that, throughout all the freedom of her
wildest foliage, Nature is resolved on expressing an encompassing limit;
and marking a unity in the whole tree, caused not only by the rising of
its branches from a common root, but by their joining in one work, and
being bound by a common law. And having ascertained this, let us turn
back for a moment to a point in leaf structure which, I doubt not, you
must already have observed in your earlier studies, but which it is well
to state here, as connected with the unity of the branches in the great
trees. You must have noticed, I should think, that whenever a leaf is
compound,--that is to say, divided into other leaflets which in any way
repeat or imitate the form of the whole leaf,--those leaflets are not
symmetrical, as the whole leaf is, but always smaller on the side
towards the point of the great leaf, so as to express their
subordination to it, and show, even when they are pulled off, that they
are not small independent leaves, but members of one large leaf.

214. Fig. 47, which is a block-plan of a leaf of columbine, without its
minor divisions on the edges, will illustrate the principle clearly. It
is composed of a central large mass, A, and two lateral ones, of which
the one on the right only is lettered, B. Each of these masses is again
composed of three others, a central and two lateral ones; but observe,
the minor one, _a_ of A, is balanced equally by its opposite; but the
minor _b_ 1 of B is larger than its opposite _b_ 2. Again, each of these
minor masses is divided into three; but while the central mass, A of A,
is symmetrically divided, the B of B is unsymmetrical, its largest
side-lobe being lowest. Again, in _b_ 2, the lobe _c_ 1 (its lowest lobe
in relation to B) is larger than _c_ 2; and so also in _b_ 1. So that
universally one lobe of a lateral leaf is always larger than the other,
and the smaller lobe is that which is nearer the central mass; the lower
leaf, as it were by courtesy, subduing some of its own dignity or power,
in the immediate presence of the greater or captain leaf, and always
expressing, therefore, its own subordination and secondary character.
This law is carried out even in single leaves. As far as I know, the
upper half, towards the point of the spray, is always the smaller; and a
slightly different curve, more convex at the springing, is used for the
lower side, giving an exquisite variety to the form of the whole leaf;
so that one of the chief elements in the beauty of every subordinate
leaf throughout the tree is made to depend on its confession of its own
lowliness and subjection.

[Illustration: FIG. 47.]

215. And now, if we bring together in one view the principles we have
ascertained in trees, we shall find they may be summed under four great
laws; and that all perfect[62] vegetable form is appointed to express
these four laws in noble balance of authority.

1. Support from one living root.

2. Radiation, or tendency of force from some one given point, either in
the root or in some stated connection with it.

3. Liberty of each bough to seek its own livelihood and happiness
according to its needs, by irregularities of action both in its play and
its work, either stretching out to get its required nourishment from
light and rain, by finding some sufficient breathing-place among the
other branches, or knotting and gathering itself up to get strength for
any load which its fruitful blossoms may lay upon it, and for any stress
of its storm-tossed luxuriance of leaves; or playing hither and thither
as the fitful sunshine may tempt its young shoots, in their undecided
states of mind about their future life.

4. Imperative requirement of each bough to stop within certain limits,
expressive of its kindly fellowship and fraternity with the boughs in
its neighborhood; and to work with them according to its power,
magnitude, and state of health, to bring out the general perfectness of
the great curve, and circumferent stateliness of the whole tree.

216. I think I may leave you, unhelped, to work out the moral analogies
of these laws; you may, perhaps, however, be a little puzzled to see the
meaning of the second one. It typically expresses that healthy human
actions should spring radiantly (like rays) from some single heart
motive; the most beautiful systems of action taking place when this
motive lies at the root of the whole life, and the action is clearly
seen to proceed from it; while also many beautiful secondary systems of
action taking place from motives not so deep or central, but in some
beautiful subordinate connection with the central or life motive.

The other laws, if you think over them, you will find equally
significative; and as you draw trees more and more in their various
states of health and hardship, you will be every day more struck by the
beauty of the types they present of the truths most essential for
mankind to know;[63] and you will see what this vegetation of the earth,
which is necessary to our life, first, as purifying the air for us and
then as food, and just as necessary to our joy in all places of the
earth,--what these trees and leaves, I say, are meant to teach us as we
contemplate them, and read or hear their lovely language, written or
spoken for us, not in frightful black letters nor in dull sentences, but
in fair green and shadowy shapes of waving words, and blossomed
brightness of odoriferous wit, and sweet whispers of unintrusive wisdom,
and playful morality.

217. Well, I am sorry myself to leave the wood, whatever my reader may
be; but leave it we must, or we shall compose no more pictures to-day.

This law of radiation, then, enforcing unison of action in arising from,
or proceeding to, some given point, is perhaps, of all principles of
composition, the most influential in producing the beauty of groups of
form. Other laws make them forcible or interesting, but this generally
is chief in rendering them beautiful. In the arrangement of masses in
pictures, it is constantly obeyed by the great composers; but, like the
law of principality, with careful concealment of its imperativeness, the
point to which the lines of main curvature are directed being very
often far away out of the picture. Sometimes, however, a system of
curves will be employed definitely to exalt, by their concurrence, the
value of some leading object, and then the law becomes traceable enough.

218. In the instance before us, the principal object being, as we have
seen, the tower on the bridge, Turner has determined that his system of
curvature should have its origin in the top of this tower. The diagram
Fig. 34, p. 145, compared with Fig. 32, p. 137, will show how this is
done. One curve joins the two towers, and is continued by the back of
the figure sitting on the bank into the piece of bent timber. This is a
limiting curve of great importance, and Turner has drawn a considerable
part of it with the edge of the timber very carefully, and then led the
eye up to the sitting girl by some white spots and indications of a
ledge in the bank; then the passage to the tops of the towers cannot be
missed.

219. The next curve is begun and drawn carefully for half an inch of its
course by the rudder; it is then taken up by the basket and the heads of
the figures, and leads accurately to the tower angle. The gunwales of
both the boats begin the next two curves, which meet in the same point;
and all are centralized by the long reflection which continues the
vertical lines.

220. Subordinated to this first system of curves there is another, begun
by the small crossing bar of wood inserted in the angle behind the
rudder; continued by the bottom of the bank on which the figure sits,
interrupted forcibly beyond it,[64] but taken up again by the water-line
leading to the bridge foot, and passing on in delicate shadows under the
arches, not easily shown in so rude a diagram, towards the other
extremity of the bridge. This is a most important curve, indicating
that the force and sweep of the river have indeed been in old times
under the large arches; while the antiquity of the bridge is told us by
a long tongue of land, either of carted rubbish, or washed down by some
minor stream, which has interrupted this curve, and is now used as a
landing-place for the boats, and for embarkation of merchandise, of
which some bales and bundles are laid in a heap, immediately beneath the
great tower. A common composer would have put these bales to one side or
the other, but Turner knows better; he uses them as a foundation for his
tower, adding to its importance precisely as the sculptured base adorns
a pillar; and he farther increases the aspect of its height by throwing
the reflection of it far down in the nearer water. All the great
composers have this same feeling about sustaining their vertical masses:
you will constantly find Prout using the artifice most dexterously (see,
for instance, the figure with the wheelbarrow under the great tower, in
the sketch of St. Nicholas, at Prague, and the white group of figures
under the tower in the sketch of Augsburg[65]); and Veronese, Titian,
and Tintoret continually put their principal figures at bases of
pillars. Turner found out their secret very early, the most prominent
instance of his composition on this principle being the drawing of Turin
from the Superga, in Hakewell's Italy. I chose Fig. 20, already given to
illustrate foliage drawing, chiefly because, being another instance of
precisely the same arrangement, it will serve to convince you of its
being intentional. There, the vertical, formed by the larger tree, is
continued by the figure of the farmer, and that of one of the smaller
trees by his stick. The lines of the interior mass of the bushes
radiate, under the law of radiation, from a point behind the farmer's
head; but their outline curves are carried on and repeated, under the
law of continuity, by the curves of the dog and boy--by the way, note
the remarkable instance in these of the use of darkest lines towards the
light--all more or less guiding the eye up to the right, in order to
bring it finally to the Keep of Windsor, which is the central object of
the picture, as the bridge tower is in the Coblentz. The wall on which
the boy climbs answers the purpose of contrasting, both in direction and
character, with these greater curves; thus corresponding as nearly as
possible to the minor tongue of land in the Coblentz. This, however,
introduces us to another law, which we must consider separately.


6. THE LAW OF CONTRAST.

221. Of course the character of everything is best manifested by
Contrast. Rest can only be enjoyed after labor; sound to be heard
clearly, must rise out of silence; light is exhibited by darkness,
darkness by light; and so on in all things. Now in art every color has
an opponent color, which, if brought near it, will relieve it more
completely than any other; so, also, every form and line may be made
more striking to the eye by an opponent form or line near them; a curved
line is set off by a straight one, a massy form by a slight one, and so
on; and in all good work nearly double the value, which any given color
or form would have uncombined, is given to each by contrast.[66]

In this case again, however, a too manifest use of the artifice
vulgarizes a picture. Great painters do not commonly, or very visibly,
admit violent contrast. They introduce it by stealth, and with
intermediate links of tender change; allowing, indeed, the opposition to
tell upon the mind as a surprise, but not as a shock.[67]

222. Thus in the rock of Ehrenbreitstein, Fig. 35, the main current of
the lines being downwards, in a convex swell, they are suddenly stopped
at the lowest tower by a counter series of beds, directed nearly
straight across them. This adverse force sets off and relieves the great
curvature, but it is reconciled to it by a series of radiating lines
below, which at first sympathize with the oblique bar, then gradually
get steeper, till they meet and join in the fall of the great curve. No
passage, however intentionally monotonous, is ever introduced by a good
artist without _some_ slight counter current of this kind; so much,
indeed, do the great composers feel the necessity of it, that they will
even do things purposely ill or unsatisfactorily, in order to give
greater value to their well-doing in other places. In a skillful poet's
versification the so-called bad or inferior lines are not inferior
because he could not do them better, but because he feels that if all
were equally weighty, there would be no real sense of weight anywhere;
if all were equally melodious, the melody itself would be fatiguing; and
he purposely introduces the laboring or discordant verse, that the full
ring may be felt in his main sentence, and the finished sweetness in his
chosen rhythm.[68] And continually in painting, inferior artists destroy
their work by giving too much of all that they think is good, while the
great painter gives just enough to be enjoyed, and passes to an opposite
kind of enjoyment, or to an inferior state of enjoyment: he gives a
passage of rich, involved, exquisitely wrought color, then passes away
into slight, and pale, and simple color; he paints for a minute or two
with intense decision, then suddenly becomes, as the spectator thinks,
slovenly; but he is not slovenly: you could not have _taken_ any more
decision from him just then; you have had as much as is good for you:
he paints over a great space of his picture forms of the most rounded
and melting tenderness, and suddenly, as you think by a freak, gives you
a bit as jagged and sharp as a leafless blackthorn. Perhaps the most
exquisite piece of subtle contrast in the world of painting is the arrow
point, laid sharp against the white side and among the flowing hair of
Correggio's Antiope. It is quite singular how very little contrast will
sometimes serve to make an entire group of forms interesting which would
otherwise have been valueless. There is a good deal of picturesque
material, for instance, in this top of an old tower, Fig. 48, tiles and
stones and sloping roof not disagreeably mingled; but all would have
been unsatisfactory if there had not happened to be that iron ring on
the inner wall, which by its vigorous black _circular_ line precisely
opposes all the square and angular characters of the battlements and
roof. Draw the tower without the ring, and see what a difference it will
make.

[Illustration: FIG. 48.]

223. One of the most important applications of the law of contrast is in
association with the law of continuity, causing an unexpected but gentle
break in a continuous series. This artifice is perpetual in music, and
perpetual also in good illumination; the way in which little surprises
of change are prepared in any current borders, or chains of ornamental
design, being one of the most subtle characteristics of the work of the
good periods. We take, for instance, a bar of ornament between two
written columns of an early fourteenth century MS., and at the first
glance we suppose it to be quite monotonous all the way up, composed of
a winding tendril, with alternately a blue leaf and a scarlet bud.
Presently, however, we see that, in order to observe the law of
principality, there is one large scarlet leaf instead of a bud, nearly
half-way up, which forms a center to the whole rod; and when we begin to
examine the order of the leaves, we find it varied carefully. Let A
stand for scarlet bud, _b_ for blue leaf, _c_ for two blue leaves on one
stalk, _s_ for a stalk without a leaf, and R, for the large red leaf.
Then, counting from the ground, the order begins as follows:

_b_, _b_, A; _b_, _s_, _b_, A; _b_, _b_, A; _b_, _b_, A; and we think we
shall have two _b_'s and an A all the way, when suddenly it becomes _b_,
A; _b_, R; _b_, A; _b_, A; _b_, A; and we think we are going to have
_b_, A continued; but no: here it becomes _b_, _s_; _b_, _s_; _b_, A;
_b_, _s_; _b_, _s_; _c_, _s_; _b_, _s_; _b_, _s_; and we think we are
surely going to have _b_, _s_ continued, but behold it runs away to the
end with a quick _b_, _b_, A; _b_, _b_, _b_, _b_![69] Very often,
however, the designer is satisfied with _one_ surprise, but I never saw
a good illuminated border without one at least; and no series of any
kind was ever introduced by a great composer in a painting without a
snap somewhere. There is a pretty one in Turner's drawing of Rome with
the large balustrade for a foreground in the Hakewell's Italy series:
the single baluster struck out of the line, and showing the street below
through the gap, simply makes the whole composition right, when
otherwise it would have been stiff and absurd.

224. If you look back to Fig. 48 you will see, in the arrangement of the
battlements, a simple instance of the use of such variation. The whole
top of the tower, though actually three sides of a square, strikes the
eye as a continuous series of five masses. The first two, on the left,
somewhat square and blank, then the next two higher and richer, the
tiles being seen on their slopes. Both these groups being couples, there
is enough monotony in the series to make a change pleasant; and the last
battlement, therefore, is a little higher than the first two,--a little
lower than the second two,--and different in shape from either. Hide it
with your finger, and see how ugly and formal the other four battlements
look.

225. There are in this figure several other simple illustrations of the
laws we have been tracing. Thus the whole shape of the walls' mass being
square, it is well, still for the sake of contrast, to oppose it not
only by the element of curvature, in the ring, and lines of the roof
below, but by that of sharpness; hence the pleasure which the eye takes
in the projecting point of the roof. Also, because the walls are thick
and sturdy, it is well to contrast their strength with weakness;
therefore we enjoy the evident decrepitude of this roof as it sinks
between them. The whole mass being nearly white, we want a contrasting
shadow somewhere; and get it, under our piece of decrepitude. This
shade, with the tiles of the wall below, forms another pointed mass,
necessary to the first by the law of repetition. Hide this inferior
angle with your finger, and see how ugly the other looks. A sense of the
law of symmetry, though you might hardly suppose it, has some share in
the feeling with which you look at the battlements; there is a certain
pleasure in the opposed slopes of their top, on one side down to the
left, on the other to the right. Still less would you think the law of
radiation had anything to do with the matter: but if you take the
extreme point of the black shadow on the left for a center, and follow
first the low curve of the eaves of the wall, it will lead you, if you
continue it, to the point of the tower cornice; follow the second curve,
the top of the tiles of the wall, and it will strike the top of the
right-hand battlement; then draw a curve from the highest point of the
angled battlement on the left, through the points of the roof and its
dark echo; and you will see how the whole top of the tower radiates from
this lowest dark point. There are other curvatures crossing these main
ones, to keep them from being too conspicuous. Follow the curve of the
upper roof, it will take you to the top of the highest battlement; and
the stones indicated at the right-hand side of the tower are more
extended at the bottom, in order to get some less direct expression of
sympathy, such as irregular stones may be capable of, with the general
flow of the curves from left to right.

226. You may not readily believe, at first, that all these laws are
indeed involved in so trifling a piece of composition. But, as you study
longer, you will discover that these laws, and many more, are obeyed by
the powerful composers in every _touch_: that literally, there is never
a dash of their pencil which is not carrying out appointed purposes of
this kind in twenty various ways at once; and that there is as much
difference, in way of intention and authority, between one of the great
composers ruling his colors, and a common painter confused by them, as
there is between a general directing the march of an army, and an old
lady carried off her feet by a mob.


7. THE LAW OF INTERCHANGE.

227. Closely connected with the law of contrast is a law which enforces
the unity of opposite things, by giving to each a portion of the
character of the other. If, for instance, you divide a shield into two
masses of color, all the way down--suppose blue and white, and put a
bar, or figure of an animal, partly on one division, partly on the
other, you will find it pleasant to the eye if you make the part of the
animal blue which comes upon the white half, and white which comes upon
the blue half. This is done in heraldry, partly for the sake of perfect
intelligibility, but yet more for the sake of delight in interchange of
color, since, in all ornamentation whatever, the practice is continual,
in the ages of good design.

228. Sometimes this alternation is merely a reversal of contrasts; as
that, after red has been for some time on one side, and blue on the
other, red shall pass to blue's side and blue to red's. This kind of
alternation takes place simply in four-quartered shields; in more subtle
pieces of treatment, a little bit only of each color is carried into the
other, and they are as it were dovetailed together. One of the most
curious facts which will impress itself upon you, when you have drawn
some time carefully from Nature in light and shade, is the appearance of
intentional artifice with which contrasts of this alternate kind are
produced by her; the artistry with which she will darken a tree trunk as
long as it comes against light sky, and throw sunlight on it precisely
at the spot where it comes against a dark hill, and similarly treat all
her masses of shade and color, is so great, that if you only follow her
closely, every one who looks at your drawing with attention will think
that you have been inventing the most artificially and unnaturally
delightful interchanges of shadow that could possibly be devised by
human wit.

229. You will find this law of interchange insisted upon at length by
Prout in his Lessons on Light and Shade: it seems of all his principles
of composition to be the one he is most conscious of; many others he
obeys by instinct, but this he formally accepts and forcibly declares.

The typical purpose of the law of interchange is, of course, to teach us
how opposite natures may be helped and strengthened by receiving each,
as far as they can, some impress or reflection, or imparted power, from
the other.


8. THE LAW OF CONSISTENCY.

230. It is to be remembered, in the next place, that while contrast
exhibits the _characters_ of things, it very often neutralizes or
paralyzes their _power_. A number of white things may be shown to be
clearly white by opposition of a black thing, but if we want the full
power of their gathered light, the black thing may be seriously in our
way. Thus, while contrast displays things, it is unity and sympathy
which employ them, concentrating the power of several into a mass. And,
not in art merely, but in all the affairs of life, the wisdom of man is
continually called upon to reconcile these opposite methods of
exhibiting, or using, the materials in his power. By change he gives
them pleasantness, and by consistency value; by change he is refreshed,
and by perseverance strengthened.

231. Hence many compositions address themselves to the spectator by
aggregate force of color or line, more than by contrasts of either; many
noble pictures are painted almost exclusively in various tones of red,
or gray, or gold, so as to be instantly striking by their breadth of
flush, or glow, or tender coldness, these qualities being exhibited only
by slight and subtle use of contrast. Similarly as to form; some
compositions associate massive and rugged forms, others slight and
graceful ones, each with few interruptions by lines of contrary
character. And, in general, such compositions possess higher sublimity
than those which are more mingled in their elements. They tell a special
tale, and summon a definite state of feeling, while the grand
compositions merely please the eye.

232. This unity or breadth of character generally attaches most to the
works of the greatest men; their separate pictures have all separate
aims. We have not, in each, gray color set against somber, and sharp
forms against soft, and loud passages against low: but we have the
bright picture, with its delicate sadness; the somber picture, with its
single ray of relief; the stern picture, with only one tender group of
lines; the soft and calm picture, with only one rock angle at its flank;
and so on. Hence the variety of their work, as well as its
impressiveness. The principal bearing of this law, however, is on the
separate masses or divisions of a picture: the character of the whole
composition may be broken or various, if we please, but there must
certainly be a tendency to consistent assemblage in its divisions. As an
army may act on several points at once, but can only act effectually by
having somewhere formed and regular masses, and not wholly by
skirmishers; so a picture may be various in its tendencies, but must be
somewhere united and coherent in its masses. Good composers are always
associating their colors in great groups; binding their forms together
by encompassing lines, and securing, by various dexterities of
expedient, what they themselves call "breadth:" that is to say, a large
gathering of each kind of thing into one place; light being gathered to
light, darkness to darkness, and color to color. If, however, this be
done by introducing false lights or false colors, it is absurd and
monstrous; the skill of a painter consists in obtaining breadth by
rational arrangement of his objects, not by forced or wanton treatment
of them. It is an easy matter to paint one thing all white, and another
all black or brown; but not an easy matter to assemble all the
circumstances which will naturally produce white in one place, and brown
in another. Generally speaking, however, breadth will result in
sufficient degree from fidelity of study: Nature is always broad; and if
you paint her colors in true relations, you will paint them in majestic
masses. If you find your work look broken and scattered, it is, in all
probability, not only ill composed, but untrue.

233. The opposite quality to breadth, that of division or scattering of
light and color, has a certain contrasting charm, and is occasionally
introduced with exquisite effect by good composers.[70] Still it is
never the mere scattering, but the order discernible through this
scattering, which is the real source of pleasure; not the mere
multitude, but the constellation of multitude. The broken lights in the
work of a good painter wander like flocks upon the hills, not
unshepherded, speaking of life and peace: the broken lights of a bad
painter fall like hailstones, and are capable only of mischief, leaving
it to be wished they were also of dissolution.


9. THE LAW OF HARMONY.

234. This last law is not, strictly speaking, so much one of composition
as of truth, but it must guide composition, and is properly, therefore,
to be stated in this place.

Good drawing is, as we have seen, an _abstract_ of natural facts; you
cannot represent all that you would, but must continually be falling
short, whether you will or no, of the force, or quantity, of Nature.
Now, suppose that your means and time do not admit of your giving the
depth of color in the scene, and that you are obliged to paint it paler.
If you paint all the colors proportionately paler, as if an equal
quantity of tint had been washed away from each of them, you still
obtain a harmonious, though not an equally forcible, statement of
natural fact. But if you take away the colors unequally, and leave some
tints nearly as deep as they are in Nature, while others are much
subdued, you have no longer a true statement. You cannot say to the
observer, "Fancy all those colors a little deeper, and you will have the
actual fact." However he adds in imagination, or takes away, something
is sure to be still wrong. The picture is out of harmony.

235. It will happen, however, much more frequently, that you have to
darken the whole system of colors, than to make them paler. You
remember, in your first studies of color from Nature, you were to leave
the passages of light which were too bright to be imitated, as white
paper. But, in completing the picture, it becomes necessary to put color
into them; and then the other colors must be made darker, in some fixed
relation to them. If you deepen all proportionately, though the whole
scene is darker than reality, it is only as if you were looking at the
reality in a lower light: but if, while you darken some of the tints,
you leave others undarkened, the picture is out of harmony, and will not
give the impression of truth.

236. It is not, indeed, possible to deepen _all_ the colors so much as
to relieve the lights in their natural degree, you would merely sink
most of your colors, if you tried to do so, into a broad mass of
blackness: but it is quite possible to lower them harmoniously, and yet
more in some parts of the picture than in others, so as to allow you to
show the light you want in a visible relief. In well-harmonized pictures
this is done by gradually deepening the tone of the picture towards the
lighter parts of it, without materially lowering it in the very dark
parts; the tendency in such pictures being, of course, to include large
masses of middle tints. But the principal point to be observed in doing
this, is to deepen the individual tints without dirtying or obscuring
them. It is easy to lower the tone of the picture by washing it over
with gray or brown; and easy to see the effect of the landscape, when
its colors are thus universally polluted with black, by using the black
convex mirror, one of the most pestilent inventions for falsifying
Nature and degrading art which ever was put into an artist's hand.[71]
For the thing required is not to darken pale yellow by mixing gray with
it, but to deepen the pure yellow; not to darken crimson by mixing black
with it, but by making it deeper and richer crimson: and thus the
required effect could only be seen in Nature, if you had pieces of glass
of the color of every object in your landscape, and of every minor hue
that made up those colors, and then could see the real landscape through
this deep gorgeousness of the varied glass. You cannot do this with
glass, but you can do it for yourself as you work; that is to say, you
can put deep blue for pale blue, deep gold for pale gold, and so on, in
the proportion you need; and then you may paint as forcibly as you
choose, but your work will still be in the manner of Titian, not of
Caravaggio or Spagnoletto, or any other of the black slaves of
painting.[72]

237. Supposing those scales of color, which I told you to prepare in
order to show you the relations of color to gray, were quite accurately
made, and numerous enough, you would have nothing more to do, in order
to obtain a deeper tone in any given mass of color, than to substitute
for each of its hues the hue as many degrees deeper in the scale as you
wanted, that is to say, if you wanted to deepen the whole two degrees,
substituting for the yellow No. 5 the yellow No. 7, and for the red No.
9 the red No. 11, and so on: but the hues of any object in Nature are
far too numerous, and their degrees too subtle, to admit of so
mechanical a process. Still, you may see the principle of the whole
matter clearly by taking a group of colors out of your scale, arranging
them prettily, and then washing them all over with gray: that represents
the treatment of Nature by the black mirror. Then arrange the same group
of colors, with the tints five or six degrees deeper in the scale; and
that will represent the treatment of Nature by Titian.

238. You can only, however, feel your way fully to the right of the
thing by working from Nature.

The best subject on which to begin a piece of study of this kind is a
good thick tree trunk, seen against blue sky with some white clouds in
it. Paint the clouds in true and tenderly gradated white; then give the
sky a bold full blue, bringing them well out; then paint the trunk and
leaves grandly dark against all, but in such glowing dark green and
brown as you see they will bear. Afterwards proceed to more complicated
studies, matching the colors carefully first by your old method; then
deepening each color with its own tint, and being careful, above all
things, to keep truth of equal change when the colors are connected with
each other, as in dark and light sides of the same object. Much more
aspect and sense of harmony are gained by the precision with which you
observe the relation of colors in dark sides and light sides, and the
influence of modifying reflections, than by mere accuracy of added depth
in independent colors.

239. This harmony of tone, as it is generally called, is the most
important of those which the artist has to regard. But there are all
kinds of harmonies in a picture, according to its mode of production.
There is even a harmony of touch. If you paint one part of it very
rapidly and forcibly, and another part slowly and delicately, each
division of the picture may be right separately, but they will not agree
together: the whole will be effectless and valueless, out of harmony.
Similarly, if you paint one part of it by a yellow light in a warm day,
and another by a gray light in a cold day, though both may have been
sunlight, and both may be well toned, and have their relative shadows
truly cast, neither will look like light; they will destroy each other's
power, by being out of harmony. These are only broad and definable
instances of discordance; but there is an extent of harmony in all good
work much too subtle for definition; depending on the draughtsman's
carrying everything he draws up to just the balancing and harmonious
point, in finish, and color, and depth of tone, and intensity of moral
feeling, and style of touch, all considered at once; and never allowing
himself to lean too emphatically on detached parts, or exalt one thing
at the expense of another, or feel acutely in one place and coldly in
another. If you have got some of Cruikshank's etchings, you will be
able, I think, to feel the nature of harmonious treatment in a simple
kind, by comparing them with any of Richter's illustrations to the
numerous German story-books lately published at Christmas, with all the
German stories spoiled. Cruikshank's work is often incomplete in
character and poor in incident, but, as drawing, it is _perfect_ in
harmony. The pure and simple effects of daylight which he gets by his
thorough mastery of treatment in this respect, are quite unrivaled, as
far as I know, by any other work executed with so few touches. His
vignettes to Grimm's German stories, already recommended, are the most
remarkable in this quality. Richter's illustrations, on the contrary,
are of a very high stamp as respects understanding of human character,
with infinite playfulness and tenderness of fancy; but, as drawings,
they are almost unendurably out of harmony, violent blacks in one place
being continually opposed to trenchant white in another; and, as is
almost sure to be the case with bad harmonists, the local color hardly
felt anywhere. All German work is apt to be out of harmony, in
consequence of its too frequent conditions of affectation, and its
willful refusals of fact; as well as by reason of a feverish kind of
excitement, which dwells violently on particular points, and makes all
the lines of thought in the picture to stand on end, as it were, like a
cat's fur electrified; while good work is always as quiet as a couchant
leopard, and as strong.

       *       *       *       *       *

240. I have now stated to you all the laws of composition which occur to
me as capable of being illustrated or defined; but there are multitudes
of others which, in the present state of my knowledge, I cannot define,
and others which I never hope to define; and these the most important,
and connected with the deepest powers of the art. I hope, when I have
thought of them more, to be able to explain some of the laws which
relate to nobleness and ignobleness; that ignobleness especially which
we commonly call "vulgarity" and which, in its essence, is one of the
most curious subjects of inquiry connected with human feeling. Others I
never hope to explain, laws of expression, bearing simply on simple
matters; but, for that very reason, more influential than any others.
These are, from the first, as inexplicable as our bodily sensations are;
it being just as impossible, I think, to show, finally, why one
succession of musical notes[73] shall be lofty and pathetic, and such as
might have been sung by Casella to Dante, and why another succession is
base and ridiculous, and would be fit only for the reasonably good ear
of Bottom, as to explain why we like sweetness, and dislike bitterness.
The best part of every great work is always inexplicable: it is good
because it is good; and innocently gracious, opening as the green of the
earth, or falling as the dew of heaven.

241. But though you cannot explain them, you may always render yourself
more and more sensitive to these higher qualities by the discipline
which you generally give to your character, and this especially with
regard to the choice of incidents; a kind of composition in some sort
easier than the artistical arrangements of lines and colors, but in
every sort nobler, because addressed to deeper feelings.

242. For instance, in the "Datur Hora Quieti," the last vignette to
Rogers's Poems, the plow in the foreground has three purposes. The first
purpose is to meet the stream of sunlight on the river, and make it
brighter by opposition; but any dark object whatever would have done
this. Its second purpose is, by its two arms, to repeat the cadence of
the group of the two ships, and thus give a greater expression of
repose; but two sitting figures would have done this. Its third and
chief, or pathetic, purpose is, as it lies abandoned in the furrow (the
vessels also being moored, and having their sails down), to be a type of
human labor closed with the close of day. The parts of it on which the
hand leans are brought most clearly into sight; and they are the chief
dark of the picture, because the tillage of the ground is required of
man as a punishment: but they make the soft light of the setting sun
brighter, because rest is sweetest after toil. These thoughts may never
occur to us as we glance carelessly at the design; and yet their under
current assuredly affects the feelings, and increases, as the painter
meant it should, the impression of melancholy, and of peace.

243. Again, in the "Lancaster Sands," which is one of the plates I have
marked as most desirable for your possession: the stream of light which
falls from the setting sun on the advancing tide stands similarly in
need of some force of near object to relieve its brightness. But the
incident which Turner has here adopted is the swoop of an angry sea-gull
at a dog, who yelps at it, drawing back as the wave rises over his
feet, and the bird shrieks within a foot of his face. Its unexpected
boldness is a type of the anger of its ocean element, and warns us of
the sea's advance just as surely as the abandoned plow told us of the
ceased labor of the day.

244. It is not, however, so much in the selection of single incidents of
this kind, as in the feeling which regulates the arrangement of the
whole subject, that the mind of a great composer is known. A single
incident may be suggested by a felicitous chance, as a pretty motto
might be for the heading of a chapter. But the great composers so
arrange _all_ their designs that one incident illustrates another, just
as one color relieves another. Perhaps the "Heysham," of the Yorkshire
series, which, as to its locality, may be considered a companion to the
last drawing we have spoken of, the "Lancaster Sands," presents as
interesting an example as we could find of Turner's feeling in this
respect. The subject is a simple north-country village, on the shore of
Morecambe Bay; not in the common sense a picturesque village; there are
no pretty bow-windows, or red roofs, or rocky steps of entrance to the
rustic doors, or quaint gables; nothing but a single street of thatched
and chiefly clay-built cottages, ranged in a somewhat monotonous line,
the roofs so green with moss that at first we hardly discern the houses
from the fields and trees. The village street is closed at the end by a
wooden gate, indicating the little traffic there is on the road through
it, and giving it something the look of a large farmstead, in which a
right of way lies through the yard. The road which leads to this gate is
full of ruts, and winds down a bad bit of hill between two broken banks
of moor ground, succeeding immediately to the few inclosures which
surround the village; they can hardly be called gardens: but a decayed
fragment or two of fencing fill the gaps in the bank; a clothes-line,
with some clothes on it, striped blue and red, and a smock-frock, is
stretched between the trunks of some stunted willows; a _very_ small
haystack and pig-sty being seen at the back of the cottage beyond. An
empty, two-wheeled, lumbering cart, drawn by a pair of horses with huge
wooden collars, the driver sitting lazily in the sun, sideways on the
leader, is going slowly home along the rough road, it being about
country dinner-time. At the end of the village there is a better house,
with three chimneys and a dormer window in its roof, and the roof is of
stone shingle instead of thatch, but very rough. This house is no doubt
the clergyman's: there is some smoke from one of its chimneys, none from
any other in the village; this smoke is from the lowest chimney at the
back, evidently that of the kitchen, and it is rather thick, the fire
not having been long lighted. A few hundred yards from the clergyman's
house, nearer the shore, is the church, discernible from the cottages
only by its low two-arched belfry, a little neater than one would expect
in such a village; perhaps lately built by the Puseyite incumbent:[74]
and beyond the church, close to the sea, are two fragments of a border
war-tower, standing on their circular mound, worn on its brow deep into
edges and furrows by the feet of the village children. On the bank of
moor, which forms the foreground, are a few cows, the carter's dog
barking at a vixenish one: the milkmaid is feeding another, a gentle
white one, which turns its head to her, expectant of a handful of fresh
hay, which she has brought for it in her blue apron, fastened up round
her waist; she stands with her pail on her head, evidently the village
coquette, for she has a neat bodice, and pretty striped petticoat under
the blue apron, and red stockings. Nearer us, the cowherd, bare-footed,
stands on a piece of the limestone rock (for the ground is thistly and
not pleasurable to bare feet);--whether boy or girl we are not sure: it
may be a boy, with a girl's worn-out bonnet on, or a girl with a pair of
ragged trousers on; probably the first, as the old bonnet is evidently
useful to keep the sun out of our eyes when we are looking for strayed
cows among the moorland hollows, and helps us at present to watch
(holding the bonnet's edge down) the quarrel of the vixenish cow with
the dog, which, leaning on our long stick, we allow to proceed without
any interference. A little to the right the hay is being got in, of
which the milkmaid has just taken her apronful to the white cow; but the
hay is very thin, and cannot well be raked up because of the rocks; we
must glean it like corn, hence the smallness of our stack behind the
willows; and a woman is pressing a bundle of it hard together, kneeling
against the rock's edge, to carry it safely to the hay-cart without
dropping any. Beyond the village is a rocky hill, deep set with
brushwood, a square crag or two of limestone emerging here and there,
with pleasant turf on their brows, heaved in russet and mossy mounds
against the sky, which, clear and calm, and as golden as the moss,
stretches down behind it towards the sea. A single cottage just shows
its roof over the edge of the hill, looking seawards: perhaps one of the
village shepherds is a sea captain now, and may have built it there,
that his mother may first see the sails of his ship whenever it runs
into the bay. Then under the hill, and beyond the border tower, is the
blue sea itself, the waves flowing in over the sand in long curved lines
slowly; shadows of cloud, and gleams of shallow water on white sand
alternating--miles away; but no sail is visible, not one fisher-boat on
the beach, not one dark speck on the quiet horizon. Beyond all are the
Cumberland mountains, clear in the sun, with rosy light on all their
crags.

245. I should think the reader cannot but feel the kind of harmony there
is in this composition; the entire purpose of the painter to give us the
impression of wild, yet gentle, country life, monotonous as the
succession of the noiseless waves, patient and enduring as the rocks;
but peaceful, and full of health and quiet hope, and sanctified by the
pure mountain air and baptismal dew of heaven, falling softly between
days of toil and nights of innocence.

246. All noble composition of this kind can be reached only by
instinct; you cannot set yourself to arrange such a subject; you may see
it, and seize it, at all times, but never laboriously invent it. And
your power of discerning what is best in expression, among natural
subjects, depends wholly on the temper in which you keep your own mind;
above all, on your living so much alone as to allow it to become acutely
sensitive in its own stillness. The noisy life of modern days is wholly
incompatible with any true perception of natural beauty. If you go down
into Cumberland by the railroad, live in some frequented hotel, and
explore the hills with merry companions, however much you may enjoy your
tour or their conversation, depend upon it you will never choose so much
as one pictorial subject rightly; you will not see into the depth of
any. But take knapsack and stick, walk towards the hills by short day's
journeys,--ten or twelve miles a day--taking a week from some
starting-place sixty or seventy miles away: sleep at the pretty little
wayside inns, or the rough village ones; then take the hills as they
tempt you, following glen or shore as your eye glances or your heart
guides, wholly scornful of local fame or fashion, and of everything
which it is the ordinary traveler's duty to see, or pride to do. Never
force yourself to admire anything when you are not in the humor; but
never force yourself away from what you feel to be lovely, in search of
anything better; and gradually the deeper scenes of the natural world
will unfold themselves to you in still increasing fullness of passionate
power; and your difficulty will be no more to seek or to compose
subjects, but only to choose one from among the multitude of melodious
thoughts with which you will be haunted, thoughts which will of course
be noble or original in proportion to your own depth of character and
general power of mind; for it is not so much by the consideration you
give to any single drawing, as by the previous discipline of your powers
of thought, that the character of your composition will be determined.
Simplicity of life will make you sensitive to the refinement and modesty
of scenery, just as inordinate excitement and pomp of daily life will
make you enjoy coarse colors and affected forms. Habits of patient
comparison and accurate judgment will make your art precious, as they
will make your actions wise; and every increase of noble enthusiasm in
your living spirit will be measured by the reflection of its light upon
the works of your hands.--Faithfully yours,

                                                          J. RUSKIN.


FOOTNOTES:

  [41] I give Rossetti this pre-eminence, because, though the leading
    Pre-Raphaelites have all about equal power over color in the
    abstract, Rossetti and Holman Hunt are distinguished above the rest
    for rendering color under effects of light; and of these two,
    Rossetti composes with richer fancy, and with a deeper sense of
    beauty, Hunt's stern realism leading him continually into harshness.
    Rossetti's carelessness, to do him justice, is only in water-color,
    never in oil.

  [42] All the degradation of art which was brought about, after the
    rise of the Dutch school, by asphaltum, yellow varnish, and brown
    trees would have been prevented, if only painters had been forced to
    work in dead color. Any color will do for some people, if it is
    browned and shining; but fallacy in dead color is detected on the
    instant. I even believe that whenever a painter begins to _wish_
    that he could touch any portion of his work with gum, he is going
    wrong.

    It is necessary, however, in this matter, carefully to distinguish
    between translucency and luster. Translucency, though, as I have
    said above, a dangerous temptation, is, in its place, beautiful; but
    luster or _shininess_ is always, in painting, a defect. Nay, one of
    my best painter-friends (the "best" being understood to attach to
    both divisions of that awkward compound word,) tried the other day
    to persuade me that luster was an ignobleness in anything; and it
    was only the fear of treason to ladies' eyes, and to mountain
    streams, and to morning dew, which kept me from yielding the point
    to him. One is apt always to generalize too quickly in such matters;
    but there can be no question that luster is destructive of
    loveliness in color, as it is of intelligibility in form. Whatever
    may be the pride of a young beauty in the knowledge that her eyes
    shine (though perhaps even eyes are most beautiful in dimness), she
    would be sorry if her cheeks did; and which of us would wish to
    polish a rose?

  [43] But not shiny or greasy. Bristol board, or hot-pressed
    imperial, or gray paper that feels slightly adhesive to the hand, is
    best. Coarse, gritty, and sandy papers are fit only for blotters and
    blunderers; no good draughtsman would lay a line on them. Turner
    worked much on a thin tough paper, dead in surface; rolling up his
    sketches in tight bundles that would go deep into his pockets.

  [44] I insist upon this unalterability of color the more because I
    address you as a beginner, or an amateur: a great artist can
    sometimes get out of a difficulty with credit, or repent without
    confession. Yet even Titian's alterations usually show as stains on
    his work.

  [45] It is, I think, a piece of affectation to try to work with few
    colors: it saves time to have enough tints prepared without mixing,
    and you may at once allow yourself these twenty-four. If you arrange
    them in your color-box in the order I have set them down, you will
    always easily put your finger on the one you want.

    Cobalt         Smalt                  Antwerb blue     Prussian blue
    Black          Gamboge                Emerald green    Hooker's green
    Lemon yellow   Cadmium yellow         Yellow ocher     Roman ocher
    Raw sienna     Burnt sienna           Light red        Indian red
    Mars orange    Extract of vermilion   Carmine          Violet carmine
    Brown madder   Burnt umber            Vandyke brown    Sepia

    Antwerp blue and Prussian blue are not very permanent colors, but
    you need not care much about permanence in your work as yet, and
    they are both beautiful; while Indigo is marked by Field as more
    fugitive still, and is very ugly. Hooker's green is a mixed color,
    put in the box merely to save you loss of time in mixing gamboge and
    Prussian blue. No. 1 is the best tint of it. Violet carmine is a
    noble color for laying broken shadows with, to be worked into
    afterwards with other colors.

    If you wish to take up coloring seriously you had better get Field's
    "Chromatography" at once; only do not attend to anything it says
    about principles or harmonies of color; but only to its statements
    of practical serviceableness in pigments, and of their operations on
    each other when mixed, etc.

  [46] A more methodical, though under general circumstances uselessly
    prolix way, is to cut a square hole, some half an inch wide, in the
    sheet of cardboard, and a series of small circular holes in a slip
    of cardboard an inch wide. Pass the slip over the square opening,
    and match each color beside one of the circular openings. You will
    thus have no occasion to wash any of the colors away. But the first
    rough method is generally all you want, as, after a little practice,
    you only need to _look_ at the hue through the opening in order to
    be able to transfer it to your drawing at once.

  [47] If colors were twenty times as costly as they are, we should
    have many more good painters. If I were Chancellor of the Exchequer
    I would lay a tax of twenty shillings a cake on all colors except
    black, Prussian blue, Vandyke brown, and Chinese white, which I
    would leave for students. I don't say this jestingly; I believe such
    a tax would do more to advance real art than a great many schools of
    design.

  [48] I say _modern_, because Titian's quiet way of blending colors,
    which is the perfectly right one, is not understood now by any
    artist. The best color we reach is got by stippling; but this is not
    quite right.

  [49] See Note 6 in Appendix I.

  [50] The worst general character that color can possibly have is a
    prevalent tendency to a dirty yellowish green, like that of a
    decaying heap of vegetables; this color is _accurately_ indicative
    of decline or paralysis in missal-painting.

  [51] That is to say, local color inherent in the object. The
    gradations of color in the various shadows belonging to various
    lights exhibit form, and therefore no one but a colorist can ever
    draw _forms_ perfectly (see Modern Painters, vol. iv. chap. iii. at
    the end); but all notions of explaining form by superimposed color,
    as in architectural moldings, are absurd. Color adorns form, but
    does not interpret it. An apple is prettier because it is striped,
    but it does not look a bit rounder; and a cheek is prettier because
    it is flushed, but you would see the form of the cheek bone better
    if it were not. Color may, indeed, detach one shape from another, as
    in grounding a bas-relief, but it always diminishes the appearance
    of projection, and whether you put blue, purple, red, yellow, or
    green, for your ground, the bas-relief will be just as clearly or
    just as imperfectly relieved, as long as the colors are of equal
    depth. The blue ground will not retire the hundredth part of an inch
    more than the red one.

  [52] See, however, at the close of this letter, the notice of one
    more point connected with the management of color, under the head
    "Law of Harmony."

  [53] See farther, on this subject, Modern Painters, vol. iv. chap.
    viii. § 6.

  [54] See Note 7 in Appendix I.

  [55] "In general, throughout Nature, reflection and repetition are
    peaceful things, associated with the idea of quiet succession in
    events; that one day should be like another day, or one history the
    repetition of another history, being more or less results of
    quietness, while dissimilarity and non-succession are results of
    interference and disquietude. Thus, though an echo actually
    increases the quantity of sound heard, its repetition of the note or
    syllable gives an idea of calmness attainable in no other way; hence
    also the feeling of calm given to a landscape by the voice of a
    cuckoo."

  [56] This is obscure in the rude wood-cut, the masts being so
    delicate that they are confused among the lines of reflection. In
    the original they have orange light upon them, relieved against
    purple behind.

  [57] The cost of art in getting a bridge level is _always_ lost, for
    you must get up to the height of the central arch at any rate, and
    you only can make the whole bridge level by putting the hill farther
    back, and pretending to have got rid of it when you have not, but
    have only wasted money in building an unnecessary embankment. Of
    course, the bridge should not be difficultly or dangerously steep,
    but the necessary slope, whatever it may be, should be in the bridge
    itself, as far as the bridge can take it, and not pushed aside into
    the approach, as in our Waterloo road; the only rational excuse for
    doing which is that when the slope must be long it is inconvenient
    to put on a drag at the top of the bridge, and that any restiveness
    of the horse is more dangerous on the bridge than on the embankment.
    To this I answer: first, it is not more dangerous in reality, though
    it looks so, for the bridge is always guarded by an effective
    parapet, but the embankment is sure to have no parapet, or only a
    useless rail; and secondly, that it is better to have the slope on
    the bridge and make the roadway wide in proportion, so as to be
    quite safe, because a little waste of space on the river is no loss,
    but your wide embankment at the side loses good ground; and so my
    picturesque bridges are right as well as beautiful, and I hope to
    see them built again some day instead of the frightful
    straight-backed things which we fancy are fine, and accept from the
    pontifical rigidities of the engineering mind.

  [58] I cannot waste space here by reprinting what I have said in
    other books; but the reader ought, if possible, to refer to the
    notices of this part of our subject in Modern Painters, vol. iv.
    chap xvii.; and Stones of Venice, vol. iii. chap. i. § 8.

  [59] If you happen to be reading at this part of the book, without
    having gone through any previous practice, turn back to the sketch
    of the ramification of stone pine, Fig. 4, p. 17, and examine the
    curves of its boughs one by one, trying them by the conditions here
    stated under the heads A and B.

  [60] The reader, I hope, observes always that every line in these
    figures is itself one of varying curvature, and cannot be drawn by
    compasses.

  [61] I hope the reader understands that these wood-cuts are merely
    facsimiles of the sketches I make at the side of my paper to
    illustrate my meaning as I write--often sadly scrawled if I want to
    get on to something else. This one is really a little too careless;
    but it would take more time and trouble to make a proper drawing of
    so odd a boat than the matter is worth. It will answer the purpose
    well enough as it is.

  [62] Imperfect vegetable form I consider that which is in its nature
    dependent, as in runners and climbers; or which is susceptible of
    continual injury without materially losing the power of giving
    pleasure by its aspect, as in the case of the smaller grasses. I
    have not, of course, space here to explain these minor distinctions,
    but the laws above stated apply to all the more important trees and
    shrubs likely to be familiar to the student.

  [63] There is a very tender lesson of this kind in the shadows of
    leaves upon the ground; shadows which are the most likely of all to
    attract attention, by their pretty play and change. If you examine
    them, you will find that the shadows do not take the forms of the
    leaves, but that, through each interstice, the light falls, at a
    little distance, in the form of a round or oval spot; that is to
    say, it produces the image of the sun itself, cast either vertically
    or obliquely, in circle or ellipse according to the slope of the
    ground. Of course the sun's rays produce the same effect, when they
    fall through any small aperture: but the openings between leaves are
    the only ones likely to show it to an ordinary observer, or to
    attract his attention to it by its frequency, and lead him to think
    what this type may signify respecting the greater Sun; and how it
    may show us that, even when the opening through which the earth
    receives light is too small to let us see the Sun Himself, the ray
    of light that enters, if it comes straight from Him, will still bear
    with it His image.

  [64] In the smaller figure (32), it will be seen that this
    interruption is caused by a cart coming down to the water's edge;
    and this object is serviceable as beginning another system of curves
    leading out of the picture on the right, but so obscurely drawn as
    not to be easily represented in outline. As it is unnecessary to the
    explanation of our point here, it has been omitted in the larger
    diagram, the direction of the curve it begins being indicated by the
    dashes only.

  [65] Both in the Sketches in Flanders and Germany.

  [66] If you happen to meet with the plate of Dürer's representing a
    coat-of-arms with a skull in the shield, note the value given to the
    concave curves and sharp point of the helmet by the convex leafage
    carried round it in front; and the use of the blank white part of
    the shield in opposing the rich folds of the dress.

  [67] Turner hardly ever, as far as I remember, allows a strong light
    to oppose a full dark, without some intervening tint. His suns never
    set behind dark mountains without a film of cloud above the
    mountain's edge.

  [68]       "A prudent chief not always must display
              His powers in equal ranks and fair array,
              But with the occasion and the place comply,
              Conceal his force; nay, seem sometimes to fly.
              Those oft are stratagems which errors seem,
              Nor is it Homer nods, but we that dream."

                                                  _Essay on Criticism._

  [69] I am describing from an MS., _circa_ 1300, of Gregory's
    Decretalia, in my own possession.

  [70] One of the most wonderful compositions of Tintoret in Venice,
    is little more than a field of subdued crimson, spotted with flakes
    of scattered gold. The upper clouds in the most beautiful skies owe
    great part of their power to infinitude of divisions; order being
    marked through this division.

  [71] I fully believe that the strange gray gloom, accompanied by
    considerable power of effect, which prevails in modern French art,
    must be owing to the use of this mischievous instrument; the French
    landscape always gives me the idea of Nature seen carelessly in the
    dark mirror, and painted coarsely, but scientifically, through the
    veil of its perversion.

  [72] Various other parts of this subject are entered into,
    especially in their bearing on the ideal of painting, in Modern
    Painters, vol. iv. chap. iii.

  [73] In all the best arrangements of color, the delight occasioned
    by their mode of succession is entirely inexplicable, nor can it be
    reasoned about; we like it just as we like an air in music, but
    cannot reason any refractory person into liking it, if they do not:
    and yet there is distinctly a right and a wrong in it, and a good
    taste and bad taste respecting it, as also in music.

  [74] "Puseyism" was unknown in the days when this drawing was made;
    but the kindly and helpful influences of what may be called
    ecclesiastical sentiment, which, in a morbidly exaggerated
    condition, forms one of the principal elements of "Puseyism,"--I use
    this word regretfully, no other existing which will serve for
    it,--had been known and felt in our wild northern districts long
    before.




APPENDIX.


I.

ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES.

  NOTE 1, p. 42.--"_Principle of the stereoscope._"

247. I am sorry to find a notion current among artists, that they can,
in some degree, imitate in a picture the effect of the stereoscope, by
confusion of lines. There are indeed one or two artifices by which, as
stated in the text, an appearance of retirement or projection may be
obtained, so that they partly supply the place of the stereoscopic
effect, but they do not imitate that effect. The principle of the human
sight is simply this:--by means of our two eyes we literally see
everything from two places at once; and, by calculated combination, in
the brain, of the facts of form so seen, we arrive at conclusions
respecting the distance and shape of the object, which we could not
otherwise have reached. But it is just as vain to hope to paint at once
the two views of the object as seen from these two places, though only
an inch and a half distant from each other, as it would be if they were
a mile and a half distant from each other. With the right eye you see
one view of a given object, relieved against one part of the distance;
with the left eye you see another view of it, relieved against another
part of the distance. You may paint whichever of those views you please;
you cannot paint both. Hold your finger upright, between you and this
page of the book, about six inches from your eyes, and three from the
book; shut the right eye, and hide the words "inches from," in the
second line above this, with your finger; you will then see "six" on one
side of it, and "your," on the other. Now shut the left eye and open the
right without moving your finger, and you will see "inches," but not
"six." You may paint the finger with "inches" beyond it, or with "six"
beyond it, but not with both. And this principle holds for any object
and any distance. You might just as well try to paint St. Paul's at once
from both ends of London Bridge as to realize any stereoscopic effect in
a picture.


  NOTE 2, p. 59.--"_Dark lines turned to the light._"

248. It ought to have been farther observed, that the inclosure of the
light by future shadow is by no means the only reason for the dark lines
which great masters often thus introduce. It constantly happens that a
local color will show its own darkness most on the light side, by
projecting into and against masses of light in that direction; and then
the painter will indicate this future force of the mass by his dark
touch. Both the monk's head in Fig. 11 and dog in Fig. 20 are dark
towards the light for this reason.


  NOTE 3, p. 98.--"_Softness of reflections._"

249. I have not quite insisted enough on the extreme care which is
necessary in giving the tender evanescence of the edges of the
reflections, when the water is in the least agitated; nor on the
decision with which you may reverse the object, when the water is quite
calm. Most drawing of reflections is at once confused and hard; but
Nature's is at once intelligible and tender. Generally, at the edge of
the water, you ought not to see where reality ceases and reflection
begins; as the image loses itself you ought to keep all its subtle and
varied veracities, with the most exquisite softening of its edge.
Practice as much as you can from the reflections of ships in calm
water, following out all the reversed rigging, and taking, if anything,
more pains with the reflection than with the ship.


  NOTE 4, p. 100.--"_Where the reflection is darkest, you will see
     through the water best._"

250. For this reason it often happens that if the water be shallow, and
you are looking steeply down into it, the reflection of objects on the
bank will consist simply of pieces of the bottom seen clearly through
the water, and relieved by flashes of light, which are the reflection of
the sky. Thus you may have to draw the reflected dark shape of a bush:
but, inside of that shape, you must not draw the leaves of the bush, but
the stones under the water; and, outside of this dark reflection, the
blue or white of the sky, with no stones visible.


  NOTE 5, p. 101.--"_Approach streams with reverence._"

251. I have hardly said anything about waves of torrents or waterfalls,
as I do not consider them subjects for beginners to practice upon; but,
as many of our younger artists are almost breaking their hearts over
them, it may be well to state at once that it is physically impossible
to draw a running torrent quite rightly, the luster of its currents and
whiteness of its foam being dependent on intensities of light which art
has not at its command. This also is to be observed, that most young
painters make their defeat certain by attempting to draw running water,
which is a lustrous object in rapid motion, without ever trying their
strength on a lustrous object standing still. Let them break a coarse
green-glass bottle into a great many bits, and try to paint those, with
all their undulations and edges of fracture, as they lie still on the
table; if they cannot, of course they need not try the rushing crystal
and foaming fracture of the stream. If they can manage the glass bottle,
let them next buy a fragment or two of yellow fire-opal; it is quite a
common and cheap mineral, and presents, as closely as anything can, the
milky bloom and color of a torrent wave: and if they can conquer the
opal, they may at last have some chance with the stream, as far as the
stream is in any wise possible. But, as I have just said, the bright
parts of it are _not_ possible, and ought, as much as may be, to be
avoided in choosing subjects. A great deal more may, however, be done
than any artist has done yet, in painting the gradual disappearance and
lovely coloring of stones seen through clear and calm water.

Students living in towns may make great progress in rock-drawing by
frequently and faithfully drawing broken edges of common roofing slates,
of their real size.


  NOTE 6, p. 125.--"_Nature's economy of color._"

252. I heard it wisely objected to this statement, the other day, by a
young lady, that it was not through economy that Nature did not color
deep down in the flower bells, but because "she had not light enough
there to see to paint with." This may be true; but it is certainly not
for want of light that, when she is laying the dark spots on a foxglove,
she will not use any more purple than she has got already on the bell,
but takes out the color all round the spot, and concentrates it in the
middle.


  NOTE 7, p. 138.--"_The law of repetition._"

253. The reader may perhaps recollect a very beautiful picture of
Vandyck's in the Manchester Exhibition, representing three children in
court dresses of rich black and red. The law in question was amusingly
illustrated, in the lower corner of that picture, by the introduction of
two crows, in a similar color of court dress, having jet black feathers
and bright red beaks.

254. Since the first edition of this work was published, I have
ascertained that there are two series of engravings from the Bible
drawings mentioned in the list at p. 50. One of these is inferior to the
other, and in many respects false to the drawing; the "Jericho," for
instance, in the false series, has common bushes instead of palm trees
in the middle distance. The original plates may be had at almost any
respectable printseller's; and ordinary impressions, whether of these or
any other plates mentioned in the list at p. 50, will be quite as useful
as proofs: but, in buying Liber Studiorum, it is always well to get the
best impressions that can be had, and if possible impressions of the
original plates, published by Turner. In case these are not to be had,
the copies which are in course of publication by Mr. Lupton (4 Keppel
Street, Russell Square) are good and serviceable; but no others are of
any use.--[Note of 1857.]

I have placed in the hands of Mr. Ward (Working Men's College) some
photographs from the etchings made by Turner for the Liber; the original
etchings being now unobtainable, except by fortunate accident. I have
selected the subjects carefully from my own collection of the etchings;
and though some of the more subtle qualities of line are lost in the
photographs, the student will find these proofs the best lessons in
pen-drawing accessible to him.--[Note of 1859]


II.

THINGS TO BE STUDIED.

255. The worst danger by far, to which a solitary student is exposed, is
that of liking things that he should not. It is not so much his
difficulties, as his tastes, which he must set himself to conquer: and
although, under the guidance of a master, many works of art may be made
instructive, which are only of partial excellence (the good and bad of
them being duly distinguished), his safeguard, as long as he studies
alone, will be in allowing himself to possess only things, in their way,
so free from faults, that nothing he copies in them can seriously
mislead him, and to contemplate only those works of art which he knows
to be either perfect or noble in their errors. I will therefore set
down, in clear order, the names of the masters whom you may safely
admire, and a few of the books which you may safely possess. In these
days of cheap illustration, the danger is always rather of your
possessing too much than too little. It may admit of some question, how
far the looking at bad art may set off and illustrate the characters of
the good; but, on the whole, I believe it is best to live always on
quite wholesome food, and that our enjoyment of it will never be made
more acute by feeding on ashes; though it may be well sometimes to taste
the ashes, in order to know the bitterness of them. Of course the works
of the great masters can only be serviceable to the student after he has
made considerable progress himself. It only wastes the time and dulls
the feelings of young persons, to drag them through picture galleries;
at least, unless they themselves wish to look at particular pictures.
Generally, young people only care to enter a picture gallery when there
is a chance of getting leave to run a race to the other end of it; and
they had better do that in the garden below. If, however, they have any
real enjoyment of pictures, and want to look at this one or that, the
principal point is never to disturb them in looking at what interests
them, and never to make them look at what does not. Nothing is of the
least use to young people (nor, by the way, of much use to old ones),
but what interests them; and therefore, though it is of great importance
to put nothing but good art into their possession, yet, when they are
passing through great houses or galleries, they should be allowed to
look precisely at what pleases them: if it is not useful to them as art,
it will be in some other way; and the healthiest way in which art can
interest them is when they look at it, not as art, but because it
represents something they like in Nature. If a boy has had his heart
filled by the life of some great man, and goes up thirstily to a Vandyck
portrait of him, to see what he was like, that is the wholesomest way in
which he can begin the study of portraiture; if he loves mountains, and
dwells on a Turner drawing because he sees in it a likeness to a
Yorkshire scar or an Alpine pass, that is the wholesomest way in which
he can begin the study of landscape; and if a girl's mind is filled with
dreams of angels and saints, and she pauses before an Angelico because
she thinks it must surely be like heaven, that is the right way for her
to begin the study of religious art.

256. When, however, the student has made some definite progress, and
every picture becomes really a guide to him, false or true, in his own
work, it is of great importance that he should never look, with even
partial admiration, at bad art; and then, if the reader is willing to
trust me in the matter, the following advice will be useful to him. In
which, with his permission, I will quit the indirect and return to the
epistolary address, as being the more convenient.


  First, in Galleries of Pictures:

1. You may look, with trust in their being always right, at Titian,
Veronese, Tintoret, Giorgione, John Bellini, and Velasquez; the
authenticity of the picture being of course established for you by
proper authority.

2. You may look with admiration, admitting, however, question of right
and wrong,[75] at Van Eyck, Holbein, Perugino, Francia, Angelico,
Leonardo da Vinci, Correggio, Vandyck, Rembrandt, Reynolds,
Gainsborough, Turner, and the modern Pre-Raphaelites.[76] You had better
look at no other painters than these, for you run a chance, otherwise,
of being led far off the road, or into grievous faults, by some of the
other great ones, as Michael Angelo, Raphael, and Rubens; and of being,
besides, corrupted in taste by the base ones, as Murillo, Salvator,
Claude, Gaspar Poussin, Teniers, and such others. You may look, however,
for examples of evil, with safe universality of reprobation, being sure
that everything you see is bad, at Domenichino, the Carracci, Bronzino,
and the figure pieces of Salvator.

Among those named for study under question, you cannot look too much at,
nor grow too enthusiastically fond of, Angelico, Correggio, Reynolds,
Turner, and the Pre-Raphaelites; but, if you find yourself getting
especially fond of any of the others, leave off looking at them, for you
must be going wrong some way or other. If, for instance, you begin to
like Rembrandt or Leonardo especially, you are losing your feeling for
color; if you like Van Eyck or Perugino especially, you must be getting
too fond of rigid detail; and if you like Vandyck or Gainsborough
especially, you must be too much attracted by gentlemanly flimsiness.

257. Secondly, of published, or otherwise multiplied, art, such as you
may be able to get yourself, or to see at private houses or in shops,
the works of the following masters are the most desirable, after the
Turners, Rembrandts, and Dürers, which I have asked you to get first:


  1. Samuel Prout.[77]

All his published lithographic sketches are of the greatest value,
wholly unrivaled in power of composition, and in love and feeling of
architectural subject. His somewhat mannered linear execution, though
not to be imitated in your own sketches from Nature, may be occasionally
copied, for discipline's sake, with great advantage: it will give you a
peculiar steadiness of hand, not quickly attainable in any other way;
and there is no fear of your getting into any faultful mannerism as long
as you carry out the different modes of more delicate study above
recommended.

If you are interested in architecture, and wish to make it your chief
study, you should draw much from photographs of it; and then from the
architecture itself, with the same completion of detail and gradation,
only keeping the shadows of due paleness,--in photographs they are
always about four times as dark as they ought to be,--and treat
buildings with as much care and love as artists do their rock
foregrounds, drawing all the moss, and weeds, and stains upon them. But
if, without caring to understand architecture, you merely want the
picturesque character of it, and to be able to sketch it fast, you
cannot do better than take Prout for your exclusive master; only do not
think that you are copying Prout by drawing straight lines with dots at
the end of them. Get first his "Rhine," and draw the subjects that have
most hills, and least architecture in them, with chalk on smooth paper,
till you can lay on his broad flat tints, and get his gradations of
light, which are very wonderful; then take up the architectural subjects
in the "Rhine," and draw again and again the groups of figures, etc., in
his "Microcosm," and "Lessons on Light and Shadow." After that, proceed
to copy the grand subjects in the "Sketches in Flanders and Germany;" or
"in Switzerland and Italy," if you cannot get the Flanders; but the
Switzerland is very far inferior. Then work from Nature, not trying to
Proutize Nature, by breaking smooth buildings into rough ones, but only
drawing _what you see_, with Prout's simple method and firm lines. Don't
copy his colored works. They are good, but not at all equal to his chalk
and pencil drawings; and you will become a mere imitator, and a very
feeble imitator, if you use color at all in Prout's method. I have not
space to explain why this is so, it would take a long piece of
reasoning; trust me for the statement.


  2. John Lewis.

His sketches in Spain, lithographed by himself, are very valuable. Get
them, if you can, and also some engravings (about eight or ten, I think,
altogether) of wild beasts, executed by his own hand a long time ago;
they are very precious in every way. The series of the "Alhambra" is
rather slight, and few of the subjects are lithographed by himself;
still it is well worth having.

But let _no_ lithographic work come into the house, if you can help it,
nor even look at any, except Prout's, and those sketches of Lewis's.


  3. George Cruikshank.

If you ever happen to meet with the two volumes of "Grimm's German
Stories," which were illustrated by him long ago, pounce upon them
instantly; the etchings in them are the finest things, next to
Rembrandt's, that, as far as I know, have been done since etching was
invented. You cannot look at them too much, nor copy them too often.

All his works are very valuable, though disagreeable when they touch on
the worst vulgarities of modern life; and often much spoiled by a
curiously mistaken type of face, divided so as to give too much to the
mouth and eyes and leave too little for forehead, the eyes being set
about two thirds up, instead of at half the height of the head. But his
manner of work is always right; and his tragic power, though rarely
developed, and warped by habits of caricature, is, in reality, as great
as his grotesque power.

There is no fear of his hurting your taste, as long as your principal
work lies among art of so totally different a character as most of that
which I Have recommended to you; and you may, therefore, get great good
by copying almost anything of his that may come in your way; except only
his illustrations, lately published, to "Cinderella," and "Jack and the
Bean-stalk," and "Tom Thumb," which are much overlabored, and confused
in line. You should get them, but do not copy them.


  4. Alfred Rethel.

I only know two publications by him; one, the "Dance of Death," with
text by Reinick, published in Leipsic, but to be had now of any London
bookseller for the sum, I believe, of eighteen pence, and containing six
plates full of instructive character; the other, of two plates only,
"Death the Avenger," and "Death the Friend." These two are far superior
to the "Todtentanz," and, if you can get them, will be enough in
themselves to show all that Rethel can teach you. If you dislike ghastly
subjects, get "Death the Friend" only.


  5. Bewick.

The execution of the plumage in Bewick's birds is the most masterly
thing ever yet done in wood-cutting; it is worked just as Paul Veronese
would have worked in wood, had he taken to it. His vignettes, though too
coarse in execution, and vulgar in types of form, to be good copies,
show, nevertheless, intellectual power of the highest order; and there
are pieces of sentiment in them, either pathetic or satirical, which
have never since been equaled in illustrations of this simple kind; the
bitter intensity of the feeling being just like that which characterizes
some of the leading Pre-Raphaelites. Bewick is the Burns of painting.


  6. Blake.

The "Book of Job," engraved by himself, is of the highest rank in
certain characters of imagination and expression; in the mode of
obtaining certain effects of light it will also be a very useful example
to you. In expressing conditions of glaring and flickering light, Blake
is greater than Rembrandt.


  7. Richter.

I have already told you what to guard against in looking at his works. I
am a little doubtful whether I have done well in including them in this
catalogue at all; but the imaginations in them are so lovely and
numberless, that I must risk, for their sake, the chance of hurting you
a little in judgment of style. If you want to make presents of
story-books to children, his are the best you can now get; but his most
beautiful work, as far as I know, is his series of Illustrations to the
Lord's Prayer.


  8. Rossetti.

An edition of Tennyson, lately published, contains wood-cuts from
drawings by Rossetti and other chief Pre-Raphaelite masters. They are
terribly spoiled in the cutting, and generally the best part, the
expression of feature, _entirely_ lost;[78] still they are full of
instruction, and cannot be studied too closely. But observe, respecting
these wood-cuts, that if you have been in the habit of looking at much
spurious work, in which sentiment, action, and style are borrowed or
artificial, you will assuredly be offended at first by all genuine work,
which is intense in feeling. Genuine art, which is merely art, such as
Veronese's or Titian's, may not offend you, though the chances are that
you will not care about it; but genuine works of feeling, such as "Maud"
or "Aurora Leigh" in poetry, or the grand Pre-Raphaelite designs in
painting, are sure to offend you: and if you cease to work hard, and
persist in looking at vicious and false art, they will continue to
offend you. It will be well, therefore, to have one type of entirely
false art, in order to know what to guard against. Flaxman's outlines to
Dante contain, I think, examples of almost every kind of falsehood and
feebleness which it is possible for a trained artist, not base in
thought, to commit or admit, both in design and execution. Base or
degraded choice of subject, such as you will constantly find in Teniers
and others of the Dutch painters, I need not, I hope, warn you against;
you will simply turn away from it in disgust; while mere bad or feeble
drawing, which makes mistakes in every direction at once, cannot teach
you the particular sort of educated fallacy in question. But, in these
designs of Flaxman's, you have gentlemanly feeling, and fair knowledge
of anatomy, and firm setting down of lines, all applied in the
foolishest and worst possible way; you cannot have a more finished
example of learned error, amiable want of meaning, and bad drawing with
a steady hand.[79] Retzsch's outlines have more real material in them
than Flaxman's, occasionally showing true fancy and power; in artistic
principle they are nearly as bad, and in taste, worse. All outlines from
statuary, as given in works on classical art, will be very hurtful to
you if you in the least like them; and _nearly_ all finished line
engravings. Some particular prints I could name which possess
instructive qualities, but it would take too long to distinguish them,
and the best way is to avoid line engravings of figures altogether.[80]
If you happen to be a rich person, possessing quantities of them, and if
you are fond of the large finished prints from Raphael, Correggio, etc.,
it is wholly impossible that you can make any progress in knowledge of
real art till you have sold them all,--or burnt them, which would be a
greater benefit to the world. I hope that, some day, true and noble
engravings will be made from the few pictures of the great schools,
which the restorations undertaken by the modern managers of foreign
galleries may leave us; but the existing engravings have nothing
whatever in common with the good in the works they profess to represent,
and, if you like them, you like in the originals of them hardly anything
but their errors.

258. Finally, your judgment will be, of course, much affected by your
taste in literature. Indeed, I know many persons who have the purest
taste in literature, and yet false taste in art, and it is a phenomenon
which puzzles me not a little; but I have never known any one with false
taste in books, and true taste in pictures. It is also of the greatest
importance to you, not only for art's sake, but for all kinds of sake,
in these days of book deluge, to keep out of the salt swamps of
literature, and live on a little rocky island of your own, with a spring
and a lake in it, pure and good. I cannot, of course, suggest the choice
of your library to you: every several mind needs different books; but
there are some books which we all need, and assuredly, if you read
Homer,[81] Plato, Æschylus, Herodotus, Dante,[82] Shakspeare, and
Spenser, as much as you ought, you will not require wide enlargement of
shelves to right and left of them for purposes of perpetual study. Among
modern books avoid generally magazine and review literature. Sometimes
it may contain a useful abridgment or a wholesome piece of criticism;
but the chances are ten to one it will either waste your time or mislead
you. If you want to understand any subject whatever, read the best book
upon it you can hear of: not a review of the book. If you don't like the
first book you try, seek for another; but do not hope ever to understand
the subject without pains, by a reviewer's help. Avoid especially that
class of literature which has a knowing tone; it is the most poisonous
of all. Every good book, or piece of book, is full of admiration and
awe; it may contain firm assertion or stern satire, but it never sneers
coldly, nor asserts haughtily, and it always leads you to reverence or
love something with your whole heart. It is not always easy to
distinguish the satire of the venomous race of books from the satire of
the noble and pure ones; but in general you may notice that the
cold-blooded, Crustacean and Batrachian books will sneer at sentiment;
and the warm-blooded, human books, at sin. Then, in general, the more
you can restrain your serious reading to reflective or lyric poetry,
history, and natural history, avoiding fiction and the drama, the
healthier your mind will become. Of modern poetry, keep to Scott,
Wordsworth, Keats, Crabbe, Tennyson, the two Brownings, Thomas Hood,
Lowell, Longfellow, and Coventry Patmore, whose "Angel in the House" is
a most finished piece of writing, and the sweetest analysis we possess
of quiet modern domestic feeling; while Mrs. Browning's "Aurora Leigh"
is, as far as I know, the greatest poem which the century has produced
in any language. Cast Coleridge at once aside, as sickly and useless;
and Shelley, as shallow and verbose; Byron, until your taste is fully
formed, and you are able to discern the magnificence in him from the
wrong. Never read bad or common poetry, nor write any poetry yourself;
there is, perhaps, rather too much than too little in the world already.

259. Of reflective prose, read chiefly Bacon, Johnson, and Helps.
Carlyle is hardly to be named as a writer for "beginners," because his
teaching, though to some of us vitally necessary, may to others be
hurtful. If you understand and like him, read him; if he offends you,
you are not yet ready for him, and perhaps may never be so; at all
events, give him up, as you would sea-bathing if you found it hurt you,
till you are stronger. Of fiction, read "Sir Charles Grandison," Scott's
novels, Miss Edgeworth's, and, if you are a young lady, Madame de
Genlis', the French Miss Edgeworth; making these, I mean, your constant
companions. Of course you must, or will, read other books for amusement
once or twice; but you will find that these have an element of
perpetuity in them, existing in nothing else of their kind; while their
peculiar quietness and repose of manner will also be of the greatest
value in teaching you to feel the same characters in art. Read little at
a time, trying to feel interest in little things, and reading not so
much for the sake of the story as to get acquainted with the pleasant
people into whose company these writers bring you. A common book will
often give you much amusement, but it is only a noble book which will
give you dear friends. Remember, also, that it is of less importance to
you in your earlier years, that the books you read should be clever than
that they should be right. I do not mean oppressively or repulsively
instructive; but that the thoughts they express should be just, and the
feelings they excite generous. It is not necessary for you to read the
wittiest or the most suggestive books: it is better, in general, to hear
what is already known, and may be simply said. Much of the literature of
the present day, though good to be read by persons of ripe age, has a
tendency to agitate rather than confirm, and leaves its readers too
frequently in a helpless or hopeless indignation, the worst possible
state into which the mind of youth can be thrown. It may, indeed, become
necessary for you, as you advance in life, to set your hand to things
that need to be altered in the world, or apply your heart chiefly to
what must be pitied in it, or condemned; but, for a young person, the
safest temper is one of reverence, and the safest place one of
obscurity. Certainly at present, and perhaps through all your life, your
teachers are wisest when they make you content in quiet virtue, and that
literature and art are best for you which point out, in common life, and
in familiar things, the objects for hopeful labor, and for humble love.


FOOTNOTES:

  [75] I do not mean necessarily to imply inferiority of rank in
    saying that this second class of painters have questionable
    qualities. The greatest men have often many faults, and sometimes
    their faults are a part of their greatness; but such men are not, of
    course, to be looked upon by the student with absolute implicitness
    of faith.

  [76] Including, under this term, John Lewis, and William Hunt of the
    Old Water-color, who, take him all in all, is the best painter of
    still life, I believe, that ever existed.

  [77] The order in which I place these masters does not in the least
    imply superiority or inferiority. I wrote their names down as they
    occurred to me; putting Rossetti's last because what I had to say of
    him was connected with other subjects; and one or another will
    appear to you great, or be found by you useful, according to the
    kind of subjects you are studying.

  [78] This is especially the case in the St. Cecily, Rossetti's first
    illustration to the "Palace of Art," which would have been the best
    in the book had it been well engraved. The whole work should be
    taken up again, and done by line engraving, perfectly; and wholly
    from Pre-Raphaelite designs, with which no other modern work can
    bear the least comparison.

  [79] The praise I have given incidentally to Flaxman's sculpture in
    the "Seven Lamps," and elsewhere, refers wholly to his studies from
    Nature, and simple groups in marble, which were always good and
    interesting. Still, I have overrated him, even in this respect; and
    it is generally to be remembered that, in speaking of artists whose
    works I cannot be supposed to have specially studied, the errors I
    fall into will always be on the side of praise. For, of course,
    praise is most likely to be given when the thing praised is above
    one's knowledge; and, therefore, as our knowledge increases, such
    things may be found less praiseworthy than we thought. But blame can
    only be justly given when the thing blamed is below one's level of
    sight; and, practically, I never do blame anything until I have got
    well past it, and am certain that there is demonstrable falsehood in
    it. I believe, therefore, all my blame to be wholly trust-worthy,
    having never yet had occasion to repent of one depreciatory word
    that I have ever written, while I have often found that, with
    respect to things I had not time to study closely, I was led too far
    by sudden admiration, helped, perhaps, by peculiar associations, or
    other deceptive accidents; and this the more, because I never care
    to check an expression of delight, thinking the chances are, that,
    even if mistaken, it will do more good than harm; but I weigh every
    word of blame with scrupulous caution. I have sometimes erased a
    strong passage of blame from second editions of my books; but this
    was only when I found it offended the reader without convincing him,
    never because I repented of it myself.

  [80] Large line engravings, I mean, in which the lines, as such, are
    conspicuous. Small vignettes in line are often beautiful in figures
    no less than landscape; as, for instance, those from Stothard's
    drawings in Rogers's Italy; and, therefore, I have just recommended
    the vignettes to Tennyson to be done by line engraving.

  [81] Chapman's, if not the original.

  [82] Gary's or Cayley's, if not the original. I do not know which
    are the best translations of Plato. Herodotus and Æschylus can only
    be read in the original. It may seem strange that I name books like
    these for "beginners:" but all the greatest books contain food for
    all ages; and an intelligent and rightly bred youth or girl ought to
    enjoy much, even in Plato, by the time they are fifteen or sixteen.





       *       *       *       *       *



THE ETHICS OF THE DUST

TEN LECTURES TO LITTLE HOUSEWIVES

ON THE ELEMENTS OF CRYSTALLIZATION

BY JOHN RUSKIN, LL.D.,

HONORARY STUDENT OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND SLADE PROFESSOR OF FINE ART





DEDICATION.


TO THE REAL LITTLE HOUSEWIVES, WHOSE GENTLE LISTENING AND
THOUGHTFUL QUESTIONING ENABLED THE WRITER TO WRITE THIS BOOK, IT
IS DEDICATED WITH HIS LOVE.

CHRISTMAS, 1875.





CONTENTS.


LECTURE

   I. THE VALLEY OF DIAMONDS
  II. THE PYRAMID BUILDERS
 III. THE CRYSTAL LIFE
  IV. THE CRYSTAL ORDERS
   V. CRYSTAL VIRTUES
  VI. CRYSTAL QUARRELS
 VII. HOME VIRTUES
VIII. CRYSTAL CAPRICE
  IX. CRYSTAL SORROWS
   X. THE CRYSTAL REST
      NOTES





PERSONAE


OLD LECTURER (of incalculable age).

FLORRIE,
   on astronomical evidence presumed to be aged 9.

ISABEL ..................................... "  11.

MAY ........................................ "  11.

LILY ....................................... "  12.

KATHLEEN.................................... "  14.

LUCILLA..................................... "  15.

VIOLET ..................................... "  16.

DORA (who has the keys and is housekeeper)... " 17.

EGYPT (so called from her dark eyes) ....... "  17.

JESSIE (who somehow always makes the room
look brighter when she is in it) ........... "  18.

MARY (of whom everybody, including the Old
Lecturer, is in great awe) ................. "  20.





PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


I have seldom been more disappointed by the result of my best
pains given to any of my books, than by the earnest request of my
publisher, after the opinion of the public had been taken on the
"Ethics of the Dust," that I would "write no more in dialogue!"
However, I bowed to public judgment in this matter at once
(knowing also my inventive powers to be of the feeblest); but in
reprinting the book (at the prevailing request of my kind friend,
Mr. Henry Willett), I would pray the readers whom it may at first
offend by its disconnected method, to examine, nevertheless, with
care, the passages in which the principal speaker sums the
conclusions of any dialogue: for these summaries were written as
introductions, for young people, to all that I have said on the
same matters in my larger books; and, on re-reading them, they
satisfy me better, and seem to me calculated to be more generally
useful, than anything else I have done of the kind.





PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


The summary of the contents of the whole book, beginning, "You may
at least earnestly believe," at p. 215, is thus the clearest
exposition I have ever yet given of the general conditions under
which the Personal Creative Power manifests itself in the forms of
matter; and the analysis of heathen conceptions of Deity,
beginning at p. 217, and closing at p. 229, not only prefaces, but
very nearly supersedes, all that in more lengthy terms I have
since asserted, or pleaded for, in "Aratra Pentelici," and the
"Queen of the Air."

And thus, however the book may fail in its intention of suggesting
new occupations or interests to its younger readers, I think it
worth reprinting, in the way I have also reprinted "Unto this
Last,"--page for page; that the students of my more advanced works
may be able to refer to these as the original documents of them;
of which the most essential in this book are these following.

I. The explanation of the baseness of the avaricious functions of
the Lower Pthah, p. 54, with his beetle-gospel, p. 59, "that a
nation can stand on its vices better than on its virtues,"
explains the main motive of all my books on Political Economy.

II. The examination of the connection between stupidity and crime,
pp. 87-96, anticipated all that I have had to urge in Fors
Clavigera against the commonly alleged excuse for public
wickedness,--"They don't mean it--they don't know any better."

III. The examination of the roots of Moral Power, pp. 145-149, is
a summary of what is afterwards developed with utmost care in my
inaugural lecture at Oxford on the relation of Art to Morals;
compare in that lecture, sections 83-85, with the sentence in p.
147 of this book, "Nothing is ever done so as really to please our
Father, unless we would also have done it, though we had had no
Father to know of it."

This sentence, however, it must be observed, regards only the
general conditions of action in the children of God, in
consequence of which it is foretold of them by Christ that they
will say at the Judgment, "When saw we thee?" It does not refer to
the distinct cases in which virtue consists in faith given to
command, appearing to foolish human judgment inconsistent with the
Moral Law, as in the sacrifice of Isaac; nor to those in which any
directly-given command requires nothing more of virtue than
obedience.

IV. The subsequent pages, 149-158, were written especially to
check the dangerous impulses natural to the minds of many amiable
young women, in the direction of narrow and selfish religious
sentiment: and they contain, therefore, nearly everything which I
believe it necessary that young people should be made to observe,
respecting the errors of monastic life. But they in nowise enter
on the reverse, or favorable side: of which indeed I did not, and
as yet do not, feel myself able to speak with any decisiveness;
the evidence on that side, as stated in the text, having "never
yet been dispassionately examined."

V. The dialogue with Lucilla, beginning at p. 96, is, to my own
fancy, the best bit of conversation in the book; and the issue of
it, at p. 103, the most practically and immediately useful. For on
the idea of the inevitable weakness and corruption of human
nature, has logically followed, in our daily life, the horrible
creed of modern "Social science," that all social action must be
scientifically founded on vicious impulses. But on the habit of
measuring and reverencing our powers and talents that we may
kindly use them, will be founded a true Social science,
developing, by the employment of them, all the real powers and
honorable feelings of the race.

VI. Finally, the account given in the second and third lectures,
of the real nature and marvelousness of the laws of
crystallization, is necessary to the understanding of what farther
teaching of the beauty of inorganic form I may be able to give,
either in "Deucalion," or in my "Elements of Drawing." I wish
however that the second lecture had been made the beginning of the
book; and would fain now cancel the first altogether, which I
perceive to be both obscure and dull. It was meant for a
metaphorical description of the pleasures and dangers in the
kingdom of Mammon, or of worldly wealth; its waters mixed with
blood, its fruits entangled in thickets of trouble, and poisonous
when gathered; and the final captivity of its inhabitants within
frozen walls of cruelty and disdain. But the imagery is stupid and
ineffective throughout; and I retain this chapter only because I
am resolved to leave no room for any one to say that I have
withdrawn, as erroneous in principle, so much as a single sentence
of any of my books written since 1860.

One license taken in this book, however, though often permitted to
essay-writers for the relief of their dullness, I never mean to
take more,--the relation of composed metaphor as of actual dream,
pp. 27 and 171. I assumed, it is true, that in these places the
supposed dream would be easily seen to be an invention; but must
not any more, even under so transparent disguise, pretend to any
share in the real powers of Vision possessed by great poets and
true painters.

BRANTWOOD:

10th October, 1877.





PREFACE.


The following lectures were really given, in substance, at a
girls' school (far in the country); which, in the course of
various experiments on the possibility of introducing some better
practice of drawing into the modern scheme of female education, I
visited frequently enough to enable the children to regard me as a
friend. The Lectures always fell more or less into the form of
fragmentary answers to questions; and they are allowed to retain
that form, as, on the whole, likely to be more interesting than
the symmetries of a continuous treatise. Many children (for the
school was large) took part, at different times, in the
conversations; but I have endeavored, without confusedly
multiplying the number of imaginary speakers, to represent, as far
as I could, the general tone of comment and inquiry among young
people.

[Footnote: I do not mean, in saying "imaginary," that I have not
permitted to myself, in several instances, the affectionate
discourtesy of some reminiscence of personal character; for which
I must hope to be forgiven by my old pupils and their friends, as
I could not otherwise have written the book at all. But only two
sentences in all the dialogues, and the anecdote of "Dotty," are
literally "historical."]

It will be at once seen that these Lectures were not intended for
an introduction to mineralogy. Their purpose was merely to awaken
in the minds of young girls, who were ready to work earnestly and
systematically, a vital interest in the subject of their study. No
science can be learned in play; but it is often possible, in play,
to bring good fruit out of past labor, or show sufficient reasons
for the labor of the future.

The narrowness of this aim does not, indeed, justify the absence
of all reference to many important principles of structure, and
many of the most interesting orders of minerals; but I felt it
impossible to go far into detail without illustrations; and if
readers find this book useful, I may, perhaps, endeavor to
supplement it by illustrated notes of the more interesting
phenomena in separate groups of familiar minerals;--flints of the
chalk;--agates of the basalts;--and the fantastic and exquisitely
beautiful varieties of the vein-ores of the two commonest metals,
lead and iron. But I have always found that the less we speak of
our intentions, the more chance there is of our realizing them;
and this poor little book will sufficiently have done its work,
for the present, if it engages any of its young readers in study
which may enable them to despise it for its shortcomings.

DENMARK HILL: Christmas, 1865.





LECTURE 1.

THE VALLEY OF DIAMONDS


A very idle talk, by the dining-room fire, after raisin-and-almond
time.

OLD LECTURER; FLORRIE, ISABEL, MAY, LILY, and SIBYL.

OLD LECTURER (L.). Come here, Isabel, and tell me what the make-
believe was, this afternoon.

ISABEL (arranging herself very primly on the foot-stool). Such a
dreadful one! Florrie and I were lost in the Valley of Diamonds.

L. What! Sindbad's, which nobody could get out of? ISABEL. Yes;
but Florrie and I got out of it.

L. So I see. At least, I see you did; but are you sure Florrie
did?

ISABEL. Quite sure.

FLORRIE (putting her head round from behind L.'s sofa-cushion).
Quite sure. (Disappears again.)

L. I think I could be made to feel surer about it.

(FLORRIE reappears, gives L. a kiss, and again exit.)

L. I suppose it's all right; but how did you manage it?

ISABEL. Well, you know, the eagle that took up Sindbad was very
large--very, very large--the largest of all the eagles.

L. How large were the others?

ISABEL. I don't quite know--they were so far off. But this one
was, oh, so big! and it had great wings, as wide as--twice over
the ceiling. So, when it was picking up Sindbad, Florrie and I
thought it wouldn't know if we got on its back too: so I got up
first, and then I pulled up Florrie, and we put our arms round its
neck, and away it flew.

L. But why did you want to get out of the valley? and why haven't
you brought me some diamonds?

ISABEL. It was because of the serpents. I couldn't pick up even
the least little bit of a diamond, I was so frightened.

L. You should not have minded the serpents.

ISABEL. Oh, but suppose that they had minded me?

L. We all of us mind you a little too much, Isabel, I'm afraid.

ISABEL. No--no--no, indeed.

L. I tell you what, Isabel--I don't believe either Sindbad, or
Florrie, or you, ever were in the Valley of Diamonds.

ISABEL. You naughty! when I tell you we were!

L. Because you say you were frightened at the serpents.

ISABEL. And wouldn't you have been?

L. Not at those serpents. Nobody who really goes into the valley
is ever frightened at them--they are so beautiful.

ISABEL (suddenly serious). But there's no real Valley of Diamonds,
is there?

L. Yes, Isabel; very real indeed.

FLORRIE (reappearing). Oh, where? Tell me about it.

L. I cannot tell you a great deal about it; only I know it is very
different from Sindbad's. In his valley, there was only a diamond
lying here and there; but, in the real valley, there are diamonds
covering the grass in showers every morning, instead of dew: and
there are clusters of trees, which look like lilac trees; but, in
spring, all their blossoms are of amethyst.

FLORRIE. But there can't be any serpents there, then?

L. Why not?

FLORRIE. Because they don't come into such beautiful places.

L. I never said it was a beautiful place.

FLORRIE. What! not with diamonds strewed about it like dew?

L. That's according to your fancy, Florrie. For myself, I like dew
better.

ISABEL. Oh, but the dew won't stay; it all dries!

L. Yes; and it would be much nicer if the diamonds dried too, for
the people in the valley have to sweep them off the grass, in
heaps, whenever they want to walk on it; and then the heaps
glitter so, they hurt one's eyes.

FLORRIE. Now you're just playing, you know.

L. So are you, you know.

FLORRIE. Yes, but you mustn't play.

L. That's very hard, Florrie; why mustn't I, if you may?

FLORRIE. Oh, I may, because I'm little, but you mustn't, because
you're--(hesitates for a delicate expression of magnitude).

L. (rudely taking the first that comes). Because I'm big? No;
that's not the way of it at all, Florrie. Because you're little,
you should have very little play; and because I'm big I should
have a great deal.

ISABEL and FLORRIE (both). No--no--no--no. That isn't it at all.
(ISABEL sola, quoting Miss Ingelow.) "The lambs play always--they
know no better." (Putting her head very much on one side.) Ah, now
--please--please--tell us true; we want to know.

L. But why do you want me to tell you true, any more than the man
who wrote the "Arabian Nights"?

ISABEL. Because--because we like to know about real things; and
you can tell us, and we can't ask the man who wrote the stories.

L. What do you call real things?

ISABEL. Now, you know! Things that really are.

L. Whether you can see them or not?

ISABEL. Yes, if somebody else saw them.

L. But if nobody has ever seen them?

ISABEL. (evading the point). Well, but, you know, if there were a
real Valley of Diamonds, somebody MUST have seen it.

L. You cannot be so sure of that, Isabel. Many people go to real
places, and never see them; and many people pass through this
valley, and never see it.

FLORRIE. What stupid people they must be!

L. No, Florrie. They are much wiser than the people who do see it.

MAY. I think I know where it is.

ISABEL. Tell us more about it, and then we'll guess.

L. Well. There's a great broad road, by a river-side, leading up
into it.

MAY (gravely cunning, with emphasis on the last word). Does the
road really go UP?

L. You think it should go down into a valley? No, it goes up; this
is a valley among the hills, and it is as high as the clouds, and
is often full of them; so that even the people who most want to
see it, cannot, always.

ISABEL. And what is the river beside the road like?

L. It ought to be very beautiful, because it flows over diamond
sand--only the water is thick and red.

ISABEL. Red water?

L. It isn't all water.

MAY. Oh, please never mind that, Isabel, just now; I want to hear
about the valley.

L. So the entrance to it is very wide, under a steep rock; only
such numbers of people are always trying to get in, that they keep
jostling each other, and manage it but slowly. Some weak ones are
pushed back, and never get in at all; and make great moaning as
they go away: but perhaps they are none the worse in the end.

MAY. And when one gets in, what is it like?

L. It is up and down, broken kind of ground: the road stops
directly; and there are great dark rocks, covered all over with
wild gourds and wild vines; the gourds, if you cut them, are red,
with black seeds, like water-melons, and look ever so nice; and
the people of the place make a red pottage of them: but you must
take care not to eat any if you ever want to leave the valley
(though I believe putting plenty of meal in it makes it
wholesome). Then the wild vines have clusters of the color of
amber; and the people of the country say they are the grape of
Eshcol; and sweeter than honey: but, indeed, if anybody else
tastes them, they are like gall. Then there are thickets of
bramble, so thorny that they would be cut away directly, anywhere
else; but here they are covered with little cinque-foiled blossoms
of pure silver; and, for berries, they have clusters of rubies.
Dark rubies, which you only see are red after gathering them. But
you may fancy what blackberry parties the children have! Only they
get their frocks and hands sadly torn.

LILY. But rubies can't spot one's frocks, as blackberries do?

L. No; but I'll tell you what spots them--the mulberries. There
are great forests of them, all up the hills, covered with silk-
worms, some munching the leaves so loud that it is like mills at
work; and some spinning. But the berries are the blackest you ever
saw; and, wherever they fall, they stain a deep red; and nothing
ever washes it out again. And it is their juice, soaking through
the grass, which makes the river so red, because all its springs
are in this wood. And the boughs of the trees are twisted, as if
in pain, like old olive branches; and their leaves are dark. And
it is in these forests that the serpents are; but nobody is afraid
of them. They have fine crimson crests, and they are wreathed
about the wild branches, one in every tree, nearly; and they are
singing serpents, for the serpents are, in this forest, what birds
are in ours.

FLORRIE. Oh, I don't want to go there at all, now.

L. You would like it very much indeed, Florrie, if you were there.
The serpents would not bite you; the only fear would be of your
turning into one!

FLORRIE. Oh, dear, but that's worse.

L. You wouldn't think so if you really were turned into one,
Florrie; you would be very proud of your crest. And as long as you
were yourself (not that you could get there if you remained quite
the little Florrie you are now), you would like to hear the
serpents sing. They hiss a little through it, like the cicadas in
Italy; but they keep good time, and sing delightful melodies; and
most of them have seven heads, with throats which each take a note
of the octave; so that they can sing chords--it is very fine
indeed. And the fireflies fly round the edge of the forests all
the night long; you wade in fireflies, they make the fields look
like a lake trembling with reflection of stars; but you must take
care not to touch them, for they are not like Italian fireflies,
but burn, like real sparks.

FLORRIE. I don't like it at all; I'll never go there.

L. I hope not, Florrie; or at least that you will get out again if
you do. And it is very difficult to get out, for beyond these
serpent forests there are great cliffs of dead gold, which form a
labyrinth, winding always higher and higher, till the gold is all
split asunder by wedges of ice; and glaciers, welded, half of ice
seven times frozen, and half of gold seven times frozen, hang down
from them, and fall in thunder, cleaving into deadly splinters,
like the Cretan arrowheads; and into a mixed dust of snow and
gold, ponderous, yet which the mountain whirlwinds are able to
lift and drive in wreaths and pillars, hiding the paths with a
burial cloud, fatal at once with wintry chill, and weight of
golden ashes. So the wanderers in the labyrinth fall, one by one,
and are buried there:--yet, over the drifted graves, those who are
spared climb to the last, through coil on coil of the path;--for
at the end of it they see the king of the valley, sitting on his
throne: and beside him (but it is only a false vision), spectra of
creatures like themselves, sit on thrones, from which they seem to
look down on all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
And on the canopy of his throne there is an inscription in fiery
letters, which they strive to read, but cannot; for it is written
in words which are like the words of all languages, and yet are of
none. Men say it is more like their own tongue to the English than
it is to any other nation; but the only record of it is by an
Italian, who heard the king himself cry it as a war cry, "Pape
Satan, Pape Satan Aleppe." [Footnote: Dante, Inf. 7, I.]

SIBYL. But do they all perish there? You said there was a way
through the valley, and out of it.

L. Yes; but few find it. If any of them keep to the grass paths,
where the diamonds are swept aside; and hold their hands over
their eyes so as not to be dazzled, the grass paths lead forward
gradually to a place where one sees a little opening in the golden
rocks. You were at Chamouni last year, Sibyl; did your guide
chance to show you the pierced rock of the Aiguille du Midi?

SIBYL. No, indeed, we only got up from Geneva on Monday night; and
it rained all Tuesday; and we had to be back at Geneva again,
early on Wednesday morning.

L. Of course. That is the way to see a country in a Sibylline
manner, by inner consciousness: but you might have seen the
pierced rock in your drive up, or down, if the clouds broke: not
that there is much to see in it; one of the crags of the aiguille-
edge, on the southern slope of it, is struck sharply through, as
by an awl, into a little eyelet hole; which you may see, seven
thousand feet above the valley (as the clouds flit past behind it,
or leave the sky), first white, and then dark blue. Well, there's
just such an eyelet hole in one of the upper crags of the Diamond
Valley; and, from a distance, you think that it is no bigger than
the eye of a needle. But if you get up to it, they say you may
drive a loaded camel through it, and that there are fine things on
the other side, but I have never spoken with anybody who had been
through.

SIBYL. I think we understand it now. We will try to write it down,
and think of it.

L. Meantime, Florrie, though all that I have been telling you is
very true, yet you must not think the sort of diamonds that people
wear in rings and necklaces are found lying about on the grass.
Would you like to see how they really are found?

FLORRIE. Oh, yes--yes.

L. Isabel--or Lily--run up to my room and fetch me the little box
with a glass lid, out of the top drawer of the chest of drawers.
(Race between LILY and ISABEL.)

(Re-enter ISABEL with the box, very much out of breath. LILY
behind.)

L. Why, you never can beat Lily in a race on the stairs, can you,
Isabel?

ISABEL (panting). Lily--beat me--ever so far--but she gave me--the
box--to carry in.

L. Take off the lid, then; gently.

FLORRIE (after peeping in, disappointed). There's only a great
ugly brown stone!

L. Not much more than that, certainly, Florrie, if people were
wise. But look, it is not a single stone; but a knot of pebbles
fastened together by gravel: and in the gravel, or compressed
sand, if you look close, you will see grains of gold glittering
everywhere, all through; and then, do you see these two white
beads, which shine, as if they had been covered with grease?

FLORRIE. May I touch them?

L. Yes; you will find they are not greasy, only very smooth. Well,
those are the fatal jewels; native here in their dust with gold,
so that you may see, cradled here together, the two great enemies
of mankind,--the strongest of all malignant physical powers that
have tormented our race.

SIBYL. Is that really so? I know they do great harm; but do they
not also do great good?

L. My dear child, what good? Was any woman, do you suppose, ever
the better for possessing diamonds? but how many have been made
base, frivolous, and miserable by desiring them? Was ever man the
better for having coffers full of gold? But who shall measure the
guilt that is incurred to fill them? Look into the history of any
civilized nations; analyze, with reference to this one cause of
crime and misery, the lives and thoughts of their nobles, priests,
merchants, and men of luxurious life. Every other temptation is at
last concentrated into this: pride, and lust, and envy, and anger
all give up their strength to avarice. The sin of the whole world
is essentially the sin of Judas. Men do not disbelieve their
Christ; but they sell Him.

SIBYL. But surely that is the fault of human nature? it is not
caused by the accident, as it were, of there being a pretty metal,
like gold, to be found by digging. If people could not find that,
would they not find something else, and quarrel for it instead?

L. No. Wherever legislators have succeeded in excluding, for a
time, jewels and precious metals from among national possessions,
the national spirit has remained healthy. Covetousness is not
natural to man--generosity is; but covetousness must be excited by
a special cause, as a given disease by a given miasma; and the
essential nature of a material for the excitement of covetousness
is, that it shall be a beautiful thing which can be retained
without a use. The moment we can use our possessions to any good
purpose ourselves, the instinct of communicating that use to
others rises side by side with our power. If you can read a book
rightly, you will want others to hear it; if you can enjoy a
picture rightly, you will want others to see it: learn how to
manage a horse, a plough, or a ship, and you will desire to make
your subordinates good horsemen, ploughmen, or sailors; you will
never be able to see the fine instrument you are master of,
abused; but, once fix your desire on anything useless, and all the
purest pride and folly in your heart will mix with the desire, and
make you at last wholly inhuman, a mere ugly lump of stomach and
suckers, like a cuttle-fish.

SIBYL. But surely, these two beautiful things, gold and diamonds,
must have been appointed to some good purpose?

L. Quite conceivably so, my dear: as also earthquakes and
pestilences; but of such ultimate purposes we can have no sight.
The practical, immediate office of the earthquake and pestilence
is to slay us, like moths; and, as moths, we shall be wise to live
out of their way. So, the practical, immediate office of gold and
diamonds is the multiplied destruction of souls (in whatever sense
you have been taught to understand that phrase); and the paralysis
of wholesome human effort and thought on the face of God's earth:
and a wise nation will live out of the way of them. The money
which the English habitually spend in cutting diamonds would, in
ten years, if it were applied to cutting rocks instead, leave no
dangerous reef nor difficult harbor round the whole island coast.
Great Britain would be a diamond worth cutting, indeed, a true
piece of regalia. (Leaves this to their thoughts for a little
while.) Then, also, we poor mineralogists might sometimes have the
chance of seeing a fine crystal of diamond unhacked by the
jeweler.

SIBYL. Would it be more beautiful uncut?

L. No; but of infinite interest. We might even come to know
something about the making of diamonds.

SIBYL. I thought the chemists could make them already?

L. In very small black crystals, yes; but no one knows how they
are formed where they are found; or if indeed they are formed
there at all. These, in my hand, look as if they had been swept
down with the gravel and gold; only we can trace the gravel and
gold to their native rocks, but not the diamonds. Read the account
given of the diamond in any good work on mineralogy;--you will
find nothing but lists of localities of gravel, or conglomerate
rock (which is only an old indurated gravel). Some say it was once
a vegetable gum; but it may have been charred wood; but what one
would like to know is, mainly, why charcoal should make itself
into diamonds in India, and only into black lead in Borrowdale.

SIBYL. Are they wholly the same, then?

L. There is a little iron mixed with our black lead; but nothing
to hinder its crystallization. Your pencils in fact are all
pointed with formless diamond, though they would be H H H pencils
to purpose, if it crystallized.

SIBYL. But what IS crystallization?

L. A pleasant question, when one's half asleep, and it has been
tea-time these two hours. What thoughtless things girls are!

SYBIL. Yes, we are; but we want to know, for all that.

L. My dear, it would take a week to tell you.

SIBYL. Well, take it, and tell us.

L. But nobody knows anything about it.

SIBYL. Then tell us something that nobody knows.

L. Get along with you, and tell Dora to make tea.

(The house rises; but of course the LECTURER wanted to be forced
to lecture again, and was.)





LECTURE 2.

THE PYRAMID BUILDERS


In the large Schoolroom, to which everybody has been summoned by
ringing of the great bell.

L. So you have all actually come to hear about crystallization! I
cannot conceive why unless the little ones think that the
discussion may involve some reference to sugar-candy.

(Symptoms of high displeasure among the younger members of
council. ISABEL frowns severely at L., and shakes her head
violently.)

My dear children, if you knew it, you are yourselves, at this
moment, as you sit in your ranks, nothing, in the eye of a
mineralogist, but a lovely group of rosy sugar-candy, arranged by
atomic forces. And even admitting you to be something more, you
have certainly been crystallizing without knowing it. Did not I
hear a great hurrying and whispering ten minutes ago, when you
were late in from the playground; and thought you would not all be
quietly seated by the time I was ready:--besides some discussion
about places--something about "it's not being fair that the little
ones should always be nearest?" Well, you were then all being
crystallized. When you ran in from the garden, and against one
another in the passages, you were in what mineralogists would call
a state of solution, and gradual confluence; when you got seated
in those orderly rows, each in her proper place, you became
crystalline. That is just what the atoms of a mineral do, if they
can, whenever they get disordered: they get into order again as
soon as may be.

I hope you feel inclined to interrupt me, and say, "But we know
our places; how do the atoms know theirs? And sometimes we dispute
about our places; do the atoms--(and, besides, we don't like being
compared to atoms at all)--never dispute about theirs?" Two wise
questions these, if you had a mind to put them! it was long before
I asked them myself, of myself. And I will not call you atoms any
more. May I call you--let me see--"primary molecules?" (General
dissent indicated in subdued but decisive murmurs.) No! not even,
in familiar Saxon, "dust"?

(Pause, with expression on faces of sorrowful doubt; LILY gives
voice to the general sentiment in a timid "Please don't.")

No, children, I won't call you that; and mind, as you grow up,
that you do not get into an idle and wicked habit of calling
yourselves that. You are something better than dust, and have
other duties to do than ever dust can do; and the bonds of
affection you will enter into are better than merely "getting in
to order." But see to it, on the other hand, that you always
behave at least as well as "dust;" remember, it is only on
compulsion, and while it has no free permission to do as it likes,
that IT ever gets out of order; but sometimes, with some of us,
the compulsion has to be the other way--hasn't it? (Remonstratory
whispers, expressive of opinion that the LECTURER is becoming too
personal.) I'm not looking at anybody in particular--indeed I am
not. Nay, if you blush so, Kathleen, how can one help looking?
We'll go back to the atoms.

"How do they know their places?" you asked, or should have asked.
Yes, and they have to do much more than know them: they have to
find their way to them, and that quietly and at once, without
running against each other.

We may, indeed, state it briefly thus:--Suppose you have to build
a castle, with towers and roofs and buttresses, out of bricks of a
given shape, and that these bricks are all lying in a huge heap at
the bottom, in utter confusion, upset out of carts at random. You
would have to draw a great many plans, and count all your bricks,
and be sure you had enough for this and that tower, before you
began, and then you would have to lay your foundation, and add
layer by layer, in order, slowly.

But how would you be astonished, in these melancholy days, when
children don't read children's books, nor believe any more in
fairies, if suddenly a real benevolent fairy, in a bright brick-
red gown, were to rise in the midst of the red bricks, and to tap
the heap of them with her wand, and say, "Bricks, bricks, to your
places!" and then you saw in an instant the whole heap rise in the
air, like a swarm of red bees, and--you have been used to see bees
make a honeycomb, and to think that strange enough, but now you
would see the honeycomb make itself!--You want to ask something,
Florrie, by the look of your eyes.

FLORRIE. Are they turned into real bees, with stings?

L. No, Florrie; you are only to fancy flying bricks, as you saw
the slates flying from the roof the other day in the storm; only
those slates didn't seem to know where they were going, and,
besides, were going where they had no business: but my spell-bound
bricks, though they have no wings, and what is worse, no heads and
no eyes, yet find their way in the air just where they should
settle, into towers and roofs, each flying to his place and
fastening there at the right moment, so that every other one shall
fit to him in his turn.

LILY. But who are the fairies, then, who build the crystals?

L. There is one great fairy, Lily, who builds much more than
crystals; but she builds these also. I dreamed that I saw her
building a pyramid, the other day, as she used to do, for the
Pharaohs.

ISABEL. But that was only a dream?

L. Some dreams are truer than some wakings, Isabel; but I won't
tell it you unless you like.

ISABEL. Oh, please, please.

L. You are all such wise children, there's no talking to you; you
won't believe anything.

LILY. No, we are not wise, and we will believe anything, when you
say we ought.

L. Well, it came about this way. Sibyl, do you recollect that
evening when we had been looking at your old cave by Cumae, and
wondering why you didn't live there still: and then we wondered
how old you were; and Egypt said you wouldn't tell, and nobody
else could tell but she; and you laughed--I thought very gayly for
a Sibyl--and said you would harness a flock of cranes for us, and
we might fly over to Egypt if we liked, and see.

SIBYL. Yes, and you went, and couldn't find out after all!

L. Why, you know, Egypt had been just doubling that third pyramid
of hers; [Footnote: Note i.] and making a new entrance into it;
and a fine entrance it was! First, we had to go through an ante-
room, which had both its doors blocked up with stones; and then we
had three granite portcullises to pull up, one after another; and
the moment we had got under them, Egypt signed to somebody above;
and down they came again behind us, with a roar like thunder, only
louder; then we got into a passage fit for nobody but rats, and
Egypt wouldn't go any further herself, but said we might go on if
we liked; and so we came to a hole in the pavement, and then to a
granite trap-door--and then we thought we had gone quite far
enough, and came back, and Egypt laughed at us.

EGYPT. You would not have had me take my crown off, and stoop all
the way down a passage fit only for rats?

L. It was not the crown, Egypt--you know that very well. It was
the flounces that would not let you go any further. I suppose,
however, you wear them as typical of the inundation of the Nile,
so it is all right.

ISABEL. Why didn't you take me with you? Where rats can go, mice
can. I wouldn't have come back.

L. No, mousie; you would have gone on by yourself, and you might
have waked one of Pasht's cats,[Footnote: Note iii] and it would
have eaten you. I was very glad you were not there. But after all
this, I suppose the imagination of the heavy granite blocks and
the underground ways had troubled me, and dreams are often shaped
in a strange opposition to the impressions that have caused them;
and from all that we had been reading in Bunsen about stones that
couldn't be lifted with levers, I began to dream about stones that
lifted themselves with wings.

SIBYL. Now you must just tell us all about it.

L. I dreamed that I was standing beside the lake, out of whose
clay the bricks were made for the great pyramid of Asychis.
[Footnote: Note ii] They had just been all finished, and were
lying by the lake margin, in long ridges, like waves. It was near
evening; and as I looked towards the sunset, I saw a thing like a
dark pillar standing where the rock of the desert stoops to the
Nile valley. I did not know there was a pillar there, and wondered
at it; and it grew larger, and glided nearer, becoming like the
form of a man, but vast, and it did not move its feet, but glided,
like a pillar of sand. And as it drew nearer, I looked by chance
past it, towards the sun; and saw a silver cloud, which was of all
the clouds closest to the sun (and in one place crossed it), draw
itself back from the sun, suddenly. And it turned, and shot
towards the dark pillar; leaping in an arch, like an arrow out of
a bow. And I thought it was lightning; but when it came near the
shadowy pillar, it sank slowly down beside it, and changed into
the shape of a woman, very beautiful, and with a strength of deep
calm in her blue eyes. She was robed to the feet with a white
robe; and above that, to her knees, by the cloud which I had seen
across the sun; but all the golden ripples of it had become
plumes, so that it had changed into two bright wings like those of
a vulture, which wrapped round her to her knees. She had a
weaver's shuttle hanging over her shoulder, by the thread of it,
and in her left hand, arrows, tipped with fire.

ISABEL (clapping her hands). Oh! it was Neith, it was Neith! I
know now.

L. Yes; it was Neith herself; and as the two great spirits came
nearer to me, I saw they were the Brother and Sister--the pillared
shadow was the Greater Pthah.[Footnote: Note iii] And I heard them
speak, and the sound of their words was like a distant singing. I
could not understand the words one by one; yet their sense came to
me; and so I knew that Neith had come down to see her brother's
work, and the work that he had put into the mind of the king to
make his servants do. And she was displeased at it; because she
saw only pieces of dark clay; and no porphyry, nor marble, nor any
fair stone that men might engrave the figures of the gods upon.
And she blamed her brother, and said, "Oh, Lord of truth! is this
then thy will, that men should mold only foursquare pieces of
clay: and the forms of the gods no more?" Then the Lord of truth
sighed, and said, "Oh! sister, in truth they do not love us; why
should they set up our images? Let them do what they may, and not
lie--let them make their clay foursquare; and labor; and perish."

Then Neith's dark blue eyes grew darker, and she said, "Oh, Lord
of truth! why should they love us? their love is vain; or fear us?
for their fear is base. Yet let them testify of us, that they knew
we lived forever."

But the Lord of truth answered, "They know, and yet they know not.
Let them keep silence; for their silence only is truth."

But Neith answered, "Brother, wilt thou also make league with
Death, because Death is true? Oh! thou potter, who hast cast these
human things from thy wheel, many to dishonor, and few to honor;
wilt thou not let them so much as see my face; but slay them in
slavery?"

But Pthah only answered, "Let them build, sister, let them build."

And Neith answered, "What shall they build, if I build not with
them?"

And Pthah drew with his measuring rod upon the sand. And I saw
suddenly, drawn on the sand, the outlines of great cities, and of
vaults, and domes, and aqueducts, and bastions, and towers,
greater than obelisks, covered with black clouds. And the wind
blew ripples of sand amidst the lines that Pthah drew, and the
moving sand was like the marching of men. But I saw that wherever
Neith looked at the lines, they faded, and were effaced.

"Oh, Brother!" she said at last, "what is this vanity? If I, who
am Lady of wisdom, do not mock the children of men, why shouldst
thou mock them, who art Lord of truth?" But Pthah answered, "They
thought to bind me; and they shall be bound. They shall labor in
the fire for vanity."

And Neith said, looking at the sand, "Brother, there is no true
labor here--there is only weary life and wasteful death."

And Pthah answered, "Is it not truer labor, sister, than thy
sculpture of dreams?" Then Neith smiled; and stopped suddenly.

She looked to the sun; its edge touched the horizon-edge of the
desert. Then she looked to the long heaps of pieces of clay, that
lay, each with its blue shadow, by the lake shore.

"Brother," she said, "how long will this pyramid of thine be in
building?"

"Thoth will have sealed the scroll of the years ten times, before
the summit is laid."

"Brother, thou knowest not how to teach thy children to labor,"
answered Neith. "Look! I must follow Phre beyond Atlas; shall I
build your pyramid for you before he goes down?" And Pthah
answered, "Yea, sister, if thou canst put thy winged shoulders to
such work." And Neith drew herself to her height; and I heard a
clashing pass through the plumes of her wings, and the asp stood
up on her helmet, and fire gathered in her eyes. And she took one
of the flaming arrows out of the sheaf in her left hand, and
stretched it out over the heaps of clay. And they rose up like
flights of locusts, and spread themselves in the air, so that it
grew dark in a moment. Then Neith designed them places with her
arrow point; and they drew into ranks, like dark clouds laid level
at morning. Then Neith pointed with her arrow to the north, and to
the south, and to the east, and to the west, and the flying motes
of earth drew asunder into four great ranked crowds; and stood,
one in the north, and one in the south, and one in the east, and
one in the west--one against another. Then Neith spread her wings
wide for an instant, and closed them with a sound like the sound
of a rushing sea; and waved her hand towards the foundation of the
pyramid, where it was laid on the brow of the desert. And the four
flocks drew together and sank down, like sea-birds settling to a
level rock, and when they met, there was a sudden flame, as broad
as the pyramid, and as high as the clouds; and it dazzled me; and
I closed my eyes for an instant; and when I looked again, the
pyramid stood on its rock, perfect; and purple with the light from
the edge of the sinking sun.

THE YOUNGER CHILDREN (variously pleased). I'm so glad! How nice!
But what did Pthah say?

L. Neith did not wait to hear what he would say. When I turned
back to look at her, she was gone; and I only saw the level white
cloud form itself again, close to the arch of the sun as it sank.
And as the last edge of the sun disappeared, the form of Pthah
faded into a mighty shadow, and so passed away.

EGYPT. And was Neith's pyramid left?

L. Yes; but you could not think, Egypt, what a strange feeling of
utter loneliness came over me when the presence of the two gods
passed away. It seemed as if I had never known what it was to be
alone before; and the unbroken line of the desert was terrible.

EGYPT. I used to feel that, when I was queen: sometimes I had to
carve gods, for company, all over my palace. I would fain have
seen real ones, if I could.

L. But listen a moment yet, for that was not quite all my dream.
The twilight drew swiftly to the dark, and I could hardly see the
great pyramid; when there came a heavy murmuring sound in the air;
and a horned beetle, with terrible claws, fell on the sand at my
feet, with a blow like the beat of a hammer. Then it stood up on
its hind claws, and waved its pincers at me: and its fore claws
became strong arms, and hands; one grasping real iron pincers, and
the other a huge hammer; and it had a helmet on its head, without
any eyelet holes, that I could see. And its two hind claws became
strong crooked legs, with feet bent inwards. And so there stood by
me a dwarf, in glossy black armor, ribbed and embossed like a
beetle's back, leaning on his hammer. And I could not speak for
wonder; but he spoke with a murmur like the dying away of a beat
upon a bell. He said, "I will make Neith's great pyramid small. I
am the lower Pthah; and have power over fire. I can wither the
strong things, and strengthen the weak; and everything that is
great I can make small, and everything that is little I can make
great." Then he turned to the angle of the pyramid and limped
towards it. And the pyramid grew deep purple; and then red like
blood, and then pale rose-color, like fire. And I saw that it
glowed with fire from within. And the lower Pthah touched it with
the hand that held the pincers; and it sank down like the sand in
an hour-glass,--then drew itself together, and sank, still, and
became nothing, it seemed to me; but the armed dwarf stooped down,
and took it into his hand, and brought it to me, saying,
"Everything that is great I can make like this pyramid; and give
into men's hands to destroy." And I saw that he had a little
pyramid in his hand, with as many courses in it as the large one;
and built like that,--only so small. And because it glowed still,
I was afraid to touch it; but Pthah said, "Touch it--for I have
bound the fire within it, so that it cannot burn." So I touched
it, and took it into my own hand; and it was cold; only red, like
a ruby. And Pthah laughed, and became like a beetle again, and
buried himself in the sand, fiercely; throwing it back over his
shoulders. And it seemed to me as if he would draw me down with
him into the sand; and I started back, and woke, holding the
little pyramid so fast in my hand that it hurt me.

EGYPT. Holding WHAT in your hand?

L. The little pyramid.

EGYPT. Neith's pyramid?

L. Neith's, I believe; though not built for Asychis. I know only
that it is a little rosy transparent pyramid, built of more
courses of bricks than I can count, it being made so small. You
don't believe me, of course, Egyptian infidel; but there it is.
(Giving crystal of rose Fluor.)

(Confused examination by crowded audience, over each other's
shoulders and under each other's arms. Disappointment begins to
manifest itself.)

SIBYL. (not quite knowing why she and others are disappointed).
But you showed us this the other day!

L. Yes; but you would not look at it the other day.

SIBYL. But was all that fine dream only about this?

L. What finer thing could a dream be about than this? It is small,
if you will; but when you begin to think of things rightly, the
ideas of smallness and largeness pass away. The making of this
pyramid was in reality just as wonderful as the dream I have been
telling you, and just as incomprehensible. It was not, I suppose,
as swift, but quite as grand things are done as swiftly. When
Neith makes crystals of snow, it needs a great deal more
marshaling of the atoms, by her flaming arrows, than it does to
make crystals like this one; and that is done in a moment.

EGYPT. But how you DO puzzle us! Why do you say Neith does it? You
don't mean that she is a real spirit, do you?

L. What _I_ mean, is of little consequence. What the Egyptians
meant, who called her "Neith,"--or Homer, who called her
"Athena,"--or Solomon, who called her by a word which the Greeks
render as "Sophia," you must judge for yourselves. But her
testimony is always the same, and all nations have received it: "I
was by Him as one brought up with Him, and I was daily His
delight; rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth, and my
delights were with the sons of men."

MARY. But is not that only a personification?

L. If it be, what will you gain by unpersonifying it, or what
right have you to do so? Cannot you accept the image given you, in
its life; and listen, like children, to the words which chiefly
belong to you as children: "I love them that love me, and those
that seek me early shall find me"?

(They are all quiet for a minute or two; questions begin to appear
in their eyes.)

I cannot talk to you any more to-day. Take that rose-crystal away
with you, and think.





LECTURE 3.

THE CRYSTAL LIFE


A very dull Lecture, willfully brought upon themselves by the
elder children. Some of the young ones have, however, managed to
get in by mistake. SCENE, the Schoolroom.

L. So I am to stand up here merely to be asked questions, to-day,
Miss Mary, am I?

MARY. Yes; and you must answer them plainly; without telling us
any more stories. You are quite spoiling the children: the poor
little things' heads are turning round like kaleidoscopes: and
they don't know in the least what you mean. Nor do we old ones,
either, for that matter: to-day you must really tell us nothing
but facts.

L. I am sworn; but you won't like it, a bit.

MARY. Now, first of all, what do you mean by "bricks"?--Are the
smallest particles of minerals all of some accurate shape, like
bricks?

L. I do not know. Miss Mary; I do not even know if anybody knows.
The smallest atoms which are visibly and practically put together
to make large crystals, may better be described as "limited in
fixed directions" than as "of fixed forms." But I can tell you
nothing clear about ultimate atoms: you will find the idea of
little bricks, or, perhaps, of little spheres, available for all
the uses you will have to put it to.

MARY. Well, it's very provoking; one seems always to be stopped
just when one is coming to the very thing one wants to know.

L. No, Mary, for we should not wish to know anything but what is
easily and assuredly knowable. There's no end to it. If I could
show you, or myself, a group of ultimate atoms, quite clearly, in
this magnifying glass, we should both be presently vexed, because
we could not break them in two pieces, and see their insides.

MARY. Well then, next, what do you mean by the flying of the
bricks? What is it the atoms do, that is like flying?

L. When they are dissolved, or uncrystallized, they are really
separated from each other, like a swarm of gnats in the air, or
like a shoal of fish in the sea;--generally at about equal
distances. In currents of solutions, or at different depths of
them, one part may be more full of the dissolved atoms than
another; but on the whole, you may think of them as equidistant,
like the spots in the print of your gown. If they are separated by
force of heat only, the substance is said to be melted; if they
are separated by any other substance, as particles of sugar by
water, they are said to be "dissolved." Note this distinction
carefully, all of you.

DORA. I will be very particular. When next you tell me there isn't
sugar enough in your tea, I will say, "It is not yet dissolved,
sir."

L. I tell you what shall be dissolved, Miss Dora; and that's the
present parliament, if the members get too saucy.

(DORA folds her hands and casts down her eyes.)

L. (proceeds in state). Now, Miss Mary, you know already, I
believe, that nearly everything will melt, under a sufficient
heat, like wax. Limestone melts (under pressure); sand melts;
granite melts; the lava of a volcano is a mixed mass of many kinds
of rocks, melted: and any melted substance nearly always, if not
always, crystallizes as it cools; the more slowly the more
perfectly. Water melts at what we call the freezing, but might
just as wisely, though not as conveniently, call the melting,
point; and radiates as it cools into the most beautiful of all
known crystals. Glass melts at a greater heat, and will
crystallize, if you let it cool slowly enough, in stars, much like
snow. Gold needs more heat to melt it, but crystallizes also
exquisitely, as I will presently show you. Arsenic and sulphur
crystallize from their vapors. Now in any of these cases, either
of melted, dissolved, or vaporous bodies, the particles are
usually separated from each other, either by heat, or by an
intermediate substance; and in crystallizing they are both brought
nearer to each other, and packed, so as to fit as closely as
possible: the essential part of the business being not the
bringing together, but the packing. Who packed your trunk for you,
last holidays, Isabel?

ISABEL. Lily does, always.

L. And how much can you allow for Lily's good packing, in guessing
what will go into the trunk?

ISABEL. Oh! I bring twice as much as the trunk holds. Lily always
gets everything in.

LILY. Ah! but, Isey, if you only knew what a time it takes! and
since you've had those great hard buttons on your frocks, I can't
do anything with them. Buttons won't go anywhere, you know.

L. Yes, Lily, it would be well if she only knew what a time it
takes; and I wish any of us knew what a time crystallization
takes, for that is consummately fine packing. The particles of the
rock are thrown down, just as Isabel brings her things--in a heap;
and innumerable Lilies, not of the valley, but of the rock, come
to pack them. But it takes such a time!

However, the best--out and out the best--way of understanding the
thing, is to crystallize yourselves.

THE AUDIENCE. Ourselves!

L. Yes; not merely as you did the other day, carelessly on the
schoolroom forms; but carefully and finely, out in the playground.
You can play at crystallization there as much as you please.

KATHLEEN and JESSIE. Oh! how?--how?

L. First, you must put yourselves together, as close as you can,
in the middle of the grass, and form, for first practice, any
figure you like.

JESSIE. Any dancing figure, do you mean?

L. No; I mean a square, or a cross, or a diamond. Any figure you
like, standing close together. You had better outline it first on
the turf, with sticks, or pebbles, so as to see that it is rightly
drawn; then get into it and enlarge or diminish it at one side,
till you are all quite in it, and no empty space left.

DORA. Crinoline and all?

L. The crinoline may stand eventually for rough crystalline
surface, unless you pin it in; and then you may make a polished
crystal of yourselves.

LILY. Oh, we'll pin it in--we'll pin it in!

L. Then, when you are all in the figure, let every one note her
place, and who is next her on each side; and let the outsiders
count how many places they stand from the corners.

KATHLEEN. Yes, yes,--and then?

L. Then you must scatter all over the playground--right over it
from side to side, and end to end; and put yourselves all at equal
distances from each other, everywhere. You needn't mind doing it
very accurately, but so as to be nearly equidistant; not less than
about three yards apart from each other, on every side.

JESSIE. We can easily cut pieces of string of equal length, to
hold. And then? L. Then, at a given signal, let everybody walk, at
the same rate, towards the outlined figure in the middle. You had
better sing as you walk; that will keep you in good time. And as
you close in towards it, let each take her place, and the next
comers fit themselves in beside the first ones, till you are all
in the figure again.

KATHLEEN. Oh! how we shall run against each other. What fun it
will be!

L. No, no, Miss Katie; I can't allow any running against each
other. The atoms never do that, whatever human creatures do. You
must all know your places, and find your way to them without
jostling.

LILY. But how ever shall we do that?

ISABEL. Mustn't the ones in the middle be the nearest, and the
outside ones farther off--when we go away to scatter, I mean?

L. Yes; you must be very careful to keep your order; you will soon
find out how to do it; it is only like soldiers forming square,
except that each must stand still in her place as she reaches it,
and the others come round her; and you will have much more
complicated figures, afterwards, to form, than squares.

ISABEL. I'll put a stone at my place: then I shall know it.

L. You might each nail a bit of paper to the turf, at your place,
with your name upon it: but it would be of no use, for if you
don't know your places, you will make a fine piece of business of
it, while you are looking for your names. And, Isabel, if with a
little head, and eyes, and a brain (all of them very good and
serviceable of their kind, as such things go), you think you
cannot know your place without a stone at it, after examining it
well,--how do you think each atom knows its place, when it never
was there before, and there's no stone at it?

ISABEL. But does every atom know its place?

L. How else could it get there?

MARY. Are they not attracted into their places?

L. Cover a piece of paper with spots, at equal intervals; and then
imagine any kind of attraction you choose, or any law of
attraction, to exist between the spots, and try how, on that
permitted supposition, you can attract them into the figure of a
Maltese cross, in the middle of the paper.

MARY (having tried it). Yes; I see that I cannot:--one would need
all kinds of attractions, in different ways, at different places.
But you do not mean that the atoms are alive?

L. What is it to be alive?

DORA. There now; you're going to be provoking, I know.

L. I do not see why it should be provoking to be asked what it is
to be alive. Do you think you don't know whether you are alive or
not?

(ISABEL skips to the end of the room and back.)

L. Yes, Isabel, that's all very fine; and you and I may call that
being alive: but a modern philosopher calls it being in a "mode of
motion." It requires a certain quantity of heat to take you to the
sideboard; and exactly the same quantity to bring you back again.
That's all.

ISABEL. No, it isn't. And besides, I'm not hot.

L. I am, sometimes, at the way they talk. However, you know,
Isabel, you might have been a particle of a mineral, and yet have
been carried round the room, or anywhere else, by chemical forces,
in the liveliest way.

ISABEL. Yes; but I wasn't carried: I carried myself.

L. The fact is, mousie, the difficulty is not so much to say what
makes a thing alive, as what makes it a Self. As soon as you are
shut off from the rest of the universe into a Self, you begin to
be alive.

VIOLET (indignant). Oh, surely--surely that cannot be so. Is not
all the life of the soul in communion, not separation?

L. There can be no communion where there is no distinction. But we
shall be in an abyss of metaphysics presently, if we don't look
out; and besides, we must not be too grand, to-day, for the
younger children. We'll be grand, some day, by ourselves, if we
must. (The younger children are not pleased, and prepare to
remonstrate; but, knowing by experience, that all conversations in
which the word "communion" occurs, are unintelligible, think
better of it.) Meantime, for broad answer about the atoms. I do
not think we should use the word "life," of any energy which does
not belong to a given form. A seed, or an egg, or a young animal,
are properly called "alive" with respect to the force belonging to
those forms, which consistently develops that form, and no other.
But the force which crystallizes a mineral appears to be chiefly
external, and it does not produce an entirely determinate and
individual form, limited in size, but only an aggregation, in
which some limiting laws must be observed.

MARY. But I do not see much difference, that way, between a
crystal and a tree.

L. Add, then, that the mode of the energy in a living thing
implies a continual change in its elements; and a period for its
end. So you may define life by its attached negative, death; and
still more by its attached positive, birth. But I won't be plagued
any more about this, just now; if you choose to think the crystals
alive, do, and welcome. Rocks have always been called "living" in
their native place.

MARY. There's one question more; then I've done.

L. Only one?

MARY. Only one.

L. But if it is answered, won't it turn into two?

MARY. No; I think it will remain single, and be comfortable.

L. Let me hear it.

MARY. You know, we are to crystallize ourselves out of the whole
playground. Now, what playground have the minerals! Where are they
scattered before they are crystallized; and where are the crystals
generally made?

L. That sounds to me more like three questions than one, Mary. If
it is only one, it is a wide one.

MARY. I did not say anything about the width of it.

L. Well, I must keep it within the best compass I can. When rocks
either dry from a moist state, or cool from a heated state, they
necessarily alter in bulk; and cracks, or open spaces, form in
them in all directions. These cracks must be filled up with solid
matter, or the rock would eventually become a ruinous heap. So,
sometimes by water, sometimes by vapor, sometimes nobody knows
how, crystallizable matter is brought from somewhere, and fastens
itself in these open spaces, so as to bind the rock together again
with crystal cement. A vast quantity of hollows are formed in
lavas by bubbles of gas, just as the holes are left in bread well
baked. In process of time these cavities are generally filled with
various crystals.

MARY. But where does the crystallizing substance come from?

L. Sometimes out of the rock itself; sometimes from below or
above, through the veins. The entire substance of the contracting
rock may be filled with liquid, pressed into it so as to fill
every pore;--or with mineral vapor;--or it may be so charged at
one place, and empty at another. There's no end to the "may be's."
But all that you need fancy, for our present purpose, is that
hollows in the rocks, like the caves in Derbyshire, are traversed
by liquids or vapor containing certain elements in a more or less
free or separate state, which crystallize on the cave walls.

SIBYL. There now;--Mary has had all her questions answered: it's
my turn to have mine.

L. Ah, there's a conspiracy among you, I see. I might have guessed
as much.

DORA. I'm sure you ask us questions enough! How can you have the
heart, when you dislike so to be asked them yourself?

L. My dear child, if people do not answer questions, it does not
matter how many they are asked, because they've no trouble with
them. Now, when I ask you questions, I never expect to be
answered; but when you ask me, you always do; and it's not fair.

DORA. Very well, we shall understand, next time.

SIBYL. No, but seriously, we all want to ask one thing more, quite
dreadfully.

L. And I don't want to be asked it, quite dreadfully; but you'll
have your own way, of course.

SIBYL. We none of us understand about the lower Pthah. It was not
merely yesterday; but in all we have read about him in Wilkinson,
or in any book, we cannot understand what the Egyptians put their
god into that ugly little deformed shape for.

L. Well, I'm glad it's that sort of question; because I can answer
anything I like to that.

EGYPT. Anything you like will do quite well for us; we shall be
pleased with the answer, if you are.

L. I am not so sure of that, most gracious queen; for I must begin
by the statement that queens seem to have disliked all sorts of
work, in those days, as much as some queens dislike sewing to-day.

EGYPT. Now, it's too bad! and just when I was trying to say the
civillest thing I could!

L. But, Egypt, why did you tell me you disliked sewing so?

EGYPT. Did not I show you how the thread cuts my fingers? and I
always get cramp, somehow, in my neck, if I sew long.

L. Well, I suppose the Egyptian queens thought everybody got cramp
in their neck, if they sewed long; and that thread always cut
people's fingers. At all events, every kind of manual labor was
despised both by them, and the Greeks; and, while they owned the
real good and fruit of it, they yet held it a degradation to all
who practiced it. Also, knowing the laws of life thoroughly, they
perceived that the special practice necessary to bring any manual
art to perfection strengthened the body distortedly; one energy or
member gaining at the expense of the rest. They especially dreaded
and despised any kind of work that had to be done near fire: yet,
feeling what they owed to it in metal-work, as the basis of all
other work, they expressed this mixed reverence and scorn in the
varied types of the lame Hephaestus, and the lower Pthah.

SIBYL. But what did you mean by making him say "Everything great I
can make small, and everything small great"?

L. I had my own separate meaning in that. We have seen in modern
times the power of the lower Pthah developed in a separate way,
which no Greek nor Egyptian could have conceived. It is the
character of pure and eyeless manual labor to conceive everything
as subjected to it: and, in reality, to disgrace and diminish all
that is so subjected, aggrandizing itself, and the thought of
itself, at the expense of all noble things. I heard an orator, and
a good one too, at the Working Men's College, the other day, make
a great point in a description of our railroads; saying, with
grandly conducted emphasis, "They have made man greater, and the
world less." His working audience were mightily pleased; they
thought it so very fine a thing to be made bigger themselves; and
all the rest of the world less. I should have enjoyed asking them
(but it would have been a pity--they were so pleased), how much
less they would like to have the world made;--and whether, at
present, those of them really felt the biggest men, who lived in
the least houses.

SIBYL. But then, why did you make Pthah say that he could make
weak things strong, and small things great?

L. My dear, he is a boaster and self-assertor, by nature; but it
is so far true. For instance, we used to have a fair in our
neighborhood--a very fine fair we thought it. You never saw such
an one; but if you look at the engraving of Turner's "St.
Catherine's Hill," you will see what it was like. There were
curious booths, carried on poles; and peep-shows; and music, with
plenty of drums and cymbals; and much barley-sugar and
gingerbread, and the like: and in the alleys of this fair the
London populace would enjoy themselves, after their fashion, very
thoroughly. Well, the little Pthah set to work upon it one day; he
made the wooden poles into iron ones, and put them across, like
his own crooked legs, so that you always fall over them if you
don't look where you are going; and he turned all the canvas into
panes of glass, and put it up on his iron cross-poles; and made
all the little booths into one great booth;--and people said it
was very fine, and a new style of architecture; and Mr. Dickens
said nothing was ever like it in Fairy-land, which was very true.
And then the little Pthah set to work to put fine fairings in it;
and he painted the Nineveh bulls afresh, with the blackest eyes he
could paint (because he had none himself), and he got the angels
down from Lincoln choir, and gilded their wings like his
gingerbread of old times; and he sent for everything else he could
think of, and put it in his booth. There are the casts of Niobe
and her children; and the Chimpanzee; and the wooden Caffres and
New-Zealanders; and the Shakespeare House; and Le Grand Blondin,
and Le Petit Blondin; and Handel; and Mozart; and no end of shops,
and buns, and beer; and all the little-Pthah-worshippers say,
never was anything so sublime!

SIBYL. Now, do you mean to say you never go to these Crystal
Palace concerts? they're as good as good can be.

L. I don't go to the thundering things with a million of bad
voices in them. When I want a song, I get Julia Mannering and Lucy
Bertram and Counselor Pleydell to sing "We be three poor Mariners"
to me; then I've no headache next morning. But I do go to the
smaller concerts, when I can; for they are very good, as you say,
Sibyl: and I always get a reserved seat somewhere near the
orchestra, where I am sure I can see the kettle-drummer drum.

SIBYL. Now DO be serious, for one minute.

L. I am serious--never was more so. You know one can't see the
modulation of violinists' fingers, but one can see the vibration
of the drummer's hand; and it's lovely.

SIBYL. But fancy going to a concert, not to hear, but to see!

L. Yes, it is very absurd. The quite right thing, I believe, is to
go there to talk. I confess, however, that in most music, when
very well done, the doing of it is to me the chiefly interesting
part of the business. I'm always thinking how good it would be for
the fat, supercilious people, who care so little for their half-
crown's worth, to be set to try and do a half-crown's worth of
anything like it.

MARY. But surely that Crystal Palace is a great good and help to
the people of London?

L. The fresh air of the Norwood hills is, or was, my dear; but
they are spoiling that with smoke as fast as they can. And the
palace (as they call it) is a better place for them, by much, than
the old fair; and it is always there, instead of for three days
only; and it shuts up at proper hours of night. And good use may
be made of the things in it, if you know how: but as for its
teaching the people, it will teach them nothing but the lowest of
the lower Pthah's work--nothing but hammer and tongs. I saw a
wonderful piece, of his doing, in the place, only the other day.
Some unhappy metal-worker--I am not sure if it was not a metal-
working firm--had taken three years to make a Golden eagle.

SIBYL. Of real gold?

L. No; of bronze, or copper, or some of their foul patent metals--
it is no matter what. I meant a model of our chief British eagle.
Every feather was made separately; and every filament of every
feather separately, and so joined on; and all the quills modeled
of the right length and right section, and at last the whole
cluster of them fastened together. You know, children, I don't
think much of my own drawing; but take my proud word for once,
that when I go to the Zoological Gardens, and happen to have a bit
of chalk in my pocket, and the Gray Harpy will sit, without
screwing his head round, for thirty seconds,--I can do a better
thing of him in that time than the three years' work of this
industrious firm. For, during the thirty seconds, the eagle is my
object,--not myself; and during the three years, the firm's
object, in every fiber of bronze it made, was itself, and not the
eagle. That is the true meaning of the little Pthah's having no
eyes--he can see only himself. The Egyptian beetle was not quite
the full type of him; our northern ground beetle is a truer one.
It is beautiful to see it at work, gathering its treasures (such
as they are) into little round balls; and pushing them home with
the strong wrong end of it,--head downmost all the way,--like a
modern political economist with his ball of capital, declaring
that a nation can stand on its vices better than on its virtues.
But away with you, children, now, for I'm getting cross.

DORA. I'm going downstairs; I shall take care, at any rate, that
there are no little Pthahs in the kitchen cupboards.





LECTURE 4.

THE CRYSTAL ORDERS


A working Lecture in the large Schoolroom; with experimental
Interludes. The great bell has rung unexpectedly.

KATHLEEN (entering disconsolate, though first at the summons). Oh
dear, oh dear, what a day! Was ever anything so provoking! just
when we wanted to crystallize ourselves;--and I'm sure it's going
to rain all day long.

L. So am I, Kate. The sky has quite an Irish way with it. But I
don't see why Irish girls should also look so dismal. Fancy that
you don't want to crystallize yourselves: you didn't, the day
before yesterday, and you were not unhappy when it rained then.

FLORRIE. Ah! but we do want to-day; and the rain's so tiresome.

L. That is to say, children, that because you are all the richer
by the expectation of playing at a new game, you choose to make
yourselves unhappier than when you had nothing to look forward to,
but the old ones.

ISABEL. But then, to have to wait--wait--wait; and before we've
tried it;--and perhaps it will rain to-morrow, too!

L. It may also rain the day after to-morrow. We can make ourselves
uncomfortable to any extent with perhapses, Isabel. You may stick
perhapses into your little minds, like pins, till you are as
uncomfortable as the Lilliputians made Gulliver with their arrows,
when he would not lie quiet.

ISABEL. But what ARE we to do to-day?

L. To be quiet, for one thing, like Gulliver when he saw there was
nothing better to be done. And to practice patience. I can tell
you, children, THAT requires nearly as much practicing as music;
and we are continually losing our lessons when the master comes.
Now, to-day, here's a nice, little adagio lesson for us, if we
play it properly.

ISABEL. But I don't like that sort of lesson. I can't play it
properly.

L. Can you play a Mozart sonata yet, Isabel? The more need to
practice. All one's life is a music, if one touches the notes
rightly, and in time. But there must be no hurry.

KATHLEEN. I'm sure there's no music in stopping in on a rainy day.

L. There's no music in a "rest," Katie, that I know of: but
there's the making of music in it. And people are always missing
that part of the life-melody; and scrambling on without counting--
not that it's easy to count; but nothing on which so much depends
ever IS easy. People are always talking of perseverance, and
courage, and fortitude; but patience is the finest and worthiest
part of fortitude,--and the rarest, too. I know twenty persevering
girls for one patient one: but it is only that twenty-first who
can do her work, out and out, or enjoy it. For patience lies at
the root of all pleasures, as well as of all powers. Hope herself
ceases to be happiness, when Impatience companions her.

(ISABEL and LILY sit down on the floor, and fold their hands. The
others follow their example.)

Good children! but that's not quite the way of it, neither. Folded
hands are not necessarily resigned ones. The Patience who really
smiles at grief usually stands, or walks, or even runs: she seldom
sits; though she may sometimes have to do it, for many a day, poor
thing, by monuments; or like Chaucer's, "with face pale, upon a
hill of sand." But we are not reduced to that to-day. Suppose we
use this calamitous fore-noon to choose the shapes we are to
crystallize into? we know nothing about them yet.

(The pictures of resignation rise from the floor not in the
patientest manner. General applause.)

MARY (with one or two others). The very thing we wanted to ask you
about!

LILY. We looked at the books about crystals, but they are so
dreadful.

L. Well, Lily, we must go through a little dreadfulness, that's a
fact: no road to any good knowledge is wholly among the lilies and
the grass; there is rough climbing to be done always. But the
crystal-books are a little TOO dreadful, most of them, I admit;
and we shall have to be content with very little of their help.
You know, as you cannot stand on each other's heads, you can only
make yourselves into the sections of crystals,--the figures they
show when they are cut through; and we will choose some that will
be quite easy. You shall make diamonds of yourselves--

ISABEL. Oh, no, no! we won't be diamonds, please.

L, Yes, you shall, Isabel; they are very pretty things, if the
jewelers, and the kings and queens, would only let them alone. You
shall make diamonds of yourselves, and rubies of yourselves, and
emeralds; and Irish diamonds; two of those--with Lily in the
middle of one, which will be very orderly, of course; and Kathleen
in the middle of the other, for which we will hope the best; and
you shall make Derbyshire spar of yourselves, and Iceland spar,
and gold, and silver, and--Quicksilver there's enough of in you,
without any making.

MARY. Now you know, the children will be getting quite wild we
must really get pencils and paper, and begin properly.

L. Wait a minute, Miss Mary, I think as we the schoolroom clear
to-day, I'll try to give you some notion of the three great orders
or ranks of crystals, into which all the others seem more or less
to fall. We shall only want one figure a day, in the playground,
and that can be drawn in a minute: but the general ideas had
better be fastened first. I must show you a great many minerals;
so let me have three tables wheeled into the three windows, that
we may keep our specimens separate;--we will keep the three orders
of crystals on separate tables.

(First Interlude of pushing and pulling, and spreading of baize
covers. VIOLET, not particularly minding what she is about, gets
herself jammed into a corner, and bid to stand out of the way; on
which she devotes herself to meditation.)

VIOLET (after interval of meditation). How strange it is that
everything seems to divide into threes!

L. Everything doesn't divide into threes. Ivy won't, though
shamrock will, and daisies won't though lilies will.

VIOLET. But all the nicest things seem to divide into threes.

L. Violets won't.

VIOLET. No; I should think not, indeed! But I mean the great
things.

L. I've always heard the globe had four quarters.

ISABEL. Well; but you know you said it hadn't any quarters at all.
So mayn't it really be divided into three?

L. If it were divided into no more than three, on the outside of
it, Isabel, it would be a fine world to live in; and if it were
divided into three in the inside of it, it would soon be no world
to live in at all.

DORA. We shall never get to the crystals, at this rate. (Aside to
MARY.) He will get off into political economy before we know where
we are. (Aloud.) But the crystals are divided into three, then?

L. No; but there are three general notions by which we may best
get hold of them. Then between these notions there are other
notions.

LILY (alarmed). A great many? And shall we have to learn them all?

L. More than a great many--a quite infinite many. So you cannot
learn them all.

LILY (greatly relieved). Then may we only learn the three?

L. Certainly; unless, when you have got those three notions, you
want to have some more notions;--which would not surprise me. But
we'll try for the three, first. Katie, you broke your coral
necklace this morning?

KATHLEEN. Oh! who told you? It was in jumping. I'm so sorry!

L. I'm very glad. Can you fetch me the beads of it?

KATHLEEN. I've lost some; here are the rest in my pocket, if I can
only get them out.

L. You mean to get them out some day, I suppose; so try now. I
want them.

(KATHLEEN empties her pocket on the floor. The beads disperse. The
School disperses also. Second Interlude--hunting piece.)

L. (after waiting patiently for a quarter of an hour, to ISABEL,
who comes up from under the table with her hair all about her ears
and the last findable beads in her hand.) Mice are useful little
things sometimes. Now, mousie, I want all those beads
crystallized. How many ways are there of putting them in order?

ISABEL. Well, first one would string them, I suppose?

L. Yes, that's the first way. You cannot string ultimate atoms;
but you can put them in a row, and then they fasten themselves
together, somehow, into a long rod or needle. We will call these
"NEEDLE-crystals." What would be the next way?

ISABEL. I suppose, as we are to get together in the playground,
when it stops raining, in different shapes?

L. Yes; put the beads together, then, in the simplest form you
can, to begin with. Put them into a square, and pack them close.

ISABEL (after careful endeavor). I can't get them closer.

L. That will do. Now you may see, beforehand, that if you try to
throw yourselves into square in this confused way, you will never
know your places; so you had better consider every square as made
of rods, put side by side. Take four beads of equal size, first,
Isabel; put them into a little square. That, you may consider as
made up of two rods of two beads each. Then you can make a square
a size larger, out of three rods of three. Then the next square
may be a size larger. How many rods, Lily?

LILY. Four rods of four beads each, I suppose.

L. Yes, and then five rods of five, and so on. But now, look here;
make another square of four beads again. You see they leave a
little opening in the center.

ISABEL (pushing two opposite ones closer together). Now they
don't.

L. No; but now it isn't a square; and by pushing the two together
you have pushed the two others farther apart.

ISABEL. And yet, somehow, they all seem closer than they were!

L. Yes; for before, each of them only touched two of the others,
but now each of the two in the middle touches the other three.
Take away one of the outsiders, Isabel: now you have three in a
triangle--the smallest triangle you can make out of the beads. Now
put a rod of three beads on at one side. So, you have a triangle
of six beads; but just the shape of the first one. Next a rod of
four on the side of that; and you have a triangle of ten beads:
then a rod of five on the side of that; and you have a triangle of
fifteen. Thus you have a square with five beads on the side, and a
triangle with five beads on the side; equal-sided, therefore, like
the square. So, however few or many you may be, you may soon learn
how to crystallize quickly into these two figures, which are the
foundation of form in the commonest, and therefore actually the
most important, as well as in the rarest, and therefore, by our
esteem, the most important, minerals of the world. Look at this in
my hand.

VIOLET. Why, it is leaf gold!

L. Yes; but beaten by no man's hammer; or rather, not beaten at
all, but woven. Besides, feel the weight of it. There is gold
enough there to gild the walls and ceiling, if it were beaten
thin.

VIOLET. How beautiful! And it glitters like a leaf covered with
frost.

L. You only think it so beautiful because you know it is gold. It
is not prettier, in reality, than a bit of brass for it is
Transylvanian gold; and they say there is a foolish gnome in the
mines there, who is always wanting to live in the moon, and so
alloys all the gold with a little silver. I don't know how that
may be, but the silver always IS in the gold, and if he does it,
it's very provoking of him, for no gold is woven so fine anywhere
else.

MARY (who has been looking through her magnifying glass). But this
is not woven. This is all made of little triangles.

L. Say "patched," then, if you must be so particular. But if you
fancy all those triangles, small as they are (and many of them are
infinitely small), made up again of rods, and those of grains, as
we built our great triangle of the beads, what word will you take
for the manufacture?

MAY. There's no word--it is beyond words.

L. Yes, and that would matter little, were it not beyond thoughts
too. But, at all events, this yellow leaf of dead gold, shed, not
from the ruined woodlands, but the ruined rocks, will help you to
remember the second kind of crystals, LEAF-crystals, or FOLIATED
crystals, though I show you the form in gold first only to make a
strong impression on you, for gold is not generally or
characteristically, crystallized in leaves; the real type of
foliated crystals is this thing, Mica; which if you once feel well
and break well, you will always know again; and you will often
have occasion to know it, for you will find it everywhere nearly,
in hill countries.

KATHLEEN. If we break it well! May we break it?

L. To powder, if you like.

(Surrenders plate of brown mica to public investigation. Third
Interlude. It sustains severely philosophic al treatment at all
hands.)

FLORRIE (to whom the last fragments have descended). Always
leaves, and leaves, and nothing but leaves, or white dust?

L. That dust itself is nothing but finer leaves.

(Shows them to FLORRIE through magnifying glass.)

ISABEL (peeping over FLORRIE'S shoulder). But then this bit under
the glass looks like that bit out of the glass! If we could break
this bit under the glass, what would it be like?

L. It would be all leaves still.

ISABEL. And then if we broke those again?

L. All less leaves still.

ISABEL (impatient). And if we broke them again, and again, and
again, and again, and again?

L. Well, I suppose you would come to a limit, if you could only
see it. Notice that the little flakes already differ somewhat from
the large ones: because I can bend them up and down, and they stay
bent; while the large flake, though it bent easily a little way,
sprang back when you let it go, and broke when you tried to bend
it far. And a large mass would not bend at all.

MARY. Would that leaf gold separate into finer leaves, in the same
way?

L. No; and therefore, as I told you, it is not a characteristic
specimen of a foliated crystallization. The little triangles are
portions of solid crystals, and so they are in this, which looks
like a black mica; but you see it is made up of triangles like the
gold, and stands, almost accurately, as an intermediate link, in
crystals, between mica and gold. Yet this is the commonest, as
gold the rarest, of metals.

MARY. Is it iron? I never saw iron so bright.

L. It is rust of iron, finely crystallized: from its resemblance
to mica, it is often called micaceous iron.

KATHLEEN. May we break this, too?

L. No, for I could not easily get such another crystal; besides,
it would not break like the mica; it is much harder. But take the
glass again, and look at the fineness of the jagged edges of the
triangles where they lap over each other. The gold has the same:
but you see them better here, terrace above terrace, countless,
and, in successive angles, like superb fortified bastions.

MAY. But all foliated crystals are not made of triangles?

L. Far from it; mica is occasionally so. but usually of hexagons;
and here is a foliated crystal made of squares, which will show
you that the leaves of the rock-land have their summer green, as
well as their autumnal gold.

FLORRIE. Oh! oh! oh! (jumps for joy).

L. Did you never see a bit of green leaf before, Florrie?

FLORRIE. Yes, but never so bright as that, and not in a stone.

L. If you will look at the leaves of the trees in sunshine after a
shower, you will find they are much brighter than that; and surely
they are none the worse for being on stalks instead of in stones?

FLORRIE. Yes, but then there are so many of them, one never looks,
I suppose.

L. Now you have it, Florrie.

VIOLET (sighing). There are so many beautiful things we never see!

L. You need not sigh for that, Violet; but I will tell you what we
should all sigh for--that there are so many ugly things we never
see.

VIOLET. But we don't want to see ugly things!

L. You had better say, "We don't want to suffer them." You ought
to be glad in thinking how much more beauty God has made, than
human eyes can ever see; but not glad in thinking how much more
evil man has made, than his own soul can ever conceive, much more
than his hands can ever heal.

VIOLET. I don't understand;--how is that like the leaves?

L. The same law holds in our neglect of multiplied pain, as in our
neglect of multiplied beauty. Florrie jumps for joy at sight of
half an inch of a green leaf in a brown stone, and takes more
notice of it than of all the green in the wood, and you, or I, or
any of us, would be unhappy if any single human creature beside us
were in sharp pain; but we can read, at breakfast, day after day,
of men being killed, and of women and children dying of hunger,
faster than the leaves strew the brooks in Vallombrosa;--and then
go out to play croquet, as if nothing had happened.

MAY. But we do not see the people being killed or dying.

L. You did not see your brother, when you got the telegram the
other day, saying he was ill, May; but you cried for him; and
played no croquet. But we cannot talk of these things now; and
what is more, you must let me talk straight on, for a little
while; and ask no questions till I've done: for we branch
("exfoliate," I should say, mineralogically) always into something
else,--though that's my fault more than yours; but I must go
straight on now. You have got a distinct notion, I hope, of leaf-
crystals; and you see the sort of look they have: you can easily
remember that "folium" is Latin for a leaf, and that the separate
flakes of mica, or any other such stones, are called "folia;" but,
because mica is the most characteristic of these stones, other
things that are like it in structure are called "micas;" thus we
have Uran-mica, which is the green leaf I showed you; and Copper-
mica, which is another like it, made chiefly of copper; and this
foliated iron is called "micaceous iron." You have then these two
great orders, Needle-crystals, made (probably) of grains in rows;
and Leaf-crystals, made (probably) of needles interwoven; now,
lastly, there are crystals of a third order, in heaps, or knots,
or masses, which may be made either of leaves laid one upon
another, or of needles bound like Roman fasces; and mica itself,
when it is well crystallized, puts itself into such masses, as if
to show us how others are made. Here is a brown six-sided crystal,
quite as beautifully chiseled at the sides as any castle tower;
but you see it is entirely built of folia of mica, one laid above
another, which break away the moment I touch the edge with my
knife. Now, here is another hexagonal tower, of just the same size
and color, which I want you to compare with the mica carefully;
but as I cannot wait for you to do it just now, I must tell you
quickly what main differences to look for. First, you will feel it
far heavier than the mica. Then, though its surface looks quite
micaceous in the folia of it when you try them with the knife, you
will find you cannot break them away--

KATHLEEN. May I try?

L. Yes, you mistrusting Katie. Here's my strong knife for you.
(Experimental pause. KATHLEEN doing her best.) You'll have that
knife shutting on your finger presently, Kate; and I don't know a
girl who would like less to have her hand tied up for a week.

KATHLEEN (who also does not like to be beaten--giving up the knife
despondently.). What CAN the nasty hard thing be?

L. It is nothing but indurated clay, Kate: very hard set
certainly, yet not so hard as it might be. If it were thoroughly
well crystallized, you would see none of those micaceous
fractures; and the stone would be quite red and clear, all
through.

KATHLEEN. Oh, cannot you show us one?

L. Egypt can, if you ask her; she has a beautiful one in the clasp
of her favorite bracelet.

KATHLEEN. Why, that's a ruby!

L. Well, so is that thing you've been scratching at.

KATHLEEN. My goodness! (Takes up the stone again, very delicately;
and drops it. General consternation.)

L. Never mind, Katie, you might drop it from the top of the house,
and do it no harm. But though you really are a very good girl, and
as good-natured as anybody can possibly be, remember, you have
your faults, like other people, and, if I were you, the next time
I wanted to assert anything energetically, I would assert it by
"my badness," not "my goodness."

KATHLEEN. Ah, now, it's too bad of you!

L. Well, then, I'll invoke, on occasion, my "too-badness." But you
may as well pick up the ruby, now you have dropped it; and look
carefully at the beautiful hexagonal lines which gleam on its
surface, and here is a pretty white sapphire (essentially the same
stone as the ruby), in which you will see the same lovely
structure, like the threads of the finest white cobweb. I do not
know what is the exact method of a ruby's construction, but you
see by these lines, what fine construction there is, even in this
hardest of stones (after the diamond), which usually appears as a
massive lump or knot. There is therefore no real mineralogical
distinction between needle crystals and knotted crystals, but,
practically, crystallized masses throw themselves into one of the
three groups we have been examining to-day; and appear either as
Needles, as Folia, or as Knots; when they are in needles (or
fibers), they make the stones or rocks formed out of them
"FIBROUS;" when they are in folia, they make them "FOLIATED;" when
they are in knots (or grains), "GRANULAR." Fibrous rocks are
comparatively rare, in mass; but fibrous minerals are innumerable;
and it is often a question which really no one but a young lady
could possibly settle, whether one should call the fibers
composing them "threads" or "needles." Here is amianthus, for
instance, which is quite as fine and soft as any cotton thread you
ever sewed with; and here is sulphide of bismuth, with sharper
points and brighter luster than your finest needles have; and
fastened in white webs of quartz more delicate than your finest
lace; and here is sulphide of antimony, which looks like mere
purple wool, but it is all of purple needle crystals; and here is
red oxide of copper (you must not breathe on it as you look, or
you may blow some of the films of it off the stone), which is
simply a woven tissue of scarlet silk. However, these finer
thread-forms are comparatively rare, while the bolder and needle-
like crystals occur constantly; so that, I believe, "Needle-
crystal" is the best word (the grand one is, "Acicular crystal,"
but Sibyl will tell you it is all the same, only less easily
understood; and therefore more scientific). Then the Leaf-
crystals, as I said, form an immense mass of foliated rocks; and
the Granular crystals, which are of many kinds, form essentially
granular, or granitic and porphyritic rocks; and it is always a
point of more interest to me (and I think will ultimately be to
you), to consider the causes which force a given mineral to take
any one of these three general forms, than what the peculiar
geometrical limitations are, belonging to its own crystals.
[Footnote: Note iv.] It is more interesting to me, for instance,
to try and find out why the red oxide of copper, usually
crystallizing in cubes or octahedrons, makes itself exquisitely,
out of its cubes, into this red silk in one particular Cornish
mine, than what are the absolutely necessary angles of the
octahedron, which is its common form. At all events, that
mathematical part of crystallography is quite beyond girls'
strength; but these questions of the various tempers and manners
of crystals are not only comprehensible by you, but full of the
most curious teaching for you. For in the fulfillment, to the best
of their power, of their adopted form under given circumstances,
there are conditions entirely resembling those of human virtue;
and indeed expressible under no term so proper as that of the
Virtue, or Courage of crystals;--which, if you are not afraid of
the crystals making you ashamed of yourselves, we will by to get
some notion of, to-morrow. But it will be a bye-lecture, and more
about yourselves than the minerals. Don't come unless you like.

MARY. I'm sure the crystals will make us ashamed of ourselves; but
we'll come, for all that.

L. Meantime, look well and quietly over these needle, or thread
crystals, and those on the other two tables, with magnifying
glasses; and see what thoughts will come into your little heads
about them. For the best thoughts are generally those which come
without being forced, one does not know how. And so I hope you
will get through your wet day patiently.





LECTURE 5.

CRYSTAL VIRTUES


A quiet talk, in the afternoon, by the sunniest window of the
Drawing-room. Present: FLORRIE, ISABEL, MAY, LUCILLA, KATHLEEN,
DORA, MARY, and some others, who have saved time for the bye-
Lecture.

L. So you have really come, like good girls, to be made ashamed of
yourselves?

DORA (very meekly). No, we needn't be made so; we always are.

L. Well, I believe that's truer than most pretty speeches: but you
know, you saucy girl, some people have more reason to be so than
others. Are you sure everybody is, as well as you?

THE GENERAL VOICE. Yes, yes; everybody.

L. What! Florrie ashamed of herself?

(FLORRIE hides behind the curtain.)

L. And Isabel?

(ISABEL hides under the table.)

L. And Mary?

(MARY runs into the corner behind the piano.)

L. And Lucilla?

(LUCILLA hides her face in her hands.)

L. Dear, dear; but this will never do. I shall have to tell you of
the faults of the crystals, instead of virtues, to put you in
heart again.

MAY (coming out of her corner). Oh! have the crystals faults, like
us?

L. Certainly, May. Their best virtues are shown in fighting their
faults; and some have a great many faults; and some are very
naughty crystals indeed.

FLORRIE (from behind her curtain). As naughty as me?

ISABEL (peeping out from under the table-cloth). Or me?

L. Well, I don't know. They never forget their syntax, children,
when once they've been taught it. But I think some of them are, on
the whole, worse than any of you. Not that it's amiable of you to
look so radiant, all in a minute, on that account.

DORA. Oh! but it's so much more comfortable.

(Everybody seems to recover their spirits. Eclipse of FLORRIE and
ISABEL terminates.)

L. What kindly creatures girls are, after all, to their neighbors'
failings! I think you may be ashamed of yourselves indeed, now,
children! I can tell you, you shall hear of the highest
crystalline merits that I can think of, to-day: and I wish there
were more of them; but crystals have a limited, though a stern,
code of morals; and their essential virtues are but two;--the
first is to be pure, and the second to be well shaped.

MARY. Pure! Does that mean clear--transparent?

L. No; unless in the case of a transparent substance. You cannot
have a transparent crystal of gold; but you may have a perfectly
pure one.

ISABEL. But you said it was the shape that made things be
crystals; therefore, oughtn't their shape to be their first
virtue, not their second?

L. Right, you troublesome mousie. But I call their shape only
their second virtue, because it depends on time and accident, and
things which the crystal cannot help. If it is cooled too quickly,
or shaken, it must take what shape it can; but it seems as if,
even then, it had in itself the power of rejecting impurity, if it
has crystalline life enough. Here is a crystal of quartz, well
enough shaped in its way; but it seems to have been languid and
sick at heart; and some white milky substance has got into it, and
mixed itself up with it, all through. It makes the quartz quite
yellow, if you hold it up to the light, and milky blue on the
surface. Here is another, broken into a thousand separate facets
and out of all traceable shape; but as pure as a mountain spring.
I like this one best.

THE AUDIENCE. So do I--and I--and I.

MARY. Would a crystallographer?

L. I think so. He would find many more laws curiously exemplified
in the irregularly grouped but pure crystal. But it is a futile
question, this of first or second. Purity is in most cases a
prior, if not a nobler, virtue; at all events it is most
convenient to think about it first.

MARY. But what ought we to think about it? Is there much to be
thought--I mean, much to puzzle one?

L. I don't know what you call "much." It is a long time since I
met with anything in which there was little. There's not much in
this, perhaps. The crystal must be either dirty or clean,--and
there's an end. So it is with one's hands, and with one's heart--
only you can wash your hands without changing them, but not
hearts, nor crystals. On the whole, while you are young, it will
be as well to take care that your hearts don't want much washing;
for they may perhaps need wringing also, when they do.

(Audience doubtful and uncomfortable. LUCILLA at last takes
courage.)

LUCILLA. Oh! but surely, sir, we cannot make our hearts clean?

L. Not easily, Lucilla; so you had better keep them so, when they
are.

LUCILLA. When they are! But, sir--

L. Well?

LUCILLA. Sir--surely--are we not told that they are all evil?

L. Wait a little, Lucilla; that is difficult ground you are
getting upon; and we must keep to our crystals, till at least we
understand what THEIR good and evil consist in; they may help us
afterwards to some useful hints about our own. I said that their
goodness consisted chiefly in purity of substance, and perfectness
of form: but those are rather the EFFECTS of their goodness, than
the goodness itself. The inherent virtues of the crystals,
resulting in these outer conditions, might really seem to be best
described in the words we should use respecting living creatures--
"force of heart" and "steadiness of purpose." There seem to be in
some crystals, from the beginning, an unconquerable purity of
vital power, and strength of crystal spirit. Whatever dead
substance, unacceptant of this energy, comes in their way, is
either rejected, or forced to take some beautiful subordinate
form; the purity of the crystal remains unsullied, and every atom
of it bright with coherent energy. Then the second condition is,
that from the beginning of its whole structure, a fine crystal
seems to have determined that it will be of a certain size and of
a certain shape; it persists in this plan, and completes it. Here
is a perfect crystal of quartz for you. It is of an unusual form,
and one which it might seem very difficult to build--a pyramid
with convex sides, composed of other minor pyramids. But there is
not a flaw in its contour throughout; not one of its myriads of
component sides but is as bright as a jeweler's faceted work (and
far finer, if you saw it close). The crystal points are as sharp
as javelins; their edges will cut glass with a touch. Anything
more resolute, consummate, determinate in form, cannot be
conceived. Here, on the other hand, is a crystal of the same
substance, in a perfectly simple type of form--a plain six-sided
prism; but from its base to its point,--and it is nine inches
long,--it has never for one instant made up its mind what
thickness it will have. It seems to have begun by making itself as
thick as it thought possible with the quantity of material at
command. Still not being as thick as it would like to be, it has
clumsily glued on more substance at one of its sides. Then it has
thinned itself, in a panic of economy; then puffed itself out
again; then starved one side to enlarge another; then warped
itself quite out of its first line. Opaque, rough-surfaced, jagged
on the edge, distorted in the spine, it exhibits a quite human
image of decrepitude and dishonor; but the worst of all the signs
of its decay and helplessness is that half-way up a parasite
crystal, smaller, but just as sickly, has rooted itself in the
side of the larger one, eating out a cavity round its root, and
then growing backwards, or downwards contrary to the direction of
the main crystal. Yet I cannot trace the least difference in
purity of substance between the first most noble stone, and this
ignoble and dissolute one. The impurity of the last is in its
will, or want of will.

MARY. Oh, if we could but understand the meaning of it all!

L. We can understand all that is good for us. It is just as true
for us as for the crystal, that the nobleness of life depends on
its consistency,--clearness of purpose--quiet and ceaseless
energy. All doubt and repenting, and botching and re-touching and
wondering what will it be best to do next, are vice, as well as
misery.

MARY (much wondering). But must not one repent when one does
wrong, and hesitate when one can't see one's way?

L. You have no business at all to do wrong, nor to get into any
way that you cannot see. Your intelligence should always be far in
advance of your act. Whenever you do not know what you are about,
you are sure to be doing wrong.

KATHLEEN. Oh, dear, but I never know what I am about!

L. Very true, Katie, but it is a great deal to know, if you know
that. And you find that you have done wrong afterwards; and
perhaps some day you may begin to know, or at least, think, what
you are about.

ISABEL. But surely people can't do very wrong if they don't know,
can they? I mean, they can't be very naughty. They can be wrong,
like Kathleen or me, when we make mistakes; but not wrong in the
dreadful way. I can't express what I mean; but there are two sorts
of wrong, are there not?

L. Yes, Isabel; but you will find that the great difference is
between kind and unkind wrongs, not between meant and unmeant
wrong. Very few people really mean to do wrong,--in a deep sense,
none. They only don't know what they are about. Cain did not mean
to do wrong when he killed Abel.

(ISABEL draws a deep breath, and opens her eyes very wide.)

L. No, Isabel; and there are countless Cains among us now, who
kill their brothers by the score a day, not only for less
provocation than Cain had, but for NO provocation,--and merely for
what they can make of their bones,--yet do not think they are
doing wrong in the least. Then sometimes you have the business
reversed, as over in America these last years, where you have seen
Abel resolutely killing Cain, and not thinking he is doing wrong
The great difficulty is always to open people's eyes: to touch
their feelings and break their hearts, is easy, the difficult
thing is to break their heads. What does it matter as long as they
remain stupid, whether you change their feelings or not? You
cannot be always at their elbow to tell them what is right and
they may just do as wrong as before or worse, and their best
intentions merely make the road smooth for them,--you know where,
children. For it is not the place itself that is paved with them
as people say so often. You can't pave the bottomless pit, but you
may the road to it

MAY. Well, but if people do as well as they can see how, surely
that is the right for them, isn't it?

L. No, May, not a bit of it right is right, and wrong is wrong. It
is only the fool who does wrong, and says he "did it for the
best." And if there's one sort of person in the world that the
Bible speaks harder of than another, it is fools. Their particular
and chief way of saying "There is no God" is this of declaring
that whatever their "public opinion" may be is right and that
God's opinion is of no consequence.

MAY. But surely nobody can always know what is right?

L. Yes, you always can, for to-day; and if you do what you see of
it to-day, you will see more of it, and more clearly, to-morrow.
Here for instance, you children are at school, and have to learn
French, and arithmetic, and music, and several other such things.
That is your "right" for the present; the "right" for us, your
teachers, is to see that you learn as much as you can, without
spoiling your dinner, your sleep, or your play; and that what you
do learn, you learn well. You all know when you learn with a will,
and when you dawdle. There's no doubt of conscience about that, I
suppose?

VIOLET. No; but if one wants to read an amusing book, instead of
learning one's lesson?

L. You don't call that a "question," seriously, Violet? You are
then merely deciding whether you will resolutely do wrong or not.

MARY. But, in after life, how many fearful difficulties may arise,
however one tries to know or to do what is right!

L. You are much too sensible a girl, Mary, to have felt that,
whatever you may have seen. A great many of young ladies'
difficulties arise from their falling in love with a wrong person;
but they have no business to let themselves fall in love, till
they know he is the right one.

DORA. How many thousands ought he to have a year?

L. (disdaining reply). There are, of course, certain crises of
fortune when one has to take care of oneself, and mind shrewdly
what one is about. There is never any real doubt about the path,
but you may have to walk very slowly.

MARY. And if one is forced to do a wrong thing by some one who has
authority over you?

L. My dear, no one can be forced to do a wrong thing, for the
guilt is in the will: but you may any day be forced to do a fatal
thing, as you might be forced to take poison; the remarkable law
of nature in such cases being, that it is always unfortunate YOU
who are poisoned, and not the person who gives you the dose. It is
a very strange law, but it IS a law. Nature merely sees to the
carrying out of the normal operation of arsenic. She never
troubles herself to ask who gave it you. So also you may be
starved to death, morally as well as physically, by other people's
faults. You are, on the whole, very good children sitting here to-
day; do you think that your goodness comes all by your own
contriving? or that you are gentle and kind because your
dispositions are naturally more angelic than those of the poor
girls who are playing, with wild eyes, on the dust-heaps in the
alleys of our great towns; and who will one day fill their
prisons,--or, better, their graves? Heaven only knows where they,
and we who have cast them there shall stand at last But the main
judgment question will be, I suppose, for all of us, "Did you keep
a good heart through it? What you were, others may answer for,--
what you tried to be, you must answer for yourself. Was the heart
pure and true--tell us that?

And so we come back to your sorrowful question, Lucilla, which I
put aside a little ago. You would be afraid to answer that your
heart WAS pure and true, would not you?

LUCILLA. Yes, indeed, sir.

L. Because you have been taught that it is all evil--"only evil
continually." Somehow, often as people say that, they never seem,
to me, to believe it. Do you really believe it?

LUCILLA. Yes, sir, I hope so.

L. That you have an entirely bad heart?

LUCILLA (a little uncomfortable at the substitution of the
monosyllable for the dissyllable, nevertheless persisting in her
orthodoxy). Yes, sir.

L. Florrie, I am sure you are tired; I never like you to stay when
you are tired; but, you know, you must not play with the kitten
while we're talking.

FLORRIE. Oh! but I'm not tired, and I'm only nursing her. She'll
be asleep in my lap, directly.

L. Stop! that puts me in mind of something I had to show you,
about minerals that are like hair I want a hair out of Tittie's
tail.

FLORRIE. (quite rude in her surprise, even to the point of
repeating expressions). Out of Tittie's tail!

L. Yes, a brown one Lucilla, you can get at the tip of it nicely,
under Florrie's arm, just pull one out for me.

LUCILLA. Oh! but, sir, it will hurt her so!

L. Never mind, she can't scratch you while Florrie is holding her.
Now that I think of it you had better pull out two.

LUCILLA. But then she may scratch Florrie! and it will hurt her so
sir! if you only want brown hairs, wouldn't two of mine do?

L. Would you really rather pull out your own than Tittie's?

LUCILLA. Oh, of course, if mine will do.

L. But that's very wicked, Lucilla!

LUCILLA. Wicked, sir?

L. Yes, if your heart was not so bad, you would much rather pull
all the cat's hairs out, than one of your own.

LUCILLA. Oh! but, sir, I didn't mean bad like that.

L. I believe, if the truth were told, Lucilla, you would like to
tie a kettle to Tittie's tail, and hunt her round the playground.

LUCILLA. Indeed, I should not, sir.

L. That's not true, Lucilla; you know it cannot be.

LUCILLA. Sir?

L. Certainly it is not;--how can you possibly speak any truth out
of such a heart as you have? It is wholly deceitful.

LUCILLA. Oh! no, no; I don't mean that way; I don't mean that it
makes me tell lies, quite out.

L. Only that it tells lies within you?

LUCILLA. Yes.

L. Then, outside of it, you know what is true, and say so; and I
may trust the outside of your heart; but within, it is all foul
and false. Is that the way?

LUCILLA. I suppose so: I don't understand it quite.

L. There is no occasion for understanding it; but do you feel it?
Are you sure that your heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked?

LUCILLA (much relieved by finding herself among phrases with which
she is acquainted). Yes, sir. I'm sure of that.

L. (pensively). I'm sorry for it, Lucilla.

LUCILLA. So am I, indeed.

L. What are you sorry with, Lucilla?

LUCILLA. Sorry with, sir?

L. Yes; I mean, where do you feel sorry; in your feet?

LUCILLA (laughing a little). No, sir, of course.

L. In your shoulders, then?

LUCILLA. No, sir.

L. You are sure of that? Because, I fear, sorrow in the shoulders
would not be worth much.

LUCILLA. I suppose I feel it in my heart, if I really am sorry.

L. If you really are! Do you mean to say that you are sure you are
utterly wicked, and yet do not care?

LUCILLA. No, indeed; I have cried about it often.

L. Well, then, you are sorry in your heart?

LUCILLA. Yes, when the sorrow is worth anything.

L. Even if it be not, it cannot be anywhere else but there. It is
not the crystalline lens of your eyes which is sorry, when you
cry?

LUCILLA. No, sir, of course.

L. Then, have you two hearts; one of which is wicked, and the
other grieved? or is one side of it sorry for the other side?

LUCILLA. (weary of cross-examination, and a little vexed). Indeed,
sir, you know I can't understand it; but you know how it is
written--"another law in my members, warring against the law of my
mind."

L. Yes, Lucilla, I know how it is written; but I do not see that
it will help us to know that, if we neither understand what is
written, nor feel it. And you will not get nearer to the meaning
of one verse, if, as soon as you are puzzled by it, you escape to
another, introducing three new words--"law," "members," and
"mind"; not one of which you at present know the meaning of; and
respecting which, you probably never will be much wiser; since men
like Montesquieu and Locke have spent great part of their lives in
endeavoring to explain two of them.

LUCILLA. Oh! please, sir, ask somebody else.

L. If I thought any one else could answer better than you,
Lucilla, I would: but suppose I try, instead, myself, to explain
your feelings to you?

LUCILLA. Oh, yes; please do.

L. Mind, I say your "feelings," not your "belief." For I cannot
undertake to explain anybody's beliefs. Still I must try a little,
first, to explain the belief also, because I want to draw it to
some issue. As far as I understand what you say, or any one else,
taught as you have been taught, says, on this matter,--you think
that there is an external goodness, a whited-sepulcher kind of
goodness, which appears beautiful outwardly, but is within full of
uncleanness: a deep secret guilt, of which we ourselves are not
sensible; and which can only be seen by the Maker of us all.
(Approving murmurs from audience.)

L. Is it not so with the body as well as the soul?

(Looked notes of interrogation.)

L. A skull, for instance, is not a beautiful thing? (Grave faces,
signifying "Certainly not," and "What next?")

L. And if you all could see in each other, with clear eyes,
whatever God sees beneath those fair faces of yours, you would not
like it?

(Murmured No's.)

L. Nor would it be good for you?

(Silence.)

L. The probability being that what God does not allow you to see,
He does not wish you to see; nor even to think of?

(Silence prolonged.)

L. It would not at all be good for you, for instance, whenever you
were washing your faces, and braiding your hair, to be thinking of
the shapes of the jawbones, and of the cartilage of the nose, and
of the jagged sutures of the scalp?

(Resolutely whispered No's.)

L. Still less, to see through a clear glass the daily processes of
nourishment and decay?

(No.)

L. Still less if instead of merely inferior and preparatory
conditions of structure, as in the skeleton,--or inferior offices
of structure, as in operations of life and death,--there were
actual disease in the body, ghastly and dreadful. You would try to
cure it; but having taken such measures as were necessary, you
would not think the cure likely to be promoted by perpetually
watching the wounds, or thinking of them. On the contrary, you
would be thankful for every moment of forgetfulness: as, in daily
health, you must be thankful that your Maker has veiled whatever
is fearful in your frame under a sweet and manifest beauty; and
has made it your duty, and your only safety, to rejoice in that,
both in yourself and in others;--not indeed concealing, or
refusing to believe in sickness, if it come; but never dwelling on
it.

Now, your wisdom and duty touching soul-sickness are just the
same. Ascertain clearly what is wrong with you; and so far as you
know any means of mending it, take those means, and have done;
when you are examining yourself, never call yourself merely a
"sinner," that is very cheap abuse; and utterly useless. You may
even get to like it, and be proud of it. But call yourself a liar,
a coward, a sluggard, a glutton, or an evil-eyed, jealous wretch,
if you indeed find yourself to be in any wise any of these. Take
steady means to check yourself in whatever fault you have
ascertained, and justly accused yourself of. And as soon as you
are in active way of mending, you will be no more inclined to moan
over an undefined corruption. For the rest, you will find it less
easy to uproot faults, than to choke them by gaining virtues. Do
not think of your faults; still less of others' faults: in every
person who comes near you, look for what is good and strong: honor
that; rejoice in it; and, as you can, try to imitate it: and your
faults will drop off like dead leaves, when their time comes. If,
on looking back, your whole life should seem rugged as a palm-tree
stem; still, never mind, so long as it has been growing; and has
its grand green shade of leaves, and weight of honeyed fruit, at
top. And even if you cannot find much good in yourself at last,
think that it does not much matter to the universe either what you
were, or are; think how many people are noble, if you cannot be;
and rejoice in THEIR nobleness. An immense quantity of modern
confession of sin, even when honest, is merely a sickly egotism;
which will rather gloat over its own evil, than lose the
centralization of its interest in itself.

MARY. But then, if we ought to forget ourselves so much, how did
the old Greek proverb "Know thyself" come to be so highly
esteemed?

L. My dear, it is the proverb of proverbs; Apollo's proverb, and
the sun's--but do you think you can know yourself by looking INTO
yourself? Never. You can know what you are, only by looking OUT of
yourself. Measure your own powers with those of others; compare
your own interests with those of others; try to understand what
you appear to them, as well as what they appear to you; and judge
of yourselves, in all things, relatively and subordinately; not
positively: starting always with a wholesome conviction of the
probability that there is nothing particular about you. For
instance, some of you perhaps think you can write poetry. Dwell on
your own feelings; and doings:--and you will soon think yourselves
Tenth Muses; but forget your own feeling; and try, instead, to
understand a line or two of Chaucer or Dante: and you will soon
begin to feel yourselves very foolish girls--which is much like
the fact.

So, something which befalls you may seem a great misfortune,--you
meditate over its effects on you personally: and begin to think
that it is a chastisement, or a warning, or a this or that or the
other of profound significance; and that all the angels in heaven
have left their business for a little while, that they may watch
its effects on your mind. But give up this egotistic indulgence of
your fancy; examine a little what misfortunes, greater a thousand-
fold, are happening, every second, to twenty times worthier
persons: and your self-consciousness will change into pity and
humility; and you will know yourself so far as to understand that
"there hath nothing taken thee but what is common to man."

Now, Lucilla, these are the practical conclusions which any person
of sense would arrive at, supposing the texts which relate to the
inner evil of the heart were as many, and as prominent, as they
are often supposed to be by careless readers. But the way in which
common people read their Bibles is just like the way that the old
monks thought hedgehogs ate grapes. They rolled themselves (it was
said), over and over, where the grapes lay on the ground. What
fruit stuck to their spines, they carried off, and ate. So your
hedgehoggy readers roll themselves over and over their Bibles, and
declare that whatever sticks to their own spines is Scripture, and
that nothing else is. But you can only get the skins of the texts
that way. If you want their juice, you must press them in cluster.
Now, the clustered texts about the human heart, insist, as a body,
not on any inherent corruption in all hearts, but on the terrific
distinction between the bad and the good ones. "A good man, out of
the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that which is good;
and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth that
which is evil." "They on the rock are they which, in an honest and
good heart, having heard the word, keep it." "Delight thyself in
the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart." "The
wicked have bent their bow, that they may privily shoot at him
that is upright in heart." And so on; they are countless, to the
same effect. And, for all of us, the question is not at all to
ascertain how much or how little corruption there is in human
nature; but to ascertain whether, out of all the mass of that
nature, we are of the sheep or the goat breed; whether we are
people of upright heart, being shot at, or people of crooked
heart, shooting. And, of all the texts bearing on the subject,
this, which is a quite simple and practical order, is the one you
have chiefly to hold in mind. "Keep thy heart with all diligence,
for out of it are the issues of life."

LUCILLA. And yet, how inconsistent the texts seem!

L. Nonsense, Lucilla! do you think the universe is bound to look
consistent to a girl of fifteen? Look up at your own room window;
--you can just see it from where you sit. I'm glad that it is left
open, as it ought to be, in so fine a day. But do you see what a
black spot it looks, in the sunlighted wall?

LUCILLA. Yes, it looks as black as ink.

L. Yet you know it is a very bright room when you are inside of
it; quite as bright as there is any occasion for it to be, that
its little lady may see to keep it tidy. Well, it is very
probable, also, that if you could look into your heart from the
sun's point of view, it might appear a very black hole indeed:
nay, the sun may sometimes think good to tell you that it looks so
to Him; but He will come into it, and make it very cheerful for
you, for all that, if you don't put the shutters up. And the one
question for YOU, remember, is not "dark or light?" but "tidy or
untidy?" Look well to your sweeping and garnishing; and be sure it
is only the banished spirit, or some of the seven wickeder ones at
his back, who will still whisper to you that it is all black.





LECTURE 6.

CRYSTAL QUARRELS


Full conclave, in Schoolroom. There has been a game of
crystallization in the morning, of which various account has to be
rendered. In particular, everybody has to explain why they were
always where they were not intended to be.

L. (having received and considered the report). You have got on
pretty well children: but you know these were easy figures you
have been trying. Wait till I have drawn you out the plans of some
crystals of snow!

MARY. I don't think those will be the most difficult:--they are so
beautiful that we shall remember our places better; and then they
are all regular, and in stars: it is those twisty oblique ones we
are afraid of.

L. Read Carlyle's account of the battle of Leuthen, and learn
Friedrich's "oblique order." You will "get it done for once, I
think, provided you CAN march as a pair of compasses would." But
remember, when you can construct the most difficult single
figures, you have only learned half the game--nothing so much as
the half, indeed, as the crystals themselves play it.

MARY. Indeed; what else is there?

L. It is seldom that any mineral crystallizes alone. Usually two
or three, under quite different crystalline laws, form together.
They do this absolutely without flaw or fault, when they are in
fine temper: and observe what this signifies. It signifies that
the two, or more, minerals of different natures agree, somehow,
between themselves how much space each will want;--agree which of
them shall give way to the other at their junction; or in what
measure each will accommodate itself to the other's shape! And
then each takes its permitted shape, and allotted share of space;
yielding, or being yielded to, as it builds till each crystal has
fitted itself perfectly and gracefully to its differently-natured
neighbor. So that, in order to practice this, in even the simplest
terms, you must divide into two parties, wearing different colors;
each must choose a different figure to construct; and you must
form one of these figures through the other, both going on at the
same time.

MARY. I think WE may, perhaps, manage it; but I cannot at all
understand how the crystals do. It seems to imply so much
preconcerting of plan, and so much giving way to each other, as if
they really were living.

L. Yes, it implies both the concurrence and compromise, regulating
all wilfulness of design: and, more curious still, the crystals do
NOT always give way to each other. They show exactly the same
varieties of temper that human creatures might. Sometimes they
yield the required place with perfect grace and courtesy; forming
fantastic, but exquisitely finished groups: and sometimes they
will not yield at all; but fight furiously for their places,
losing all shape and honor, and even their own likeness, in the
contest.

MARY. But is not that wholly wonderful? How is it that one never
sees it spoken of in books?

L. The scientific men are all busy in determining the constant
laws under which the struggle takes place; these indefinite humors
of the elements are of no interest to them. And unscientific
people rarely give themselves the trouble of thinking at all, when
they look at stones. Not that it is of much use to think; the more
one thinks, the more one is puzzled.

MARY. Surely it is more wonderful than anything in botany?

L. Everything has its own wonders; but, given the nature of the
plant, it is easier to understand what a flower will do, and why
it does it, than, given anything we as yet know of stone-nature,
to understand what a crystal will do, and why it does it. You at
once admit a kind of volition and choice, in the flower; but we
are not accustomed to attribute anything of the kind to the
crystal. Yet there is, in reality, more likeness to some
conditions of human feeling among stones than among plants. There
is a far greater difference between kindly-tempered and ill-
tempered crystals of the same mineral, than between any two
specimens of the same flower: and the friendships and wars of
crystals depend more definitely and curiously on their varieties
of disposition, than any associations of flowers. Here, for
instance, is a good garnet, living with good mica; one rich red,
and the other silver white; the mica leaves exactly room enough
for the garnet to crystallize comfortably in; and the garnet lives
happily in its little white house; fitted to it, like a pholas in
its cell. But here are wicked garnets living with wicked mica. See
what ruin they make of each other! You cannot tell which is which;
the garnets look like dull red stains on the crumbling stone. By
the way, I never could understand, if St. Gothard is a real saint,
why he can't keep his garnets in better order. These are all under
his care; but I suppose there are too many of them for him to look
after. The streets of Airolo are paved with them.

MAY. Paved with garnets?

L. With mica-slate and garnets; I broke this bit out of a paving
stone. Now garnets and mica are natural friends, and generally
fond of each other; but you see how they quarrel when they are ill
brought up. So it is always. Good crystals are friendly with
almost all other good crystals, however little they chance to see
of each other, or however opposite their habits may be; while
wicked crystals quarrel with one another, though they may be
exactly alike in habits, and see each other continually. And of
course the wicked crystals quarrel with the good ones.

ISABEL. Then do the good ones get angry?

L. No, never: they attend to their own work and life; and live it
as well as they can, though they are always the sufferers. Here,
for instance, is a rock crystal of the purest race and finest
temper, who was born, unhappily for him, in a bad neighborhood,
near Beaufort in Savoy; and he has had to fight with vile
calcareous mud all his life. See here, when he was but a child, it
came down on him, and nearly buried him; a weaker crystal would
have died in despair; but he only gathered himself together, like
Hercules against the serpents, and threw a layer of crystal over
the clay; conquered it,--imprisoned it,--and lived on. Then, when
he was a little older, came more clay; and poured itself upon him
here, at the side; and he has laid crystal over that, and lived
on, in his purity. Then the clay came on at his angles, and tried
to cover them, and round them away; but upon that he threw out
buttress-crystals at his angles, all as true to his own central
line as chapels round a cathedral apse; and clustered them round
the clay; and conquered it again. At last the clay came on at his
summit, and tried to blunt his summit; but he could not endure
that for an instant; and left his flanks all rough, but pure; and
fought the clay at his crest, and built crest over crest and peak
over peak, till the clay surrendered at last, and here is his
summit, smooth and pure, terminating a pyramid of alternate clay
and crystal, half a foot high!

LILY. Oh, how nice of him! What a dear, brave crystal! But I can't
bear to see his flanks all broken, and the clay within them.

L. Yes; it was an evil chance for him, the being born to such
contention; there are some enemies so base that even to hold them
captive is a kind of dishonor. But look, here has been quite a
different kind of struggle: the adverse power has been more
orderly, and has fought the pure crystal in ranks as firm as its
own. This is not mere rage and impediment of crowded evil: here is
a disciplined hostility; army against army.

LILY. Oh, but this is much more beautiful!

L. Yes, for both the elements have true virtue in them, it is a
pity they are at war, but they war grandly.

MARY. But is this the same clay as in the other crystal?

L. I used the word clay for shortness. In both, the enemy is
really limestone; but in the first, disordered, and mixed with
true clay; while, here, it is nearly pure, and crystallizes into
its own primitive form, the oblique six-sided one, which you know:
and out of these it makes regiments; and then squares of the
regiments, and so charges the rock crystal, literally in square
against column.

ISABEL. Please, please, let me see. And what does the rock crystal
do?

L. The rock crystal seems able to do nothing. The calcite cuts it
through at every charge. Look here,--and here! The loveliest
crystal in the whole group is hewn fairly into two pieces.

ISABEL. Oh, dear; but is the calcite harder than the crystal then?

L. No, softer. Very much softer.

MARY. But then, how can it possibly cut the crystal?

L. It did not really cut it, though it passes through it. The two
were formed together, as I told you but no one knows how. Still,
it is strange that this hard quartz has in all cases a good-
natured way with it, of yielding to everything else. All sorts of
soft things make nests for themselves in it; and it never makes a
nest for itself in anything. It has all the rough outside work;
and every sort of cowardly and weak mineral can shelter itself
within it. Look; these are hexagonal plates of mica; if they were
outside of this crystal they would break, like burnt paper; but
they are inside of it,--nothing can hurt them,--the crystal has
taken them into its very heart, keeping all their delicate edges
as sharp as if they were under water, instead of bathed in rock.
Here is a piece of branched silver: you can bend it with a touch
of your finger, but the stamp of its every fiber is on the rock in
which it lay, as if the quartz had been as soft as wool.

LILY. Oh, the good, good quartz! But does it never get inside of
anything?

L. As it is a little Irish girl who asks, I may perhaps answer,
without being laughed at, that it gets inside of itself sometimes.
But I don't remember seeing quartz make a nest for itself in
anything else.

ISABEL. Please, there as something I heard you talking about, last
time, with Miss Mary. I was at my lessons, but I heard something
about nests; and I thought it was birds' nests; and I couldn't
help listening; and then, I remember, it was about "nests of
quartz in granite." I remember, because I was so disappointed!

L. Yes, mousie, you remember quite rightly; but I can't tell you
about those nests to-day, nor perhaps to-morrow: but there's no
contradiction between my saying then, and now; I will show you
that there is not, some day. Will you trust me meanwhile?

ISABEL. Won't I!

L. Well, then, look, lastly, at this piece of courtesy in quartz;
it is on a small scale, but wonderfully pretty. Here is nobly born
quartz living with a green mineral, called epidote; and they are
immense friends. Now, you see, a comparatively large and strong
quartz-crystal, and a very weak and slender little one of epidote,
have begun to grow, close by each other, and sloping unluckily
towards each other, so that at last they meet. They cannot go on
growing together; the quartz crystal is five times as thick, and
more than twenty times as strong[Footnote: Quartz is not much
harder than epidote; the strength is only supposed to be in some
proportion to the squares of the diameters.], as the epidote; but
he stops at once, just in the very crowning moment of his life,
when he is building his own summit! He lets the pale little film
of epidote grow right past him; stopping his own summit for it;
and he never himself grows any more.

LILY (after some silence of wonder). But is the quartz NEVER
wicked then?

L. Yes, but the wickedest quartz seems good-natured, compared to
other things. Here are two very characteristic examples; one is
good quartz, living with good pearl-spar, and the other, wicked
quartz, living with wicked pearl spar. In both, the quartz yields
to the soft carbonate of iron: but, in the first place, the iron
takes only what it needs of room; and is inserted into the planes
of the rock crystal with such precision that you must break it
away before you can tell whether it really penetrates the quartz
or not; while the crystals of iron are perfectly formed, and have
a lovely bloom on their surface besides. But here, when the two
minerals quarrel, the unhappy quartz has all its surfaces jagged
and torn to pieces; and there is not a single iron crystal whose
shape you can completely trace. But the quartz has the worst of
it, in both instances.

VIOLET. Might we look at that piece of broken quartz again, with
the weak little film across it? it seems such a strange lovely
thing, like the self-sacrifice of a human being.

L. The self-sacrifice of a human being is not a lovely thing,
Violet. It is often a necessary and noble thing; but no form nor
degree of suicide can be ever lovely.

VIOLET. But self-sacrifice is not suicide!

L. What is it then?

VIOLET. Giving up one's self for another.

L. Well; and what do you mean by "giving up one's self"?

VIOLET. Giving up one's tastes, one's feelings, one's time, one's
happiness, and so on, to make others happy.

L. I hope you will never marry anybody, Violet, who expects you to
make him happy in that way.

VIOLET (hesitating). In what way?

L. By giving up your tastes, and sacrificing your feelings, and
happiness.

VIOLET. No, no, I don't mean that; but you know, for other people,
one must.

L. For people who don't love you, and whom you know nothing about?
Be it so; but how does this "giving up" differ from suicide then?

VIOLET. Why, giving up one's pleasures is not killing one's self?

L. Giving up wrong pleasure is not; neither is it self-sacrifice,
but self-culture. But giving up right pleasure is. If you
surrender the pleasure of walking, your foot will wither: you may
as well cut it off: if you surrender the pleasure of seeing, your
eyes will soon be unable to bear the light; you may as well pluck
them out. And to maim yourself is partly to kill yourself. Do but
go on maiming, and you will soon slay.

VIOLET. But why do you make me think of that verse then, about the
foot and the eye?

L. You are indeed commanded to cut off and to pluck out, if foot
or eye offend you; but why SHOULD they offend you?

VIOLET. I don't know; I never quite understood that.

L. Yet it is a sharp order; one needing to be well understood if
it is to be well obeyed! When Helen sprained her ankle the other
day, you saw how strongly it had to be bandaged; that is to say,
prevented from all work, to recover it. But the bandage was not
"lovely."

VIOLET. No, indeed.

L. And if her foot had been crushed, or diseased, or snake-bitten,
instead of sprained, it might have been needful to cut it off. But
the amputation would not have been "lovely."

VIOLET. No.

L. Well, if eye and foot are dead already, and betray you,--if the
light that is in you be darkness, and your feet run into mischief,
or are taken in the snare,--it is indeed time to pluck out, and
cut off, I think: but, so crippled, you can never be what you
might have been otherwise. You enter into life, at best, halt or
maimed; and the sacrifice is not beautiful, though necessary.

VIOLET (after a pause). But when one sacrifices one's self for
others?

L. Why not rather others for you?

VIOLET. Oh! but I couldn't bear that.

L. Then why should they bear it?

DORA (bursting in, indignant). And Thermopylae, and Protesilaus,
and Marcus Curtius, and Arnold de Winkelried, and Iphigenia, and
Jephthah's daughter?

L. (sustaining the indignation unmoved). And the Samaritan woman's
son?

DORA. Which Samaritan woman's?

L. Read 2 Kings vi. 29.

DORA (obeys). How horrid! As if we meant anything like that!

L. You don't seem to me to know in the least what you do mean,
children. What practical difference is there between "that," and
what you are talking about? The Samaritan children had no voice of
their own in the business, it is true; but neither had Iphigenia:
the Greek girl was certainly neither boiled, nor eaten; but that
only makes a difference in the dramatic effect; not in the
principle.

DORA (biting her lip). Well, then, tell us what we ought to mean.
As if you didn't teach it all to us, and mean it yourself, at this
moment, more than we do, if you wouldn't be tiresome!

L. I mean, and always have meant, simply this, Dora;--that the
will of God respecting us is that we shall live by each other's
happiness, and life; not by each other's misery, or death. I made
you read that verse which so shocked you just now, because the
relations of parent and child are typical of all beautiful human
help. A child may have to die for its parents; but the purpose of
Heaven is that it shall rather live for them;--that, not by its
sacrifice, but by its strength, its joy, its force of being, it
shall be to them renewal of strength; and as the arrow in the hand
of the giant. So it is in all other right relations. Men help each
other by their joy, not by their sorrow. They are not intended to
slay themselves for each other, but to strengthen themselves for
each other. And among the many apparently beautiful things which
turn, through mistaken use, to utter evil, I am not sure but that
the thoughtlessly meek and self-sacrificing spirit of good men
must be named as one of the fatalest. They have so often been
taught that there is a virtue in mere suffering, as such; and
foolishly to hope that good may be brought by Heaven out of all on
which Heaven itself has set the stamp of evil, that we may avoid
it,--that they accept pain and defeat as if these were their
appointed portion; never understanding that their defeat is not
the less to be mourned because it is more fatal to their enemies
than to them. The one thing that a good man has to do, and to see
done, is justice; he is neither to slay himself nor others
causelessly: so far from denying himself, since he is pleased by
good, he is to do his utmost to get his pleasure accomplished. And
I only wish there were strength, fidelity, and sense enough, among
the good Englishmen of this day, to render it possible for them to
band together in a vowed brotherhood, to enforce, by strength of
heart and hand, the doing of human justice among all who came
within their sphere. And finally, for your own teaching, observe,
although there may be need for much self-sacrifice and self-denial
in the correction of faults of character, the moment the character
is formed, the self-denial ceases. Nothing is really well done,
which it costs you pain to do.

VIOLET. But surely, sir, you are always pleased with us when we
try to please others, and not ourselves?

L. My dear child, in the daily course and discipline of right
life, we must continually and reciprocally submit and surrender in
all kind and courteous and affectionate ways: and these
submissions and ministries to each other, of which you all know
(none better) the practice and the preciousness, are as good for
the yielder as the receiver: they strengthen and perfect as much
as they soften and refine. But the real sacrifice of all our
strength, or life, or happiness to others (though it may be
needed, and though all brave creatures hold their lives in their
hand, to be given, when such need comes, as frankly as a soldier
gives his life in battle), is yet always a mournful and momentary
necessity; not the fulfillment of the continuous law of being.
Self-sacrifice which is sought after, and triumphed in, is usually
foolish; and calamitous in its issue: and by the sentimental
proclamation and pursuit of it, good people have not only made
most of their own lives useless, but the whole framework of their
religion so hollow, that at this moment, while the English nation,
with its lips, pretends to teach every man to "love his neighbor
as himself," with its hands and feet it clutches and tramples like
a wild beast; and practically lives, every soul of it that can, on
other people's labor. Briefly, the constant duty of every man to
his fellows is to ascertain his own powers and special gifts; and
to strengthen them for the help of others. Do you think Titian
would have helped the world better by denying himself, and not
painting; or Casella by denying himself, and not singing! The real
virtue is to be ready to sing the moment people ask us; as he was,
even in purgatory. The very word "virtue" means not "conduct" but
"strength," vital energy in the heart. Were not you reading about
that group of words beginning with V,--vital, virtuous, vigorous,
and so on,--in Max Muller, the other day, Sibyl? Can't you tell
the others about it?

SIBYL. No, I can't; will you tell us, please?

L. Not now, it is too late. Come to me some idle time to-morrow,
and I'll tell you about it, if all's well. But the gist of it is,
children, that you should at least know two Latin words; recollect
that "mors" means death and delaying; and "vita" means life and
growing: and try always, not to mortify yourselves, but to vivify
yourselves.

VIOLET. But, then, are we not to mortify our earthly affections?
and surely we are to sacrifice ourselves, at least in God's
service, if not in man's?

L. Really, Violet, we are getting too serious. I've given you
enough ethics for one talk, I think! Do let us have a little play.
Lily, what were you so busy about, at the ant-hill in the wood,
this morning?

LILY. Oh, it was the ants who were busy, not I; I was only trying
to help them a little.

L. And they wouldn't be helped, I suppose?

LILY. No, indeed. I can't think why ants are always so tiresome,
when one tries to help them! They were carrying bits of stick, as
fast as they could, through a piece of grass; and pulling and
pushing, SO hard; and tumbling over and over,--it made one quite
pity them; so I took some of the bits of stick, and carried them
forward a little, where I thought they wanted to put them; but
instead of being pleased, they left them directly, and ran about
looking quite angry and frightened; and at last ever so many of
them got up my sleeves, and bit me all over, and I had to come
away.

L. I couldn't think what you were about. I saw your French grammar
lying on the grass behind you, and thought perhaps you had gone to
ask the ants to hear you a French verb.

ISABEL. Ah! but you didn't, though!

L. Why not, Isabel? I knew, well enough, Lily couldn't learn that
verb by herself.

ISABEL. No; but the ants couldn't help her.

L. Are you sure the ants could not have helped you, Lily?

LILY (thinking). I ought to have learned something from them,
perhaps.

L. But none of them left their sticks to help you through the
irregular verb?

LILY. No, indeed. (Laughing, with some others.)

L. What are you laughing at, children? I cannot see why the ants
should not have left their tasks to help Lily in hers,--since here
is Violet thinking she ought to leave HER tasks, to help God in
his. Perhaps, however, she takes Lily's more modest view, and
thinks only that "He ought to learn something from her."

(Tears in VIOLET'S eyes.)

DORA (scarlet). It's too bad--it's a shame:--poor Violet!

L. My dear children, there's no reason why one should be so red,
and the other so pale, merely because you are made for a moment to
feel the absurdity of a phrase which you have been taught to use,
in common with half the religious world. There is but one way in
which man can ever help God--that is, by letting God help him: and
there is no way in which His name is more guiltily taken in vain,
than by calling the abandonment of our own work, the performance
of His.

God is a kind Father. He sets us all in the places where He wishes
us to be employed; and that employment is truly "our Father's
business." He chooses work for every creature which will be
delightful to them, if they do it simply and humbly. He gives us
always strength enough, and sense enough, for what He wants us to
do; if we either tire ourselves or puzzle ourselves, it is
ourselves, it is our own fault. And we may always be sure,
whatever we are doing, that we cannot be pleasing Him, if we are
not happy ourselves. Now, away with you, children; and be as happy
as you can. And when you cannot, at least don't plume yourselves
upon pouting.





LECTURE 7.

HOME VIRTUES


By the fireside, in the Drawing-room. Evening.

DORA. Now, the curtains are drawn, and the fire's bright, and
here's your arm-chair--and you're to tell us all about what you
promised.

L. All about what?

DORA. All about virtue.

KATHLEEN. Yes, and about the words that begin with V.

L. I heard you singing about a word that begins with V, in the
playground, this morning, Miss Katie.

KATHLEEN. Me singing!

MAY. Oh tell us--tell us.

L. "Vilikens and his--"

KATHLEEN (stopping his mouth). Oh! please don't. Where were you?

ISABEL. I'm sure I wish I had known where he was! We lost him
among the rhododendrons, and I don't know where he got to; oh, you
naughty--naughty--(climbs on his knee).

DORA. Now, Isabel, we really want to talk.

L. _I_ don't.

DORA. Oh, but you must. You promised, you know.

L. Yes, if all was well; but all's ill. I'm tired and cross; and I
won't.

DORA. You're not a bit tired, and you're not crosser than two
sticks; and we'll make you talk, if you were crosser than six.
Come here, Egypt; and get on the other side of him.

(EGYPT takes up a commanding position near the hearth-brush.)

DORA (reviewing her forces). Now, Lily, come and sit on the rug in
front.

(LILY does as she is bid.)

L. (seeing he has no chance against the odds). Well, well; but I'm
really tired. Go and dance a little, first; and let me think.

DORA. No; you mustn't think. You will be wanting to make us think
next; that will be tiresome.

L. Well, go and dance first, to get quit of thinking: and then
I'll talk as long as you like.

DORA. Oh, but we can't dance to-night. There isn't time; and we
want to hear about virtue.

L. Let me see a little of it first. Dancing is the first of girls'
virtues.

EGYPT. Indeed! And the second?

L. Dressing.

EGYPT. Now, you needn't say that! I mended that tear the first
thing before breakfast this morning.

L. I cannot otherwise express the ethical principle, Egypt;
whether you have mended your gown or not.

DORA. Now don't be tiresome. We really must hear about virtue,
please; seriously.

L. Well. I'm telling you about it, as fast as I can.

DORA. What! the first of girls' virtues is dancing?

L. More accurately, it is wishing to dance, and not wishing to
tease, nor hear about virtue.

DORA (to EGYPT). Isn't he cross?

EGYPT. How many balls must we go to in the season, to be perfectly
virtuous?

L. As many as you can without losing your color. But I did not say
you should wish to go to balls. I said you should be always
wanting to dance.

EGYPT. So we do; but everybody says it is very wrong.

L. Why, Egypt, I thought--

    "There was a lady once,
    That would not be a queen,--that would she not,
    For all the mud in Egypt."

You were complaining the other day of having to go out a great
deal oftener than you liked.

EGYPT. Yes, so I was; but then, it isn't to dance. There's no room
to dance: it's--(Pausing to consider what it is for).

L. It is only to be seen, I suppose. Well, there's no harm in
that. Girls ought to like to be seen.

DORA (her eyes flashing). Now, you don't mean that; and you're too
provoking; and we won't dance again, for a month.

L. It will answer every purpose of revenge, Dora, if you only
banish me to the library; and dance by yourselves; but I don't
think Jessie and Lily will agree to that. You like me to see you
dancing, don't you, Lily?

LILY. Yes, certainly,--when we do it rightly.

L. And besides, Miss Dora, if young ladies really do not want to
be seen, they should take care not to let their eyes flash when
they dislike what people say: and, more than that, it is all
nonsense from beginning to end, about not wanting to be seen. I
don't know any more tiresome flower in the borders than your
especially "modest" snowdrop; which one always has to stoop down
and take all sorts of tiresome trouble with, and nearly break its
poor little head off, before you can see it; and then, half of it
is not worth seeing. Girls should be like daisies, nice and white,
with an edge of red, if you look close, making the ground bright
wherever they are, knowing simply and quietly that they do it, and
are meant to do it and that it would be very wrong if they didn't
do it. Not want to be seen, indeed! How long were you in doing up
your back hair, this afternoon Jessie?

(JESSIE not immediately answering, DORA comes to her assistance)

DORA. Not above three-quarters of an hour, I think, Jess?

JESSIE (putting her finger up). Now, Dorothy, you needn't talk,
you know!

L. I know she needn't, Jessie, I shall ask her about those dark
plaits presently. (DORA looks round to see if there is any way
open for retreat) But never mind, it was worth the time, whatever
it was, and nobody will ever mistake that golden wreath for a
chignon: but if you don't want it to be seen you had better wear a
cap.

JESSIE. Ah, now, are you really going to do nothing but play? And
we all have been thinking, and thinking, all day, and hoping you
would tell us things, and now--!

L. And now I am telling you things, and true things, and things
good for you, and you won't believe me. You might as well have let
me go to sleep at once, as I wanted to. (Endeavors again to make
himself comfortable.)

ISABEL. Oh, no, no, you sha'n't go to sleep, you naughty!--
Kathleen, come here.

L. (knowing what he has to expect if KATHLEEN comes). Get away,
Isabel, you're too heavy. (Sitting up.) What have I been saying?

DORA. I do believe he has been asleep all the time! You never
heard anything like the things you've been saying.

L. Perhaps not. If you have heard them, and anything like them, it
is all I want.

EGYPT. Yes, but we don't understand, and you know we don't; and we
want to.

L. What did I say first?

DORA. That the first virtue of girls was wanting to go to balls.

L. I said nothing of the kind.

JESSIE. "Always wanting to dance," you said.

L. Yes, and that's true. Their first virtue is to be intensely
happy;--so happy that they don't know what to do with themselves
for happiness,--and dance, instead of walking. Don't you recollect
"Louisa,"

    "No fountain from a rocky cave
    E'er tripped with foot so free;
    She seemed as happy as a wave
    That dances on the sea."

A girl is always like that, when everything's right with her.

VIOLET. But, surely, one must be sad sometimes?

L. Yes, Violet and dull sometimes and stupid sometimes, and cross
sometimes. What must be, must; but it is always either our own
fault, or somebody else's. The last and worst thing that can be
said of a nation is, that it has made its young girls sad, and
weary.

MAY. But I am sure I have heard a great many good people speak
against dancing?

L. Yes, May, but it does not follow they were wise as well as
good. I suppose they think Jeremiah liked better to have to write
Lamentations for his people, than to have to write that promise
for them, which everybody seems to hurry past, that they may get
on quickly to the verse about Rachel weeping for her children,
though the verse they pass is the counter blessing to that one:
"Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance; and both young men
and old together, and I will turn their mourning into joy."

(The children get very serious, but look at each other, as if
pleased.)

MARY. They understand now: but, do you know what you said next?

L. Yes, I was not more than half asleep. I said their second
virtue was dressing.

MARY. Well! what did you mean by that?

L. What do YOU mean by dressing?

MARY. Wearing fine clothes.

L. Ah! there's the mistake. _I_ mean wearing plain ones.

MARY. Yes, I daresay I but that's not what girls understand by
dressing, you know.

L. I can't help that. If they understand by dressing, buying
dresses, perhaps they also understand by drawing, buying pictures.
But when I hear them say they can draw, I understand that they can
make a drawing; and when I hear them say they can dress, I
understand that they can make a dress and--which is quite as
difficult--wear one.

DORA. I'm not sure about the making; for the wearing, we can all
wear them--out, before anybody expects it.

EGYPT (aside to L., piteously). Indeed I have mended that torn
flounce quite neatly; look if I haven't!

L. (aside, to EGYPT). All right; don't be afraid. (Aloud to DORA.)
Yes, doubtless; but you know that is only a slow way of
UNdressing.

DORA. Then, we are all to learn dress-making, are we?

L. Yes; and always to dress yourselves beautifully--not finely,
unless on occasion; but then very finely and beautifully, too.
Also, you are to dress as many other people as you can; and to
teach them how to dress, if they don't know; and to consider every
ill-dressed woman or child whom you see anywhere, as a personal
disgrace; and to get at them, somehow, until everybody is as
beautifully dressed as birds.

(Silence; the children drawing their breaths hard, as if they had
come from under a shower bath.)

L. (seeing objections begin to express themselves in the eyes).
Now you needn't say you can't; for you can, and it's what you were
meant to do, always; and to dress your houses, and your gardens,
too; and to do very little else, I believe, except singing; and
dancing, as we said, of course and--one thing more.

DORA. Our third and last virtue, I suppose?

L. Yes; on Violet's system of triplicities.

DORA. Well, we are prepared for anything now. What is it?

L. Cooking.

DORA. Cardinal, indeed! If only Beatrice were here with her seven
handmaids, that she might see what a fine eighth we had found for
her!

MARY. And the interpretation? What does "cooking" mean?

L. It means the knowledge of Medea, and of Circe, and of Calypso,
and of Helen, and of Rebekah, and of the Queen of Sheba. It means
the knowledge of all herbs, and fruits, and balms, and spices; and
of all that is healing and sweet in fields and groves, and savory
in meats, it means carefulness, and inventiveness, and
watchfulness, and willingness, and readiness of appliance, it
means the economy of your great-grandmothers, and the science of
modern chemists; it means much tasting, and no wasting, it means
English thoroughness, and French art, and Arabian hospitality, and
it means, in fine, that you are to be perfectly and always
"ladies"--"loaf-givers;" and, as you are to see, imperatively,
that everybody has something pretty to put on,--so you are to see,
yet more imperatively, that everybody has something nice to eat.

(Another pause, and long drawn breath.)

DORA (slowly recovering herself) to EGYPT. We had better have let
him go to sleep, I think, after all!

L. You had better let the younger ones go to sleep now: for I
haven't half done.

ISABEL (panic-struck). Oh! please, please! just one quarter of an
hour.

L. No, Isabel, I cannot say what I've got to say in a quarter of
an hour; and it is too hard for you, besides:--you would be lying
awake, and trying to make it out, half the night. That will never
do.

ISABEL. Oh, please!

L. It would please me exceedingly, mousie: but there are times
when we must both be displeased; more's the pity. Lily may stay
for half an hour, if she likes.

LILY. I can't, because Isey never goes to sleep, if she is waiting
for me to come.

ISABEL. Oh, yes, Lily, I'll go to sleep to-night. I will, indeed.

LILY. Yes, it's very likely, Isey, with those fine round eyes! (To
L.) You'll tell me something of what you we been saying, to-
morrow, won't you?

L. No, I won't, Lily. You must choose. It's only in Miss
Edgeworth's novels that one can do right, and have one's cake and
sugar afterwards as well (not that I consider the dilemma, to-
night, so grave).

(LILY, sighing, takes ISABEL'S hand.)

Yes, Lily dear, it will be better, in the outcome of it, so, than
if you were to hear all the talks that eer were talked, and all
the stories that ever were told. Good-night.

(The door leading to the condemned cells of the Dormitory closes
on LILY, ISABEL, FLORRIE, and other diminutive and submissive
victims.)

JESSIE (after a pause). Why, I thought you were so fond of Miss
Edgeworth.

L. So I am, and so you ought all to be. I can read her over and
over again, without ever tiring; there's no one whose every page
is so full, and so delightful, no one who brings you into the
company of pleasanter or wiser people; no one who tells you more
truly how to do right. And it is very nice, in the midst of a wild
world, to have the very ideal of poetical justice done always to
one's hand:--to have everybody found out, who tells lies; and
everybody decorated with a red riband, who doesn't; and to see the
good Laura, who gave away her half sovereign, receiving a grand
ovation from an entire dinner party disturbed for the purpose; and
poor, dear, little Rosamond, who chooses purple jars instead of
new shoes, left at last without either her shoes or her bottle.
But it isn't life: and, in the way children might easily
understand it, it isn't morals.

JESSIE. How do you mean we might understand it?

L. You might think Miss Edgeworth meant that the right was to be
done mainly because one was always rewarded for doing it. It is an
injustice to her to say that: her heroines always do right simply
for its own sake, as they should; and her examples of conduct and
motive are wholly admirable. But her representation of events is
false and misleading. Her good characters never are brought into
the deadly trial of goodness,--the doing right, and suffering for
it, quite finally. And that is life, as God arranges it. "Taking
up one's cross" does not at all mean having ovations at dinner
parties, and being put over everybody else's head.

DORA. But what does it mean then? That is just what we couldn't
understand, when you were telling us about not sacrificing
ourselves, yesterday.

L. My dear, it means simply that you are to go the road which you
see to be the straight one; carrying whatever you find is given
you to carry, as well and stoutly as you can; without making
faces, or calling people to come and look at you. Above all, you
are neither to load, nor unload, yourself; nor cut your cross to
your own liking. Some people think it would be better for them to
have it large; and many, that they could carry it much faster if
it were small; and even those who like it largest are usually very
particular about its being ornamental, and made of the best ebony.
But all that you have really to do is to keep your back as
straight as you can; and not think about what is upon it--above
all, not to boast of what is upon it. The real and essential
meaning of "virtue" is in that straightness of back. Yes; you may
laugh, children, but it is. You know I was to tell you about the
words that began with V. Sibyl, what does "virtue" mean literally?

SIBYL. Does it mean courage?

L. Yes; but a particular kind of courage. It means courage of the
nerve; vital courage. That first syllable of it, if you look in
Max Muller, you will find really means "nerve," and from it come
"vis," and "vir," and "virgin" (through vireo), and the connected
word "virga"--"a rod;"--the green rod, or springing bough of a
tree, being the type of perfect human strength, both in the use
of. it in the Mosaic story, when it becomes a serpent, or strikes
the rock; or when Aaron's bears its almonds; and in the
metaphorical expressions, the "Rod out of the stem of Jesse," and
the "Man whose name is the Branch," and so on. And the essential
idea of real virtue is that of a vital human strength, which
instinctively, constantly, and without motive, does what is right.
You must train men to this by habit, as you would the branch of a
tree; and give them instincts and manners (or morals) of purity,
justice, kindness, and courage. Once rightly trained, they act as
they should, irrespectively of all motive, of fear, or of reward.
It is the blackest sign of putrescence in a national religion,
when men speak as if it were the only safeguard of conduct; and
assume that, but for the fear of being burned, or for the hope of
being rewarded, everybody would pass their lives in lying,
stealing, and murdering. I think quite one of the notablest
historical events of this century (perhaps the very notablest),
was that council of clergymen, horror-struck at the idea of any
diminution in our dread of hell, at which the last of English
clergymen whom one would have expected to see in such a function,
rose as the devil's advocate; to tell us how impossible it was we
could get on without him.

VIOLET (after a pause). But, surely, if people weren't afraid--
(hesitates again).

L. They should be afraid of doing wrong, and of that only, my
dear. Otherwise, if they only don't do wrong for fear of being
punished, they HAVE done wrong in their hearts already.

VIOLET. Well, but surely, at least one ought to be afraid of
displeasing God; and one's desire to please Him should be one's
first motive?

L. He never would be pleased with us, if it were, my dear. When a
father sends his son out into the world--suppose as an apprentice
--fancy the boy's coming home at night, and saying, "Father, I
could have robbed the till to-day; but I didn't, because I thought
you wouldn't like it." Do you think the father would be
particularly pleased?

(VIOLET is silent.)

He would answer, would he not, if he were wise and good, "My boy,
though you had no father, you must not rob tills"? And nothing is
ever done so as really to please our Great Father, unless we would
also have done it, though we had had no Father to know of it.

VIOLET (after long pause). But, then, what continual threatenings,
and promises of reward there are!

L. And how vain both! with the Jews, and with all of us. But the
fact is, that the threat and promise are simply statements of the
Divine law, and of its consequences. The fact is truly told you,--
make what use you may of it: and as collateral warning, or
encouragement, or comfort, the knowledge of future consequences
may often be helpful to us; but helpful chiefly to the better
state when we can act without reference to them. And there's no
measuring the poisoned influence of that notion of future reward
on the mind of Christian Europe, in the early ages. Half the
monastic system rose out of that, acting on the occult pride and
ambition of good people (as the other half of it came of their
follies and misfortunes). There is always a considerable quantity
of pride, to begin with, in what is called "giving one's self to
God." As if one had ever belonged to anybody else!

DORA. But, surely, great good has come out of the monastic system
--our books,--our sciences--all saved by the monks?

L. Saved from what, my dear? From the abyss of misery and ruin
which that false Christianity allowed the whole active world to
live in. When it had become the principal amusement, and the most
admired art of Christian men, to cut one another's throats, and
burn one another's towns; of course the few feeble or reasonable
persons left, who desired quiet, safety, and kind fellowship, got
into cloisters; and the gentlest, thoughtfullest, noblest men and
women shut themselves up, precisely where they could be of least
use. They are very fine things, for us painters, now--the towers
and white arches upon the tops of the rocks; always in places
where it takes a day's climbing to get at them; but the intense
tragi-comedy of the thing, when one thinks of it, is unspeakable.
All the good people of the world getting themselves hung up out of
the way of mischief, like Bailie Nicol Jarvie;--poor little lambs,
as it were, dangling there for the sign of the Golden Fleece; or
like Socrates in his basket in the "Clouds"! (I must read you that
bit of Aristophanes again, by the way.) And believe me, children,
I am no warped witness, as far as regards monasteries; or if I am,
it is in their favor. I have always had a strong leaning that way;
and have pensively shivered with Augustines at St. Bernard; and
happily made hay with Franciscans at Fesole; and sat silent with
Carthusians in their little gardens, south of Florence; and
mourned through many a day-dream, at Melrose and Bolton. But the
wonder is always to me, not how much, but how little, the monks
have, on the whole, done, with all that leisure, and all that
good-will! What nonsense monks characteristically wrote;--what
little progress they made in the sciences to which they devoted
themselves as a duty,--medicine especially;--and, last and worst,
what depths of degradation they can sometimes see one another, and
the population round them, sink into; without either doubting
their system, or reforming it!

(Seeing questions rising to lips.) Hold your little tongues,
children; it's very late, and you'll make me forget what I've to
say. Fancy yourselves in pews, for five minutes. There's one point
of possible good in the conventual system, which is always
attractive to young girls; and the idea is a very dangerous one;--
0the notion of a merit, or exalting virtue, consisting in a habit
of meditation on the "things above," or things of the next world.
Now it is quite true, that a person of beautiful mind, dwelling on
whatever appears to them most desirable and lovely in a possible
future, will not only pass their time pleasantly, but will even
acquire, at last, a vague and wildly gentle charm of manner and
feature, which will give them an air of peculiar sanctity in the
eyes of others. Whatever real or apparent good there may be in
this result, I want you to observe, children, that we have no real
authority for the reveries to which it is owing. We are told
nothing distinctly of the heavenly world; except that it will be
free from sorrow, and pure from sin. What is said of pearl gates,
golden floors, and the like, is accepted as merely figurative by
religious enthusiasts themselves; and whatever they pass their
time in conceiving, whether of the happiness of risen souls, of
their intercourse, or of the appearance and employment of the
heavenly powers, is entirely the product of their own imagination;
and as completely and distinctly a work of fiction, or romantic
invention, as any novel of Sir Walter Scott's. That the romance is
founded on religious theory or doctrine;--that no disagreeable or
wicked persons are admitted into the story;--and that the inventor
fervently hopes that some portion of it may hereafter come true,
does not in the least alter the real nature of the effort or
enjoyment.

Now, whatever indulgence may be granted to amiable people for
pleasing themselves in this innocent way, it is beyond question,
that to seclude themselves from the rough duties of life, merely
to write religious romances, or, as in most cases, merely to dream
them, without taking so much trouble as is implied in writing,
ought not to be received as an act of heroic virtue. But, observe,
even in admitting thus much, I have assumed that the fancies are
just and beautiful, though fictitious. Now, what right have any of
us to assume that our own fancies will assuredly be either the one
or the other? That they delight us, and appear lovely to us, is no
real proof of its not being wasted time to form them: and we may
surely be led somewhat to distrust our judgment of them by
observing what ignoble imaginations have sometimes sufficiently,
or even enthusiastically, occupied the hearts of others. The
principal source of the spirit of religious contemplation is the
East; now I have here in my hand a Byzantine image of Christ,
which, if you will look at it seriously, may, I think, at once and
forever render you cautious in the indulgence of a merely
contemplative habit of mind. Observe, it is the fashion to look at
such a thing only as a piece of barbarous art; that is the
smallest part of its interest. What I want you to see, is the
baseness and falseness of a religious state of enthusiasm, in
which such a work could be dwelt upon with pious pleasure. That a
figure, with two small round black beads for eyes; a gilded face,
deep cut into horrible wrinkles; an open gash for a mouth, and a
distorted skeleton for a body, wrapped about, to make it fine,
with striped enamel of blue and gold;--that such a figure, I say,
should ever have been thought helpful towards the conception of a
Redeeming Deity, may make you, I think, very doubtful, even of the
Divine approval,--much more of the Divine inspiration,--of
religious reverie in general. You feel, doubtless, that your own
idea of Christ would be something very different from this; but in
what does the difference consist? Not in any more divine authority
in your imagination; but in the intellectual work of six
intervening centuries; which, simply, by artistic discipline, has
refined this crude conception for you, and filled you, partly with
an innate sensation, partly with an acquired knowledge, of higher
forms,--which render this Byzantine crucifix as horrible to you,
as it was pleasing to its maker. More is required to excite your
fancy; but your fancy is of no more authority than his was: and a
point of national art-skill is quite conceivable, in which the
best we can do now will be as offensive to the religious dreamers
of the more highly cultivated time, as this Byzantine crucifix is
to you.

MARY. But surely, Angelico will always retain his power over
everybody?

L. Yes, I should think, always; as the gentle words of a child
will: but you would be much surprised, Mary, if you thoroughly
took the pains to analyze, and had the perfect means of analyzing,
that power of Angelico,--to discover its real sources. Of course
it is natural, at first, to attribute it to the pure religious
fervor by which he was inspired; but do you suppose Angelico was
really the only monk, in all the Christian world of the middle
ages, who labored, in art, with a sincere religious enthusiasm?

MARY. No, certainly not.

L. Anything more frightful, more destructive of all religious
faith whatever, than such a supposition, could not be. And yet,
what other monk ever produced such work? I have myself examined
carefully upwards of two thousand illuminated missals, with
especial view to the discovery of any evidence of a similar result
upon the art, from the monkish devotion; and utterly in vain.

MARY. But then, was not Fra Angelico a man of entirely separate
and exalted genius?

L. Unquestionably; and granting him to be that, the peculiar
phenomenon in his art is, to me, not its loveliness, but its
weakness. The effect of "inspiration," had it been real, on a man
of consummate genius, should have been, one would have thought, to
make everything that he did faultless and strong, no less than
lovely. But of all men, deserving to be called "great," Fra
Angelico permits to himself the least pardonable faults, and the
most palpable follies. There is evidently within him a sense of
grace, and power of invention, as great as Ghiberti's:--we are in
the habit of attributing those high qualities to his religious
enthusiasm; but, if they were produced by that enthusiasm in him,
they ought to be produced by the same feelings in others; and we
see they are not. Whereas, comparing him with contemporary great
artists, of equal grace and invention, one peculiar character
remains notable in him,--which, logically, we ought therefore to
attribute to the religious fervor;--and that distinctive character
is, the contented indulgence of his own weaknesses, and
perseverance in his own ignorances.

MARY. But that's dreadful! And what is the source of the peculiar
charm which we all feel in his work?

L. There are many sources of it, Mary; united and seeming like
one. You would never feel that charm but in the work of an
entirely good man; be sure of that; but the goodness is only the
recipient and modifying element, not the creative one. Consider
carefully what delights you in any original picture of Angelico's.
You will find, for one minor thing, an exquisite variety and
brightness of ornamental work. That is not Angelico's inspiration.
It is the final result of the labor and thought of millions of
artists, of all nations; from the earliest Egyptian potters
downwards--Greeks, Byzantines, Hindoos, Arabs, Gauls, and
Northmen--all joining in the toil; and consummating it in
Florence, in that century, with such embroidery of robe and
inlaying of armor as had never been seen till then; nor probably,
ever will be seen more. Angelico merely takes his share of this
inheritance, and applies it in the tenderest way to subjects which
are peculiarly acceptant of it. But the inspiration, if it exist
anywhere, flashes on the knight's shield quite as radiantly as on
the monk's picture. Examining farther into the sources of your
emotion in the Angelico work, you will find much of the impression
of sanctity dependent on a singular repose and grace of gesture,
consummating itself in the floating, flying, and above all, in the
dancing groups. That is not Angelico's inspiration. It is only a
peculiarly tender use of systems of grouping which had been long
before developed by Giotto, Memmi, and Orcagna; and the real root
of it all is simply--What do you think, children? The beautiful
dancing of the Florentine maidens!

DORA (indignant again). Now, I wonder what next! Why not say it
all depended on Herodias' daughter, at once?

L. Yes; it is certainly a great argument against singing that
there were once sirens.

DORA. Well, it may be all very fine and philosophical, but
shouldn't I just like to read you the end of the second volume of
"Modern Painters"!

L. My dear, do you think any teacher could be worth your listening
to, or anybody else's listening to, who had learned nothing, and
altered his mind in nothing, from seven and twenty to seven and
forty? But that second volume is very good for you as far as it
goes. It is a great advance, and a thoroughly straight and swift
one, to be led, as it is the main business of that second volume
to lead you, from Dutch cattle-pieces, and ruffian-pieces, to Fra
Angelico. And it is right for you also, as you grow older, to be
strengthened in the general sense and judgment which may enable
you to distinguish the weaknesses from the virtues of what you
love, else you might come to love both alike; or even the
weaknesses without the virtues. You might end by liking Overbeck
and Cornelius as well as Angelico. However, I have perhaps been
leaning a little too much to the merely practical side of things,
in to-night's talk; and you are always to remember, children, that
I do not deny, though I cannot affirm, the spiritual advantages
resulting, in certain cases, from enthusiastic religious reverie,
and from the other practices of saints and anchorites. The
evidence respecting them has never yet been honestly collected,
much less dispassionately examined: but assuredly, there is in
that direction a probability, and more than a probability, of
dangerous error, while there is none whatever in the practice of
an active, cheerful, and benevolent life. The hope of attaining a
higher religious position, which induces us to encounter, for its
exalted alternative, the risk of unhealthy error, is often, as I
said, founded more on pride than piety; and those who, in modest
usefulness, have accepted what seemed to them here the lowliest
place in the kingdom of their Father, are not, I believe, the
least likely to receive hereafter the command, then unmistakable,
"Friend, go up higher."





LECTURE 8.

CRYSTAL CAPRICE


Formal Lecture in Schoolroom, after some practical examination of
minerals.

L. We have seen enough, children, though very little of what might
be seen if we had more time, of mineral structures produced by
visible opposition, or contest among elements; structures of which
the variety, however great, need not surprise us: for we quarrel,
ourselves, for many and slight causes,--much more, one should
think, may crystals, who can only feel the antagonism, not argue
about it. But there is a yet more singular mimicry of our human
ways in the varieties of form which appear owing to no
antagonistic force; but merely to the variable humor and caprice
of the crystals themselves: and I have asked you all to come into
the schoolroom to-day, because, of course, this is a part of the
crystal mind which must be peculiarly interesting to a feminine
audience. (Great symptoms of disapproval on the part of said
audience.) Now, you need not pretend that it will not interest
you; why should it not? It is true that we men are never
capricious; but that only makes us the more dull and disagreeable.
You, who are crystalline in brightness, as well as in caprice,
charm infinitely, by infinitude of change. (Audible murmurs of
"Worse and worse!" "As if we could be got over that way!" Etc. The
LECTURER, however, observing the expression of the features to be
more complacent, proceeds.) And the most curious mimicry, if not
of your changes of fashion, at least of your various modes (in
healthy periods) of national costume, takes place among the
crystals of different countries. With a little experience, it is
quite possible to say at a glance, in what districts certain
crystals have been found; and although, if we had knowledge
extended and accurate enough, we might of course ascertain the
laws and circumstances which have necessarily produced the form
peculiar to each locality, this would be just as true of the
fancies of the human mind. If we could know the exact
circumstances which affect it, we could foretell what now seems to
us only caprice of thought, as well as what now seems to us only
caprice of crystal: nay, so far as our knowledge reaches, it is on
the whole easier to find some reason why the peasant girls of
Berne should wear their caps in the shape of butterflies; and the
peasant girls of Munich theirs in the shape of shells, than to say
why the rock-crystals of Dauphine should all have their summits of
the shape of lip-pieces of flageolets, while those of St. Gothard
are symmetrical, or why the fluor of Chamouni is rose-colored, and
in octahedrons, while the fluor of Weardale is green, and in
cubes. Still farther removed is the hope, at present, of
accounting for minor differences in modes of grouping and
construction. Take, for instance, the caprices of this single
mineral, quart;--variations upon a single theme. It has many
forms; but see what it will make out of this ONE, the six-sided
prism. For shortness' sake, I shall call the body of the prism its
"column," and the pyramid at the extremities its "cap." Now, here,
first you have a straight column as long and thin as a stalk of
asparagus, with two little caps at the ends; and here you have a
short thick column, as solid as a haystack, with two fat caps at
the ends; and here you have two caps fastened together, and no
column at all between them! Then here is a crystal with its column
fat in the middle, and tapering to a little cap; and here is one
stalked like a mushroom, with a huge cap put on the top of a
slender column! Then here is a column built wholly out of little
caps, with a large smooth cap at the top. And here is a column
built of columns and caps; the caps all truncated about half-way
to their points. And in both these last, the little crystals are
set anyhow, and build the large one in a disorderly way; but here
is a crystal made of columns and truncated caps, set in regular
terraces all the way up.

MARY. But are not these groups of crystals, rather than one
crystal?

L. What do you mean by a group, and what by one crystal?

DORA (audibly aside, to MARY, who is brought to pause). You know
you are never expected to answer, Mary.

L. I'm sure this is easy enough. What do you mean by a group of
people?

MARY. Three or four together, or a good many together, like the
caps in these crystals.

L. But when a great many persons get together they don't take the
shape of one person?

(MARY still at pause.)

ISABEL. No, because they can't; but you know the crystals can; so
why shouldn't they?

L. Well, they don't; that is to say, they don't always, nor even
often. Look here, Isabel.

ISABEL. What a nasty ugly thing!

L. I'm glad you think it so ugly. Yet it is made of beautiful
crystals; they are a little gray and cold in color, but most of
them are clear.

ISABEL. But they're in such horrid, horrid disorder!

L. Yes; all disorder is horrid, when it is among things that are
naturally orderly. Some little girls' rooms are naturally orderly,
I suppose; or I don't know how they could live in them, if they
cry out so when they only see quartz crystals in confusion.

ISABEL. Oh! but how come they to be like that?

L. You may well ask. And yet you will always hear people talking,
as if they thought order more wonderful than disorder! It is
wonderful--as we have seen; but to me, as to you, child, the
supremely wonderful thing is that nature should ever be ruinous or
wasteful, or deathful! I look at this wild piece of
crystallization with endless astonishment.

MARY. Where does it come from?

L. The Tete Noire of Chamonix. What makes it more strange is that
it should be in a vein of fine quartz. If it were in a mouldering
rock, it would be natural enough; but in the midst of so fine
substance, here are the crystals tossed in a heap; some large,
myriads small (almost as small as dust), tumbling over each other
like a terrified crowd, and glued together by the sides, and
edges, and backs, and heads; some warped, and some pushed out and
in, and all spoiled, and each spoiling the rest.

MARY. And how flat they all are!

L. Yes; that's the fashion at the Tete Noire.

MARY. But surely this is ruin, not caprice?

L. I believe it is in great part misfortune; and we will examine
these crystal troubles in next lecture. But if you want to see the
gracefullest and happiest caprices of which dust is capable, you
must go to the Hartz; not that I ever mean to go there myself, for
I want to retain the romantic feeling about the name; and I have
done myself some harm already by seeing the monotonous and heavy
form of the Brocken from the suburbs of Brunswick. But whether the
mountains be picturesque or not, the tricks which the goblins (as
I am told) teach the crystals in them, are incomparably pretty.
They work chiefly on the mind of a docile, bluish-colored,
carbonate of lime; which comes out of a gray limestone. The
goblins take the greatest possible care of its education, and see
that nothing happens to it to hurt its temper; and when it may be
supposed to have arrived at the crisis which is to a well brought
up mineral, what presentation at court is to a young lady--after
which it is expected to set fashions--there's no end to its pretty
ways of behaving. First it will make itself into pointed darts as
fine as hoarfrost; here, it is changed into a white fur as fine as
silk; here into little crowns and circlets, as bright as silver;
as if for the gnome princesses to wear; here it is in beautiful
little plates, for them to eat off; presently it is in towers
which they might be imprisoned in; presently in caves and cells,
where they may make nun-gnomes of themselves, and no gnome ever
hear of them more; here is some of it in sheaves, like corn; here,
some in drifts, like snow; here, some in rays, like stars: and,
though these are, all of them, necessarily, shapes that the
mineral takes in other places, they are all taken here with such a
grace that you recognize the high caste and breeding of the
crystals wherever you meet them, and know at once they are Hartz-
born.

Of course, such fine things as these are only done by crystals
which are perfectly good, and good-humored; and of course, also,
there are ill-humored crystals who torment each other, and annoy
quieter crystals, yet without coming to anything like serious war.
Here (for once) is some ill-disposed quartz, tormenting a
peaceable octahedron of fluor, in mere caprice. I looked at it the
other night so long, and so wonderingly, just before putting my
candle out, that I fell into another strange dream. But you don't
care about dreams.

DORA. No; we didn't, yesterday; but you know we are made up of
caprice; so we do, to-day: and you must tell it us directly.

L. Well, you see, Neith and her work were still much in my mind;
and then, I had been looking over these Hartz things for you, and
thinking of the sort of grotesque sympathy there seemed to be in
them with the beautiful fringe and pinnacle work of Northern
architecture. So, when I fell asleep, I thought I saw Neith and
St. Barbara talking together.

DORA. But what had St. Barbara to do with it?

L. My dear, I am quite sure St. Barbara is the patroness of good
architects; not St. Thomas, whatever the old builders thought. It
might be very fine, according to the monks' notions, in St.
Thomas, to give all his employer's money away to the poor: but
breaches of contract are bad foundations; and I believe, it was
not he, but St. Barbara, who overlooked the work in all the
buildings you and I care about. However that may be, it was
certainly she whom I saw in my dream with Neith. Neith was sitting
weaving, and I thought she looked sad, and threw her shuttle
slowly; and St. Barbara was standing at her side, in a stiff
little gown, all ins and outs, and angles; but so bright with
embroidery that it dazzled me whenever she moved; the train of it
was just like a heap of broken jewels, it was so stiff, and full
of corners, and so many-colored and bright. Her hair fell over her
shoulders in long, delicate waves, from under a little three
pinnacled crown, like a tower. She was asking Neith about the laws
of architecture in Egypt and Greece; and when Neith told her the
measures of the pyramids, St. Barbara said she thought they would
have been better three-cornered and when Neith told her the
measures of the Parthenon, St. Barbara said she thought it ought
to have had two transepts. But she was pleased when Neith told her
of the temple of the dew, and of the Caryan maidens bearing its
frieze: and then she thought that perhaps Neith would like to hear
what sort of temples she was building herself, in the French
valleys, and on the crags of the Rhine. So she began gossiping,
just as one of you might to an old lady: and certainly she talked
in the sweetest way in the world to Neith; and explained to her
all about crockets and pinnacles: and Neith sat, looking very
grave; and always graver as St. Barbara went on; till at last, I'm
sorry to say, St. Barbara lost her temper a little.

MARY (very grave herself). "St. Barbara"?

L. Yes, Mary. Why shouldn't she? It was very tiresome of Neith to
sit looking like that.

MAY. But, then, St. Barbara was a saint!

L. What's that, May?

MAY. A saint! A saint is--I am sure you know!

L. If I did, it would not make me sure that you knew too, May: but
I don't.

VIOLET (expressing the incredulity of the audience). Oh,--sir!

L. That is to say, I know that people are called saints who are
supposed to be better than others: but I don't know how much
better they must be, in order to be saints; nor how nearly anybody
may be a saint, and yet not be quite one; nor whether everybody
who is called a saint was one; nor whether everybody who isn't
called a saint, isn't one.

(General silence; the audience feeling themselves on the verge of
the Infinities--and a little shocked--and much puzzled by so many
questions at once.)

L. Besides, did you never hear that verse about being--called to
be "saints"?

MAY (repeats Rom. i. 7).

L. Quite right, May. Well, then, who are called to be that? People
in Rome only?

MAY. Everybody, I suppose, whom God loves.

L. What! little girls as well as other people?

MAY. All grown-up people, I mean.

L. Why not little girls? Are they wickeder when they are little?

MAY. Oh, I hope not.

L Why not little girls, then? (Pause)

LILY. Because, you know we can't be worth anything if we're ever
so good,--I mean, if we try to be ever so good and we can't do
difficult things--like saints.

L I am afraid, my dear that old people are not more able or
willing for their difficulties than you children are for yours.
All I can say is, that if ever I see any of you, when you are
seven or eight and twenty, knitting your brows over any work you
want to do or to understand as I saw you Lily knitting your brows
over your slate this morning I should think you very noble women.
But--to come back to my dream--St Barbara did lose her temper a
little, and I was not surprised. For you can't think how provoking
Neith looked, sitting there just like a statue of sandstone, only
going on weaving like a machine and never quickening the cast of
her shuttle, while St Barbara was telling her so eagerly all about
the most beautiful things and chattering away, as fast as bells
ring on Christmas Eve, till she saw that Neilh didn't care, and
then St Barbara got as red as a rose, and stopped just in time,--
or I think she would really have said something naughty.

ISABEL Oh please, but didn't Neith say anything then?

L. Yes. She said, quite quietly, "It may be very pretty, my love;
but it is all nonsense."

ISABEL. Oh dear, oh dear; and then?

L. Well; then I was a little angry myself, and hoped St. Barbara
would be quite angry; but she wasn't. She bit her lips first; and
then gave a great sigh--such a wild, sweet sigh--and then she
knelt down and hid her face on Neith's knees. Then Neith smiled a
little, and was moved.

ISABEL. Oh, I am so glad!

L. And she touched St. Barbara's forehead with a flower of white
lotus; and St. Barbara sobbed once or twice, and then said: "If
you only could see how beautiful it is, and how much it makes
people feel what is good and lovely; and if you could only hear
the children singing in the Lady chapels!" And Neith smiled,--but
still sadly,--and said, "How do you know what I have seen, or
heard, my love? Do you think all those vaults and towers of yours
have been built without me? There was not a pillar in your
Giotto's Santa Maria del Fiore which I did not set true by my
spear-shaft as it rose. But this pinnacle and flame work which has
set your little heart on fire, is all vanity; and you will see
what it will come to, and that soon; and none will grieve for it
more than I. And then every one will disbelieve your pretty
symbols and types. Men must be spoken simply to, my dear, if you
would guide them kindly, and long." But St. Barbara answered,
that, "Indeed she thought every one liked her work," and that "the
people of different towns were as eager about their cathedral
towers as about their privileges or their markets;" and then she
asked Neith to come and build something with her, wall against
tower; and "see whether the people will be as much pleased with
your building as with mine." But Neith answered, "I will not
contend with you, my dear. I strive not with those who love me;
and for those who hate me, it is not well to strive with me, as
weaver Arachne knows. And remember, child, that nothing is ever
done beautifully, which is done in rivalship; nor nobly, which is
done in pride."

Then St. Barbara hung her head quite down, and said she was very
sorry she had been so foolish; and kissed Neith; and stood
thinking a minute: and then her eyes got bright again, and she
said, she would go directly and build a chapel with five windows
in it; four for the four cardinal virtues, and one for humility,
in the middle, bigger than the rest. And Neith very nearly laughed
quite out, I thought; certainly her beautiful lips lost all their
sternness for an instant; then she said, "Well, love, build it,
but do not put so many colors into your windows as you usually do;
else no one will be able to see to read, inside: and when it is
built, let a poor village priest consecrate it, and not an
archbishop." St. Barbara started a little, I thought, and turned
as if to say something; but changed her mind, and gathered up her
train, and went out. And Neith bent herself again to her loom, in
which she was weaving a web of strange dark colors, I thought; but
perhaps it was only after the glittering of St. Barbara's
embroidered train: and I tried to make out the figures in Neith's
web, and confused myself among them, as one always does in dreams;
and then the dream changed altogether, and I found myself, all at
once, among a crowd of little Gothic and Egyptian spirits, who
were quarreling: at least the Gothic ones were trying to quarrel;
for the Egyptian ones only sat with their hands on their knees,
and their aprons sticking out very stiffly; and stared. And after
a while I began to understand what the matter was. It seemed that
some of the troublesome building imps, who meddle and make
continually, even in the best Gothic work, had been listening to
St. Barbara's talk with Neith; and had made up their minds that
Neith had no workpeople who could build against them. They were
but dull imps, as you may fancy by their thinking that; and never
had done much, except disturbing the great Gothic building angels
at their work, and playing tricks to each other; indeed, of late
they had been living years and years, like bats, up under the
cornices of Strasbourg and Cologne cathedrals, with nothing to do
but to make mouths at the people below. However, they thought they
knew everything about tower building; and those who had heard what
Neith said, told the rest; and they all flew down directly,
chattering in German, like jackdaws, to show Neith's people what
they could do. And they had found some of Neith's old workpeople
somewhere near Sais, sitting in the sun, with their hands on their
knees; and abused them heartily: and Neith's people did not mind
at first, but, after a while, they seemed to get tired of the
noise; and one or two rose up slowly, and laid hold of their
measuring rods, and said, "If St. Barbara's people liked to build
with them, tower against pyramid, they would show them how to lay
stones."

Then the Gothic little spirits threw a great many double
somersaults for joy; and put the tips of their tongues out slyly
to each other, on one side; and I heard the Egyptians say, "they
must be some new kind of frog--they didn't think there was much
building in them." However, the stiff old workers took their rods,
as I said, and measured out a square space of sand; but as soon as
the German spirits saw that, they declared they wanted exactly
that bit of ground to build on, themselves. Then the Egyptian
builders offered to go farther off and the German ones said, "Ja
wohl." But as soon as the Egyptians had measured out another
square, the little Germans said they must have some of that too.
Then Neith's people laughed; and said, "they might take as much as
they liked, but they would not move the plan of their pyramid
again." Then the little Germans took three pieces, and began to
build three spires directly; one large, and two little. And when
the Egyptians saw they had fairly begun, they laid their
foundation all round, of large square stones: and began to build,
so steadily that they had like to have swallowed up the three
little German spires. So when the Gothic spirits saw that, they
built their spires leaning, like the tower of Pisa, that they
might stick out at the side of the pyramid. And Neith's people
stared at them; and thought it very clever, but very wrong; and on
they went, in their own way, and said nothing. Then the little
Gothic spirits were terribly provoked because they could not spoil
the shape of the pyramid; and they sat down all along the ledges
of it to make faces; but that did no good. Then they ran to the
corners, and put their elbows on their knees, and stuck themselves
out as far as they could, and made more faces; but that did no
good, neither. Then they looked up to the sky, and opened their
mouths wide, and gobbled, and said it was too hot for work, and
wondered when it would rain; but that did no good, neither. And
all the while the Egyptian spirits were laying step above step
patiently. But when the Gothic ones looked, and saw how big they
had got, they said, "Ach, Himmel!" and flew down in a great black
cluster to the bottom; and swept out a level spot in the sand with
their wings, in no time, and began building a tower straight up,
as fast as they could. And the Egyptians stood still again to
stare at them; for the Gothic spirits had got quite into a
passion, and were really working very wonderfully. They cut the
sandstone into strips as fine as reeds; and put one reed on the
top of another, so that you could not see where they fitted: and
they twisted them in and out like basket work, and knotted them
into likenesses of ugly faces, and of strange beasts biting each
other; and up they went, and up still, and they made spiral
staircases at the corners, for the loaded workers to come up by
(for I saw they were but weak imps, and could not fly with stones
on their backs), and then they made traceried galleries for them
to run round by; and so up again; with finer and finer work, till
the Egyptians wondered whether they meant the thing for a tower or
a pillar: and I heard them saying to one another, "It was nearly
as pretty as lotus stalks; and if it were not for the ugly faces,
there would be a fine temple, if they were going to build it all
with pillars as big as that!" But in a minute afterwards,--just as
the Gothic spirits had carried their work as high as the upper
course, but three or four, of the pyramid--the Egyptians called
out to them to "mind what they were about, for the sand was
running away from under one of their tower corners." But it was
too late to mind what they were about; for, in another instant,
the whole tower sloped aside; and the Gothic imps rose out of it
like a flight of puffins, in a single cloud; but screaming worse
than any puffins you ever heard: and down came the tower, all in a
piece, like a falling poplar, with its head right on the flank of
the pyramid; against which it snapped short off. And of course
that waked me.

MARY. What a shame of you to have such a dream, after all you have
told us about Gothic architecture!

L. If you have understood anything I ever told you about it, you
know that no architecture was ever corrupted more miserably; or
abolished more justly by the accomplishment of its own follies.
Besides, even in its days of power, it was subject to catastrophes
of this kind. I have stood too often, mourning, by the grand
fragment of the apse of Beauvais, not to have that fact well burnt
into me. Still, you must have seen, surely, that these imps were
of the Flamboyant school; or, at least, of the German schools
correspondent with it in extravagance.

MARY. But, then, where is the crystal about which you dreamed all
this?

L. Here; but I suppose little Pthah has touched it again, for it
is very small. But, you see, here is the pyramid, built of great
square stones of fluor spar, straight up; and here are the three
little pinnacles of mischievous quartz, which have set themselves,
at the same time, on the same foundation; only they lean like the
tower of Pisa, and come out obliquely at the side: and here is one
great spire of quartz which seems as if it had been meant to stand
straight up, a little way off; and then had fallen down against
the pyramid base, breaking its pinnacle away. In reality, it has
crystallized horizontally, and terminated imperfectly: but, then,
by what caprice does one crystal form horizontally, when all the
rest stand upright? But this is nothing to the phantasies of
fluor, and quartz, and some other such companions, when they get
leave to do anything they like. I could show you fifty specimens,
about every one of which you might fancy a new fairy tale. Not
that, in truth, any crystals get leave to do quite what they like;
and many of them are sadly tried, and have little time for
caprices--poor things!

MARY. I thought they always looked as if they were either in play
or in mischief! What trials have they?

L. Trials much like our own. Sickness, and starvation; fevers, and
agues, and palsy; oppression; and old age, and the necessity of
passing away in their time, like all else. If there's any pity in
you, you must come to-morrow, and take some part in these crystal
griefs.

DORA. I am sure we shall cry till our eyes are red. L. Ah, you may
laugh, Dora: but I've been made grave, not once, nor twice, to see
that even crystals "cannot choose but be old" at last. It may be
but a shallow proverb of the Justice's; but it is a shrewdly wide
one.

DORA (pensive for once). I suppose it is very dreadful to be old!
But then (brightening again), what should we do without our dear
old friends, and our nice old lecturers?

L. If all nice old lecturers were minded as little as one I know
of;--

DORA. And if they all meant as little what they say, would they
not deserve it? But we'll come--we'll come, and cry.





LECTURE 9.

CRYSTAL SORROWS


Working Lecture in Schoolroom.

L. We have been hitherto talking, children, as if crystals might
live, and play, and quarrel, and behave ill or well, according to
their characters, without interruption from anything else. But so
far from this being so, nearly all crystals, whatever their
characters, have to live a hard life of it, and meet with many
misfortunes. If we could see far enough, we should find, indeed,
that, at the root, all their vices were misfortunes: but to-day I
want you to see what sort of troubles the best crystals have to go
through, occasionally, by no fault of their own.

This black thing, which is one of the prettiest of the very few
pretty black things in the world, is called "Tourmaline." It may
be transparent, and green, or red, as well as black; and then no
stone can be prettier (only, all the light that gets into it, I
believe, comes out a good deal the worse; and is not itself again
for a long while). But this is the commonest state of it,--opaque,
and as black as jet.

MARY. What does "Tourmaline" mean?

L. They say it is Ceylanese, and I don't know Ceylanese, but we
may always be thankful for a graceful word, whatever it means

MARY. And what is it made of?

L. A little of everything there's always flint and clay, and
magnesia in it, and the black is iron, according to its fancy, and
there's boracic acid if you know what that is and if you don't, I
cannot tell you today, and it doesn't signify and there's potash,
and soda, and, on the whole, the chemistry of it is more like a
mediaeval doctor's prescription, than the making of a respectable
mineral but it may, perhaps, be owing to the strange complexity of
its make, that it has a notable habit which makes it, to me one of
the most interesting of minerals. You see these two crystals are
broken right across, in many places, just as if they had been
shafts of black marble fallen from a ruinous temple, and here they
lie, imbedded in white quartz, fragment succeeding fragment
keeping the line of the original crystal, while the quartz fills
up the intervening spaces Now tourmaline has a trick of doing
this, more than any other mineral I know here is another bit which
I picked up on the glacier of Macugnaga; it is broken, like a
pillar built of very flat broad stones, into about thirty joints,
and all these are heaved and warped away from each other sideways,
almost into a line of steps, and then all is tilled up with quartz
paste. And here, lastly is a green Indian piece, in which the
pillar is first disjointed, and then wrung round into the shape of
an S.

MARY. How CAN this have been done?

L. There are a thousand ways in which it may have been done, the
difficulty is not to account for the doing of it, but for the
showing of it in some crystals and not in others You never by any
chance get a quartz crystal broken or twisted in this way. If it
break or twist at all which it does sometimes, like the spire of
Dijon, it is by its own will or fault, it never seems to have been
passively crushed But, for the forces which cause this passive
ruin of the tourmaline,--here is a stone which will show you
multitudes of them in operation at once It is known as "biecciated
agate," beautiful, as you see, and highly valued as a pebble yet,
so far as I can read or hear no one has ever looked at it with the
least attention At the first glance, you see it is made of very
fine red striped agates, which have been broken into small pieces,
and fastened together again by paste also of agate There would be
nothing wonderful in this, if this were all. It is well known that
by the movements of strata, portions of rock are often shattered
to pieces:--well known also that agate is a deposit of flint by
water under certain conditions of heat and pressure: there is,
therefore, nothing wonderful in an agate's being broken; and
nothing wonderful in its being mended with the solution out of
which it was itself originally congealed. And with this
explanation, most people, looking at a brecciated agate, or
brecciated anything, seem to be satisfied. I was so myself, for
twenty years; but, lately happening to stay for some time at the
Swiss Baden, where the beach of the Limmat is almost wholly
composed of brecciated limestones, I began to examine them
thoughtfully; and perceived, in the end, that they were, one and
all, knots of as rich mystery as any poor little human brain was
ever lost in. That piece of agate in your hand, Mary, will show
you many of the common phenomena of breccias; but you need not
knit your brows over it in that way; depend upon it, neither you
nor I shall ever know anything about the way it was made, as long
as we live.

DORA. That does not seem much to depend upon.

L. Pardon me, puss. When once we gain some real notion of the
extent and unconquerableness of our ignorance, it is a very broad
and restful thing to depend upon: you can throw yourself upon it
at ease, as on a cloud, to feast with the gods. You do not
thenceforward trouble yourself,--nor any one else,--with theories,
or the contradiction of theories; you neither get headache nor
heart-burning and you nevermore waste your poor little store of
strength or allowance of time.

However, there are certain facts, about this agate-making, which I
can tell you; and then you may look at it in a pleasant wonder as
long as you like, pleasant wonder is no loss of time.

First, then, it is not broken freely by a blow; it is slowly
wrung, or ground, to pieces. You can only with extreme dimness
conceive the force exerted on mountains in transitional states of
movement. You have all read a little geology; and you know how
coolly geologists talk of mountains being raised or depressed.
They talk coolly of it, because they are accustomed to the fact;
but the very universality of the fact prevents us from ever
conceiving distinctly the conditions of force involved. You know I
was living last year in Savoy; my house was on the back of a
sloping mountain, which rose gradually for two miles behind it;
and then fell at once in a great precipice toward Geneva, going
down three thousand feet in four or five cliffs, or steps. Now
that whole group of cliffs had simply been torn away by sheer
strength from the rocks below, as if the whole mass had been as
soft as biscuit. Put four or five captains' biscuits on the floor,
on the top of one another; and try to break them all in half, not
by bending, but by holding one half down, and tearing the other
halves straight up;--of course you will not be able to do it, but
you will feel and comprehend the sort of force needed. Then, fancy
each captains' biscuit a bed of rock, six or seven hundred feet
thick; and the whole mass torn straight through; and one half
heaved up three thousand feet, grinding against the other as it
rose,--and you will have some idea of the making of the Mont
Saleve.

MAY. But it must crush the rocks all to dust!

L. No; for there is no room for dust. The pressure is too great;
probably the heat developed also so great that the rock is made
partly ductile; but the worst of it is, that we never can see
these parts of mountains in the state they were left in at the
time of their elevation; for it is precisely in these rents and
dislocations that the crystalline power principally exerts itself.
It is essentially a styptic power, and wherever the earth is torn,
it heals and binds; nay, the torture and grieving of the earth
seem necessary to bring out its full energy; for you only find the
crystalline living power fully in action, where the rents and
faults are deep and many.

DORA. If you please, sir,--would you tell us--what are "faults"?

L. You never heard of such things?

DORA. Never in all our lives.

L. When a vein of rock which is going on smoothly, is interrupted
by another troublesome little vein, which stops it, and puts it
out, so that it has to begin again in another place--that is
called a fault. _I_ always think it ought to be called the fault
of the vein that interrupts it; but the miners always call it the
fault of the vein that is interrupted.

DORA. So it is, if it does not begin again where it left off.

L. Well, that is certainly the gist of the business: but, whatever
good-natured old lecturers may do, the rocks have a bad habit,
when they are once interrupted, of never asking "Where was I?"

DORA. When the two halves of the dining-table came separate,
yesterday, was that a "fault"?

L. Yes; but not the table's. However, it is not a bad
illustration, Dora. When beds of rock are only interrupted by a
fissure, but remain at the same level, like the two halves of the
table, it is not called a fault, but only a fissure; but if one
half of the table be either tilted higher than the other, or
pushed to the side, so that the two parts will not fit, it is a
fault. You had better read the chapter on faults in Jukes's
Geology; then you will know all about it. And this rent that I am
telling you of in the Saleve, is one only of myriads, to which are
owing the forms of the Alps, as, I believe, of all great mountain
chains. Wherever you see a precipice on any scale of real
magnificence, you will nearly always find it owing to some
dislocation of this kind; but the point of chief wonder to me is
the delicacy of the touch by which these gigantic rents have been
apparently accomplished. Note, however, that we have no clear
evidence, hitherto, of the time taken to produce any of them. We
know that a change of temperature alters the position and the
angles of the atoms of crystals, and also the entire bulk of
rocks. We know that in all volcanic, and the greater part of all
subterranean, action, temperatures are continually changing, and
therefore masses of rock must be expanding or contracting, with
infinite slowness, but with infinite force. This pressure must
result in mechanical strain somewhere, both in their own
substance, and in that of the rocks surrounding them; and we can
form no conception of the result of irresistible pressure, applied
so as to rend and raise, with imperceptible slowness of gradation,
masses thousands of feet in thickness. We want some experiments
tried on masses of iron and stone; and we can't get them tried,
because Christian creatures never will seriously and sufficiently
spend money, except to find out the shortest ways of killing each
other. But, besides this slow kind of pressure, there is evidence
of more or less sudden violence, on the same terrific scale; and,
through it all, the wonder, as I said, is always to me the
delicacy of touch. I cut a block of the Saleve limestone from the
edge of one of the principal faults which have formed the
precipice; it is a lovely compact limestone, and the fault itself
is filled up with a red breccia, formed of the crushed fragments
of the torn rock, cemented by a rich red crystalline paste. I have
had the piece I cut from it smoothed, and polished across the
junction; here it is; and you may now pass your soft little
fingers over the surface, without so much as feeling the place
where a rock which all the hills of England might have been sunk
in the body of, and not a summit seen, was torn asunder through
that whole thickness, as a thin dress is torn when you tread upon
it.

(The audience examine the stone, and touch it timidly, but the
matter remains inconceivable to them.)

MARY (struck by the beauty of the stone). But this is almost
marble?

L. It is quite marble. And another singular point in the business,
to my mind, is that these stones, which men have been cutting into
slabs, for thousands of years, to ornament their principal
buildings with,--and which, under the general name of "marble,"
have been the delight of the eyes, and the wealth of architecture,
among all civilized nations,--are precisely those on which the
signs and brands of these earth agonies have been chiefly struck;
and there is not a purple vein nor flaming zone in them, which is
not the record of their ancient torture. What a boundless capacity
for sleep, and for serene stupidity, there is in the human mind!
Fancy reflective beings, who cut and polish stones for three
thousand years, for the sake of the pretty stains upon them; and
educate themselves to an art at last (such as it is), of imitating
these veins by dexterous painting; and never a curious soul of
them, all that while, asks, "What painted the rocks?"

(The audience look dejected, and ashamed of themselves.)

The fact is, we are all, and always, asleep, through our lives;
and it is only by pinching ourselves very hard that we ever come
to see, or understand, anything. At least, it is not always we who
pinch ourselves; sometimes other people pinch us; which I suppose
is very good of them,--or other things, which I suppose is very
proper of them. But it is a sad life; made up chiefly of naps and
pinches.

(Some of the audience, on this, appearing to think that the others
require pinching, the LECTURER changes the subject.)

Now, however, for once, look at a piece of marble carefully, and
think about it. You see this is one side of the fault; the other
side is down or up, nobody knows where; but, on this side, you can
trace the evidence of the dragging and tearing action. All along
the edge of this marble, the ends of the fibers of the rock are
torn, here an inch, and there half an inch, away from each other;
and you see the exact places where they fitted, before they were
torn separate: and you see the rents are now all filled up with
the sanguine paste, full of the broken pieces of the rock; the
paste itself seems to have been half melted, and partly to have
also melted the edge of the fragments it contains, and then to
have crystallized with them, and round them. And the brecciated
agate I first showed you contains exactly the same phenomena; a
zoned crystallization going on amidst the cemented fragments,
partly altering the structure of those fragments themselves, and
subject to continual change, either in the intensity of its own
power, or in the nature of the materials submitted to it;--so
that, at one time, gravity acts upon them, and disposes them in
horizontal layers, or causes them to droop in stalactites; and at
another, gravity is entirely defied, and the substances in
solution are crystallized in bands of equal thickness on every
side of the cell. It would require a course of lectures longer
than these (I have a great mind,--you have behaved so saucily--to
stay and give them) to describe to you the phenomena of this kind,
in agates and chalcedonies only,--nay, there is a single
sarcophagus in the British Museum, covered with grand sculpture of
the 18th dynasty, which contains in magnificent breccia (agates
and jaspers imbedded in porphyry), out of which it is hewn,
material for the thought of years; and record of the earth-sorrow
of ages in comparison with the duration of which, the Egyptian
letters tell us but the history of the evening and morning of a
day.

Agates, I think, of all stones, confess most of their past
history, but all crystallization goes on under, and partly
records, circumstances of this kind--circumstances of infinite
variety, but always involving difficulty, interruption, and change
of condition at different times. Observe, first, you have the
whole mass of the rock in motion, either contracting itself, and
so gradually widening the cracks, or being compressed, and thereby
closing them, and crushing their edges,--and, if one part of its
substance be softer, at the given temperature, than another,
probably squeezing that softer substance out into the veins. Then
the veins themselves, when the rock leaves them open by its
contraction, act with various power of suction upon its
substance;--by capillary attraction when they are fine,--by that
of pure vacuity when they are larger, or by changes in the
constitution and condensation of the mixed gases with which they
have been originally filled. Those gases themselves may be
supplied in all variation of volume and power from below; or,
slowly, by the decomposition of the rocks themselves; and, at
changing temperatures, must exert relatively changing forces of
decomposition and combination on the walls of the veins they fill;
while water, at every degree of heat and pressure (from beds of
everlasting ice, alternate with cliffs of native rock, to volumes
of red hot, or white hot, steam), congeals, and drips, and throbs,
and thrills, from crag to crag; and breathes from pulse to pulse
of foaming or fiery arteries, whose beating is felt through chains
of the great islands of the Indian seas, as your own pulses lift
your bracelets, and makes whole kingdoms of the world quiver in
deadly earthquake, as if they were light as aspen leaves. And,
remember, the poor little crystals have to live their lives, and
mind their own affairs, in the midst of all this, as best they
may. They are wonderfully like human creatures,--forget all that
is going on if they don't see it, however dreadful; and never
think what is to happen to-morrow. They are spiteful or loving,
and indolent or painstaking, and orderly or licentious, with no
thought whatever of the lava or the flood which may break over
them any day; and evaporate them into air-bubbles, or wash them
into a solution of salts. And you may look at them, once
understanding the surrounding conditions of their fate, with an
endless interest. You will see crowds of unfortunate little
crystals, who have been forced to constitute themselves in a
hurry, their dissolving element being fiercely scorched away; you
will see them doing their best, bright and numberless, but tiny.
Then you will find indulged crystals, who have had centuries to
form themselves in, and have changed their mind and ways
continually; and have been tired, and taken heart again; and have
been sick, and got well again; and thought they would try a
different diet, and then thought better of it; and made but a poor
use of their advantages, after all. And others you will see, who
have begun life as wicked crystals; and then have been impressed
by alarming circumstances, and have become converted crystals, and
behaved amazingly for a little while, and fallen away again, and
ended, but discreditably, perhaps even in decomposition; so that
one doesn't know what will become of them. And sometimes you will
see deceitful crystals, that look as soft as velvet, and are
deadly to all near them; and sometimes you will see deceitful
crystals, that seem flint-edged, like our little quartz-crystal of
a housekeeper here (hush! Dora), and are endlessly gentle and true
wherever gentleness and truth are needed. And sometimes you will
see little child-crystals put to school like school-girls, and
made to stand in rows; and taken the greatest care of, and taught
how to hold themselves up, and behave: and sometimes you will see
unhappy little child-crystals left to lie about in the dirt, and
pick up their living, and learn manners where they can. And
sometimes you will see fat crystals eating up thin ones, like
great capitalists and little laborers; and politico-economic
crystals teaching the stupid ones how to eat each other, and cheat
each other; and foolish crystals getting in the way of wise ones;
and impatient crystals spoiling the plans of patient ones,
irreparably; just as things go on in the world. And sometimes you
may see hypocritical crystals taking the shape of others, though
they are nothing like in their minds; and vampire crystals eating
out the hearts of others; and hermit-crab crystals living in the
shells of others; and parasite crystals living on the means of
others; and courtier crystals glittering in attendance upon
others; and all these, besides the two great companies of war and
peace, who ally themselves, resolutely to attack, or resolutely to
defend. And for the close, you see the broad shadow and deadly
force of inevitable fate, above all this: you see the multitudes
of crystals whose time has come; not a set time, as with us, but
yet a time, sooner or later, when they all must give up their
crystal ghosts:--when the strength by which they grew, and the
breath given them to breathe, pass away from them; and they fail,
and are consumed, and vanish away; and another generation is
brought to life, framed out of their ashes.

MARY. It is very terrible. Is it not the complete fulfillment,
down into the very dust, of that verse: "The whole creation
groaneth and travaileth in pain?"

L. I do not know that it is in pain, Mary: at least, the evidence
tends to show that there is much more pleasure than pain, as soon
as sensation becomes possible.

LUCILLA. But then, surely, if we are told that it is pain, it must
be pain?

L. Yes; if we are told; and told in the way you mean, Lucilla; but
nothing is said of the proportion to pleasure. Unmitigated pain
would kill any of us in a few hours; pain equal to our pleasures
would make us loathe life; the word itself cannot be applied to
the lower conditions of matter in its ordinary sense. But wait
till to-morrow to ask me about this. To-morrow is to be kept for
questions and difficulties; let us keep to the plain facts to-day.
There is yet one group of facts connected with this rending of the
rocks, which I especially want you to notice. You know, when you
have mended a very old dress, quite meritoriously, till it won't
mend any more--

EGYPT (interrupting). Could not you sometimes take gentlemen's
work to illustrate by?

L. Gentlemen's work is rarely so useful as yours, Egypt; and when
it is useful, girls cannot easily understand it.

DORA. I am sure we should understand it better than gentlemen
understand about sewing.

L. My dear, I hope I always speak modestly, and under correction,
when I touch upon matters of the kind too high for me; and
besides, I never intend to speak otherwise than respectfully of
sewing;--though you always seem to think I am laughing at you. In
all seriousness, illustrations from sewing are those which Neith
likes me best to use; and which young ladies ought to like
everybody to use. What do you think the beautiful word "wife"
comes from?

DORA (tossing her head). I don't think it is a particularly
beautiful word.

L. Perhaps not. At your ages you may think "bride" sounds better;
but wife's the word for wear, depend upon it. It is the great word
in which the English and Latin languages conquer the French and
the Greek. I hope the French will some day get a word for it, yet,
instead of their dreadful "femme." But what do you think it comes
from?

DORA. I never did think about it.

L. Nor you, Sibyl?

SIBYL. No; I thought it was Saxon, and stopped there.

L. Yes, but the great good of Saxon words is, that they usually do
mean something. Wife means "weaver". You have all the right to
call yourselves little "housewives," when you sew neatly.

DORA. But I don t think we want to call ourselves 'little
housewives'.

L. You must either be house-wives, or house-moths; remember that.
In the deep sense, you must either weave men's fortunes, and
embroider them, or feed upon, and bring them to decay. You had
better let me keep my sewing illustration, and help me out with
it.

DORA. Well, we'll hear it, under protest.

L. You have heard it before, but with reference to other matters.
When it is said, "no man putteth a piece of new cloth on an old
garment, else it taketh from the old," does it not mean that the
new piece tears the old one away at the sewn edge?

DORA. Yes; certainly.

L. And when you mend a decayed stuff with strong thread, does not
the whole edge come away sometimes, when it tears again?

DORA. Yes; and then it is of no use to mend it any more.

L. Well, the rocks don't seem to think that: but the same thing
happens to them continually. I told you they were full of rents,
or veins. Large masses of mountain are sometimes as full of veins
as your hand is; and of veins nearly as fine (only you know a rock
vein does not mean a tube, but a crack or cleft). Now these clefts
are mended, usually, with the strongest material the rock can
find; and often literally with threads; for the gradually opening
rent seems to draw the substance it is filled with into fibers,
which cross from one side of it to the other, and are partly
crystalline; so that, when the crystals become distinct, the
fissure has often exactly the look of a tear, brought together
with strong cross stitches. Now when this is completely done, and
all has been fastened and made firm, perhaps some new change of
temperature may occur, and the rock begin to contract again. Then
the old vein must open wider; or else another open elsewhere. If
the old vein widen, it MAY do so at its center; but it constantly
happens, with well filled veins, that the cross stitches are too
strong to break; the walls of the vein, instead, are torn away by
them: and another little supplementary vein--often three or four
successively--will be thus formed at the side of the first.

MARY. That is really very much like our work. But what do the
mountains use to sew with?

L. Quartz, whenever they can get it: pure limestones are obliged
to be content with carbonate of lime; but most mixed rocks can
find some quartz for themselves. Here is a piece of black slate
from the Buet: it looks merely like dry dark mud; you could not
think there was any quartz in it; but, you see, its rents are all
stitched together with beautiful white thread, which is the purest
quartz, so close drawn that you can break it like flint, in the
mass; but, where it has been exposed to the weather, the fine
fibrous structure is shown: and, more than that, you see the
threads have been all twisted and pulled aside, this way and the
other, by the warpings and shifting of the sides of the vein as it
widened.

MARY. It is wonderful! But is that going on still? Are the
mountains being torn and sewn together again at this moment?

L. Yes, certainly, my dear: but I think, just as certainly (though
geologists differ on this matter), not with the violence, or on
the scale, of their ancient ruin and renewal. All things seem to
be tending towards a condition of at least temporary rest; and
that groaning and travailing of the creation, as, assuredly, not
wholly in pain, is not, in the full sense, "until now."

MARY. I want so much to ask you about that!

SIBYL. Yes; and we all want to ask you about a great many other
things besides.

L. It seems to me that you have got quite as many new ideas as are
good for any of you at present: and I should not like to burden
you with more; but I must see that those you have are clear, if I
can make them so; so we will have one more talk, for answer of
questions, mainly. Think over all the ground, and make your
difficulties thoroughly presentable. Then we'll see what we can
make of them.

DORA. They shall all be dressed in their very best; and curtsey as
they come in.

L. No, no, Dora; no curtseys, if you please. I had enough of them
the day you all took a fit of reverence, and curtsied me out of
the room.

DORA. But, you know, we cured ourselves of the fault, at once, by
that fit. We have never been the least respectful since. And the
difficulties will only curtsey themselves out of the room, I
hope;--come in at one door--vanish at the other.

L. What a pleasant world it would be, if all its difficulties were
taught to behave so! However, one can generally make something, or
(better still) nothing, or at least less of them, if they
thoroughly know their own minds; and your difficulties--I must say
that for you, children,--generally do know their own minds, as you
do yourselves.

DORA. That is very kindly said for us. Some people would not allow
so much as that girls had any minds to know.

L. They will at least admit that you have minds to change, Dora.

MARY. You might have left us the last speech, without a retouch.
But we'll put our little minds, such as they are, in the best trim
we can, for to-morrow.





LECTURE 10.

THE CRYSTAL REST


Evening. The fireside. L's arm-chair in the comfortablest corner.

L. (perceiving various arrangements being made of footstool,
cushion, screen, and the like.) Yes, yes, it's all very fine! and
I am to sit here to be asked questions till supper-time, am I?

DORA. I don't think you can have any supper to-night:--we've got
so much to ask.

LILY. Oh, Miss Dora! We can fetch it him here, you know, so
nicely!

L. Yes, Lily, that will be pleasant, with competitive examination
going on over one's plate: the competition being among the
examiners. Really, now that I know what teasing things girls are,
I don't so much wonder that people used to put up patiently with
the dragons who took THEM for supper. But I can't help myself, I
suppose;--no thanks to St. George. Ask away, children, and I'll
answer as civilly as may be.

DORA. We don't so much care about being answered civilly, as about
not being asked things back again.

L. "Ayez seulement la patience que je le parle." There shall be no
requitals.

DORA. Well, then, first of all--What shall we ask first, Mary?

MARY. It does not matter. I think all the questions come into one,
at last, nearly.

DORA. You know, you always talk as if the crystals were alive; and
we never understand how much you are in play, and how much in
earnest. That's the first thing.

L. Neither do I understand, myself, my dear, how much I am in
earnest. The stones puzzle me as much as I puzzle you. They look
as if they were alive, and make me speak as if they were; and I do
not in the least know how much truth there is in the appearance.
I'm not to ask things back again to-night, but all questions of
this sort lead necessarily to the one main question, which we
asked, before, in vain, "What is it to be alive?"

DORA. Yes; but we want to come back to that: for we've been
reading scientific books about the "conservation of forces," and
it seems all so grand, and wonderful; and the experiments are so
pretty; and I suppose it must be all right: but then the books
never speak as if there were any such thing as "life."

L. They mostly omit that part of the subject, certainly, Dora; but
they are beautifully right as far as they go; and life is not a
convenient element to deal with. They seem to have been getting
some of it into and out of bottles, in their "ozone" and
"antizone" lately; but they still know little of it: and,
certainly, I know less.

DORA. You promised not to be provoking, to-night.

L. Wait a minute. Though, quite truly, I know less of the secrets
of life than the philosophers do; I yet know one corner of ground
on which we artists can, stand, literally as "Life Guards" at bay,
as steadily as the Guards at Inkermann; however hard the
philosophers push. And you may stand with us, if once you learn to
draw nicely.

DORA. I'm sure we are all trying! but tell us where we may stand.

L. You may always stand by Form, against Force. To a painter, the
essential character of anything is the form of it, and the
philosophers cannot touch that. They come and tell you, for
instance, that there is as much heat, or motion, or calorific
energy (or whatever else they like to call it), in a tea-kettle as
in a Gier-eagle. Very good; that is so; and it is very
interesting. It requires just as much heat as will boil the
kettle, to take the Gier-eagle up to his nest; and as much more to
bring him down again on a hare or a partridge. But we painters,
acknowledging the equality and similarity of the kettle and the
bird in all scientific respects, attach, for our part, our
principal interest to the difference in their forms. For us the
primarily cognizable facts, in the two things, are, that the
kettle has a spout, and the eagle a beak, the one a lid on its
back, the other a pair of wings,--not to speak of the distinction
also of volition which the philosophers may properly call merely a
form or mode of force,--but then, to an artist, the form or mode,
is the gist of the business. The kettle chooses to sit still on
the hob, the eagle to recline on the air. It is the fact of the
choice, not the equal degree of temperature in the fulfillment of
it, which appears to us the more interesting circumstance--though
the other is very interesting too. Exceedingly so! Don't laugh
children, the philosophers have been doing quite splendid work
lately, in their own way especially, the transformation of force
into light is a great piece of systematized discovery and this
notion about the sun being supplied with his flame by ceaseless
meteoric hail is grand, and looks very likely to be true. Of
course, it is only the old gunlock,--flint and steel,--on a large
scale but the order and majesty of it are sublime. Still, we
sculptors and painters care little about it. "It is very fine," we
say, "and very useful, this knocking the light out of the sun, or
into it, by an eternal cataract of planets. But you may hail away,
so, forever, and you will not knock out what we can. Here is a bit
of silver, not the size of half-a-crown, on which, with a single
hammer stroke, one of us, two thousand and odd years ago, hit out
the head of the Apollo of Clazomenas. It is merely a matter of
form; but if any of you philosophers, with your whole planetary
system to hammer with, can hit out such another bit of silver as
this,--we will take off our hats to you. For the present, we keep
them on."

MARY. Yes, I understand; and that is nice; but I don't think we
shall any of us like having only form to depend upon.

L. It was not neglected in the making of Eve, my dear.

MARY. It does not seem to separate us from the dust of the ground.
It is that breathing of the life which we want to understand.

L. So you should: but hold fast to the form, and defend that
first, as distinguished from the mere transition of forces.
Discern the molding hand of the potter commanding the clay, from
his merely beating foot, as it turns the wheel. If you can find
incense, in the vase, afterwards,--well: but it is curious how far
mere form will carry you ahead of the philosophers. For instance,
with regard to the most interesting of all their modes of force--
light;--they never consider how far the existence of it depends on
the putting of certain vitreous and nervous substances into the
formal arrangement which we call an eye. The German philosophers
began the attack, long ago, on the other side, by telling us,
there was no such thing--as light at all, unless we chose to see
it: now, German and English, both, have reversed their engines,
and insist that light would be exactly the same light that it is,
though nobody could ever see it. The fact being that the force
must be there, and the eyes there; and "light" means the effect of
the one on the other;--and perhaps, also--(Plato saw farther into
that mystery than any one has since, that I know of),--on
something a little way within the eyes; but we may stand quite
safe, close behind the retina, and defy the philosophers.

SIBYL. But I don't care so much about defying the philosophers, if
only one could get a clear idea of life, or soul, for one's self.

L. Well, Sibyl, you used to know more about it, in that cave of
yours, than any of us. I was just going to ask you about
inspiration, and the golden bough, and the like; only I remembered
I was not to ask anything. But, will not you, at least, tell us
whether the ideas of Life, as the power of putting things
together, or "making" them; and of Death, as the power of pushing
things separate, or "unmaking" them, may not be very simply held
in balance against each other?

SIBYL. No, I am not in my cave to-night; and cannot tell you
anything.

L. I think they may. Modern Philosophy is a great separator; it is
little more than the expansion of Moliere's great sentence, "Il
s'ensuit de la, que tout ce qu'ily a de beau est dans les
dictionnaires; il n'y a que les mots qui sont transposes." But
when you used to be in your cave, Sibyl, and to be inspired, there
was (and there remains still in some small measure), beyond the
merely formative and sustaining power, another, which we painters
call "passion"--I don't know what the philosophers call it; we
know it makes people red, or white; and therefore it must be
something, itself; and perhaps it is the most truly "poetic" or
"making" force of all, creating a world of its own out of a
glance, or a sigh: and the want of passion is perhaps the truest
death, or "unmaking" of everything;--even of stones. By the way,
you were all reading about that ascent of the Aiguille Verte, the
other day?

SIBYL. Because you had told us it was so difficult, you thought it
could not be ascended.

L Yes, I believed the Aiguille Verte would have held its own. But
do you recollect what one of the climbers exclaimed, when he first
felt sure of reaching the summit.

SIBYL. Yes, it was, "Oh, Aiguille Verte, vous etes morte, vous
etes morte!"

L. That was true instinct. Real philosophic joy. Now, can you at
all fancy the difference between that feeling of triumph in a
mountain's death; and the exultation of your beloved poet, in its
life--

"Quantus Athos, aut quantus Eryx, aut ipse coruscis Quum fremit
ilicibus quantus, gaudetque nivali Vertice, se attollens pater
Apenninus ad auras."

DORA. You must translate for us mere housekeepers, please--
whatever the carekeepers may know about it.

MAY. I'll try then to?

L. No Dryden is a far way worse than nothing, and nobody will "do"
You can't translate it. But this is all you need know, that the
lines are full of a passionate sense of the Apennines' fatherhood,
or protecting power over Italy; and of sympathy with, their joy in
their snowy strength in heaven, and with the same joy, shuddering
through all the leaves of their forests.

MARY. Yes, that is a difference indeed, but then, you know, one
can't help feeling that it is fanciful. It is very delightful to
imagine the mountains to be alive; but then,--are they alive?

L. It seems to me, on the whole, Mary, that the feelings of the
purest and most mightily passioned human souls are likely to be
the truest. Not, indeed, if they do not desire to know the truth,
or blind themselves to it that they may please themselves with
passion; for then they are no longer pure: but if, continually
seeking and accepting the truth as far as it is discernible, they
trust their Maker for the integrity of the instincts. He has
gifted them with, and rest in the sense of a higher truth which
they cannot demonstrate, I think they will be most in the right,
so.

DORA and JESSIE (clapping their hands). Then we really may believe
that the mountains are living?

L. You may at least earnestly believe that the presence of the
spirit which culminates in your own life, shows itself in dawning,
wherever the dust of the earth begins to assume any orderly and
lovely state. You will find it impossible to separate this idea of
gradated manifestation from that of the vital power. Things are
not either wholly alive, or wholly dead. They are less or more
alive. Take the nearest, most easily examined instance--the life of
a flower. Notice what a different degree and kind of life there is
in the calyx and the corolla. The calyx is nothing but the
swaddling clothes of the flower; the child-blossom is bound up in
it, hand and foot; guarded in it, restrained by it, till the time
of birth. The shell is hardly more subordinate to the germ in the
egg, than the calyx to the blossom. It bursts at last; but it
never lives as the corolla does. It may fall at the moment its
task is fulfilled, as in the poppy; or wither gradually, as in the
buttercup; or persist in a ligneous apathy, after the flower is
dead, as in the rose; or harmonize itself so as to share in the
aspect of the real flower, as in the lily; but it never shares in
the corolla's bright passion of life. And the gradations which
thus exist between the different members of organic creatures,
exist no less between the different ranges of organism. We know no
higher or more energetic life than our own; but there seems to me
this great good in the idea of gradation of life--it admits the
idea of a life above us, in other creatures, as much nobler than
ours, as ours is nobler than that of the dust.

MARY. I am glad you have said that; for I know Violet and Lucilla
and May want to ask you something; indeed, we all do; only you
frightened Violet so about the anthill, that she can't say a word;
and May is afraid of your teasing her, too: but I know they are
wondering why you are always telling them about heathen gods and
goddesses, as if you half believed in them; and you represent them
as good; and then we see there is really a kind of truth in the
stories about them; and we are all puzzled: and, in this, we
cannot even make our difficulty quite clear to ourselves;--it
would be such a long confused question, if we could ask you all we
should like to know.

L. Nor is it any wonder, Mary; for this is indeed the longest, and
the most wildly confused question that reason can deal with; but I
will try to give you, quickly, a few clear ideas about the heathen
gods, which you may follow out afterwards, as your knowledge
increases.

Every heathen conception of deity in which you are likely to be
interested, has three distinct characters:--

I. It has a physical character. It represents some of the great
powers or objects of nature--sun or moon, or heaven, or the winds,
or the sea. And the fables first related about each deity
represent, figuratively, the action or the natural power which it
represents; such as the rising and setting of the sun, the tides
of the sea, and so on.

II. It has an ethical character, and represents, in its history,
the moral dealings of God with man. Thus Apollo is first,
physically, the sun contending with darkness; but morally, the
power of divine life contending with corruption. Athena is,
physically, the air; morally, the breathing of the divine spirit
of wisdom. Neptune is, physically, the sea; morally, the supreme
power of agitating passion; and so on.

III. It has, at last, a personal character; and is realized in the
minds of its worshipers as a living spirit, with whom men may
speak face to face, as a man speaks to his friend.

Now it is impossible to define exactly, how far, at any period of
a national religion, these three ideas are mingled; or how far one
prevails over the other. Each inquirer usually takes up one of
these ideas, and pursues it, to the exclusion of the others; no
impartial effort seems to have been made to discern the real state
of the heathen imagination in its successive phases. For the
question is not at all what a mythological figure meant in its
origin; but what it became in each subsequent mental development
of the nation inheriting the thought. Exactly in proportion to the
mental and moral insight of any race, its mythological figures
mean more to it, and become more real. An early and savage race
means nothing more (because it has nothing more to mean) by its
Apollo, than the sun; while a cultivated Greek means every
operation of divine intellect and justice. The Neith, of Egypt,
meant, physically, little more than the blue of the air; but the
Greek, in a climate of alternate storm and calm, represented the
wild fringes of the storm-cloud by the serpents of her aegis; and
the lightning and cold of the highest thunderclouds, by the Gorgon
on her shield: while morally, the same types represented to him
the mystery and changeful terror of knowledge, as her spear and
helm its ruling and defensive power. And no study can be more
interesting, or more useful to you, than that of the different
meanings which have been created by great nations, and great
poets, out of mythological figures given them, at first, in utter
simplicity. But when we approach them in their third, or personal,
character (and, for its power over the whole national mind, this
is far the leading one), we are met at once by questions which may
well put all of you at pause. Were they idly imagined to be real
beings? and did they so usurp the place of the true God? Or were
they actually real beings,--evil spirits,--leading men away from
the true God? Or is it conceivable that they might have been real
beings,--good spirits,--entrusted with some message from the true
God? These were the questions you wanted to ask; were they not,
Lucilla?

LUCILLA. Yes, indeed.

L. Well, Lucilla, the answer will much depend upon the clearness
of your faith in the personality of the spirits which are
described in the book of your own religion;--their personality,
observe, as distinguished from merely symbolical visions. For
instance, when Jeremiah has the vision of the seething pot with
its mouth to the north, you know that this which he sees is not a
real thing; but merely a significant dream. Also, when Zachariah
sees the speckled horses among the myrtle trees in the bottom, you
still may suppose the vision symbolical;--you do not think of them
as real spirits, like Pegasus, seen in the form of horses. But
when you are told of the four riders in the Apocalypse, a distinct
sense of personality begins to force itself upon you. And though
you might, in a dull temper, think that (for one instance of all)
the fourth rider on the pale horse was merely a symbol of the
power of death,--in your stronger and more earnest moods you will
rather conceive of him as a real and living angel. And when you
look back from the vision of the Apocalypse to the account of the
destruction of the Egyptian first-born, and of the army of
Sennacherib, and again to David's vision at the threshing floor of
Araunah, the idea of personality in this death-angel becomes
entirely defined, just as in the appearance of the angels to
Abraham, Manoah, or Mary.

Now, when you have once consented to this idea of a personal
spirit, must not the question instantly follow: "Does this spirit
exercise its functions towards one race of men only, or towards
all men? Was it an angel of death to the Jew only, or to the
Gentile also?" You find a certain Divine agency made visible to a
King of Israel, as an armed angel, executing vengeance, of which
one special purpose was to lower his kingly pride. You find
another (or perhaps the same) agency, made visible to a Christian
prophet as an angel standing in the sun, calling to the birds that
fly under heaven to come, that they may eat the flesh of kings. Is
there anything impious in the thought that the same agency might
have been expressed to a Greek king, or Greek seer, by similar
visions?--that this figure, standing in the sun, and armed with
the sword, or the bow (whose arrows were drunk with blood), and
exercising especially its power in the humiliation of the proud,
might, at first, have been called only "Destroyer," and
afterwards, as the light, or sun, of justice, was recognized in
the chastisement, called also "Physician" or "Healer"? If you feel
hesitation in admitting the possibility of such a manifestation, I
believe you will find it is caused, partly indeed by such trivial
things as the difference to your ear between Greek and English
terms; but, far more, by uncertainty in your own mind respecting
the nature and truth of the visions spoken of in the Bible. Have
any of you intently examined the nature of your belief in them?
You, for instance, Lucilla, who think often, and seriously, of
such things?

LUCILLA. No; I never could tell what to believe about them. I know
they must be true in some way or other; and I like reading about
them.

L. Yes; and I like reading about them too, Lucilla; as I like
reading other grand poetry. But, surely, we ought both to do more
than like it? Will God be satisfied with us, think you, if we read
His words, merely for the sake of an entirely meaningless poetical
sensation?

LUCILLA. But do not the people who give themselves to seek out the
meaning of these things, often get very strange, and extravagant?

L. More than that, Lucilla. They often go mad. That abandonment of
the mind to religious theory, or contemplation, is the very thing
I have been pleading with you against. I never said you should set
yourself to discover the meanings; but you should take careful
pains to understand them, so far as they are clear; and you should
always accurately ascertain the state of your mind about them. I
want you never to read merely for the pleasure of fancy; still
less as a formal religious duty (else you might as well take to
repeating Paters at once; for it is surely wiser to repeat one
thing we understand, than read a thousand which we cannot).
Either, therefore, acknowledge the passages to be, for the
present, unintelligible to you; or else determine the sense in
which you at present receive them; or, at all events, the
different senses between which you clearly see that you must
choose. Make either your belief, or your difficulty, definite; but
do not go on, all through your life, believing nothing
intelligently, and yet supposing that your having read the words
of a divine book must give you the right to despise every religion
but your own. I assure you, strange as it may seem, our scorn of
Greek tradition depends, not on our belief, but our disbelief, of
our own traditions. We have, as yet, no sufficient clue to the
meaning of either; but you will always find that, in proportion to
the earnestness of our own faith, its tendency to accept a
spiritual personality increases: and that the most vital and
beautiful Christian temper rests joyfully in its conviction of the
multitudinous ministry of living angels, infinitely varied in rank
and power. You all know one expression of the purest and happiest
form of such faith, as it exists in modern times, in Richter's
lovely illustrations of the Lord's Prayer. The real and living
death-angel, girt as a pilgrim, for journey, and softly crowned
with flowers, beckons at the dying mother's door; child-angels sit
talking face to face with mortal children, among the flowers;--
hold them by their little coats, lest they fall on the stairs;
whisper dreams of heaven to them, leaning over their pillows;
carry the sound of the church bells for them far through the air;
and even descending lower in service, fill little cups with honey,
to hold out to the weary bee. By the way, Lily, did you tell the
other children that story about your little sister, and Alice, and
the sea?

LILY. I told it to Alice, and to Miss Dora. I don't think I did to
anybody else. I thought it wasn't worth.

L. We shall think it worth a great deal now, Lily, if you will
tell it us. How old is Dotty, again? I forgot.

LILY. She is not quite three; but she has such odd little old
ways, sometimes.

L. And she was very fond of Alice?

LILY. Yes; Alice was so good to her always!

L. And so when Alice went away?

LILY. Oh, it was nothing, you know, to tell about; only it was
strange at the time.

L. Well; but I want you to tell it.

LILY. The morning after Alice had gone, Dotty was very sad and
restless when she got up; and went about, looking into all the
corners, as if she could find Alice in them, and at last she came
to me, and said, "Is Alie gone over the great sea?" And I said,
"Yes, she is gone over the great, deep sea, but she will come back
again some day." Then Dotty looked round the room; and I had just
poured some water out into the basin; and Dotty ran to it, and got
up on a chair, and dashed her hands through the water, again and
again; and cried, "Oh, deep, deep sea! send little Alie back to
me."

L. Isn't that pretty, children? There's a dear little heathen for
you! The whole heart of Greek mythology is in that; the idea of a
personal being in the elemental power;--of its being moved by
prayer;--and of its presence everywhere, making the broken
diffusion of the element sacred.

Now, remember, the measure in which we may permit ourselves to
think of this trusted and adored personality, in Greek, or in any
other, mythology, as conceivably a shadow of truth, will depend on
the degree in which we hold the Greeks, or other great nations,
equal, or inferior, in privilege and character, to the Jews, or to
ourselves. If we believe that the great Father would use the
imagination of the Jew as an instrument by which to exalt and lead
him; but the imagination of the Greek only to degrade and mislead
him: if we can suppose that real angels were sent to minister to
the Jews and to punish them; but no angels, or only mocking
spectra of angels, or even devils in the shapes of angels, to lead
Lycurgus and Leonidas from desolate cradle to hopeless grave:--and
if we can think that it was only the influence of specters, or the
teaching of demons, which issued in the making of mothers like
Cornelia, and of sons like Cleobis and Bito, we may, of course,
reject the heathen Mythology in our privileged scorn: but, at
least, we are bound to examine strictly by what faults of our own
it has come to pass, that the ministry of real angels among
ourselves is occasionally so ineffectual, as to end in the
production of Cornelias who entrust their child-jewels to
Charlotte Winsors for the better keeping of them; and of sons like
that one who, the other day, in France, beat his mother to death
with a stick; and was brought in by the jury, "guilty, with
extenuating circumstances."

MAY. Was that really possible?

L. Yes, my dear. I am not sure that I can lay my hand on the
reference to it (and I should not have said "the other day"--it
was a year or two ago), but you may depend on the fact; and I
could give you many like it, if I chose. There was a murder done
in Russia, very lately, on a traveler. The murderess's little
daughter was in the way, and found it out, somehow. Her mother
killed her, too, and put her into the oven. There is a peculiar
horror about the relations between parent and child, which are
being now brought about by our variously degraded forms of
European white slavery. Here is one reference, I see, in my notes
on that story of Cleobis and Bito; though I suppose I marked this
chiefly for its quaintness, and the beautifully Christian names of
the sons; but it is a good instance of the power of the King of
the Valley of Diamonds [Footnote: Notes vi.] among us.

In "Galignani" of July 21-22, 1862, is reported a trial of a
farmer's son in the department of the Yonne. The father, two years
ago, at Malay le Grand, gave up his property to his two sons, on
condition of being maintained by them. Simon fulfilled his
agreement, but Pierre would not. The tribunal of Sens condemns
Pierre to pay eighty-four francs a year to his father. Pierre
replies, "he would rather die than pay it." Actually, returning
home, he throws himself into the river, and the body is not found
till next day.

MARY. But--but--I can't tell what you would have us think. Do you
seriously mean that the Greeks were better than we are; and that
their gods were real angels?

L. No, my dear. I mean only that we know, in reality, less than
nothing of the dealings of our Maker with our fellow-men; and can
only reason or conjecture safely about them, when we have
sincerely humble thoughts of ourselves and our creeds.

We owe to the Greeks every noble discipline in literature, every
radical principle of art; and every form of convenient beauty in
our household furniture and daily occupations of life. We are
unable, ourselves, to make rational use of half that we have
received from them: and, of our own, we have nothing but
discoveries in science, and fine mechanical adaptations of the
discovered physical powers. On the other hand, the vice existing
among certain classes, both of the rich and poor, in London,
Paris, and Vienna, could have been conceived by a Spartan or Roman
of the heroic ages only as possible in a Tartarus, where fiends
were employed to teach, but not to punish, crime. It little
becomes us to speak contemptuously of the religion of races to
whom we stand in such relations; nor do I think any man of modesty
or thoughtfulness will ever speak so of any religion, in which God
has allowed one good man to die, trusting.

The more readily we admit the possibility of our own cherished
convictions being mixed with error, the more vital and helpful
whatever is right in them will become: and no error is so
conclusively fatal as the idea that God will not allow us to err,
though He has allowed all other men to do so. There may be doubt
of the meaning of other visions, but there is none respecting that
of the dream of St. Peter; and you may trust the Rock of the
Church's Foundation for true interpreting, when he learned from it
that, "in every nation, he that feareth God and worketh
righteousness, is accepted with Him." See that you understand what
that righteousness means; and set hand to it stoutly: you will
always measure your neighbors' creed kindly, in proportion to the
substantial fruits of your own. Do not think you will ever get
harm by striving to enter into the faith of others, and to
sympathize, in imagination, with the guiding principles of their
lives. So only can you justly love them, or pity them, or praise.
By the gracious effort you will double, treble--nay, indefinitely
multiply, at once the pleasure, the reverence, and the
intelligence with which you read: and, believe me, it is wiser and
holier, by the fire of your own faith to kindle the ashes of
expired religions, than to let your soul shiver and stumble among
their graves, through the gathering darkness, and communicable
cold.

MARY (after some pause). We shall all like reading Greek history
so much better after this! but it has put everything else out of
our heads that we wanted to ask.

L. I can tell you one of the things; and I might take credit for
generosity in telling you; but I have a personal reason--Lucilla's
verse about the creation.

DORA. Oh, yes--yes; and its "pain together, until now."

L. I call you back to that, because I must warn you against an old
error of my own. Somewhere in the fourth volume of "Modern
Painters," I said that the earth seemed to have passed through its
highest state: and that, after ascending by a series of phases,
culminating in its habitation by man, it seems to be now gradually
becoming less fit for that habitation.

MARY. Yes, I remember.

L. I wrote those passages under a very bitter impression of the
gradual perishing of beauty from the loveliest scenes which I knew
in the physical world;--not in any doubtful way, such as I might
have attributed to loss of sensation in myself--but by violent and
definite physical action; such as the filling up of the Lac de
Chede by landslips from the Rochers des Fiz;--the narrowing of the
Lake Lucerne by the gaining delta of the stream of the Muotta-
Thal, which, in the course of years, will cut the lake into two,
as that of Brientz has been divided from that of Thun;--the steady
diminishing of the glaciers north of the Alps, and still more, of
the sheets of snow on their southern slopes, which supply the
refreshing streams of Lombardy:--the equally steady increase of
deadly maremma round Pisa and Venice; and other such phenomena,
quite measurably traceable within the limits even of short life,
and unaccompanied, as it seemed, by redeeming or compensatory
agencies. I am still under the same impression respecting the
existing phenomena; but I feel more strongly, every day, that no
evidence to be collected within historical periods can be accepted
as any clue to the great tendencies of geological change; but that
the great laws which never fail, and to which all change is
subordinate, appear such as to accomplish a gradual advance to
lovelier order, and more calmly, yet more deeply, animated Rest.
Nor has this conviction ever fastened itself upon me more
distinctly, than during my endeavor to trace the laws which govern
the lowly framework of the dust. For, through all the phases of
its transition and dissolution, there seems to be a continual
effort to raise itself into a higher state; and a measured gain,
through the fierce revulsion and slow renewal of the earth's
frame, in beauty, and order, and permanence. The soft white
sediments of the sea draw themselves, in process of time, into
smooth knots of sphered symmetry; burdened and strained under
increase of pressure, they pass into a nascent marble; scorched by
fervent heat, they brighten and blanch into the snowy rock of
Paros and Carrara. The dark drift of the inland river, or stagnant
slime of inland pool and lake, divides, or resolves itself as it
dries, into layers of its several elements; slowly purifying each
by the patient withdrawal of it from the anarchy of the mass in
which it was mingled. Contracted by increasing drought, till it
must shatter into fragments, it infuses continually a finer ichor
into the opening veins, and finds in its weakness the first
rudiments of a perfect strength. Rent at last, rock from rock,
nay, atom from atom, and tormented in lambent fire, it knits,
through the fusion, the fibers of a perennial endurance; and,
during countless subsequent centuries, declining, or, rather let
me say, rising, to repose, finishes the infallible luster of its
crystalline beauty, under harmonies of law which are wholly
beneficent, because wholly inexorable.

(The children seem pleased, but more inclined to think over these
matters than to talk.)

L. (after giving them a little time). Mary, I seldom ask you to
read anything out of books of mine; but there is a passage about
the Law of Help, which I want you to read to the children now,
because it is of no use merely to put it in other words for them.
You know the place I mean, do not you?

MARY. Yes (presently finding it); where shall I begin?

L. Here, but the elder ones had better look afterwards at the
piece which comes just before this.

MARY (reads)

"A pure or holy state of anything is that in which all its parts
are helpful or consistent. The highest and first law of the
universe, and the other name of life, is therefore, 'help'. The
other name of death is 'separation'. Government and cooperation
are in all things, and eternally, the laws of life. Anarchy and
competition, eternally, and in all things, the laws of death.

"Perhaps the best, though the most familiar, example we could take
of the nature and power of consistence, will be that of the
possible changes in the dust we tread on.

"Exclusive of animal decay, we can hardly arrive at a more
absolute type of impurity, than the mud or slime of a damp, over
trodden path, in the outskirts of a manufacturing town. I do not
say mud of the road, because that is mixed with animal refuse, but
take merely an ounce or two of the blackest slime of a beaten
footpath, on a rainy day, near a manufacturing town. That slime we
shall find in most cases composed of clay (or brickdust, which is
burnt clay), mixed with soot, a little sand and water. All these
elements are at helpless war with each other, and destroy
reciprocally each other's nature and power competing and fighting
for place at every tread of your foot, sand squeezing out clay,
and clay squeezing out water, and soot meddling everywhere, and
defiling the whole. Let us suppose that this ounce of mud is left
in perfect rest, and that its elements gather together, like to
like, so that their atoms may get into the closest relations
possible.

"Let the clay begin. Ridding itself of all foreign substance, it
gradually becomes a white earth, already very beautiful, and fit,
with help of congealing fire, to be made into finest porcelain,
and painted on, and be kept in kings' palaces. But such artificial
consistence is not its best. Leave it still quiet, to follow its
own instinct of unity, and it becomes, not only white but clear;
not only clear, but hard; nor only clear and hard, but so set that
it can deal with light in a wonderful way, and gather out of it
the loveliest blue rays only, refusing the rest. We call it then a
sapphire.

"Such being the consummation of the clay, we give similar
permission of quiet to the sand. It also becomes, first, a white
earth; then proceeds to grow clear and hard, and at last arranges
itself in mysterious, infinitely fine parallel lines, which have
the power of reflecting, not merely the blue rays, but the blue,
green, purple, and red rays, in the greatest beauty in which they
can be seen through any hard material whatsoever. We call it then
an opal.

"In next order the soot sets to work. It cannot make itself white
at first; but, instead of being discouraged, tries harder and
harder; and comes out clear at last; and the hardest thing in the
world: and for the blackness that it had, obtains in exchange the
power of reflecting all the rays of the sun at once, in the
vividest blaze that any solid thing can shoot. We call it then a
diamond.

"Last of all, the water purifies, or unites itself; contented
enough if it only reach the form of a dewdrop: but if we insist on
its proceeding to a more perfect consistence, it crystallizes into
the shape of a star. And, for the ounce of slime which we had by
political economy of competition, we have, by political economy of
co-operation, a sapphire, an opal, and a diamond, set in the midst
of a star of snow."

L. I have asked you to hear that, children, because, from all that
we have seen in the work and play of these past days, I would have
you gain at least one grave and enduring thought. The seeming
trouble,--the unquestionable degradation,--of the elements of the
physical earth, must passively wait the appointed time of their
repose, or their restoration. It can only be brought about for
them by the agency of external law. But if, indeed, there be a
nobler life in us than in these strangely moving atoms;--if,
indeed, there is an eternal difference between the fire which
inhabits them, and that which animates us,--it must be shown, by
each of us in his appointed place, not merely in the patience, but
in the activity of our hope; not merely by our desire, but our
labor, for the time when the Dust of the generations of men shall
be confirmed for foundations of the gates of the city of God. The
human clay, now trampled and despised, will not be,--cannot be,--
knit into strength and light by accident or ordinances of
unassisted fate. By human cruelty and iniquity it has been
afflicted;--by human mercy and justice it must be raised: and, in
all fear or questioning of what is or is not, the real message of
creation, or of revelation, you may assuredly find perfect peace,
if you are resolved to do that which your Lord has plainly
required,--and content that He should indeed require no more of
you,--than to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with
Him.





NOTES.





NOTE I.

Page 26.


"That third pyramid of hers."

THROUGHOUT the dialogues, it must be observed that "Sibyl" is
addressed (when in play) as having once been the Cumaean Sibyl;
and "Egypt" as having been Queen Nitocris,--the Cinderella and
"the greatest heroine and beauty" of Egyptian story. The Egyptians
called her "Neith the Victorious" (Nitocris), and the Greeks "Face
of the Rose" (Rhodope). Chaucer's beautiful conception of
Cleopatra in the "Legend of Good Women," is much more founded on
the traditions of her than on those of Cleopatra; and, especially
in its close, modified by Herodotus's terrible story of the death
of Nitocris, which, however, is mythologically nothing more than a
part of the deep monotonous ancient dirge for the fulfillment of
the earthly destiny of Beauty: "She cast herself into a chamber
full of ashes."

I believe this Queen is now sufficiently ascertained to have
either built, or increased to double its former size, the third
pyramid of Gizeh: and the passage following in the text refers to
an imaginary endeavor, by the Old Lecturer and the children
together, to make out the description of that pyramid in the 167th
page of the second volume of Bunsen's "Egypt's Place in Universal
History"--ideal endeavor,--which ideally terminates as the Old
Lecturer's real endeavors to the same end always have terminated.
There are, however, valuable notes respecting Nitocris at page 210
of the same volume: but the "Early Egyptian History for the
Young," by the author of "Sidney Gray," contains, in a pleasant
form, as much information as young readers will usually need.





NOTE II.

Page 27.


"Pyramid of Asychis?"

THIS pyramid, in mythology, divides with the Tower of Babel the
shame, or vain glory, of being presumptuously, and first among
great edifices, built with "brick for stone." This was the
inscription on it, according to Herodotus:

"Despise me not, in comparing me with the pyramids of stone; for I
have the pre-eminence over them, as far as Jupiter has pre-
eminence over the gods. For, striking with staves into the pool,
men gathered the clay which fastened itself to the staff, and
kneaded bricks out of it, and so made me."

The word I have translated "kneaded" is literally "drew;" in the
sense of drawing, for which the Latins used "duco;" and thus gave
us our "ductile" in speaking of dead clay, and Duke, Doge, or
leader, in speaking of living clay. As the asserted pre-eminence
of the edifice is made, in this inscription, to rest merely on the
quantity of labor consumed in it, this pyramid is considered, in
the text, as the type, at once, of the base building, and of the
lost labor, of future ages, so far at least as the spirits of
measured and mechanical effort deal with it; but Neith, exercising
her power upon it, makes it a type of the work of wise and
inspired builders.





NOTE III.

Page 29.


"The Greater Pthah."

IT is impossible, as yet, to define with distinctness the personal
agencies of the Egyptian deities. They are continually associated
in function, or hold derivative powers, or are related to each
other in mysterious triads, uniting always symbolism of physical
phenomena with real spiritual power. I have endeavored partly to
explain this in the text of the tenth Lecture here, it is only
necessary for the reader to know that the Greater Pthah more or
less represents the formative power of order and measurement he
always stands on a four-square pedestal, "the Egyptian cubit,
metaphorically used as the hieroglyphic for truth," his limbs are
bound together, to signify fixed stability, as of a pillar; he has
a measuring-rod in his hand, and at Philas, is represented as
holding an egg on a potter's wheel; but I do not know if this
symbol occurs in older sculptures. His usual title is the "Lord of
Truth". Others, very beautiful "King of the Two Worlds, of
Gracious Countenance," "Superintendent of the Great Abode," etc.,
are given by Mr. Birch in Arundale's "Gallery of Antiquities,"
which I suppose is the book of best authority easily accessible.
For the full titles and utterances of the gods, Rosellini is as
yet the only--and I believe, still a very questionable--authority,
and Arundale's little book, excellent in the text, has this great
defect, that its drawings give the statues invariably a ludicrous
or ignoble character Readers who have not access to the originals
must be warned against this frequent fault in modern illustration
(especially existing also in some of the painted casts of Gothic
and Norman work at the Crystal Palace). It is not owing to any
willful want of veracity: the plates in Arundale's book are
laboriously faithful: but the expressions of both face and body in
a figure depend merely on emphasis of touch, and, in barbaric art
most draughtsmen emphasize what they plainly see--the barbarism,
and miss conditions of nobleness, which they must approach the
monument in a different temper before they will discover and draw
with great subtlety before they can express.

The character of the Lower Pthah, or perhaps I ought rather to
say, of Pthah in his lower office, is sufficiently explained in
the text of the third Lecture, only the reader must be warned that
the Egyptian symbolism of him by the beetle was not a scornful
one, it expressed only the idea of his presence in the first
elements of life. But it may not unjustly be used, in another
sense, by us, who have seen his power in new development, and,
even as it was, I cannot conceive that the Egyptians should have
regarded their beetle headed image of him (Champollion,
"Pantheon," p. 12), without some occult scorn. It is the most
painful of all their types of any beneficent power, and even among
those of evil influences, none can be compared with it, except its
opposite, the tortoise headed demon of indolence.

Pasht (p. 27, line 9) is connected with the Greek Artemis,
especially in her offices of judgment and vengeance. She is
usually lioness headed, sometimes cat headed, her attributes
seeming often trivial or ludicrous unless their full meaning is
known, but the inquiry is much too wide to be followed here. The
cat was sacred to her, or rather to the sun, and secondarily to
her. She is alluded to in the text because she is always the
companion of Pthah (called "the beloved of Pthah," it may be as
Judgment, demanded and longed for by Truth), and it may be well
for young readers to have this fixed in their minds, even by
chance association. There are more statues of Pasht in the British
Museum than of any other Egyptian deity; several of them fine in
workmanship, nearly all in dark stone, which may be, presumably,
to connect her, as the moon, with the night; and in her office of
avenger, with grief.

Thoth (p. 31, line 12), is the Recording Angel of Judgment; and
the Greek Hermes--Phre (line 16), is the Sun.

Neith is the Egyptian spirit of divine wisdom, and the Athena of
the Greeks. No sufficient statement of her many attributes, still
less of their meanings, can be shortly given; but this should be
noted respecting the veiling of the Egyptian image of her by
vulture wings--that as she is, physically, the goddess of the air,
this bird, the most powerful creature of the air known to the
Egyptians, naturally became her symbol. It had other
significations; but certainly this, when in connection with Neith.
As representing her, it was the most important sign, next to the
winged sphere, in Egyptian sculpture; and, just as in Homer,
Athena herself guides her heroes into battle, this symbol of
wisdom, giving victory, floats over the heads of the Egyptian
Kings. The Greeks, representing the goddess herself in human form,
yet would not lose the power of the Egyptian symbol, and changed
it into an angel of victory. First seen in loveliness on the early
coins of Syracuse and Leontium, it gradually became the received
sign of all conquest, and the so called "Victory" of later times,
which, little by little, loses its truth, and is accepted by the
moderns only as a personification of victory itself,--not as an
actual picture of the living Angel who led to victory. There is a
wide difference between these two conceptions,--all the difference
between insincere poetry, and sincere religion. This I have also
endeavored farther to illustrate in the tenth Lecture, there is
however one part of Athena's character which it would have been
irrelevant to dwell upon there, yet which I must not wholly leave
unnoticed.

As the goddess of the air, she physically represents both its
beneficent calm, and necessary tempest other storm deities (as
Chrysaor and Aeolus) being invested with a subordinate and more or
less malignant function, which is exclusively their own, and is
related to that of Athena as the power of Mars is related to hers
in war. So also Virgil makes her able to wield the lightning
herself, while Juno cannot, but must pray for the intervention of
Aeolus. She has precisely the correspondent moral authority over
calmness of mind, and just anger. She soothes Achilles, as she
incites Tydides; her physical power over the air being always
hinted correlatively. She grasps Achilles by his hair--as the wind
would lift it--softly,

    "It fanned his cheek, it raised his hair,
    Like a meadow gale in spring"

She does not merely turn the lance of Mars from Diomed; but seizes
it in both her hands, and casts it aside, with a sense of making
it vain, like chaff in the wind;--to the shout of Achilles, she
adds her own voice of storm in heaven--but in all cases the moral
power is still the principal one--most beautifully in that seizing
of Achilles by the hair, which was the talisman of his life
(because he had vowed it to the Sperchius if he returned in
safety), and which, in giving at Patroclus' tomb, he, knowingly,
yields up the hope of return to his country, and signifies that he
will die with his friend. Achilles and Tydides are, above all
other heroes, aided by her in war, because their prevailing
characters are the desire of justice, united in both, with deep
affections; and, in Achilles, with a passionate tenderness, which
is the real root of his passionate anger Ulysses is her favorite
chiefly in her office as the goddess of conduct and design.





NOTE IV.

Page 81.


"Geometrical limitations."

IT is difficult, without a tedious accuracy, or without full
illustration, to express the complete relations of crystalline
structure, which dispose minerals to take, at different times,
fibrous, massive, or foliated forms; and I am afraid this chapter
will be generally skipped by the reader: yet the arrangement
itself will be found useful, if kept broadly in mind; and the
transitions of state are of the highest interest, if the subject
is entered upon with any earnestness. It would have been vain to
add to the scheme of this little volume any account of the
geometrical forms of crystals an available one, though still far
too difficult and too copious, has been arranged by the Rev. Mr.
Mitchell, for Orr's "Circle of the Sciences;" and, I believe, the
"nets" of crystals, which are therein given to be cut out with
scissors and put prettily together, will be found more conquerable
by young ladies than by other students. They should also, when an
opportunity occurs, be shown, at any public library, the diagram
of the crystallization of quartz referred to poles, at p. 8 of
Cloizaux's "Manuel de Mineralogie;" that they may know what work
is; and what the subject is.

With a view to more careful examination of the nascent states of
silica, I have made no allusion in this volume to the influence of
mere segregation, as connected with the crystalline power. It has
only been recently, during the study of the breccias alluded to in
page 186, that I have fully seen the extent to which this singular
force often modifies rocks in which at first its influence might
hardly have been suspected; many apparent conglomerates being in
reality formed chiefly by segregation, combined with mysterious
brokenly-zoned structures, like those of some malachites. I hope
some day to know more of these and several other mineral phenomena
(especially of those connected with the relative sizes of
crystals), which otherwise I should have endeavored to describe in
this volume.





NOTE V.

Page 168.


"St. Barbara."

I WOULD have given the legends of St. Barbara, and St. Thomas, if
I had thought it always well for young readers to have everything
at once told them which they may wish to know. They will remember
the stories better after taking some trouble to find them; and the
text is intelligible enough as it stands. The idea of St. Barbara,
as there given, is founded partly on her legend in Peter de
Natahbus, partly on the beautiful photograph of Van Eyck's picture
of her at Antwerp: which was some time since published at Lille.





NOTE VI.

Page 227.


"King of the Valley of Diamonds."

ISABEL interrupted the Lecturer here, and was briefly bid to hold
her tongue; which gave rise to some talk, apart, afterwards,
between L. and Sibyl, of which a word or two may be perhaps
advisably set down.

SIBYL. We shall spoil Isabel, certainly, if it don't mind: I was
glad you stopped her, and yet sorry, for she wanted so much to ask
about the Valley of Diamonds again, and she has worked so hard at
it, and made it nearly all out by herself. She recollected
Elisha's throwing in the meal, which nobody else did.

L. But what did she want to ask?

SIBYL. About the mulberry trees and the serpents; we are all
stopped by that. Won't you tell us what it means?

L. Now, Sibyl, I am sure you, who never explained yourself, should
be the last to expect others to do so. I hate explaining myself.

SIBYL. And yet how often you complain of other people for not
saying what they meant. How I have heard you growl over the three
stone steps to purgatory, for instance!

L. Yes; because Dante's meaning is worth getting at, but mine
matters nothing at least, if ever I think it is of any consequence
so I speak it as clearly as may be. But you may make anything you
like of the serpent forests I could have helped you to find out
what they were, by giving a little more detail, but it would have
been tiresome.

SIBYL. It is much more tiresome not to find out Tell us, please,
as Isabel says, because we feel so stupid.

L. There is no stupidity, you could not possibly do more than
guess at anything so vague. But I think, you, Sibyl, at least,
might have recollected what first dyed the mulberry.

SIBYL. So I did, but that helped little, I thought of Dante's
forest of suicides, too, but you would not simply have borrowed
that.

L. No! If I had had strength to use it, I should have stolen it,
to beat into another shape; not borrowed it. But that idea of
souls in trees is as old as the world; or at least, as the world
of man. And I DID mean that there were souls in those dark
branches,--the souls of all those who had perished in misery
through the pursuit of riches, and that the river was of their
blood, gathering gradually, and flowing out of the valley. Then I
meant the serpents for the souls of those who had lived carelessly
and wantonly in their riches; and who have all their sins forgiven
by the world, because they are rich: and therefore they have seven
crimson crested heads, for the seven mortal sins; of which they
are proud: and these, and the memory and report of them, are the
chief causes of temptation to others, as showing the pleasantness
and absolving power of riches; so that thus they are singing
serpents. And the worms are the souls of the common money getters
and traffickers, who do nothing but eat and spin: and who gain
habitually by the distress or foolishness of others (as you see
the butchers have been gaining out of the panic at the cattle
plague, among the poor),--so they are made to eat the dark leaves,
and spin, and perish.

SIBYL. And the souls of the great, cruel, rich people who oppress
the poor, and lend money to government to make unjust war, where
are they?

L. They change into the ice, I believe, and are knit with the
gold, and make the grave dust of the valley I believe so, at
least, for no one ever sees those souls anywhere.

(SIBYL ceases questioning.)

ISABEL (who has crept up to her side without any one seeing). Oh,
Sibyl, please ask him about the fireflies!

L. What, you there, mousie! No; I won't tell either Sibyl or you
about the fireflies, nor a word more about anything else you ought
to be little fireflies yourselves, and find your way in twilight
by your own wits.

ISABEL. But you said they burned, you know?

L. Yes; and you may be fireflies that way too, some of you, before
long, though I did not mean that. Away with you, children. You
have thought enough for to-day.





NOTE TO SECOND EDITION


Sentence out of letter from May (who is staying with Isabel just
now at Cassel), dated 15th June, 1877:--

"I am reading the Ethics with a nice Irish girl who is staying
here, and she's just as puzzled as I've always been about the
fireflies, and we both want to know so much.--Please be a very
nice old Lecturer, and tell us, won't you?"

Well, May, you never were a vain girl; so could scarcely guess
that I meant them for the light, unpursued vanities, which yet
blind us, confused among the stars. One evening, as I came late
into Siena, the fireflies were flying high on a stormy sirocco
wind,--the stars themselves no brighter, and all their host
seeming, at moments, to fade as the insects faded.







Library Edition

THE COMPLETE WORKS
OF
JOHN RUSKIN

STONES OF VENICE
VOLUME III

GIOTTO
LECTURES ON ARCHITECTURE
HARBOURS OF ENGLAND
A JOY FOREVER

NATIONAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
NEW YORK CHICAGO




THE COMPLETE WORKS
OF
JOHN RUSKIN

VOLUME X

GIOTTO AND HIS WORKS
LECTURES ON ARCHITECTURE
THE HARBORS OF ENGLAND
POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ART
(A JOY FOREVER)




THE HARBORS OF ENGLAND.




CONTENTS.

                           PAGE
   THE HARBORS OF ENGLAND    1
      I. DOVER              34
     II. RAMSGATE           36
    III. PLYMOUTH           38
     IV. CATWATER           40
      V. SHEERNESS          41
     VI. MARGATE            43
    VII. PORTSMOUTH         46
   VIII. FALMOUTH           49
     IX. SIDMOUTH           51
      X. WHITBY             52
     XI. DEAL               54
    XII. SCARBOROUGH        56




EDITOR'S PREFACE.


"Turner's _Harbors of England_," as it is generally called, is a book
which, for various reasons, has never received from readers of Mr.
Ruskin's writings the attention it deserves. True, it has always been
sought after by connoisseurs, and collectors never fail with their
eleven or twelve guineas whenever a set of Artist's Proofs of the First
Edition of 1856 comes into the market. But to the General Reader the
book with its twelve exquisitely delicate mezzotints--four of which Mr.
Ruskin has declared to be among the very finest executed by Turner from
his marine subjects--is practically unknown.

The primary reason for this neglect is not far to seek. Since 1877 no
new edition of the work has been published, and thus it has gradually
passed from public knowledge, though still regarded with lively interest
by those to whom Mr. Ruskin's words--particularly words written in
further unfolding of the subtleties of Turner's art--at all times appeal
so strongly.

In his own preface Mr. Ruskin has told us all that in 1856 it was
necessary to know of the genesis of the _Harbors_. That account may now
be supplemented with the following additional facts. In 1826 Turner (in
conjunction with Lupton, the engraver) projected and commenced a serial
publication entitled _The Ports of England_. But both artist and
engraver lacked the opportunity required to carry the undertaking to a
successful conclusion, and three numbers only were completed. Each of
these contained two engravings. Part I., introducing _Scarborough_ and
_Whitby_, duly appeared in 1826; Part II., with _Dover_ and _Ramsgate_,
in 1827; and in 1828 Part III., containing _Sheerness_ and
_Portsmouth_, closed the series.[A] Twenty-eight years afterwards (that
is, in 1856, five years after Turner's death) these six plates, together
with six new ones, were published by Messrs. E. Gambart & Co., at whose
invitation Mr. Ruskin consented to write the essay on Turner's marine
painting which accompanied them. The book, a handsome folio, appears to
have been immediately successful, for in the following year a second
edition was called for. This was a precise reprint of the 1856 edition;
but, unhappily, the delicate plates already began to exhibit signs of
wear. The copyright (which had not been retained by Mr. Ruskin, but
remained the property of Messrs. E. Gambart & Co.) then passed to
Messrs. Day & Son, who, after producing the third edition of 1859, in
turn disposed of it to Mr. T. J. Allman. Allman issued a fourth edition
in 1872, and then parted with his rights to Messrs. Smith, Elder & Co.,
who in 1877 brought out the fifth, and, until now, last edition. Since
that date the work has been out of print, and has remained practically
inaccessible to the ordinary reader.

    [A] To ornament the covers of these parts, Turner designed a
    vignette, which was printed upon the center of the front wrapper of
    each. As _The Ports of England_ is an exceptionally scarce book, and
    as the vignette can be obtained in no other form, a facsimile of it
    is here given. The original drawing was presented by Mr. Ruskin to
    the Fitz-William Museum, at Cambridge, where it may now be seen.

It is matter for congratulation that at length means have been found to
bring _The Harbors of England_ once more into currency, and to issue the
book through Mr. George Allen at a price which will place it within the
reach of the reading public at large.

The last edition of 1877, with its worn and "retouched" plates,[B] was
published at twenty-five shillings; less than a third of that sum will
suffice to procure a copy of this new issue in which the prints (save
for their reduced size) more nearly approach the clearness and beauty of
the originals of 1856 than any of the three editions which have
immediately preceded it.

    [B] By this time (1877) the plates had become considerably worn, and
    were accordingly "retouched" by Mr. Chas. A. Tomkins. But such
    retouching proved worse than useless. The delicacy of the finer work
    had entirely vanished, and the plates remained but a ghost of their
    former selves, such as no one would recognize as doing justice to
    Turner. The fifth is unquestionably the least satisfactory of the
    five original editions containing Lupton's engravings.

I have before me the following interesting letter addressed by Mr.
Ruskin's father to Mr. W. Smith Williams, for many years literary
adviser to Messrs. Smith, Elder & Co.:--

     "CHAMOUNI, _August 4th, 1856._

     "MY DEAR SIR,--I hear that in _The Athenæum_ of 26th July there is
     a good article on my son's _Harbors of England_, and I should be
     greatly obliged by Mr. Gordon Smith sending me that number....

     "The history of this book, I believe, I told you. Gambart, the
     French publisher and picture dealer, said some 18 months ago that
     he was going to put out 12 Turner plates, never published, of
     English Harbors, and he would give my son two good Turner drawings
     for a few pages of text to illustrate them.[C] John agreed, and
     wrote the text, when poorly in the spring of 1855, at Tunbridge
     Wells; and it seems the work has just come out. It was in my
     opinion an extremely well done thing, and more likely, as far as it
     went, if not to be extremely popular, at least to be received
     without cavil than anything he had written. If there is a very
     favorable review in _The Athenæum_ ... it may tend to disarm the
     critics, and partly influence opinion of his larger works....--With
     our united kind regards,

     "Yours very truly,
     "JOHN JAMES RUSKIN."

    [C] Mr. E. Gambart (who is still living) states that, to the best of
    his recollection, he paid Mr. Ruskin 150 guineas for his work.
    Probably this was the price originally agreed upon, the two Turner
    drawings being ultimately accepted as a more welcome and appropriate
    form of remuneration.

In all save one particular the Text here given follows precisely that of
the previous issues. It has been the good fortune of the present Editor
to be able to restore a characteristic passage suppressed from motives
of prudence when the work was originally planned.[D] The proof-sheets of
the first edition, worked upon by Mr. Ruskin, were given by him to his
old nurse Anne.[E] She, fortunately, carefully preserved them, and in
turn gave them to Mr. Allen, some ten years before he became Mr.
Ruskin's publisher. These proofs had been submitted as they came from
the press to Mr. W. H. Harrison (well known to readers of _On the Old
Road_, etc., as "My First Editor"), who marked them freely with notes
and suggestions. To one passage he appears to have taken so decided an
objection that its author was prevailed upon to delete it. But, whilst
deferring thus to the judgment of others, and consenting to remove a
sentence which he doubtless regarded with particular satisfaction as
expressing a decided opinion upon a favorite picture, Mr. Ruskin
indulged in one of those pleasantries which now and again we observe in
his informal letters, though seldom, if ever, in his serious writings.
In the margin, below the canceled passage, he wrote boldly: "_Sacrificed
to the Muse of Prudence. J. R._"[F]

    [D] See _post_, p. 19.

    [E] See _Præterita_. She died March 30th, 1871.

    [F] The accompanying illustration is a facsimile of the portion of
    the proof-sheet described above--slightly reduced to fit the smaller
    page.

That Mr. Harrison was justified in raising objection to this "moderate
estimate" of Turner's picture will, I think, be readily allowed. In
those days Mr. Ruskin's influence was, comparatively speaking, small;
and the expression of an opinion which heaped praise upon the single
painting of a partially understood painter at the expense of a great and
popular institution would only have served to arouse opposition, and
possibly to attract ridicule. It is different to-day. We know the keen
enthusiasm of the author of _The Seven Lamps_, and have seen again and
again how he expresses himself in terms of somewhat exaggerated
admiration when writing of a painter whom he appreciates, or a picture
that he loves. To us this enthusiasm is an attractive characteristic. It
has never been permitted to distort the vision or cloud the critical
faculty; and we follow the teaching of the Master all the more closely
because we feel his fervor, and know how completely he becomes possessed
with a subject which appeals to his imagination or his heart. I have
therefore not scrupled to revive the words which he consented to
immolate at the shrine of Prudence.

It is not my province here to enter into any criticism of the pages
which follow; but, for the benefit of those who are not versed in the
minutiæ of Shelleyan topics, a word may be said regarding Mr. Ruskin's
reference[G] to the poet who met his death in the Bay of Spezzia. The
_Don Juan_ was no "traitorous" craft. Fuller and more authentic
information is to hand now than the meager facts at the disposal of a
writer in 1856; and we know that the greed of man, and not the lack of
sea-worthiness in his tiny vessel, caused Percy Shelley to

         "... Suffer a sea change
    Into something rich and strange."

    [G] See _post_, p. 3.

There is, unhappily, no longer any room for doubt that the _Don Juan_
was willfully run down by a felucca whose crew coveted the considerable
sum of money they believed Byron to have placed on board, and cared
nothing for the sacrifice of human life in their eagerness to seize the
gold.

The twelve engravings, to which reference has already been made, have
been reproduced by the photogravure process from a selected set of early
examples; and, in addition, the plates so prepared have been carefully
worked upon by Mr. Allen himself. It will thus be apparent that
everything possible has been done to produce a worthy edition of a
worthy book, and to place in the hands of the public what to the present
generation of readers is tantamount to a new work from a pen
which--alas!--has now for so long a time been still.

THOMAS J. WISE.




AUTHOR'S ORIGINAL PREFACE.


Among the many peculiarities which distinguished the late J. M. W.
Turner from other landscape painters, not the least notable, in my
apprehension, were his earnest desire to arrange his works in connected
groups, and his evident intention, with respect to each drawing, that it
should be considered as expressing part of a continuous system of
thought. The practical result of this feeling was that he commenced many
series of drawings,--and, if any accident interfered with the
continuation of the work, hastily concluded them,--under titles
representing rather the relation which the executed designs bore to the
materials accumulated in his own mind, than the position which they
could justifiably claim when contemplated by others. The _River Scenery_
was closed without a single drawing of a rapidly running stream; and the
prints of his annual tours were assembled, under the title of the
_Rivers of France_, without including a single illustration either of
the Rhone or the Garonne.

The title under which the following plates are now presented to the
public, is retained merely out of respect to this habit of Turner's.
Under that title he commenced the publication, and executed the vignette
for its title-page, intending doubtless to make it worthy of taking rank
with, if not far above, the consistent and extensive series of the
_Southern Coast_, executed in his earlier years. But procrastination and
accident equally interfered with his purpose. The excellent engraver Mr.
Lupton, in co-operation with whom the work was undertaken, was
unfortunately also a man of genius, and seems to have been just as
capricious as Turner himself in the application of his powers to the
matter in hand. Had one of the parties in the arrangement been a mere
plodding man of business, the work would have proceeded; but between the
two men of talent it came very naturally to a stand. They petted each
other by reciprocal indulgence of delay; and at Turner's death, the
series, so magnificently announced under the title of the _Harbors of
England_, consisted only of twelve plates, all the less worthy of their
high-sounding title in that, while they included illustrations of some
of the least important of the watering-places, they did not include any
illustration whatever of such harbors of England as Liverpool, Shields,
Yarmouth, or Bristol. Such as they were, however, I was requested to
undertake their illustration. As the offer was made at a moment when
much nonsense, in various forms, was being written about Turner and his
works; and among the twelve plates there were four[H] which I considered
among the very finest that had been executed from his marine subjects, I
accepted the trust; partly to prevent the really valuable series of
engravings from being treated with injustice, and partly because there
were several features in them by which I could render more intelligible
some remarks I wished to make on Turner's marine painting in general.

    [H] Portsmouth, Sheerness, Scarborough, and Whitby.

These remarks, therefore, I have thrown together, in a connected form;
less with a view to the illustration of these particular plates, than of
the general system of ship-painting which was characteristic of the
great artist. I have afterwards separately noted the points which seemed
to me most deserving of attention in the plates themselves.

Of archæological information the reader will find none. The designs
themselves are, in most instances, little more than spirited sea-pieces,
with such indistinct suggestion of local features in the distance as may
justify the name given to the subject; but even when, as in the case of
the Dover and Portsmouth, there is something approaching topographical
detail, I have not considered it necessary to lead the reader into
inquiries which certainly Turner himself never thought of; nor do I
suppose it would materially add to the interest of these cloud distances
or rolling seas, if I had the time--which I have not--to collect the
most complete information respecting the raising of Prospect Rows, and
the establishment of circulating libraries.

DENMARK HILL.
[1856.]




THE HARBORS OF ENGLAND.


Of all things, living or lifeless, upon this strange earth, there is but
one which, having reached the mid-term of appointed human endurance on
it, I still regard with unmitigated amazement. I know, indeed, that all
around me is wonderful--but I cannot answer it with wonder:--a dark
veil, with the foolish words, NATURE OF THINGS, upon it, casts its
deadening folds between me and their dazzling strangeness. Flowers open,
and stars rise, and it seems to me they could have done no less. The
mystery of distant mountain-blue only makes me reflect that the earth is
of necessity mountainous;--the sea-wave breaks at my feet, and I do not
see how it should have remained unbroken. But one object there is still,
which I never pass without the renewed wonder of childhood, and that is
the bow of a Boat. Not of a racing-wherry, or revenue cutter, or clipper
yacht; but the blunt head of a common, bluff, undecked sea-boat, lying
aside in its furrow of beach sand. The sum of Navigation is in that. You
may magnify it or decorate as you will: you do not add to the wonder of
it. Lengthen it into hatchet-like edge of iron,--strengthen it with
complex tracery of ribs of oak,--carve it and gild it till a column of
light moves beneath it on the sea,--you have made no more of it than it
was at first. That rude simplicity of bent plank, that can breast its
way through the death that is in the deep sea, has in it the soul of
shipping. Beyond this, we may have more work, more men, more money; we
cannot have more miracle.

For there is, first, an infinite strangeness in the perfection of the
thing, as work of human hands. I know nothing else that man does, which
is perfect, but that. All his other doings have some sign of weakness,
affectation, or ignorance in them. They are overfinished or
underfinished; they do not quite answer their end, or they show a mean
vanity in answering it too well.

But the boat's bow is naïvely perfect: complete without an effort. The
man who made it knew not he was making anything beautiful, as he bent
its planks into those mysterious, ever-changing curves. It grows under
his hand into the image of a sea-shell; the seal, as it were, of the
flowing of the great tides and streams of ocean stamped on its delicate
rounding. He leaves it when all is done, without a boast. It is simple
work, but it will keep out water. And every plank thence-forward is a
Fate, and has men's lives wreathed in the knots of it, as the cloth-yard
shaft had their deaths in its plumes.

Then, also, it is wonderful on account of the greatness of the thing
accomplished. No other work of human hands ever gained so much.
Steam-engines and telegraphs indeed help us to fetch, and carry, and
talk; they lift weights for us, and bring messages, with less trouble
than would have been needed otherwise; this saving of trouble, however,
does not constitute a new faculty, it only enhances the powers we
already possess. But in that bow of the boat is the gift of another
world. Without it, what prison wall would be so strong as that "white
and wailing fringe" of sea. What maimed creatures were we all, chained
to our rocks, Andromeda-like, or wandering by the endless shores;
wasting our incommunicable strength, and pining in hopeless watch of
unconquerable waves? The nails that fasten together the planks of the
boat's bow are the rivets of the fellowship of the world. Their iron
does more than draw lightning out of heaven, it leads love round the
earth.

Then also, it is wonderful on account of the greatness of the enemy that
it does battle with. To lift dead weight; to overcome length of languid
space; to multiply or systematize a given force; this we may see done by
the bar, or beam, or wheel, without wonder. But to war with that living
fury of waters, to bare its breast, moment after moment, against the
unwearied enmity of ocean,--the subtle, fitful, implacable smiting of
the black waves, provoking each other on, endlessly, all the infinite
march of the Atlantic rolling on behind them to their help,--and still
to strike them back into a wreath of smoke and futile foam, and win its
way against them, and keep its charge of life from them;--does any other
soulless thing do as much as this?

I should not have talked of this feeling of mine about a boat, if I had
thought it was mine only; but I believe it to be common to all of us who
are not seamen. With the seaman, wonder changes into fellowship and
close affection; but to all landsmen, from youth upwards, the boat
remains a piece of enchantment; at least unless we entangle our vanity
in it, and refine it away into mere lath, giving up all its protective
nobleness for pace. With those in whose eyes the perfection of a boat is
swift fragility, I have no sympathy. The glory of a boat is, first its
steadiness of poise--its assured standing on the clear softness of the
abyss; and, after that, so much capacity of progress by oar or sail as
shall be consistent with this defiance of the treachery of the sea. And,
this being understood, it is very notable how commonly the poets,
creating for themselves an ideal of motion, fasten upon the charm of a
boat. They do not usually express any desire for wings, or, if they do,
it is only in some vague and half-unintended phrase, such as "flit or
soar," involving wingedness. Seriously, they are evidently content to
let the wings belong to Horse, or Muse, or Angel, rather than to
themselves; but they all, somehow or other, express an honest wish for a
Spiritual Boat. I will not dwell on poor Shelley's paper navies, and
seas of quicksilver, lest we should begin to think evil of boats in
general because of that traitorous one in Spezzia Bay; but it is a
triumph to find the pastorally minded Wordsworth imagine no other way of
visiting the stars than in a boat "no bigger than the crescent moon";[I]
and to find Tennyson--although his boating, in an ordinary way, has a
very marshy and punt-like character--at last, in his highest
inspiration, enter in where the wind began "to sweep a music out of
sheet and shroud."[J] But the chief triumph of all is in Dante. He had
known all manner of traveling; had been borne through vacancy on the
shoulders of chimeras, and lifted through upper heaven in the grasp of
its spirits; but yet I do not remember that he ever expresses any
positive _wish_ on such matters, except for a boat.

    [I] Prologue to _Peter Bell_.

    [J] _In Memoriam_, ci.

    "Guido, I wish that Lapo, thou, and I,
      Led by some strong enchantment, might ascend
      A magic ship, whose charmed sails should fly
      With winds at will where'er our thoughts might wend,
    So that no change nor any evil chance
      Should mar our joyous voyage; but it might be
      That even satiety should still enhance
      Between our souls their strict community:
    And that the bounteous wizard then would place
      Vanna and Bice, and our Lapo's love,
      Companions of our wandering, and would grace
    With passionate talk, wherever we might rove,
    Our time, and each were as content and free
    As I believe that thou and I should be."

And of all the descriptions of motion in the _Divina Commedia_, I do not
think there is another quite so fine as that in which Dante has
glorified the old fable of Charon by giving a boat also to the bright
sea which surrounds the mountain of Purgatory, bearing the redeemed
souls to their place of trial; only an angel is now the pilot, and there
is no stroke of laboring oar, for his wings are the sails.

                          "My preceptor silent yet
    Stood, while the brightness that we first discerned
    Opened the form of wings: then, when he knew
    The pilot, cried aloud, 'Down, down; bend low
    Thy knees; behold God's angel: fold thy hands:
    Now shalt thou see true ministers indeed.
    Lo! how all human means he sets at nought;
    So that nor oar he needs, nor other sail
    Except his wings, between such distant shores.
    Lo! how straight up to heaven he holds them reared,
    Winnowing the air with those eternal plumes,
    That not like mortal hairs fall off or change.'

      "As more and more toward us came, more bright
    Appeared the bird of God, nor could the eye
    Endure his splendor near: I mine bent down.
    He drove ashore in a small bark so swift
    And light, that in its course no wave it drank.
    The heavenly steersman at the prow was seen,
    Visibly written blessed in his looks.
    Within, a hundred spirits and more there sat."

I have given this passage at length, because it seems to me that Dante's
most inventive adaptation of the fable of Charon to Heaven has not been
regarded with the interest that it really deserves; and because, also,
it is a description that should be remembered by every traveler when
first he sees the white fork of the felucca sail shining on the Southern
Sea. Not that Dante had ever seen such sails;[K] his thought was utterly
irrespective of the form of canvas in any ship of the period; but it is
well to be able to attach this happy image to those felucca sails, as
they now float white and soft above the blue glowing of the bays of
Adria. Nor are other images wanting in them. Seen far away on the
horizon, the Neapolitan felucca has all the aspect of some strange bird
stooping out of the air and just striking the water with its claws;
while the Venetian, when its painted sails are at full swell in
sunshine, is as beautiful as a butterfly with its wings half-closed.[L]
There is something also in them that might remind us of the variegated
and spotted angel wings of Orcagna, only the Venetian sail never looks
majestic; it is too quaint and strange, yet with no peacock's pride or
vulgar gayety,--nothing of Milton's Dalilah:

    "So bedecked, ornate and gay
    Like a stately ship
    Of Tarsus, bound for the Isles
    Of Javan or Gadire
    With all her bravery on and tackle trim,
    Sails filled and streamers waving."

That description could only have been written in a time of vulgar women
and vulgar vessels. The utmost vanity of dress in a woman of the
fourteenth century would have given no image of "sails filled or
streamers waving"; nor does the look or action of a really "stately"
ship ever suggest any image of the motion of a weak or vain woman. The
beauties of the Court of Charles II., and the gilded galleys of the
Thames, might fitly be compared; but the pomp of the Venetian
fisher-boat is like neither. The sail seems dyed in its fullness by the
sunshine, as the rainbow dyes a cloud; the rich stains upon it fade and
reappear, as its folds swell or fall; worn with the Adrian storms, its
rough woof has a kind of noble dimness upon it, and its colors seem as
grave, inherent, and free from vanity as the spots of the leopard, or
veins of the seashell.

    [K] I am not quite sure of this, not having studied with any care
    the forms of mediæval shipping; but in all the MSS. I have examined
    the sails of the shipping represented are square.

    [L] It is not a little strange that in all the innumerable paintings
    of Venice, old and modern, no notice whatever had been taken of
    these sails, though they are _exactly_ the most striking features of
    the marine scenery around the city, until Turner fastened upon them,
    painting one important picture, "The Sun of Venice," entirely in
    their illustration.

Yet, in speaking of poets' love of boats, I ought to have limited the
love to _modern_ poets; Dante, in this respect, as in nearly every
other, being far in advance of his age. It is not often that I
congratulate myself upon the days in which I happen to live; but I do so
in this respect, that, compared with every other period of the world,
this nineteenth century (or rather, the period between 1750 and 1850)
may not improperly be called the Age of Boats; while the classic and
chivalric times, in which boats were partly dreaded, partly despised,
may respectively be characterized, with regard to their means of
locomotion, as the Age of Chariots, and the Age of Horses.

For, whatever perfection and costliness there may be in the present
decorations, harnessing, and horsing of any English or Parisian wheel
equipage, I apprehend that we can from none of them form any high ideal
of wheel conveyance; and that unless we had seen an Egyptian king
bending his bow with his horses at the gallop, or a Greek knight leaning
with his poised lance over the shoulder of his charioteer, we have no
right to consider ourselves as thoroughly knowing what the word
"chariot," in its noblest acceptation, means.

So, also, though much chivalry is yet left in us, and we English still
know several things about horses, I believe that if we had seen
Charlemagne and Roland ride out hunting from Aix, or Coeur de Lion trot
into camp on a sunny evening at Ascalon, or a Florentine lady canter
down the Val d'Arno in Dante's time, with her hawk on her wrist, we
should have had some other ideas even about horses than the best we can
have now. But most assuredly, nothing that ever swung at the quay sides
of Carthage, or glowed with crusaders' shields above the bays of Syria,
could give to any contemporary human creature such an idea of the
meaning of the word Boat, as may be now gained by any mortal happy
enough to behold as much as a Newcastle collier beating against the
wind. In the classical period, indeed, there was some importance given
to shipping as the means of locking a battle-field together on the
waves; but in the chivalric period, the whole mind of man is withdrawn
from the sea, regarding it merely as a treacherous impediment, over
which it was necessary sometimes to find conveyance, but from which the
thoughts were always turned impatiently, fixing themselves in green
fields, and pleasures that may be enjoyed by land--the very supremacy of
the horse necessitating the scorn of the sea, which would not be trodden
by hoofs.

It is very interesting to note how repugnant every oceanic idea appears
to be to the whole nature of our principal English mediæval poet,
Chaucer. Read first the Man of Lawe's Tale, in which the Lady Constance
is continually floated up and down the Mediterranean, and the German
Ocean, in a ship by herself; carried from Syria all the way to
Northumberland, and there wrecked upon the coast; thence yet again
driven up and down among the waves for five years, she and her child;
and yet, all this while, Chaucer does not let fall a single word
descriptive of the sea, or express any emotion whatever about it, or
about the ship. He simply tells us the lady sailed here and was wrecked
there; but neither he nor his audience appear to be capable of receiving
any sensation, but one of simple aversion, from waves, ships, or sands.
Compare with his absolutely apathetic recital, the description by a
modern poet of the sailing of a vessel, charged with the fate of another
Constance:

    "It curled not Tweed alone, that breeze--
    For far upon Northumbrian seas
      It freshly blew, and strong;
    Where from high Whitby's cloistered pile,
    Bound to St. Cuthbert's holy isle,
      It bore a bark along.
    Upon the gale she stooped her side,
    And bounded o'er the swelling tide
      As she were dancing home.
    The merry seamen laughed to see
    Their gallant ship so lustily
      Furrow the green sea foam."

Now just as Scott enjoys this sea breeze, so does Chaucer the soft air
of the woods; the moment the older poet lands, he is himself again, his
poverty of language in speaking of the ship is not because he despises
description, but because he has nothing to describe. Hear him upon the
ground in Spring:

    "These woodes else recoveren greene,
    That drie in winter ben to sene,
    And the erth waxeth proud withall,
    For sweet dewes that on it fall,
    And the poore estate forget,
    In which that winter had it set:
    And then becomes the ground so proude,
    That it wol have a newe shroude,
    And maketh so queint his robe and faire,
    That it had hewes an hundred paire,
    Of grasse and floures, of Inde and Pers,
    And many hewes full divers:
    That is the robe I mean ywis
    Through which the ground to praisen is."

In like manner, wherever throughout his poems we find Chaucer
enthusiastic, it is on a sunny day in the "good green-wood," but the
slightest approach to the sea-shore makes him shiver; and his antipathy
finds at last positive expression, and becomes the principal foundation
of the Frankeleine's Tale, in which a lady, waiting for her husband's
return in a castle by the sea, behaves and expresses herself as
follows:--

      "Another time wold she sit and thinke,
    And cast her eyen dounward fro the brinke;
    But whan she saw the grisly rockes blake,
    For veray fere so wold hire herte quake
    That on hire feet she might hire not sustene
    Than wold she sit adoun upon the grene,
    And pitously into the see behold,
    And say right thus, with careful sighes cold.
      'Eterne God, that thurgh thy purveance
    Ledest this world by certain governance,
    In idel, as men sain, ye nothing make.
    _But, lord, thise grisly fendly rockes blake,
    That semen rather a foule confusion
    Of werk, than any faire creation_
    Of swiche a parfit wise God and stable,
    Why han ye wrought this werk unresonable?'"

The desire to have the rocks out of her way is indeed severely punished
in the sequel of the tale; but it is not the less characteristic of the
age, and well worth meditating upon, in comparison with the feelings of
an unsophisticated modern French or English girl among the black rocks
of Dieppe or Ramsgate.

On the other hand, much might be said about that peculiar love of _green
fields and birds_ in the Middle Ages; and of all with which it is
connected, purity and health in manners and heart, as opposed to the
too frequent condition of the modern mind--

      "As for the birds in the thicket,
    Thrush or ousel in leafy niche,
    Linnet or finch--she was far too rich
    To care for a morning concert to which
      She was welcome, without a ticket."[M]

    [M] Thomas Hood.

But this would lead us far afield, and the main fact I have to point out
to the reader is the transition of human grace and strength from the
exercises of the land to those of the sea in the course of the last
three centuries.

Down to Elizabeth's time chivalry lasted; and grace of dress and mien,
and all else that was connected with chivalry. Then came the ages which,
when they have taken their due place in the depths of the past, will be,
by a wise and clear-sighted futurity, perhaps well comprehended under a
common name, as the ages of Starch; periods of general stiffening and
bluish-whitening, with a prevailing washerwoman's taste in everything;
involving a change of steel armor into cambric; of natural hair into
peruke; of natural walking into that which will disarrange no
wristbands; of plain language into quips and embroideries; and of human
life in general, from a green race-course, where to be defeated was at
worst only to fall behind and recover breath, into a slippery pole, to
be climbed with toil and contortion, and in clinging to which, each
man's foot is on his neighbor's head.

But, meanwhile, the marine deities were incorruptible. It was not
possible to starch the sea; and precisely as the stiffness fastened upon
men, it vanished from ships. What had once been a mere raft, with rows
of formal benches, pushed along by laborious flap of oars, and with
infinite fluttering of flags and swelling of poops above, gradually
began to lean more heavily into the deep water, to sustain a gloomy
weight of guns, to draw back its spider-like feebleness of limb, and
open its bosom to the wind, and finally darkened down from all its
painted vanities into the long, low hull, familiar with the overflying
foam; that has no other pride but in its daily duty and victory; while,
through all these changes, it gained continually in grace, strength,
audacity, and beauty, until at last it has reached such a pitch of all
these, that there is not, except the very loveliest creatures of the
living world, anything in nature so absolutely notable, bewitching, and,
according to its means and measure, heart-occupying, as a well-handled
ship under sail in a stormy day. Any ship, from lowest to proudest, has
due place in that architecture of the sea; beautiful, not so much in
this or that piece of it, as in the unity of all, from cottage to
cathedral, into their great buoyant dynasty. Yet, among them, the
fisher-boat, corresponding to the cottage on the land (only far more
sublime than a cottage ever can be), is on the whole the thing most
venerable. I doubt if ever academic grove were half so fit for
profitable meditation as the little strip of shingle between two black,
steep, overhanging sides of stranded fishing-boats. The clear, heavy
water-edge of ocean rising and falling close to their bows, in that
unaccountable way which the sea has always in calm weather, turning the
pebbles over and over as if with a rake, to look for something, and then
stopping a moment down at the bottom of the bank, and coming up again
with a little run and clash, throwing a foot's depth of salt crystal in
an instant between you and the round stone you were going to take in
your hand; sighing, all the while, as if it would infinitely rather be
doing something else. And the dark flanks of the fishing-boats all
aslope above, in their shining quietness, hot in the morning sun, rusty
and seamed with square patches of plank nailed over their rents; just
rough enough to let the little flat-footed fisher-children haul or twist
themselves up to the gunwales, and drop back again along some stray
rope; just round enough to remind us, in their broad and gradual curves,
of the sweep of the green surges they know so well, and of the hours
when those old sides of seared timber, all ashine with the sea, plunge
and dip into the deep green purity of the mounded waves more joyfully
than a deer lies down among the grass of spring, the soft white cloud of
foam opening momentarily at the bows, and fading or flying high into the
breeze where the sea-gulls toss and shriek,--the joy and beauty of it,
all the while, so mingled with the sense of unfathomable danger, and the
human effort and sorrow going on perpetually from age to age, waves
rolling forever, and winds moaning forever, and faithful hearts trusting
and sickening forever, and brave lives dashed away about the rattling
beach like weeds forever; and still at the helm of every lonely boat,
through starless night and hopeless dawn, His hand, who spread the
fisher's net over the dust of the Sidonian palaces, and gave into the
fisher's hand the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Next after the fishing-boat--which, as I said, in the architecture of
the sea represents the cottage, more especially the pastoral or
agricultural cottage, watchful over some pathless domain of moorland or
arable, as the fishing-boat swims, humbly in the midst of the broad
green fields and hills of ocean, out of which it has to win such fruit
as they can give, and to compass with net or drag such flocks as it may
find,--next to this ocean-cottage ranks in interest, it seems to me, the
small, over-wrought, under-crewed, ill-caulked merchant brig or
schooner; the kind of ship which first shows its couple of thin masts
over the low fields or marshes as we near any third-rate sea-port; and
which is sure somewhere to stud the great space of glittering water,
seen from any sea-cliff, with its four or five square-set sails. Of the
larger and more polite tribes of merchant vessels, three-masted, and
passenger-carrying, I have nothing to say, feeling in general little
sympathy with people who want to _go_ anywhere; nor caring much about
anything, which in the essence of it expresses a desire to get to other
sides of the world; but only for homely and stay-at-home ships, that
live their life and die their death about English rocks. Neither have I
any interest in the higher branches of commerce, such as traffic with
spice islands, and porterage of painted tea-chests or carved ivory; for
all this seems to me to fall under the head of commerce of the
drawing-room; costly, but not venerable. I respect in the merchant
service only those ships that carry coals, herrings, salt, timber, iron,
and such other commodities, and that have disagreeable odor, and
unwashed decks. But there are few things more impressive to me than one
of these ships lying up against some lonely quay in a black sea-fog,
with the furrow traced under its tawny keel far in the harbor slime. The
noble misery that there is in it, the might of its rent and strained
unseemliness, its wave-worn melancholy, resting there for a little while
in the comfortless ebb, unpitied, and claiming no pity; still less
honored, least of all conscious of any claim to honor; casting and
craning by due balance whatever is in its hold up to the pier, in quiet
truth of time; spinning of wheel, and slackening of rope, and swinging
of spade, in as accurate cadence as a waltz music; one or two of its
crew, perhaps, away forward, and a hungry boy and yelping dog eagerly
interested in something from which a blue dull smoke rises out of pot or
pan; but dark-browed and silent, their limbs slack, like the ropes above
them, entangled as they are in those inextricable meshes about the
patched knots and heaps of ill-reefed sable sail. What a majestic sense
of service in all that languor! the rest of human limbs and hearts, at
utter need, not in sweet meadows or soft air, but in harbor slime and
biting fog; so drawing their breath once more, to go out again, without
lament, from between the two skeletons of pier-heads, vocal with wash of
under wave, into the gray troughs of tumbling brine; there, as they can,
with slacked rope, and patched sail, and leaky hull, again to roll and
stagger far away amidst the wind and salt sleet, from dawn to dusk and
dusk to dawn, winning day by day their daily bread; and for last reward,
when their old hands, on some winter night, lose feeling along the
frozen ropes, and their old eyes miss mark of the lighthouse quenched in
foam, the so-long impossible Rest, that shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more,--their eyes and mouths filled with the brown sea-sand.

After these most venerable, to my mind, of all ships, properly so
styled, I find nothing of comparable interest in any floating fabric
until we come to the great achievement of the 19th century. For one
thing this century will in after ages be considered to have done in a
superb manner, and one thing, I think, only. It has not distinguished
itself in political spheres; still less in artistical. It has produced
no golden age by its Reason; neither does it appear eminent for the
constancy of its Faith. Its telescopes and telegraphs would be
creditable to it, if it had not in their pursuit forgotten in great part
how to see clearly with its eyes, and to talk honestly with its tongue.
Its natural history might have been creditable to it also, if it could
have conquered its habit of considering natural history to be mainly the
art of writing Latin names on white tickets. But, as it is, none of
these things will be hereafter considered to have been got on with by us
as well as might be; whereas it will always be said of us, with unabated
reverence,

"THEY BUILT SHIPS OF THE LINE."

Take it all in all, a Ship of the Line is the most honorable thing that
man, as a gregarious animal, has ever produced. By himself, unhelped, he
can do better things than ships of the line; he can make poems and
pictures, and other such concentrations of what is best in him. But as a
being living in flocks, and hammering out, with alternate strokes and
mutual agreement, what is necessary for him in those flocks, to get or
produce, the ship of the line is his first work. Into that he has put as
much of his human patience, common sense, forethought, experimental
philosophy, self-control, habits of order and obedience, thoroughly
wrought handwork, defiance of brute elements, careless courage, careful
patriotism, and calm expectation of the judgment of God, as can well be
put into a space of 300 feet long by 80 broad. And I am thankful to have
lived in an age when I could see this thing so done.

Considering, then, our shipping, under the three principal types of
fishing-boat, collier, and ship of the line, as the great glory of this
age; and the "New Forest" of mast and yard that follows the windings of
the Thames, to be, take it all in all, a more majestic scene, I don't
say merely than any of our streets or palaces as they now are, but even
than the best that streets and palaces can generally be; it has often
been a matter of serious thought to me how far this chiefly substantial
thing done by the nation ought to be represented by the art of the
nation; how far our great artists ought seriously to devote themselves
to such perfect painting of our ships as should reveal to later
generations--lost perhaps in clouds of steam and floating troughs of
ashes--the aspect of an ancient ship of battle under sail.

To which, I fear, the answer must be sternly this: That no great art
ever was, or can be, employed in the careful imitation of the work of
man as its principal subject. That is to say, art will not bear to be
reduplicated. A ship is a noble thing, and a cathedral a noble thing,
but a painted ship or a painted cathedral is not a noble thing. Art
which reduplicates art is necessarily second-rate art. I know no
principle more irrefragably authoritative than that which I had long ago
occasion to express: "All noble art is the expression of man's delight
in God's work; not in his own."

"How!" it will be asked, "Are Stanfield, Isabey, and Prout necessarily
artists of the second order because they paint ships and buildings
instead of trees and clouds?" Yes, necessarily of the second order; so
far as they paint ships rather than sea, and so far as they paint
buildings rather than the natural light, and color, and work of years
upon those buildings. For, in this respect, a ruined building is a noble
subject, just as far as man's work has therein been subdued by nature's;
and Stanfield's chief dignity is his being a painter less of shipping
than of the seal of time or decay upon shipping.[N] For a wrecked ship,
or shattered boat, is a noble subject, while a ship in full sail, or a
perfect boat, is an ignoble one; not merely because the one is by
reason of its ruin more picturesque than the other, but because it is a
nobler act in man to meditate upon Fate as it conquers his work, than
upon that work itself.

    [N] As in the very beautiful picture of this year's Academy, "The
    Abandoned."

Shipping, therefore, in its perfection, never can become the subject of
noble art; and that just because to represent it in its perfection would
tax the powers of art to the utmost. If a great painter could rest in
drawing a ship, as he can rest in drawing a piece of drapery, we might
sometimes see vessels introduced by the noblest workmen, and treated by
them with as much delight as they would show in scattering luster over
an embroidered dress, or knitting the links of a coat of mail. But ships
cannot be drawn at times of rest. More complicated in their anatomy than
the human frame itself, so far as that frame is outwardly discernible;
liable to all kinds of strange accidental variety in position and
movement, yet in each position subject to imperative laws which can only
be followed by unerring knowledge; and involving, in the roundings and
foldings of sail and hull, delicacies of drawing greater than exist in
any other inorganic object, except perhaps a snow wreath,[O]--they
present, irrespective of sea or sky, or anything else around them,
difficulties which could only be vanquished by draughtsmanship quite
accomplished enough to render even the subtlest lines of the human face
and form. But the artist who has once attained such skill as this will
not devote it to the drawing of ships. He who can paint the face of St.
Paul will not elaborate the parting timbers of the vessel in which he is
wrecked; and he who can represent the astonishment of the apostles at
the miraculous draught will not be solicitous about accurately showing
that their boat is overloaded.

    [O] The catenary and other curves of tension which a sail assumes
    under the united influence of the wind, its own weight, and the
    particular tensions of the various ropes by which it is attached, or
    against which it presses, show at any moment complexities of
    arrangement to which fidelity, except after the study of a lifetime,
    is impossible.

"What!" it will perhaps be replied, "have, then, ships never been
painted perfectly yet, even by the men who have devoted most attention
to them?" Assuredly not. A ship never yet has been painted at all, in
any other sense than men have been painted in "Landscapes with figures."
Things have been painted which have a general effect of ships, just as
things have been painted which have a general effect of shepherds or
banditti; but the best average ship-painting no more reaches the truth
of ships than the equestrian troops in one of Van der Meulen's
battle-pieces express the higher truths of humanity.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

Take a single instance. I do not know any work in which, on the whole,
there is a more unaffected love of ships for their own sake, and a
fresher feeling of sea breeze always blowing, than Stanfield's "Coast
Scenery." Now, let the reader take up that book, and look through all
the plates of it at the way in which the most important parts of a
ship's skeleton are drawn, those most wonderful junctions of mast with
mast, corresponding to the knee or hip in the human frame, technically
known as "Tops." Under its very simplest form, in one of those poor
collier brigs, which I have above endeavored to recommend to the readers
affection, the junction of the top-gallant-mast with the topmast, when
the sail is reefed, will present itself under no less complex and
mysterious form than this in Fig. 1, a horned knot of seven separate
pieces of timber, irrespective of the two masts and the yard; the whole
balanced and involved in an apparently inextricable web of chain and
rope, consisting of at least sixteen ropes about the top-gallant-mast,
and some twenty-five crossing each other in every imaginable degree of
slackness and slope about the topmast. Two-thirds of these ropes are
omitted in the cut, because I could not draw them without taking more
time and pains than the point to be illustrated was worth; the thing, as
it is, being drawn quite well enough to give some idea of the facts of
it. Well, take up Stanfield's "Coast Scenery," and look through it in
search of tops, and you will invariably find them represented as in Fig.
2, or even with fewer lines; the example Fig. 2 being one of the tops of
the frigate running into Portsmouth harbor, magnified to about twice its
size in the plate.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

"Well, but it was impossible to do more on so small a scale." By no
means: but take what scale you choose, of Stanfield's or any other
marine painter's most elaborate painting, and let me magnify the study
of the real top in proportion, and the deficiency of detail will always
be found equally great: I mean in the work of the higher artists, for
there are of course many efforts at greater accuracy of delineation by
those painters of ships who are to the higher marine painter what
botanical draughtsmen are to the landscapists; but just as in the
botanical engraving the spirit and life of the plant are always lost, so
in the technical ship-painting the life of the ship is always lost,
without, as far as I can see, attaining, even by this sacrifice,
anything like completeness of mechanical delineation. At least, I never
saw the ship drawn yet which gave me the slightest idea of the
entanglement of real rigging.

Respecting this lower kind of ship-painting, it is always matter of
wonder to me that it satisfies sailors. Some years ago I happened
to stand longer than pleased my pensioner guide before Turner's
"Battle of Trafalgar," at Greenwich Hospital; a picture which, at
a moderate estimate, is simply worth all the rest of the
hospital--ground--walls--pictures and models put together. My guide,
supposing me to be detained by indignant wonder at seeing it in so good
a place, assented to my supposed, sentiments by muttering in a low
voice: "Well, sir, it _is_ a shame that that thing should be there. We
ought to 'a 'ad a Uggins; that's sartain." I was not surprised that my
sailor friend should be disgusted at seeing the _Victory_ lifted nearly
right out of the water, and all the sails of the fleet blowing about to
that extent that the crews might as well have tried to reef as many
thunder-clouds. But I was surprised at his perfect repose of respectful
faith in "Uggins," who appeared to me--unfortunate landsman as I was--to
give no more idea of the look of a ship of the line going through the
sea, than might be obtained from seeing one of the correct models at the
top of the hall floated in a fishpond.

Leaving, however, the sailor to his enjoyment, on such grounds as it may
be, of this model drawing, and being prepared to find only a vague and
hasty shadowing forth of shipping in the works of artists proper, we
will glance briefly at the different stages of excellence which such
shadowing forth has reached, and note in their consecutive changes the
feelings with which shipping has been regarded at different periods of
art.

1. _Mediæval Period._ The vessel is regarded merely as a sort of
sea-carriage, and painted only so far as it is necessary for complete
display of the groups of soldiers or saints on the deck: a great deal of
quaint shipping, richly hung with shields, and gorgeous with banners,
is, however, thus incidently represented in 15th-century manuscripts,
embedded in curly green waves of sea full of long fish; and although
there is never the slightest expression of real sea character, of
motion, gloom, or spray, there is more real interest of marine detail
and incident than in many later compositions.

2. _Early Venetian Period._ A great deal of tolerably careful
boat-drawing occurs in the pictures of Carpaccio and Gentile Bellini,
deserving separate mention among the marine schools, in confirmation of
what has been stated above, that the drawing of boats is more difficult
than that of the human form. For, long after all the perspectives and
fore-shortenings of the human body were completely understood, as well
as those of architecture, it remained utterly beyond the power of the
artists of the time to draw a boat with even tolerable truth. Boats are
always tilted up on end, or too long, or too short, or too high in the
water. Generally they appear to be regarded with no interest whatever,
and are painted merely where they are matters of necessity. This is
perfectly natural: we pronounce that there is romance in the Venetian
conveyance by oars, merely because we ourselves are in the habit of
being dragged by horses. A Venetian, on the other hand, sees vulgarity
in a gondola, and thinks the only true romance is in a hackney coach.
And thus, it was no more likely that a painter in the days of Venetian
power should pay much attention to the shipping in the Grand Canal than
that an English artist should at present concentrate the brightest rays
of his genius on a cab-stand.

3. _Late Venetian Period._ Deserving mention only for its notably
negative character. None of the great Venetian painters, Tintoret,
Titian, Veronese, Bellini, Giorgione, Bonifazio, ever introduce a ship
if they can help it. They delight in ponderous architecture, in grass,
flowers, blue mountains, skies, clouds, and gay dresses; nothing comes
amiss to them but ships and the sea. When they are forced to introduce
these, they represent merely a dark-green plain, with reddish galleys
spotted about it here and there, looking much like small models of
shipping pinned on a green board. In their marine battles, there is
seldom anything discernible except long rows of scarlet oars, and men in
armor falling helplessly through them.

4. _Late Roman Period._ That is to say, the time of the beginning of the
Renaissance landscape by the Caracci, Claude, and Salvator. First, in
