with great caution, for fear their comrades should find out their
treasure.”  My master said, “he could never discover the reason of this
unnatural appetite, or how these stones could be of any use to a _Yahoo_;
but now he believed it might proceed from the same principle of avarice
which I had ascribed to mankind.  That he had once, by way of experiment,
privately removed a heap of these stones from the place where one of his
_Yahoos_ had buried it; whereupon the sordid animal, missing his
treasure, by his loud lamenting brought the whole herd to the place,
there miserably howled, then fell to biting and tearing the rest, began
to pine away, would neither eat, nor sleep, nor work, till he ordered a
servant privately to convey the stones into the same hole, and hide them
as before; which, when his _Yahoo_ had found, he presently recovered his
spirits and good humour, but took good care to remove them to a better
hiding place, and has ever since been a very serviceable brute.”

My master further assured me, which I also observed myself, “that in the
fields where the shining stones abound, the fiercest and most frequent
battles are fought, occasioned by perpetual inroads of the neighbouring
_Yahoos_.”

He said, “it was common, when two _Yahoos_ discovered such a stone in a
field, and were contending which of them should be the proprietor, a
third would take the advantage, and carry it away from them both;” which
my master would needs contend to have some kind of resemblance with our
suits at law; wherein I thought it for our credit not to undeceive him;
since the decision he mentioned was much more equitable than many decrees
among us; because the plaintiff and defendant there lost nothing beside
the stone they contended for: whereas our courts of equity would never
have dismissed the cause, while either of them had any thing left.

My master, continuing his discourse, said, “there was nothing that
rendered the _Yahoos_ more odious, than their undistinguishing appetite
to devour every thing that came in their way, whether herbs, roots,
berries, the corrupted flesh of animals, or all mingled together: and it
was peculiar in their temper, that they were fonder of what they could
get by rapine or stealth, at a greater distance, than much better food
provided for them at home.  If their prey held out, they would eat till
they were ready to burst; after which, nature had pointed out to them a
certain root that gave them a general evacuation.

“There was also another kind of root, very juicy, but somewhat rare and
difficult to be found, which the _Yahoos_ sought for with much eagerness,
and would suck it with great delight; it produced in them the same
effects that wine has upon us.  It would make them sometimes hug, and
sometimes tear one another; they would howl, and grin, and chatter, and
reel, and tumble, and then fall asleep in the mud.”

I did indeed observe that the _Yahoos_ were the only animals in this
country subject to any diseases; which, however, were much fewer than
horses have among us, and contracted, not by any ill-treatment they meet
with, but by the nastiness and greediness of that sordid brute.  Neither
has their language any more than a general appellation for those
maladies, which is borrowed from the name of the beast, and called
_hnea-yahoo_, or _Yahoo’s evil_; and the cure prescribed is a mixture of
their own dung and urine, forcibly put down the _Yahoo’s_ throat.  This I
have since often known to have been taken with success, and do here
freely recommend it to my countrymen for the public good, as an admirable
specific against all diseases produced by repletion.

“As to learning, government, arts, manufactures, and the like,” my master
confessed, “he could find little or no resemblance between the _Yahoos_
of that country and those in ours; for he only meant to observe what
parity there was in our natures.  He had heard, indeed, some curious
_Houyhnhnms_ observe, that in most herds there was a sort of ruling
_Yahoo_ (as among us there is generally some leading or principal stag in
a park), who was always more deformed in body, and mischievous in
disposition, than any of the rest; that this leader had usually a
favourite as like himself as he could get, whose employment was to lick
his master’s feet and posteriors, and drive the female _Yahoos_ to his
kennel; for which he was now and then rewarded with a piece of ass’s
flesh.  This favourite is hated by the whole herd, and therefore, to
protect himself, keeps always near the person of his leader.  He usually
continues in office till a worse can be found; but the very moment he is
discarded, his successor, at the head of all the _Yahoos_ in that
district, young and old, male and female, come in a body, and discharge
their excrements upon him from head to foot.  But how far this might be
applicable to our courts, and favourites, and ministers of state, my
master said I could best determine.”

I durst make no return to this malicious insinuation, which debased human
understanding below the sagacity of a common hound, who has judgment
enough to distinguish and follow the cry of the ablest dog in the pack,
without being ever mistaken.

My master told me, “there were some qualities remarkable in the _Yahoos_,
which he had not observed me to mention, or at least very slightly, in
the accounts I had given of humankind.”  He said, “those animals, like
other brutes, had their females in common; but in this they differed,
that the she _Yahoo_ would admit the males while she was pregnant; and
that the hes would quarrel and fight with the females, as fiercely as
with each other; both which practices were such degrees of infamous
brutality, as no other sensitive creature ever arrived at.

“Another thing he wondered at in the _Yahoos_, was their strange
disposition to nastiness and dirt; whereas there appears to be a natural
love of cleanliness in all other animals.”  As to the two former
accusations, I was glad to let them pass without any reply, because I had
not a word to offer upon them in defence of my species, which otherwise I
certainly had done from my own inclinations.  But I could have easily
vindicated humankind from the imputation of singularity upon the last
article, if there had been any swine in that country (as unluckily for me
there were not), which, although it may be a sweeter quadruped than a
_Yahoo_, cannot, I humbly conceive, in justice, pretend to more
cleanliness; and so his honour himself must have owned, if he had seen
their filthy way of feeding, and their custom of wallowing and sleeping
in the mud.

My master likewise mentioned another quality which his servants had
discovered in several Yahoos, and to him was wholly unaccountable.  He
said, “a fancy would sometimes take a _Yahoo_ to retire into a corner, to
lie down, and howl, and groan, and spurn away all that came near him,
although he were young and fat, wanted neither food nor water, nor did
the servant imagine what could possibly ail him.  And the only remedy
they found was, to set him to hard work, after which he would infallibly
come to himself.”  To this I was silent out of partiality to my own kind;
yet here I could plainly discover the true seeds of spleen, which only
seizes on the lazy, the luxurious, and the rich; who, if they were forced
to undergo the same regimen, I would undertake for the cure.

His honour had further observed, “that a female _Yahoo_ would often stand
behind a bank or a bush, to gaze on the young males passing by, and then
appear, and hide, using many antic gestures and grimaces, at which time
it was observed that she had a most offensive smell; and when any of the
males advanced, would slowly retire, looking often back, and with a
counterfeit show of fear, run off into some convenient place, where she
knew the male would follow her.

“At other times, if a female stranger came among them, three or four of
her own sex would get about her, and stare, and chatter, and grin, and
smell her all over; and then turn off with gestures, that seemed to
express contempt and disdain.”

Perhaps my master might refine a little in these speculations, which he
had drawn from what he observed himself, or had been told him by others;
however, I could not reflect without some amazement, and much sorrow,
that the rudiments of lewdness, coquetry, censure, and scandal, should
have place by instinct in womankind.

I expected every moment that my master would accuse the _Yahoos_ of those
unnatural appetites in both sexes, so common among us.  But nature, it
seems, has not been so expert a school-mistress; and these politer
pleasures are entirely the productions of art and reason on our side of
the globe.



CHAPTER VIII.


The author relates several particulars of the _Yahoos_.  The great
virtues of the _Houyhnhnms_.  The education and exercise of their youth.
Their general assembly.

As I ought to have understood human nature much better than I supposed it
possible for my master to do, so it was easy to apply the character he
gave of the _Yahoos_ to myself and my countrymen; and I believed I could
yet make further discoveries, from my own observation.  I therefore often
begged his honour to let me go among the herds of _Yahoos_ in the
neighbourhood; to which he always very graciously consented, being
perfectly convinced that the hatred I bore these brutes would never
suffer me to be corrupted by them; and his honour ordered one of his
servants, a strong sorrel nag, very honest and good-natured, to be my
guard; without whose protection I durst not undertake such adventures.
For I have already told the reader how much I was pestered by these
odious animals, upon my first arrival; and I afterwards failed very
narrowly, three or four times, of falling into their clutches, when I
happened to stray at any distance without my hanger.  And I have reason
to believe they had some imagination that I was of their own species,
which I often assisted myself by stripping up my sleeves, and showing my
naked arms and breasts in their sight, when my protector was with me.  At
which times they would approach as near as they durst, and imitate my
actions after the manner of monkeys, but ever with great signs of hatred;
as a tame jackdaw with cap and stockings is always persecuted by the wild
ones, when he happens to be got among them.

They are prodigiously nimble from their infancy.  However, I once caught
a young male of three years old, and endeavoured, by all marks of
tenderness, to make it quiet; but the little imp fell a squalling, and
scratching, and biting with such violence, that I was forced to let it
go; and it was high time, for a whole troop of old ones came about us at
the noise, but finding the cub was safe (for away it ran), and my sorrel
nag being by, they durst not venture near us.  I observed the young
animal’s flesh to smell very rank, and the stink was somewhat between a
weasel and a fox, but much more disagreeable.  I forgot another
circumstance (and perhaps I might have the reader’s pardon if it were
wholly omitted), that while I held the odious vermin in my hands, it
voided its filthy excrements of a yellow liquid substance all over my
clothes; but by good fortune there was a small brook hard by, where I
washed myself as clean as I could; although I durst not come into my
master’s presence until I were sufficiently aired.

By what I could discover, the _Yahoos_ appear to be the most unteachable
of all animals: their capacity never reaching higher than to draw or
carry burdens.  Yet I am of opinion, this defect arises chiefly from a
perverse, restive disposition; for they are cunning, malicious,
treacherous, and revengeful.  They are strong and hardy, but of a
cowardly spirit, and, by consequence, insolent, abject, and cruel.  It is
observed, that the red haired of both sexes are more libidinous and
mischievous than the rest, whom yet they much exceed in strength and
activity.

The _Houyhnhnms_ keep the _Yahoos_ for present use in huts not far from
the house; but the rest are sent abroad to certain fields, where they dig
up roots, eat several kinds of herbs, and search about for carrion, or
sometimes catch weasels and _luhimuhs_ (a sort of wild rat), which they
greedily devour.  Nature has taught them to dig deep holes with their
nails on the side of a rising ground, wherein they lie by themselves;
only the kennels of the females are larger, sufficient to hold two or
three cubs.

They swim from their infancy like frogs, and are able to continue long
under water, where they often take fish, which the females carry home to
their young.  And, upon this occasion, I hope the reader will pardon my
relating an odd adventure.

Being one day abroad with my protector the sorrel nag, and the weather
exceeding hot, I entreated him to let me bathe in a river that was near.
He consented, and I immediately stripped myself stark naked, and went
down softly into the stream.  It happened that a young female _Yahoo_,
standing behind a bank, saw the whole proceeding, and inflamed by desire,
as the nag and I conjectured, came running with all speed, and leaped
into the water, within five yards of the place where I bathed.  I was
never in my life so terribly frightened.  The nag was grazing at some
distance, not suspecting any harm.  She embraced me after a most fulsome
manner.  I roared as loud as I could, and the nag came galloping towards
me, whereupon she quitted her grasp, with the utmost reluctancy, and
leaped upon the opposite bank, where she stood gazing and howling all the
time I was putting on my clothes.

This was a matter of diversion to my master and his family, as well as of
mortification to myself.  For now I could no longer deny that I was a
real _Yahoo_ in every limb and feature, since the females had a natural
propensity to me, as one of their own species.  Neither was the hair of
this brute of a red colour (which might have been some excuse for an
appetite a little irregular), but black as a sloe, and her countenance
did not make an appearance altogether so hideous as the rest of her kind;
for I think she could not be above eleven years old.

Having lived three years in this country, the reader, I suppose, will
expect that I should, like other travellers, give him some account of the
manners and customs of its inhabitants, which it was indeed my principal
study to learn.

As these noble _Houyhnhnms_ are endowed by nature with a general
disposition to all virtues, and have no conceptions or ideas of what is
evil in a rational creature, so their grand maxim is, to cultivate
reason, and to be wholly governed by it.  Neither is reason among them a
point problematical, as with us, where men can argue with plausibility on
both sides of the question, but strikes you with immediate conviction; as
it must needs do, where it is not mingled, obscured, or discoloured, by
passion and interest.  I remember it was with extreme difficulty that I
could bring my master to understand the meaning of the word opinion, or
how a point could be disputable; because reason taught us to affirm or
deny only where we are certain; and beyond our knowledge we cannot do
either.  So that controversies, wranglings, disputes, and positiveness,
in false or dubious propositions, are evils unknown among the
_Houyhnhnms_.  In the like manner, when I used to explain to him our
several systems of natural philosophy, he would laugh, “that a creature
pretending to reason, should value itself upon the knowledge of other
people’s conjectures, and in things where that knowledge, if it were
certain, could be of no use.”  Wherein he agreed entirely with the
sentiments of Socrates, as Plato delivers them; which I mention as the
highest honour I can do that prince of philosophers.  I have often since
reflected, what destruction such doctrine would make in the libraries of
Europe; and how many paths of fame would be then shut up in the learned
world.

Friendship and benevolence are the two principal virtues among the
_Houyhnhnms_; and these not confined to particular objects, but universal
to the whole race; for a stranger from the remotest part is equally
treated with the nearest neighbour, and wherever he goes, looks upon
himself as at home.  They preserve decency and civility in the highest
degrees, but are altogether ignorant of ceremony.  They have no fondness
for their colts or foals, but the care they take in educating them
proceeds entirely from the dictates of reason.  And I observed my master
to show the same affection to his neighbour’s issue, that he had for his
own.  They will have it that nature teaches them to love the whole
species, and it is reason only that makes a distinction of persons, where
there is a superior degree of virtue.

When the matron _Houyhnhnms_ have produced one of each sex, they no
longer accompany with their consorts, except they lose one of their issue
by some casualty, which very seldom happens; but in such a case they meet
again; or when the like accident befalls a person whose wife is past
bearing, some other couple bestow on him one of their own colts, and then
go together again until the mother is pregnant.  This caution is
necessary, to prevent the country from being overburdened with numbers.
But the race of inferior _Houyhnhnms_, bred up to be servants, is not so
strictly limited upon this article: these are allowed to produce three of
each sex, to be domestics in the noble families.

In their marriages, they are exactly careful to choose such colours as
will not make any disagreeable mixture in the breed.  Strength is chiefly
valued in the male, and comeliness in the female; not upon the account of
love, but to preserve the race from degenerating; for where a female
happens to excel in strength, a consort is chosen, with regard to
comeliness.

Courtship, love, presents, jointures, settlements have no place in their
thoughts, or terms whereby to express them in their language.  The young
couple meet, and are joined, merely because it is the determination of
their parents and friends; it is what they see done every day, and they
look upon it as one of the necessary actions of a reasonable being.  But
the violation of marriage, or any other unchastity, was never heard of;
and the married pair pass their lives with the same friendship and mutual
benevolence, that they bear to all others of the same species who come in
their way, without jealousy, fondness, quarrelling, or discontent.

In educating the youth of both sexes, their method is admirable, and
highly deserves our imitation.  These are not suffered to taste a grain
of oats, except upon certain days, till eighteen years old; nor milk, but
very rarely; and in summer they graze two hours in the morning, and as
many in the evening, which their parents likewise observe; but the
servants are not allowed above half that time, and a great part of their
grass is brought home, which they eat at the most convenient hours, when
they can be best spared from work.

Temperance, industry, exercise, and cleanliness, are the lessons equally
enjoined to the young ones of both sexes: and my master thought it
monstrous in us, to give the females a different kind of education from
the males, except in some articles of domestic management; whereby, as he
truly observed, one half of our natives were good for nothing but
bringing children into the world; and to trust the care of our children
to such useless animals, he said, was yet a greater instance of
brutality.

But the _Houyhnhnms_ train up their youth to strength, speed, and
hardiness, by exercising them in running races up and down steep hills,
and over hard stony grounds; and when they are all in a sweat, they are
ordered to leap over head and ears into a pond or river.  Four times a
year the youth of a certain district meet to show their proficiency in
running and leaping, and other feats of strength and agility; where the
victor is rewarded with a song in his or her praise.  On this festival,
the servants drive a herd of _Yahoos_ into the field, laden with hay, and
oats, and milk, for a repast to the _Houyhnhnms_; after which, these
brutes are immediately driven back again, for fear of being noisome to
the assembly.

Every fourth year, at the vernal equinox, there is a representative
council of the whole nation, which meets in a plain about twenty miles
from our house, and continues about five or six days.  Here they inquire
into the state and condition of the several districts; whether they
abound or be deficient in hay or oats, or cows, or _Yahoos_; and wherever
there is any want (which is but seldom) it is immediately supplied by
unanimous consent and contribution.  Here likewise the regulation of
children is settled: as for instance, if a _Houyhnhnm_ has two males, he
changes one of them with another that has two females; and when a child
has been lost by any casualty, where the mother is past breeding, it is
determined what family in the district shall breed another to supply the
loss.



CHAPTER IX.


A grand debate at the general assembly of the _Houyhnhnms_, and how it
was determined.  The learning of the _Houyhnhnms_.  Their buildings.
Their manner of burials.  The defectiveness of their language.

One of these grand assemblies was held in my time, about three months
before my departure, whither my master went as the representative of our
district.  In this council was resumed their old debate, and indeed the
only debate that ever happened in their country; whereof my master, after
his return, give me a very particular account.

The question to be debated was, “whether the _Yahoos_ should be
exterminated from the face of the earth?”  One of the members for the
affirmative offered several arguments of great strength and weight,
alleging, “that as the _Yahoos_ were the most filthy, noisome, and
deformed animals which nature ever produced, so they were the most
restive and indocible, mischievous and malicious; they would privately
suck the teats of the _Houyhnhnms’_ cows, kill and devour their cats,
trample down their oats and grass, if they were not continually watched,
and commit a thousand other extravagancies.”  He took notice of a general
tradition, “that _Yahoos_ had not been always in their country; but that
many ages ago, two of these brutes appeared together upon a mountain;
whether produced by the heat of the sun upon corrupted mud and slime, or
from the ooze and froth of the sea, was never known; that these _Yahoos_
engendered, and their brood, in a short time, grew so numerous as to
overrun and infest the whole nation; that the _Houyhnhnms_, to get rid of
this evil, made a general hunting, and at last enclosed the whole herd;
and destroying the elder, every _Houyhnhnm_ kept two young ones in a
kennel, and brought them to such a degree of tameness, as an animal, so
savage by nature, can be capable of acquiring, using them for draught and
carriage; that there seemed to be much truth in this tradition, and that
those creatures could not be _yinhniamshy_ (or _aborigines_ of the land),
because of the violent hatred the _Houyhnhnms_, as well as all other
animals, bore them, which, although their evil disposition sufficiently
deserved, could never have arrived at so high a degree if they had been
_aborigines_, or else they would have long since been rooted out; that
the inhabitants, taking a fancy to use the service of the _Yahoos_, had,
very imprudently, neglected to cultivate the breed of asses, which are a
comely animal, easily kept, more tame and orderly, without any offensive
smell, strong enough for labour, although they yield to the other in
agility of body, and if their braying be no agreeable sound, it is far
preferable to the horrible howlings of the _Yahoos_.”

Several others declared their sentiments to the same purpose, when my
master proposed an expedient to the assembly, whereof he had indeed
borrowed the hint from me.  “He approved of the tradition mentioned by
the honourable member who spoke before, and affirmed, that the two
_Yahoos_ said to be seen first among them, had been driven thither over
the sea; that coming to land, and being forsaken by their companions,
they retired to the mountains, and degenerating by degrees, became in
process of time much more savage than those of their own species in the
country whence these two originals came.  The reason of this assertion
was, that he had now in his possession a certain wonderful _Yahoo_
(meaning myself) which most of them had heard of, and many of them had
seen.  He then related to them how he first found me; that my body was
all covered with an artificial composure of the skins and hairs of other
animals; that I spoke in a language of my own, and had thoroughly learned
theirs; that I had related to him the accidents which brought me thither;
that when he saw me without my covering, I was an exact _Yahoo_ in every
part, only of a whiter colour, less hairy, and with shorter claws.  He
added, how I had endeavoured to persuade him, that in my own and other
countries, the _Yahoos_ acted as the governing, rational animal, and held
the _Houyhnhnms_ in servitude; that he observed in me all the qualities
of a _Yahoo_, only a little more civilized by some tincture of reason,
which, however, was in a degree as far inferior to the _Houyhnhnm_ race,
as the _Yahoos_ of their country were to me; that, among other things, I
mentioned a custom we had of castrating _Houyhnhnms_ when they were
young, in order to render them tame; that the operation was easy and
safe; that it was no shame to learn wisdom from brutes, as industry is
taught by the ant, and building by the swallow (for so I translate the
word _lyhannh_, although it be a much larger fowl); that this invention
might be practised upon the younger _Yahoos_ here, which besides
rendering them tractable and fitter for use, would in an age put an end
to the whole species, without destroying life; that in the mean time the
_Houyhnhnms_ should be exhorted to cultivate the breed of asses, which,
as they are in all respects more valuable brutes, so they have this
advantage, to be fit for service at five years old, which the others are
not till twelve.”

This was all my master thought fit to tell me, at that time, of what
passed in the grand council.  But he was pleased to conceal one
particular, which related personally to myself, whereof I soon felt the
unhappy effect, as the reader will know in its proper place, and whence I
date all the succeeding misfortunes of my life.

The _Houyhnhnms_ have no letters, and consequently their knowledge is all
traditional.  But there happening few events of any moment among a people
so well united, naturally disposed to every virtue, wholly governed by
reason, and cut off from all commerce with other nations, the historical
part is easily preserved without burdening their memories.  I have
already observed that they are subject to no diseases, and therefore can
have no need of physicians.  However, they have excellent medicines,
composed of herbs, to cure accidental bruises and cuts in the pastern or
frog of the foot, by sharp stones, as well as other maims and hurts in
the several parts of the body.

They calculate the year by the revolution of the sun and moon, but use no
subdivisions into weeks.  They are well enough acquainted with the
motions of those two luminaries, and understand the nature of eclipses;
and this is the utmost progress of their astronomy.

In poetry, they must be allowed to excel all other mortals; wherein the
justness of their similes, and the minuteness as well as exactness of
their descriptions, are indeed inimitable.  Their verses abound very much
in both of these, and usually contain either some exalted notions of
friendship and benevolence or the praises of those who were victors in
races and other bodily exercises.  Their buildings, although very rude
and simple, are not inconvenient, but well contrived to defend them from
all injuries of cold and heat.  They have a kind of tree, which at forty
years old loosens in the root, and falls with the first storm: it grows
very straight, and being pointed like stakes with a sharp stone (for the
_Houyhnhnms_ know not the use of iron), they stick them erect in the
ground, about ten inches asunder, and then weave in oat straw, or
sometimes wattles, between them.  The roof is made after the same manner,
and so are the doors.

The _Houyhnhnms_ use the hollow part, between the pastern and the hoof of
their fore-foot, as we do our hands, and this with greater dexterity than
I could at first imagine.  I have seen a white mare of our family thread
a needle (which I lent her on purpose) with that joint.  They milk their
cows, reap their oats, and do all the work which requires hands, in the
same manner.  They have a kind of hard flints, which, by grinding against
other stones, they form into instruments, that serve instead of wedges,
axes, and hammers.  With tools made of these flints, they likewise cut
their hay, and reap their oats, which there grow naturally in several
fields; the _Yahoos_ draw home the sheaves in carriages, and the servants
tread them in certain covered huts to get out the grain, which is kept in
stores.  They make a rude kind of earthen and wooden vessels, and bake
the former in the sun.

If they can avoid casualties, they die only of old age, and are buried in
the obscurest places that can be found, their friends and relations
expressing neither joy nor grief at their departure; nor does the dying
person discover the least regret that he is leaving the world, any more
than if he were upon returning home from a visit to one of his
neighbours.  I remember my master having once made an appointment with a
friend and his family to come to his house, upon some affair of
importance: on the day fixed, the mistress and her two children came very
late; she made two excuses, first for her husband, who, as she said,
happened that very morning to _shnuwnh_.  The word is strongly expressive
in their language, but not easily rendered into English; it signifies,
“to retire to his first mother.”  Her excuse for not coming sooner, was,
that her husband dying late in the morning, she was a good while
consulting her servants about a convenient place where his body should be
laid; and I observed, she behaved herself at our house as cheerfully as
the rest.  She died about three months after.

They live generally to seventy, or seventy-five years, very seldom to
fourscore.  Some weeks before their death, they feel a gradual decay; but
without pain.  During this time they are much visited by their friends,
because they cannot go abroad with their usual ease and satisfaction.
However, about ten days before their death, which they seldom fail in
computing, they return the visits that have been made them by those who
are nearest in the neighbourhood, being carried in a convenient sledge
drawn by _Yahoos_; which vehicle they use, not only upon this occasion,
but when they grow old, upon long journeys, or when they are lamed by any
accident: and therefore when the dying _Houyhnhnms_ return those visits,
they take a solemn leave of their friends, as if they were going to some
remote part of the country, where they designed to pass the rest of their
lives.

I know not whether it may be worth observing, that the _Houyhnhnms_ have
no word in their language to express any thing that is evil, except what
they borrow from the deformities or ill qualities of the _Yahoos_.  Thus
they denote the folly of a servant, an omission of a child, a stone that
cuts their feet, a continuance of foul or unseasonable weather, and the
like, by adding to each the epithet of _Yahoo_.  For instance, _hhnm
Yahoo_; _whnaholm Yahoo_, _ynlhmndwihlma Yahoo_, and an ill-contrived
house _ynholmhnmrohlnw Yahoo_.

I could, with great pleasure, enlarge further upon the manners and
virtues of this excellent people; but intending in a short time to
publish a volume by itself, expressly upon that subject, I refer the
reader thither; and, in the mean time, proceed to relate my own sad
catastrophe.



CHAPTER X.


The author’s economy, and happy life, among the Houyhnhnms.  His great
improvement in virtue by conversing with them.  Their conversations.  The
author has notice given him by his master, that he must depart from the
country.  He falls into a swoon for grief; but submits.  He contrives and
finishes a canoe by the help of a fellow-servant, and puts to sea at a
venture.

I had settled my little economy to my own heart’s content.  My master had
ordered a room to be made for me, after their manner, about six yards
from the house: the sides and floors of which I plastered with clay, and
covered with rush-mats of my own contriving.  I had beaten hemp, which
there grows wild, and made of it a sort of ticking; this I filled with
the feathers of several birds I had taken with springes made of _Yahoos’_
hairs, and were excellent food.  I had worked two chairs with my knife,
the sorrel nag helping me in the grosser and more laborious part.  When
my clothes were worn to rags, I made myself others with the skins of
rabbits, and of a certain beautiful animal, about the same size, called
_nnuhnoh_, the skin of which is covered with a fine down.  Of these I
also made very tolerable stockings.  I soled my shoes with wood, which I
cut from a tree, and fitted to the upper-leather; and when this was worn
out, I supplied it with the skins of _Yahoos_ dried in the sun.  I often
got honey out of hollow trees, which I mingled with water, or ate with my
bread.  No man could more verify the truth of these two maxims, “That
nature is very easily satisfied;” and, “That necessity is the mother of
invention.”  I enjoyed perfect health of body, and tranquillity of mind;
I did not feel the treachery or inconstancy of a friend, nor the injuries
of a secret or open enemy.  I had no occasion of bribing, flattering, or
pimping, to procure the favour of any great man, or of his minion; I
wanted no fence against fraud or oppression: here was neither physician
to destroy my body, nor lawyer to ruin my fortune; no informer to watch
my words and actions, or forge accusations against me for hire: here were
no gibers, censurers, backbiters, pickpockets, highwaymen, housebreakers,
attorneys, bawds, buffoons, gamesters, politicians, wits, splenetics,
tedious talkers, controvertists, ravishers, murderers, robbers,
virtuosos; no leaders, or followers, of party and faction; no encouragers
to vice, by seducement or examples; no dungeon, axes, gibbets,
whipping-posts, or pillories; no cheating shopkeepers or mechanics; no
pride, vanity, or affectation; no fops, bullies, drunkards, strolling
whores, or poxes; no ranting, lewd, expensive wives; no stupid, proud
pedants; no importunate, overbearing, quarrelsome, noisy, roaring, empty,
conceited, swearing companions; no scoundrels raised from the dust upon
the merit of their vices, or nobility thrown into it on account of their
virtues; no lords, fiddlers, judges, or dancing-masters.

I had the favour of being admitted to several _Houyhnhnms_, who came to
visit or dine with my master; where his honour graciously suffered me to
wait in the room, and listen to their discourse.  Both he and his company
would often descend to ask me questions, and receive my answers.  I had
also sometimes the honour of attending my master in his visits to others.
I never presumed to speak, except in answer to a question; and then I did
it with inward regret, because it was a loss of so much time for
improving myself; but I was infinitely delighted with the station of an
humble auditor in such conversations, where nothing passed but what was
useful, expressed in the fewest and most significant words; where, as I
have already said, the greatest decency was observed, without the least
degree of ceremony; where no person spoke without being pleased himself,
and pleasing his companions; where there was no interruption,
tediousness, heat, or difference of sentiments.  They have a notion, that
when people are met together, a short silence does much improve
conversation: this I found to be true; for during those little
intermissions of talk, new ideas would arise in their minds, which very
much enlivened the discourse.  Their subjects are, generally on
friendship and benevolence, on order and economy; sometimes upon the
visible operations of nature, or ancient traditions; upon the bounds and
limits of virtue; upon the unerring rules of reason, or upon some
determinations to be taken at the next great assembly: and often upon the
various excellences of poetry.  I may add, without vanity, that my
presence often gave them sufficient matter for discourse, because it
afforded my master an occasion of letting his friends into the history of
me and my country, upon which they were all pleased to descant, in a
manner not very advantageous to humankind: and for that reason I shall
not repeat what they said; only I may be allowed to observe, that his
honour, to my great admiration, appeared to understand the nature of
_Yahoos_ much better than myself.  He went through all our vices and
follies, and discovered many, which I had never mentioned to him, by only
supposing what qualities a _Yahoo_ of their country, with a small
proportion of reason, might be capable of exerting; and concluded, with
too much probability, “how vile, as well as miserable, such a creature
must be.”

I freely confess, that all the little knowledge I have of any value, was
acquired by the lectures I received from my master, and from hearing the
discourses of him and his friends; to which I should be prouder to
listen, than to dictate to the greatest and wisest assembly in Europe.  I
admired the strength, comeliness, and speed of the inhabitants; and such
a constellation of virtues, in such amiable persons, produced in me the
highest veneration.  At first, indeed, I did not feel that natural awe,
which the _Yahoos_ and all other animals bear toward them; but it grew
upon me by decrees, much sooner than I imagined, and was mingled with a
respectful love and gratitude, that they would condescend to distinguish
me from the rest of my species.

When I thought of my family, my friends, my countrymen, or the human race
in general, I considered them, as they really were, _Yahoos_ in shape and
disposition, perhaps a little more civilized, and qualified with the gift
of speech; but making no other use of reason, than to improve and
multiply those vices whereof their brethren in this country had only the
share that nature allotted them.  When I happened to behold the
reflection of my own form in a lake or fountain, I turned away my face in
horror and detestation of myself, and could better endure the sight of a
common _Yahoo_ than of my own person.  By conversing with the
_Houyhnhnms_, and looking upon them with delight, I fell to imitate their
gait and gesture, which is now grown into a habit; and my friends often
tell me, in a blunt way, “that I trot like a horse;” which, however, I
take for a great compliment.  Neither shall I disown, that in speaking I
am apt to fall into the voice and manner of the _Houyhnhnms_, and hear
myself ridiculed on that account, without the least mortification.

In the midst of all this happiness, and when I looked upon myself to be
fully settled for life, my master sent for me one morning a little
earlier than his usual hour.  I observed by his countenance that he was
in some perplexity, and at a loss how to begin what he had to speak.
After a short silence, he told me, “he did not know how I would take what
he was going to say: that in the last general assembly, when the affair
of the _Yahoos_ was entered upon, the representatives had taken offence
at his keeping a _Yahoo_ (meaning myself) in his family, more like a
_Houyhnhnm_ than a brute animal; that he was known frequently to converse
with me, as if he could receive some advantage or pleasure in my company;
that such a practice was not agreeable to reason or nature, or a thing
ever heard of before among them; the assembly did therefore exhort him
either to employ me like the rest of my species, or command me to swim
back to the place whence I came: that the first of these expedients was
utterly rejected by all the _Houyhnhnms_ who had ever seen me at his
house or their own; for they alleged, that because I had some rudiments
of reason, added to the natural pravity of those animals, it was to be
feared I might be able to seduce them into the woody and mountainous
parts of the country, and bring them in troops by night to destroy the
_Houyhnhnms’_ cattle, as being naturally of the ravenous kind, and averse
from labour.”

My master added, “that he was daily pressed by the _Houyhnhnms_ of the
neighbourhood to have the assembly’s exhortation executed, which he could
not put off much longer.  He doubted it would be impossible for me to
swim to another country; and therefore wished I would contrive some sort
of vehicle, resembling those I had described to him, that might carry me
on the sea; in which work I should have the assistance of his own
servants, as well as those of his neighbours.”  He concluded, “that for
his own part, he could have been content to keep me in his service as
long as I lived; because he found I had cured myself of some bad habits
and dispositions, by endeavouring, as far as my inferior nature was
capable, to imitate the _Houyhnhnms_.”

I should here observe to the reader, that a decree of the general
assembly in this country is expressed by the word _hnhloayn_, which
signifies an exhortation, as near as I can render it; for they have no
conception how a rational creature can be compelled, but only advised, or
exhorted; because no person can disobey reason, without giving up his
claim to be a rational creature.

I was struck with the utmost grief and despair at my master’s discourse;
and being unable to support the agonies I was under, I fell into a swoon
at his feet.  When I came to myself, he told me “that he concluded I had
been dead;” for these people are subject to no such imbecilities of
nature.  I answered in a faint voice, “that death would have been too
great a happiness; that although I could not blame the assembly’s
exhortation, or the urgency of his friends; yet, in my weak and corrupt
judgment, I thought it might consist with reason to have been less
rigorous; that I could not swim a league, and probably the nearest land
to theirs might be distant above a hundred: that many materials,
necessary for making a small vessel to carry me off, were wholly wanting
in this country; which, however, I would attempt, in obedience and
gratitude to his honour, although I concluded the thing to be impossible,
and therefore looked on myself as already devoted to destruction; that
the certain prospect of an unnatural death was the least of my evils;
for, supposing I should escape with life by some strange adventure, how
could I think with temper of passing my days among _Yahoos_, and
relapsing into my old corruptions, for want of examples to lead and keep
me within the paths of virtue? that I knew too well upon what solid
reasons all the determinations of the wise _Houyhnhnms_ were founded, not
to be shaken by arguments of mine, a miserable _Yahoo_; and therefore,
after presenting him with my humble thanks for the offer of his servants’
assistance in making a vessel, and desiring a reasonable time for so
difficult a work, I told him I would endeavour to preserve a wretched
being; and if ever I returned to England, was not without hopes of being
useful to my own species, by celebrating the praises of the renowned
_Houyhnhnms_, and proposing their virtues to the imitation of mankind.”

My master, in a few words, made me a very gracious reply; allowed me the
space of two months to finish my boat; and ordered the sorrel nag, my
fellow-servant (for so, at this distance, I may presume to call him), to
follow my instruction; because I told my master, “that his help would be
sufficient, and I knew he had a tenderness for me.”

In his company, my first business was to go to that part of the coast
where my rebellious crew had ordered me to be set on shore.  I got upon a
height, and looking on every side into the sea; fancied I saw a small
island toward the north-east.  I took out my pocket glass, and could then
clearly distinguish it above five leagues off, as I computed; but it
appeared to the sorrel nag to be only a blue cloud: for as he had no
conception of any country beside his own, so he could not be as expert in
distinguishing remote objects at sea, as we who so much converse in that
element.

After I had discovered this island, I considered no further; but resolved
it should if possible, be the first place of my banishment, leaving the
consequence to fortune.

I returned home, and consulting with the sorrel nag, we went into a copse
at some distance, where I with my knife, and he with a sharp flint,
fastened very artificially after their manner, to a wooden handle, cut
down several oak wattles, about the thickness of a walking-staff, and
some larger pieces.  But I shall not trouble the reader with a particular
description of my own mechanics; let it suffice to say, that in six weeks
time with the help of the sorrel nag, who performed the parts that
required most labour, I finished a sort of Indian canoe, but much larger,
covering it with the skins of _Yahoos_, well stitched together with
hempen threads of my own making.  My sail was likewise composed of the
skins of the same animal; but I made use of the youngest I could get, the
older being too tough and thick; and I likewise provided myself with four
paddles.  I laid in a stock of boiled flesh, of rabbits and fowls, and
took with me two vessels, one filled with milk and the other with water.

I tried my canoe in a large pond, near my master’s house, and then
corrected in it what was amiss; stopping all the chinks with _Yahoos’_
tallow, till I found it staunch, and able to bear me and my freight; and,
when it was as complete as I could possibly make it, I had it drawn on a
carriage very gently by _Yahoos_ to the sea-side, under the conduct of
the sorrel nag and another servant.

When all was ready, and the day came for my departure, I took leave of my
master and lady and the whole family, my eyes flowing with tears, and my
heart quite sunk with grief.  But his honour, out of curiosity, and,
perhaps, (if I may speak without vanity,) partly out of kindness, was
determined to see me in my canoe, and got several of his neighbouring
friends to accompany him.  I was forced to wait above an hour for the
tide; and then observing the wind very fortunately bearing toward the
island to which I intended to steer my course, I took a second leave of
my master: but as I was going to prostrate myself to kiss his hoof, he
did me the honour to raise it gently to my mouth.  I am not ignorant how
much I have been censured for mentioning this last particular.
Detractors are pleased to think it improbable, that so illustrious a
person should descend to give so great a mark of distinction to a
creature so inferior as I.  Neither have I forgotten how apt some
travellers are to boast of extraordinary favours they have received.
But, if these censurers were better acquainted with the noble and
courteous disposition of the _Houyhnhnms_, they would soon change their
opinion.

I paid my respects to the rest of the _Houyhnhnms_ in his honour’s
company; then getting into my canoe, I pushed off from shore.



CHAPTER XI.


The author’s dangerous voyage.  He arrives at New Holland, hoping to
settle there.  Is wounded with an arrow by one of the natives.  Is seized
and carried by force into a Portuguese ship.  The great civilities of the
captain.  The author arrives at England.

I began this desperate voyage on February 15, 1714–15, at nine o’clock in
the morning.  The wind was very favourable; however, I made use at first
only of my paddles; but considering I should soon be weary, and that the
wind might chop about, I ventured to set up my little sail; and thus,
with the help of the tide, I went at the rate of a league and a half an
hour, as near as I could guess.  My master and his friends continued on
the shore till I was almost out of sight; and I often heard the sorrel
nag (who always loved me) crying out, “_Hnuy illa nyha_, _majah Yahoo_;”
“Take care of thyself, gentle _Yahoo_.”

My design was, if possible, to discover some small island uninhabited,
yet sufficient, by my labour, to furnish me with the necessaries of life,
which I would have thought a greater happiness, than to be first minister
in the politest court of Europe; so horrible was the idea I conceived of
returning to live in the society, and under the government of _Yahoos_.
For in such a solitude as I desired, I could at least enjoy my own
thoughts, and reflect with delight on the virtues of those inimitable
_Houyhnhnms_, without an opportunity of degenerating into the vices and
corruptions of my own species.

The reader may remember what I related, when my crew conspired against
me, and confined me to my cabin; how I continued there several weeks
without knowing what course we took; and when I was put ashore in the
long-boat, how the sailors told me, with oaths, whether true or false,
“that they knew not in what part of the world we were.”  However, I did
then believe us to be about 10 degrees southward of the Cape of Good
Hope, or about 45 degrees southern latitude, as I gathered from some
general words I overheard among them, being I supposed to the south-east
in their intended voyage to Madagascar.  And although this were little
better than conjecture, yet I resolved to steer my course eastward,
hoping to reach the south-west coast of New Holland, and perhaps some
such island as I desired lying westward of it.  The wind was full west,
and by six in the evening I computed I had gone eastward at least
eighteen leagues; when I spied a very small island about half a league
off, which I soon reached.  It was nothing but a rock, with one creek
naturally arched by the force of tempests.  Here I put in my canoe, and
climbing a part of the rock, I could plainly discover land to the east,
extending from south to north.  I lay all night in my canoe; and
repeating my voyage early in the morning, I arrived in seven hours to the
south-east point of New Holland.  This confirmed me in the opinion I have
long entertained, that the maps and charts place this country at least
three degrees more to the east than it really is; which thought I
communicated many years ago to my worthy friend, Mr. Herman Moll, and
gave him my reasons for it, although he has rather chosen to follow other
authors.

I saw no inhabitants in the place where I landed, and being unarmed, I
was afraid of venturing far into the country.  I found some shellfish on
the shore, and ate them raw, not daring to kindle a fire, for fear of
being discovered by the natives.  I continued three days feeding on
oysters and limpets, to save my own provisions; and I fortunately found a
brook of excellent water, which gave me great relief.

On the fourth day, venturing out early a little too far, I saw twenty or
thirty natives upon a height not above five hundred yards from me.  They
were stark naked, men, women, and children, round a fire, as I could
discover by the smoke.  One of them spied me, and gave notice to the
rest; five of them advanced toward me, leaving the women and children at
the fire.  I made what haste I could to the shore, and, getting into my
canoe, shoved off: the savages, observing me retreat, ran after me: and
before I could get far enough into the sea, discharged an arrow which
wounded me deeply on the inside of my left knee: I shall carry the mark
to my grave.  I apprehended the arrow might be poisoned, and paddling out
of the reach of their darts (being a calm day), I made a shift to suck
the wound, and dress it as well as I could.

I was at a loss what to do, for I durst not return to the same
landing-place, but stood to the north, and was forced to paddle, for the
wind, though very gentle, was against me, blowing north-west.  As I was
looking about for a secure landing-place, I saw a sail to the
north-north-east, which appearing every minute more visible, I was in
some doubt whether I should wait for them or not; but at last my
detestation of the _Yahoo_ race prevailed: and turning my canoe, I sailed
and paddled together to the south, and got into the same creek whence I
set out in the morning, choosing rather to trust myself among these
barbarians, than live with European _Yahoos_.  I drew up my canoe as
close as I could to the shore, and hid myself behind a stone by the
little brook, which, as I have already said, was excellent water.

The ship came within half a league of this creek, and sent her long boat
with vessels to take in fresh water (for the place, it seems, was very
well known); but I did not observe it, till the boat was almost on shore;
and it was too late to seek another hiding-place.  The seamen at their
landing observed my canoe, and rummaging it all over, easily conjectured
that the owner could not be far off.  Four of them, well armed, searched
every cranny and lurking-hole, till at last they found me flat on my face
behind the stone.  They gazed awhile in admiration at my strange uncouth
dress; my coat made of skins, my wooden-soled shoes, and my furred
stockings; whence, however, they concluded, I was not a native of the
place, who all go naked.  One of the seamen, in Portuguese, bid me rise,
and asked who I was.  I understood that language very well, and getting
upon my feet, said, “I was a poor _Yahoo_ banished from the _Houyhnhnms_,
and desired they would please to let me depart.”  They admired to hear me
answer them in their own tongue, and saw by my complexion I must be a
European; but were at a loss to know what I meant by _Yahoos_ and
_Houyhnhnms_; and at the same time fell a-laughing at my strange tone in
speaking, which resembled the neighing of a horse.  I trembled all the
while betwixt fear and hatred.  I again desired leave to depart, and was
gently moving to my canoe; but they laid hold of me, desiring to know,
“what country I was of? whence I came?” with many other questions.  I
told them “I was born in England, whence I came about five years ago, and
then their country and ours were at peace.  I therefore hoped they would
not treat me as an enemy, since I meant them no harm, but was a poor
_Yahoo_ seeking some desolate place where to pass the remainder of his
unfortunate life.”

When they began to talk, I thought I never heard or saw any thing more
unnatural; for it appeared to me as monstrous as if a dog or a cow should
speak in England, or a _Yahoo_ in _Houyhnhnmland_.  The honest Portuguese
were equally amazed at my strange dress, and the odd manner of delivering
my words, which, however, they understood very well.  They spoke to me
with great humanity, and said, “they were sure the captain would carry me
_gratis_ to Lisbon, whence I might return to my own country; that two of
the seamen would go back to the ship, inform the captain of what they had
seen, and receive his orders; in the mean time, unless I would give my
solemn oath not to fly, they would secure me by force.  I thought it best
to comply with their proposal.  They were very curious to know my story,
but I gave them very little satisfaction, and they all conjectured that
my misfortunes had impaired my reason.  In two hours the boat, which went
laden with vessels of water, returned, with the captain’s command to
fetch me on board.  I fell on my knees to preserve my liberty; but all
was in vain; and the men, having tied me with cords, heaved me into the
boat, whence I was taken into the ship, and thence into the captain’s
cabin.

His name was Pedro de Mendez; he was a very courteous and generous
person.  He entreated me to give some account of myself, and desired to
know what I would eat or drink; said, “I should be used as well as
himself;” and spoke so many obliging things, that I wondered to find such
civilities from a _Yahoo_.  However, I remained silent and sullen; I was
ready to faint at the very smell of him and his men.  At last I desired
something to eat out of my own canoe; but he ordered me a chicken, and
some excellent wine, and then directed that I should be put to bed in a
very clean cabin.  I would not undress myself, but lay on the
bed-clothes, and in half an hour stole out, when I thought the crew was
at dinner, and getting to the side of the ship, was going to leap into
the sea, and swim for my life, rather than continue among _Yahoos_.  But
one of the seamen prevented me, and having informed the captain, I was
chained to my cabin.

After dinner, Don Pedro came to me, and desired to know my reason for so
desperate an attempt; assured me, “he only meant to do me all the service
he was able;” and spoke so very movingly, that at last I descended to
treat him like an animal which had some little portion of reason.  I gave
him a very short relation of my voyage; of the conspiracy against me by
my own men; of the country where they set me on shore, and of my five
years residence there.  All which he looked upon as if it were a dream or
a vision; whereat I took great offence; for I had quite forgot the
faculty of lying, so peculiar to _Yahoos_, in all countries where they
preside, and, consequently, their disposition of suspecting truth in
others of their own species.  I asked him, “whether it were the custom in
his country to say the thing which was not?”  I assured him, “I had
almost forgot what he meant by falsehood, and if I had lived a thousand
years in _Houyhnhnmland_, I should never have heard a lie from the
meanest servant; that I was altogether indifferent whether he believed me
or not; but, however, in return for his favours, I would give so much
allowance to the corruption of his nature, as to answer any objection he
would please to make, and then he might easily discover the truth.”

The captain, a wise man, after many endeavours to catch me tripping in
some part of my story, at last began to have a better opinion of my
veracity.  But he added, “that since I professed so inviolable an
attachment to truth, I must give him my word and honour to bear him
company in this voyage, without attempting any thing against my life; or
else he would continue me a prisoner till we arrived at Lisbon.”  I gave
him the promise he required; but at the same time protested, “that I
would suffer the greatest hardships, rather than return to live among
_Yahoos_.”

Our voyage passed without any considerable accident.  In gratitude to the
captain, I sometimes sat with him, at his earnest request, and strove to
conceal my antipathy against human kind, although it often broke out;
which he suffered to pass without observation.  But the greatest part of
the day I confined myself to my cabin, to avoid seeing any of the crew.
The captain had often entreated me to strip myself of my savage dress,
and offered to lend me the best suit of clothes he had.  This I would not
be prevailed on to accept, abhorring to cover myself with any thing that
had been on the back of a _Yahoo_.  I only desired he would lend me two
clean shirts, which, having been washed since he wore them, I believed
would not so much defile me.  These I changed every second day, and
washed them myself.

We arrived at Lisbon, Nov. 5, 1715.  At our landing, the captain forced
me to cover myself with his cloak, to prevent the rabble from crowding
about me.  I was conveyed to his own house; and at my earnest request he
led me up to the highest room backwards.  I conjured him “to conceal from
all persons what I had told him of the _Houyhnhnms_; because the least
hint of such a story would not only draw numbers of people to see me, but
probably put me in danger of being imprisoned, or burnt by the
Inquisition.”  The captain persuaded me to accept a suit of clothes newly
made; but I would not suffer the tailor to take my measure; however, Don
Pedro being almost of my size, they fitted me well enough.  He accoutred
me with other necessaries, all new, which I aired for twenty-four hours
before I would use them.

The captain had no wife, nor above three servants, none of which were
suffered to attend at meals; and his whole deportment was so obliging,
added to very good human understanding, that I really began to tolerate
his company.  He gained so far upon me, that I ventured to look out of
the back window.  By degrees I was brought into another room, whence I
peeped into the street, but drew my head back in a fright.  In a week’s
time he seduced me down to the door.  I found my terror gradually
lessened, but my hatred and contempt seemed to increase.  I was at last
bold enough to walk the street in his company, but kept my nose well
stopped with rue, or sometimes with tobacco.

In ten days, Don Pedro, to whom I had given some account of my domestic
affairs, put it upon me, as a matter of honour and conscience, “that I
ought to return to my native country, and live at home with my wife and
children.”  He told me, “there was an English ship in the port just ready
to sail, and he would furnish me with all things necessary.”  It would be
tedious to repeat his arguments, and my contradictions.  He said, “it was
altogether impossible to find such a solitary island as I desired to live
in; but I might command in my own house, and pass my time in a manner as
recluse as I pleased.”

I complied at last, finding I could not do better.  I left Lisbon the
24th day of November, in an English merchantman, but who was the master I
never inquired.  Don Pedro accompanied me to the ship, and lent me twenty
pounds.  He took kind leave of me, and embraced me at parting, which I
bore as well as I could.  During this last voyage I had no commerce with
the master or any of his men; but, pretending I was sick, kept close in
my cabin.  On the fifth of December, 1715, we cast anchor in the Downs,
about nine in the morning, and at three in the afternoon I got safe to my
house at Rotherhith. {546}

My wife and family received me with great surprise and joy, because they
concluded me certainly dead; but I must freely confess the sight of them
filled me only with hatred, disgust, and contempt; and the more, by
reflecting on the near alliance I had to them.  For although, since my
unfortunate exile from the _Houyhnhnm_ country, I had compelled myself to
tolerate the sight of _Yahoos_, and to converse with Don Pedro de Mendez,
yet my memory and imagination were perpetually filled with the virtues
and ideas of those exalted _Houyhnhnms_.  And when I began to consider
that, by copulating with one of the _Yahoo_ species I had become a parent
of more, it struck me with the utmost shame, confusion, and horror.

As soon as I entered the house, my wife took me in her arms, and kissed
me; at which, having not been used to the touch of that odious animal for
so many years, I fell into a swoon for almost an hour.  At the time I am
writing, it is five years since my last return to England.  During the
first year, I could not endure my wife or children in my presence; the
very smell of them was intolerable; much less could I suffer them to eat
in the same room.  To this hour they dare not presume to touch my bread,
or drink out of the same cup, neither was I ever able to let one of them
take me by the hand.  The first money I laid out was to buy two young
stone-horses, which I keep in a good stable; and next to them, the groom
is my greatest favourite, for I feel my spirits revived by the smell he
contracts in the stable.  My horses understand me tolerably well; I
converse with them at least four hours every day.  They are strangers to
bridle or saddle; they live in great amity with me and friendship to each
other.



CHAPTER XII.


The author’s veracity.  His design in publishing this work.  His censure
of those travellers who swerve from the truth.  The author clears himself
from any sinister ends in writing.  An objection answered.  The method of
planting colonies.  His native country commended.  The right of the crown
to those countries described by the author is justified.  The difficulty
of conquering them.  The author takes his last leave of the reader;
proposes his manner of living for the future; gives good advice, and
concludes.

Thus, gentle reader, I have given thee a faithful history of my travels
for sixteen years and above seven months: wherein I have not been so
studious of ornament as of truth.  I could, perhaps, like others, have
astonished thee with strange improbable tales; but I rather chose to
relate plain matter of fact, in the simplest manner and style; because my
principal design was to inform, and not to amuse thee.

It is easy for us who travel into remote countries, which are seldom
visited by Englishmen or other Europeans, to form descriptions of
wonderful animals both at sea and land.  Whereas a traveller’s chief aim
should be to make men wiser and better, and to improve their minds by the
bad, as well as good, example of what they deliver concerning foreign
places.

I could heartily wish a law was enacted, that every traveller, before he
were permitted to publish his voyages, should be obliged to make oath
before the Lord High Chancellor, that all he intended to print was
absolutely true to the best of his knowledge; for then the world would no
longer be deceived, as it usually is, while some writers, to make their
works pass the better upon the public, impose the grossest falsities on
the unwary reader.  I have perused several books of travels with great
delight in my younger days; but having since gone over most parts of the
globe, and been able to contradict many fabulous accounts from my own
observation, it has given me a great disgust against this part of
reading, and some indignation to see the credulity of mankind so
impudently abused.  Therefore, since my acquaintance were pleased to
think my poor endeavours might not be unacceptable to my country, I
imposed on myself, as a maxim never to be swerved from, that I would
strictly adhere to truth; neither indeed can I be ever under the least
temptation to vary from it, while I retain in my mind the lectures and
example of my noble master and the other illustrious _Houyhnhnms_ of whom
I had so long the honour to be an humble hearer.

    _—Nec si miserum Fortuna Sinonem_
    _Finxit_, _vanum etiam_, _mendacemque improba finget_.

I know very well, how little reputation is to be got by writings which
require neither genius nor learning, nor indeed any other talent, except
a good memory, or an exact journal.  I know likewise, that writers of
travels, like dictionary-makers, are sunk into oblivion by the weight and
bulk of those who come last, and therefore lie uppermost.  And it is
highly probable, that such travellers, who shall hereafter visit the
countries described in this work of mine, may, by detecting my errors (if
there be any), and adding many new discoveries of their own, justle me
out of vogue, and stand in my place, making the world forget that ever I
was an author.  This indeed would be too great a mortification, if I
wrote for fame: but as my sole intention was the public good, I cannot be
altogether disappointed.  For who can read of the virtues I have
mentioned in the glorious _Houyhnhnms_, without being ashamed of his own
vices, when he considers himself as the reasoning, governing animal of
his country?  I shall say nothing of those remote nations where _Yahoos_
preside; among which the least corrupted are the _Brobdingnagians_; whose
wise maxims in morality and government it would be our happiness to
observe.  But I forbear descanting further, and rather leave the
judicious reader to his own remarks and application.

I am not a little pleased that this work of mine can possibly meet with
no censurers: for what objections can be made against a writer, who
relates only plain facts, that happened in such distant countries, where
we have not the least interest, with respect either to trade or
negotiations?  I have carefully avoided every fault with which common
writers of travels are often too justly charged.  Besides, I meddle not
the least with any party, but write without passion, prejudice, or
ill-will against any man, or number of men, whatsoever.  I write for the
noblest end, to inform and instruct mankind; over whom I may, without
breach of modesty, pretend to some superiority, from the advantages I
received by conversing so long among the most accomplished _Houyhnhnms_.
I write without any view to profit or praise.  I never suffer a word to
pass that may look like reflection, or possibly give the least offence,
even to those who are most ready to take it.  So that I hope I may with
justice pronounce myself an author perfectly blameless; against whom the
tribes of Answerers, Considerers, Observers, Reflectors, Detectors,
Remarkers, will never be able to find matter for exercising their
talents.

I confess, it was whispered to me, “that I was bound in duty, as a
subject of England, to have given in a memorial to a secretary of state
at my first coming over; because, whatever lands are discovered by a
subject belong to the crown.”  But I doubt whether our conquests in the
countries I treat of would be as easy as those of Ferdinando Cortez over
the naked Americans.  The _Lilliputians_, I think, are hardly worth the
charge of a fleet and army to reduce them; and I question whether it
might be prudent or safe to attempt the _Brobdingnagians_; or whether an
English army would be much at their ease with the Flying Island over
their heads.  The _Houyhnhnms_ indeed appear not to be so well prepared
for war, a science to which they are perfect strangers, and especially
against missive weapons.  However, supposing myself to be a minister of
state, I could never give my advice for invading them.  Their prudence,
unanimity, unacquaintedness with fear, and their love of their country,
would amply supply all defects in the military art.  Imagine twenty
thousand of them breaking into the midst of an European army, confounding
the ranks, overturning the carriages, battering the warriors’ faces into
mummy by terrible yerks from their hinder hoofs; for they would well
deserve the character given to Augustus, _Recalcitrat undique tutus_.
But, instead of proposals for conquering that magnanimous nation, I
rather wish they were in a capacity, or disposition, to send a sufficient
number of their inhabitants for civilizing Europe, by teaching us the
first principles of honour, justice, truth, temperance, public spirit,
fortitude, chastity, friendship, benevolence, and fidelity.  The names of
all which virtues are still retained among us in most languages, and are
to be met with in modern, as well as ancient authors; which I am able to
assert from my own small reading.

But I had another reason, which made me less forward to enlarge his
majesty’s dominions by my discoveries.  To say the truth, I had conceived
a few scruples with relation to the distributive justice of princes upon
those occasions.  For instance, a crew of pirates are driven by a storm
they know not whither; at length a boy discovers land from the topmast;
they go on shore to rob and plunder, they see a harmless people, are
entertained with kindness; they give the country a new name; they take
formal possession of it for their king; they set up a rotten plank, or a
stone, for a memorial; they murder two or three dozen of the natives,
bring away a couple more, by force, for a sample; return home, and get
their pardon.  Here commences a new dominion acquired with a title by
divine right.  Ships are sent with the first opportunity; the natives
driven out or destroyed; their princes tortured to discover their gold; a
free license given to all acts of inhumanity and lust, the earth reeking
with the blood of its inhabitants: and this execrable crew of butchers,
employed in so pious an expedition, is a modern colony, sent to convert
and civilize an idolatrous and barbarous people!

But this description, I confess, does by no means affect the British
nation, who may be an example to the whole world for their wisdom, care,
and justice in planting colonies; their liberal endowments for the
advancement of religion and learning; their choice of devout and able
pastors to propagate Christianity; their caution in stocking their
provinces with people of sober lives and conversations from this the
mother kingdom; their strict regard to the distribution of justice, in
supplying the civil administration through all their colonies with
officers of the greatest abilities, utter strangers to corruption; and,
to crown all, by sending the most vigilant and virtuous governors, who
have no other views than the happiness of the people over whom they
preside, and the honour of the king their master.

But as those countries which I have described do not appear to have any
desire of being conquered and enslaved, murdered or driven out by
colonies, nor abound either in gold, silver, sugar, or tobacco, I did
humbly conceive, they were by no means proper objects of our zeal, our
valour, or our interest.  However, if those whom it more concerns think
fit to be of another opinion, I am ready to depose, when I shall be
lawfully called, that no European did ever visit those countries before
me.  I mean, if the inhabitants ought to be believed, unless a dispute
may arise concerning the two _Yahoos_, said to have been seen many years
ago upon a mountain in _Houyhnhnmland_.

But, as to the formality of taking possession in my sovereign’s name, it
never came once into my thoughts; and if it had, yet, as my affairs then
stood, I should perhaps, in point of prudence and self-preservation, have
put it off to a better opportunity.

Having thus answered the only objection that can ever be raised against
me as a traveller, I here take a final leave of all my courteous readers,
and return to enjoy my own speculations in my little garden at Redriff;
to apply those excellent lessons of virtue which I learned among the
_Houyhnhnms_; to instruct the _Yahoos_ of my own family, is far as I
shall find them docible animals; to behold my figure often in a glass,
and thus, if possible, habituate myself by time to tolerate the sight of
a human creature; to lament the brutality to _Houyhnhnms_ in my own
country, but always treat their persons with respect, for the sake of my
noble master, his family, his friends, and the whole _Houyhnhnm_ race,
whom these of ours have the honour to resemble in all their lineaments,
however their intellectuals came to degenerate.

I began last week to permit my wife to sit at dinner with me, at the
farthest end of a long table; and to answer (but with the utmost brevity)
the few questions I asked her.  Yet, the smell of a _Yahoo_ continuing
very offensive, I always keep my nose well stopped with rue, lavender, or
tobacco leaves.  And, although it be hard for a man late in life to
remove old habits, I am not altogether out of hopes, in some time, to
suffer a neighbour _Yahoo_ in my company, without the apprehensions I am
yet under of his teeth or his claws.

My reconcilement to the _Yahoo_ kind in general might not be so
difficult, if they would be content with those vices and follies only
which nature has entitled them to.  I am not in the least provoked at the
sight of a lawyer, a pickpocket, a colonel, a fool, a lord, a gamester, a
politician, a whoremonger, a physician, an evidence, a suborner, an
attorney, a traitor, or the like; this is all according to the due course
of things: but when I behold a lump of deformity and diseases, both in
body and mind, smitten with pride, it immediately breaks all the measures
of my patience; neither shall I be ever able to comprehend how such an
animal, and such a vice, could tally together.  The wise and virtuous
_Houyhnhnms_, who abound in all excellences that can adorn a rational
creature, have no name for this vice in their language, which has no
terms to express any thing that is evil, except those whereby they
describe the detestable qualities of their _Yahoos_, among which they
were not able to distinguish this of pride, for want of thoroughly
understanding human nature, as it shows itself in other countries where
that animal presides.  But I, who had more experience, could plainly
observe some rudiments of it among the wild _Yahoos_.

But the _Houyhnhnms_, who live under the government of reason, are no
more proud of the good qualities they possess, than I should be for not
wanting a leg or an arm; which no man in his wits would boast of,
although he must be miserable without them.  I dwell the longer upon this
subject from the desire I have to make the society of an English _Yahoo_
by any means not insupportable; and therefore I here entreat those who
have any tincture of this absurd vice, that they will not presume to come
in my sight.




FOOTNOTES:


{301}  A stang is a pole or perch; sixteen feet and a half.

{330}  An act of parliament has been since passed by which some breaches
of trust have been made capital.

{454a}  Britannia.—_Sir W. Scott_.

{454b}  London.—_Sir W. Scott_.

{455}  This is the revised text adopted by Dr. Hawksworth (1766).  The
above paragraph in the original editions (1726) takes another form,
commencing:—“I told him that should I happen to live in a kingdom where
lots were in vogue,” &c.  The names Tribnia and Langdon an not mentioned,
and the “close stool” and its signification do not occur.

{514}  This paragraph is not in the original editions.

{546}  The original editions and Hawksworth’s have Rotherhith here,
though earlier in the work, Redriff is said to have been Gulliver’s home
in England.



THE BATTLE OF THE BOOKS
AND OTHER SHORT PIECES.


BY
JONATHAN SWIFT.

CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED:
_LONDON_, _PARIS_, _NEW YORK & MELBOURNE_.
1886.




INTRODUCTION.


Jonathan Swift was born in 1667, on the 30th of November.  His father was
a Jonathan Swift, sixth of the ten sons of the Rev. Thomas Swift, vicar
of Goodrich, near Ross, in Herefordshire, who had married Elizabeth
Dryden, niece to the poet Dryden's grandfather.  Jonathan Swift married,
at Leicester, Abigail Erick, or Herrick, who was of the family that had
given to England Robert Herrick, the poet.  As their eldest brother,
Godwin, was prospering in Ireland, four other Swifts, Dryden, William,
Jonathan, and Adam, all in turn found their way to Dublin.  Jonathan was
admitted an attorney of the King's Inns, Dublin, and was appointed by the
Benchers to the office of Steward of the King's Inns, in January, 1666.
He died in April, 1667, leaving his widow with an infant daughter, Jane,
and an unborn child.

Swift was born in Dublin seven months after his father's death.  His
mother after a time returned to her own family, in Leicester, and the
child was added to the household of his uncle, Godwin Swift, who, by his
four wives, became father to ten sons of his own and four daughters.
Godwin Swift sent his nephew to Kilkenny School, where he had William
Congreve among his schoolfellows.  In April, 1782, Swift was entered at
Trinity College as pensioner, together with his cousin Thomas, son of his
uncle Thomas.  That cousin Thomas afterwards became rector of Puttenham,
in Surrey.  Jonathan Swift graduated as B.A. at Dublin, in February,
1686, and remained in Trinity College for another three years.  He was
ready to proceed to M.A. when his uncle Godwin became insane.  The
troubles of 1689 also caused the closing of the University, and Jonathan
Swift went to Leicester, where mother and son took counsel together as to
future possibilities of life.

The retired statesman, Sir William Temple, at Moor Park, near Farnham, in
Surrey, was in highest esteem with the new King and the leaders of the
Revolution.  His father, as Master of the Irish Rolls, had been a friend
of Godwin Swift's, and with his wife Swift's mother could claim
cousinship.  After some months, therefore, at Leicester, Jonathan Swift,
aged twenty-two, went to Moor Park, and entered Sir William Temple's
household, doing service with the expectation of advancement through his
influence.  The advancement he desired was in the Church.  When Swift
went to Moor Park he found in its household a child six or seven years
old, daughter to Mrs. Johnson, who was trusted servant and companion to
Lady Gifford, Sir William Temple's sister.  With this little Esther, aged
seven, Swift, aged twenty-two, became a playfellow and helper in her
studies.  He broke his English for her into what he called their "little
language," that was part of the same playful kindliness, and passed into
their after-life.  In July, 1692, with Sir William Temple's help,
Jonathan Swift commenced M.A. in Oxford, as of Hart Hall.  In 1694,
Swift's ambition having been thwarted by an offer of a clerkship, of 120
pounds a year, in the Irish Rolls, he broke from Sir William Temple, took
orders, and obtained, through other influence, in January, 1695, the
small prebendary of Kilroot, in the north of Ireland.  He was there for
about a year.  Close by, in Belfast, was an old college friend, named
Waring, who had a sister.  Swift was captivated by Miss Waring, called
her Varina, and would have become engaged to marry her if she had not
flinched from engagement with a young clergyman whose income was but a
hundred a year.

But Sir William Temple had missed Jonathan Swift from Moor Park.
Differences were forgotten, and Swift, at his wish, went back.  This was
in 1696, when his little pupil, Esther Johnson, was fifteen.  Swift said
of her, "I knew her from six years old, and had some share in her
education, by directing what books she should read, and perpetually
instructing her in the principles of honour and virtue, from which she
never swerved in any one action or moment of her life.  She was sickly
from her childhood until about the age of fifteen; but then grew into
perfect health, and was then looked upon as one of the most beautiful,
graceful, and agreeable young women in London, only a little too fat.  Her
hair was blacker than a raven, and every feature of her face in
perfection."  This was the Stella of Swift's after-life, the one woman to
whom his whole love was given.  But side by side with the slow growth of
his knowledge of all she was for him, was the slow growth of his
conviction that attacks of giddiness and deafness, which first came when
he was twenty, and recurred at times throughout his life, were signs to
be associated with that which he regarded as the curse upon his life.  His
end would be like his uncle Godwin's.  It was a curse transmissible to
children, but if he desired to keep the influence his genius gave him, he
could not tell the world why he refused to marry.  Only to Stella, who
remained unmarried for his sake, and gave her life to him, could all be
known.

Returned to Moor Park, Swift wrote, in 1697, the "Battle of the Books,"
as well as the "Tale of the Tub," with which it was published seven years
afterwards, in 1704.  Perrault and others had been battling in France
over the relative merits of Ancient and Modern Writers.  The debate had
spread to England.  On behalf of the Ancients, stress was laid by Temple
on the letters of Phalaris, tyrant of Agrigentum.  Wotton replied to Sir
William for the Moderns.  The Hon. Charles Boyle, of Christ Church,
published a new edition of the Epistles of Phalaris, with translation of
the Greek text into Latin.  Dr. Bentley, the King's Librarian, published
a "Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris," denying their value, and
arguing that Phalaris did not write them.  Christ Church replied through
Charles Boyle, with "Dr. Bentley's Dissertation on the Epistles of
Phalaris examined."  Swift entered into the war with a light heart, and
matched the Ancients in defending them for the amusement of his patron.
His incidental argument between the Spider and the Bee has provided a
catch-phrase, "Sweetness and Light," to a combatant of later times.

Sir William Temple died on the 27th of January, 1699.  Swift then became
chaplain to Lord Berkeley in Dublin Castle, and it was as a little
surprise to Lady Berkeley, who liked him to read to her Robert Boyle's
"Meditations," that Swift wrote the "Meditation on a Broomstick."  In
February, 1700, he obtained from Lord Berkeley the vicarage of Laracor
with the living of Rathbeggan, also in the diocese of Meath.  In the
beginning of 1701 Esther Johnson, to whom Sir William Temple had
bequeathed a leasehold farm in Wicklow, came with an elder friend, Miss
Dingley, and settled in Laracor to be near Swift.  During one of the
visits to London, made from Laracor, Swift attacked the false pretensions
of astrologers by that prediction of the death of Mr. Partridge, a
prophetic almanac maker, of which he described the Accomplishment so
clearly that Partridge had much ado to get credit for being alive.

The lines addressed to Stella speak for themselves.  "Cadenus and
Vanessa" was meant as polite and courteous admonition to Miss Hester Van
Homrigh, a young lady in whom green-sickness seems to have produced
devotion to Swift in forms that embarrassed him, and with which he did
not well know how to deal.

H. M.




THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.


This discourse, as it is unquestionably of the same author, so it seems
to have been written about the same time, with "The Tale of a Tub;" I
mean the year 1697, when the famous dispute was on foot about ancient and
modern learning.  The controversy took its rise from an essay of Sir
William Temple's upon that subject; which was answered by W. Wotton,
B.D., with an appendix by Dr. Bentley, endeavouring to destroy the credit
of AEsop and Phalaris for authors, whom Sir William Temple had, in the
essay before mentioned, highly commended.  In that appendix the doctor
falls hard upon a new edition of Phalaris, put out by the Honourable
Charles Boyle, now Earl of Orrery, to which Mr. Boyle replied at large
with great learning and wit; and the Doctor voluminously rejoined.  In
this dispute the town highly resented to see a person of Sir William
Temple's character and merits roughly used by the two reverend gentlemen
aforesaid, and without any manner of provocation.  At length, there
appearing no end of the quarrel, our author tells us that the BOOKS in
St. James's Library, looking upon themselves as parties principally
concerned, took up the controversy, and came to a decisive battle; but
the manuscript, by the injury of fortune or weather, being in several
places imperfect, we cannot learn to which side the victory fell.

I must warn the reader to beware of applying to persons what is here
meant only of books, in the most literal sense.  So, when Virgil is
mentioned, we are not to understand the person of a famous poet called by
that name; but only certain sheets of paper bound up in leather,
containing in print the works of the said poet: and so of the rest.




THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.


Satire is a sort of glass wherein beholders do generally discover
everybody's face but their own; which is the chief reason for that kind
reception it meets with in the world, and that so very few are offended
with it.  But, if it should happen otherwise, the danger is not great;
and I have learned from long experience never to apprehend mischief from
those understandings I have been able to provoke: for anger and fury,
though they add strength to the sinews of the body, yet are found to
relax those of the mind, and to render all its efforts feeble and
impotent.

There is a brain that will endure but one scumming; let the owner gather
it with discretion, and manage his little stock with husbandry; but, of
all things, let him beware of bringing it under the lash of his betters,
because that will make it all bubble up into impertinence, and he will
find no new supply.  Wit without knowledge being a sort of cream, which
gathers in a night to the top, and by a skilful hand may be soon whipped
into froth; but once scummed away, what appears underneath will be fit
for nothing but to be thrown to the hogs.




A FULL AND TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE BATTLE FOUGHT LAST FRIDAY BETWEEN THE
ANCIENT AND THE MODERN BOOKS IN SAINT JAMES'S LIBRARY.


Whoever examines, with due circumspection, into the annual records of
time, will find it remarked that War is the child of Pride, and Pride the
daughter of Riches:--the former of which assertions may be soon granted,
but one cannot so easily subscribe to the latter; for Pride is nearly
related to Beggary and Want, either by father or mother, and sometimes by
both: and, to speak naturally, it very seldom happens among men to fall
out when all have enough; invasions usually travelling from north to
south, that is to say, from poverty to plenty.  The most ancient and
natural grounds of quarrels are lust and avarice; which, though we may
allow to be brethren, or collateral branches of pride, are certainly the
issues of want.  For, to speak in the phrase of writers upon politics, we
may observe in the republic of dogs, which in its original seems to be an
institution of the many, that the whole state is ever in the profoundest
peace after a full meal; and that civil broils arise among them when it
happens for one great bone to be seized on by some leading dog, who
either divides it among the few, and then it falls to an oligarchy, or
keeps it to himself, and then it runs up to a tyranny.  The same
reasoning also holds place among them in those dissensions we behold upon
a turgescency in any of their females.  For the right of possession lying
in common (it being impossible to establish a property in so delicate a
case), jealousies and suspicions do so abound, that the whole
commonwealth of that street is reduced to a manifest state of war, of
every citizen against every citizen, till some one of more courage,
conduct, or fortune than the rest seizes and enjoys the prize: upon which
naturally arises plenty of heart-burning, and envy, and snarling against
the happy dog.  Again, if we look upon any of these republics engaged in
a foreign war, either of invasion or defence, we shall find the same
reasoning will serve as to the grounds and occasions of each; and that
poverty or want, in some degree or other (whether real or in opinion,
which makes no alteration in the case), has a great share, as well as
pride, on the part of the aggressor.

Now whoever will please to take this scheme, and either reduce or adapt
it to an intellectual state or commonwealth of learning, will soon
discover the first ground of disagreement between the two great parties
at this time in arms, and may form just conclusions upon the merits of
either cause.  But the issue or events of this war are not so easy to
conjecture at; for the present quarrel is so inflamed by the warm heads
of either faction, and the pretensions somewhere or other so exorbitant,
as not to admit the least overtures of accommodation.  This quarrel first
began, as I have heard it affirmed by an old dweller in the
neighbourhood, about a small spot of ground, lying and being upon one of
the two tops of the hill Parnassus; the highest and largest of which had,
it seems, been time out of mind in quiet possession of certain tenants,
called the Ancients; and the other was held by the Moderns.  But these
disliking their present station, sent certain ambassadors to the
Ancients, complaining of a great nuisance; how the height of that part of
Parnassus quite spoiled the prospect of theirs, especially towards the
east; and therefore, to avoid a war, offered them the choice of this
alternative, either that the Ancients would please to remove themselves
and their effects down to the lower summit, which the Moderns would
graciously surrender to them, and advance into their place; or else the
said Ancients will give leave to the Moderns to come with shovels and
mattocks, and level the said hill as low as they shall think it
convenient.  To which the Ancients made answer, how little they expected
such a message as this from a colony whom they had admitted, out of their
own free grace, to so near a neighbourhood.  That, as to their own seat,
they were aborigines of it, and therefore to talk with them of a removal
or surrender was a language they did not understand.  That if the height
of the hill on their side shortened the prospect of the Moderns, it was a
disadvantage they could not help; but desired them to consider whether
that injury (if it be any) were not largely recompensed by the shade and
shelter it afforded them.  That as to the levelling or digging down, it
was either folly or ignorance to propose it if they did or did not know
how that side of the hill was an entire rock, which would break their
tools and hearts, without any damage to itself.  That they would
therefore advise the Moderns rather to raise their own side of the hill
than dream of pulling down that of the Ancients; to the former of which
they would not only give licence, but also largely contribute.  All this
was rejected by the Moderns with much indignation, who still insisted
upon one of the two expedients; and so this difference broke out into a
long and obstinate war, maintained on the one part by resolution, and by
the courage of certain leaders and allies; but, on the other, by the
greatness of their number, upon all defeats affording continual recruits.
In this quarrel whole rivulets of ink have been exhausted, and the
virulence of both parties enormously augmented.  Now, it must be here
understood, that ink is the great missive weapon in all battles of the
learned, which, conveyed through a sort of engine called a quill,
infinite numbers of these are darted at the enemy by the valiant on each
side, with equal skill and violence, as if it were an engagement of
porcupines.  This malignant liquor was compounded, by the engineer who
invented it, of two ingredients, which are, gall and copperas; by its
bitterness and venom to suit, in some degree, as well as to foment, the
genius of the combatants.  And as the Grecians, after an engagement, when
they could not agree about the victory, were wont to set up trophies on
both sides, the beaten party being content to be at the same expense, to
keep itself in countenance (a laudable and ancient custom, happily
revived of late in the art of war), so the learned, after a sharp and
bloody dispute, do, on both sides, hang out their trophies too, whichever
comes by the worst.  These trophies have largely inscribed on them the
merits of the cause; a full impartial account of such a Battle, and how
the victory fell clearly to the party that set them up.  They are known
to the world under several names; as disputes, arguments, rejoinders,
brief considerations, answers, replies, remarks, reflections, objections,
confutations.  For a very few days they are fixed up all in public
places, either by themselves or their representatives, for passengers to
gaze at; whence the chiefest and largest are removed to certain magazines
they call libraries, there to remain in a quarter purposely assigned
them, and thenceforth begin to be called books of controversy.

In these books is wonderfully instilled and preserved the spirit of each
warrior while he is alive; and after his death his soul transmigrates
thither to inform them.  This, at least, is the more common opinion; but
I believe it is with libraries as with other cemeteries, where some
philosophers affirm that a certain spirit, which they call _brutum
hominis_, hovers over the monument, till the body is corrupted and turns
to dust or to worms, but then vanishes or dissolves; so, we may say, a
restless spirit haunts over every book, till dust or worms have seized
upon it--which to some may happen in a few days, but to others later--and
therefore, books of controversy being, of all others, haunted by the most
disorderly spirits, have always been confined in a separate lodge from
the rest, and for fear of a mutual violence against each other, it was
thought prudent by our ancestors to bind them to the peace with strong
iron chains.  Of which invention the original occasion was this: When the
works of Scotus first came out, they were carried to a certain library,
and had lodgings appointed them; but this author was no sooner settled
than he went to visit his master Aristotle, and there both concerted
together to seize Plato by main force, and turn him out from his ancient
station among the divines, where he had peaceably dwelt near eight
hundred years.  The attempt succeeded, and the two usurpers have reigned
ever since in his stead; but, to maintain quiet for the future, it was
decreed that all polemics of the larger size should be hold fast with a
chain.

By this expedient, the public peace of libraries might certainly have
been preserved if a new species of controversial books had not arisen of
late years, instinct with a more malignant spirit, from the war above
mentioned between the learned about the higher summit of Parnassus.

When these books were first admitted into the public libraries, I
remember to have said, upon occasion, to several persons concerned, how I
was sure they would create broils wherever they came, unless a world of
care were taken; and therefore I advised that the champions of each side
should be coupled together, or otherwise mixed, that, like the blending
of contrary poisons, their malignity might be employed among themselves.
And it seems I was neither an ill prophet nor an ill counsellor; for it
was nothing else but the neglect of this caution which gave occasion to
the terrible fight that happened on Friday last between the Ancient and
Modern Books in the King's library.  Now, because the talk of this battle
is so fresh in everybody's mouth, and the expectation of the town so
great to be informed in the particulars, I, being possessed of all
qualifications requisite in an historian, and retained by neither party,
have resolved to comply with the urgent importunity of my friends, by
writing down a full impartial account thereof.

The guardian of the regal library, a person of great valour, but chiefly
renowned for his humanity, had been a fierce champion for the Moderns,
and, in an engagement upon Parnassus, had vowed with his own hands to
knock down two of the ancient chiefs who guarded a small pass on the
superior rock, but, endeavouring to climb up, was cruelly obstructed by
his own unhappy weight and tendency towards his centre, a quality to
which those of the Modern party are extremely subject; for, being light-
headed, they have, in speculation, a wonderful agility, and conceive
nothing too high for them to mount, but, in reducing to practice,
discover a mighty pressure about their posteriors and their heels.  Having
thus failed in his design, the disappointed champion bore a cruel rancour
to the Ancients, which he resolved to gratify by showing all marks of his
favour to the books of their adversaries, and lodging them in the fairest
apartments; when, at the same time, whatever book had the boldness to own
itself for an advocate of the Ancients was buried alive in some obscure
corner, and threatened, upon the least displeasure, to be turned out of
doors.  Besides, it so happened that about this time there was a strange
confusion of place among all the books in the library, for which several
reasons were assigned.  Some imputed it to a great heap of learned dust,
which a perverse wind blew off from a shelf of Moderns into the keeper's
eyes.  Others affirmed he had a humour to pick the worms out of the
schoolmen, and swallow them fresh and fasting, whereof some fell upon his
spleen, and some climbed up into his head, to the great perturbation of
both.  And lastly, others maintained that, by walking much in the dark
about the library, he had quite lost the situation of it out of his head;
and therefore, in replacing his books, he was apt to mistake and clap
Descartes next to Aristotle, poor Plato had got between Hobbes and the
Seven Wise Masters, and Virgil was hemmed in with Dryden on one side and
Wither on the other.

Meanwhile, those books that were advocates for the Moderns, chose out one
from among them to make a progress through the whole library, examine the
number and strength of their party, and concert their affairs.  This
messenger performed all things very industriously, and brought back with
him a list of their forces, in all, fifty thousand, consisting chiefly of
light-horse, heavy-armed foot, and mercenaries; whereof the foot were in
general but sorrily armed and worse clad; their horses large, but
extremely out of case and heart; however, some few, by trading among the
Ancients, had furnished themselves tolerably enough.

While things were in this ferment, discord grew extremely high; hot words
passed on both sides, and ill blood was plentifully bred.  Here a
solitary Ancient, squeezed up among a whole shelf of Moderns, offered
fairly to dispute the case, and to prove by manifest reason that the
priority was due to them from long possession, and in regard of their
prudence, antiquity, and, above all, their great merits toward the
Moderns.  But these denied the premises, and seemed very much to wonder
how the Ancients could pretend to insist upon their antiquity, when it
was so plain (if they went to that) that the Moderns were much the more
ancient of the two.  As for any obligations they owed to the Ancients,
they renounced them all.  "It is true," said they, "we are informed some
few of our party have been so mean as to borrow their subsistence from
you, but the rest, infinitely the greater number (and especially we
French and English), were so far from stooping to so base an example,
that there never passed, till this very hour, six words between us.  For
our horses were of our own breeding, our arms of our own forging, and our
clothes of our own cutting out and sewing."  Plato was by chance up on
the next shelf, and observing those that spoke to be in the ragged plight
mentioned a while ago, their jades lean and foundered, their weapons of
rotten wood, their armour rusty, and nothing but rags underneath, he
laughed loud, and in his pleasant way swore, by ---, he believed them.

Now, the Moderns had not proceeded in their late negotiation with secrecy
enough to escape the notice of the enemy.  For those advocates who had
begun the quarrel, by setting first on foot the dispute of precedency,
talked so loud of coming to a battle, that Sir William Temple happened to
overhear them, and gave immediate intelligence to the Ancients, who
thereupon drew up their scattered troops together, resolving to act upon
the defensive; upon which, several of the Moderns fled over to their
party, and among the rest Temple himself.  This Temple, having been
educated and long conversed among the Ancients, was, of all the Moderns,
their greatest favourite, and became their greatest champion.

Things were at this crisis when a material accident fell out.  For upon
the highest corner of a large window, there dwelt a certain spider,
swollen up to the first magnitude by the destruction of infinite numbers
of flies, whose spoils lay scattered before the gates of his palace, like
human bones before the cave of some giant.  The avenues to his castle
were guarded with turnpikes and palisadoes, all after the modern way of
fortification.  After you had passed several courts you came to the
centre, wherein you might behold the constable himself in his own
lodgings, which had windows fronting to each avenue, and ports to sally
out upon all occasions of prey or defence.  In this mansion he had for
some time dwelt in peace and plenty, without danger to his person by
swallows from above, or to his palace by brooms from below; when it was
the pleasure of fortune to conduct thither a wandering bee, to whose
curiosity a broken pane in the glass had discovered itself, and in he
went, where, expatiating a while, he at last happened to alight upon one
of the outward walls of the spider's citadel; which, yielding to the
unequal weight, sunk down to the very foundation.  Thrice he endeavoured
to force his passage, and thrice the centre shook.  The spider within,
feeling the terrible convulsion, supposed at first that nature was
approaching to her final dissolution, or else that Beelzebub, with all
his legions, was come to revenge the death of many thousands of his
subjects whom his enemy had slain and devoured.  However, he at length
valiantly resolved to issue forth and meet his fate.  Meanwhile the bee
had acquitted himself of his toils, and, posted securely at some
distance, was employed in cleansing his wings, and disengaging them from
the ragged remnants of the cobweb.  By this time the spider was
adventured out, when, beholding the chasms, the ruins, and dilapidations
of his fortress, he was very near at his wit's end; he stormed and swore
like a madman, and swelled till he was ready to burst.  At length,
casting his eye upon the bee, and wisely gathering causes from events
(for they know each other by sight), "A plague split you," said he; "is
it you, with a vengeance, that have made this litter here; could not you
look before you, and be d---d?  Do you think I have nothing else to do
(in the devil's name) but to mend and repair after you?"  "Good words,
friend," said the bee, having now pruned himself, and being disposed to
droll; "I'll give you my hand and word to come near your kennel no more;
I was never in such a confounded pickle since I was born."  "Sirrah,"
replied the spider, "if it were not for breaking an old custom in our
family, never to stir abroad against an enemy, I should come and teach
you better manners."  "I pray have patience," said the bee, "or you'll
spend your substance, and, for aught I see, you may stand in need of it
all, towards the repair of your house."  "Rogue, rogue," replied the
spider, "yet methinks you should have more respect to a person whom all
the world allows to be so much your betters."  "By my troth," said the
bee, "the comparison will amount to a very good jest, and you will do me
a favour to let me know the reasons that all the world is pleased to use
in so hopeful a dispute."  At this the spider, having swelled himself
into the size and posture of a disputant, began his argument in the true
spirit of controversy, with resolution to be heartily scurrilous and
angry, to urge on his own reasons without the least regard to the answers
or objections of his opposite, and fully predetermined in his mind
against all conviction.

"Not to disparage myself," said he, "by the comparison with such a
rascal, what art thou but a vagabond without house or home, without stock
or inheritance? born to no possession of your own, but a pair of wings
and a drone-pipe.  Your livelihood is a universal plunder upon nature; a
freebooter over fields and gardens; and, for the sake of stealing, will
rob a nettle as easily as a violet.  Whereas I am a domestic animal,
furnished with a native stock within myself.  This large castle (to show
my improvements in the mathematics) is all built with my own hands, and
the materials extracted altogether out of my own person."

"I am glad," answered the bee, "to hear you grant at least that I am come
honestly by my wings and my voice; for then, it seems, I am obliged to
Heaven alone for my flights and my music; and Providence would never have
bestowed on me two such gifts without designing them for the noblest
ends.  I visit, indeed, all the flowers and blossoms of the field and
garden, but whatever I collect thence enriches myself without the least
injury to their beauty, their smell, or their taste.  Now, for you and
your skill in architecture and other mathematics, I have little to say:
in that building of yours there might, for aught I know, have been labour
and method enough; but, by woeful experience for us both, it is too plain
the materials are naught; and I hope you will henceforth take warning,
and consider duration and matter, as well as method and art.  You boast,
indeed, of being obliged to no other creature, but of drawing and
spinning out all from yourself; that is to say, if we may judge of the
liquor in the vessel by what issues out, you possess a good plentiful
store of dirt and poison in your breast; and, though I would by no means
lesson or disparage your genuine stock of either, yet I doubt you are
somewhat obliged, for an increase of both, to a little foreign
assistance.  Your inherent portion of dirt does not fall of acquisitions,
by sweepings exhaled from below; and one insect furnishes you with a
share of poison to destroy another.  So that, in short, the question
comes all to this: whether is the nobler being of the two, that which, by
a lazy contemplation of four inches round, by an overweening pride,
feeding, and engendering on itself, turns all into excrement and venom,
producing nothing at all but flybane and a cobweb; or that which, by a
universal range, with long search, much study, true judgment, and
distinction of things, brings home honey and wax."

This dispute was managed with such eagerness, clamour, and warmth, that
the two parties of books, in arms below, stood silent a while, waiting in
suspense what would be the issue; which was not long undetermined: for
the bee, grown impatient at so much loss of time, fled straight away to a
bed of roses, without looking for a reply, and left the spider, like an
orator, collected in himself, and just prepared to burst out.

It happened upon this emergency that AEsop broke silence first.  He had
been of late most barbarously treated by a strange effect of the regent's
humanity, who had torn off his title-page, sorely defaced one half of his
leaves, and chained him fast among a shelf of Moderns.  Where, soon
discovering how high the quarrel was likely to proceed, he tried all his
arts, and turned himself to a thousand forms.  At length, in the borrowed
shape of an ass, the regent mistook him for a Modern; by which means he
had time and opportunity to escape to the Ancients, just when the spider
and the bee were entering into their contest; to which he gave his
attention with a world of pleasure, and, when it was ended, swore in the
loudest key that in all his life he had never known two cases, so
parallel and adapt to each other as that in the window and this upon the
shelves.  "The disputants," said he, "have admirably managed the dispute
between them, have taken in the full strength of all that is to be said
on both sides, and exhausted the substance of every argument _pro_ and
_con_.  It is but to adjust the reasonings of both to the present
quarrel, then to compare and apply the labours and fruits of each, as the
bee has learnedly deduced them, and we shall find the conclusion fall
plain and close upon the Moderns and us.  For pray, gentlemen, was ever
anything so modern as the spider in his air, his turns, and his
paradoxes? he argues in the behalf of you, his brethren, and himself,
with many boastings of his native stock and great genius; that he spins
and spits wholly from himself, and scorns to own any obligation or
assistance from without.  Then he displays to you his great skill in
architecture and improvement in the mathematics.  To all this the bee, as
an advocate retained by us, the Ancients, thinks fit to answer, that, if
one may judge of the great genius or inventions of the Moderns by what
they have produced, you will hardly have countenance to bear you out in
boasting of either.  Erect your schemes with as much method and skill as
you please; yet, if the materials be nothing but dirt, spun out of your
own entrails (the guts of modern brains), the edifice will conclude at
last in a cobweb; the duration of which, like that of other spiders'
webs, may be imputed to their being forgotten, or neglected, or hid in a
corner.  For anything else of genuine that the Moderns may pretend to, I
cannot recollect; unless it be a large vein of wrangling and satire, much
of a nature and substance with the spiders' poison; which, however they
pretend to spit wholly out of themselves, is improved by the same arts,
by feeding upon the insects and vermin of the age.  As for us, the
Ancients, we are content with the bee, to pretend to nothing of our own
beyond our wings and our voice: that is to say, our flights and our
language.  For the rest, whatever we have got has been by infinite labour
and search, and ranging through every corner of nature; the difference
is, that, instead of dirt and poison, we have rather chosen to till our
hives with honey and wax; thus furnishing mankind with the two noblest of
things, which are sweetness and light."

It is wonderful to conceive the tumult arisen among the books upon the
close of this long descant of AEsop: both parties took the hint, and
heightened their animosities so on a sudden, that they resolved it should
come to a battle.  Immediately the two main bodies withdrew, under their
several ensigns, to the farther parts of the library, and there entered
into cabals and consults upon the present emergency.  The Moderns were in
very warm debates upon the choice of their leaders; and nothing less than
the fear impending from their enemies could have kept them from mutinies
upon this occasion.  The difference was greatest among the horse, where
every private trooper pretended to the chief command, from Tasso and
Milton to Dryden and Wither.  The light-horse were commanded by Cowley
and Despreaux.  There came the bowmen under their valiant leaders,
Descartes, Gassendi, and Hobbes; whose strength was such that they could
shoot their arrows beyond the atmosphere, never to fall down again, but
turn, like that of Evander, into meteors; or, like the cannon-ball, into
stars.  Paracelsus brought a squadron of stinkpot-flingers from the snowy
mountains of Rhaetia.  There came a vast body of dragoons, of different
nations, under the leading of Harvey, their great aga: part armed with
scythes, the weapons of death; part with lances and long knives, all
steeped in poison; part shot bullets of a most malignant nature, and used
white powder, which infallibly killed without report.  There came several
bodies of heavy-armed foot, all mercenaries, under the ensigns of
Guicciardini, Davila, Polydore Vergil, Buchanan, Mariana, Camden, and
others.  The engineers were commanded by Regiomontanus and Wilkins.  The
rest was a confused multitude, led by Scotus, Aquinas, and Bellarmine; of
mighty bulk and stature, but without either arms, courage, or discipline.
In the last place came infinite swarms of calones, a disorderly rout led
by L'Estrange; rogues and ragamuffins, that follow the camp for nothing
but the plunder, all without coats to cover them.

The army of the Ancients was much fewer in number; Homer led the horse,
and Pindar the light-horse; Euclid was chief engineer; Plato and
Aristotle commanded the bowmen; Herodotus and Livy the foot; Hippocrates,
the dragoons; the allies, led by Vossius and Temple, brought up the rear.

All things violently tending to a decisive battle, Fame, who much
frequented, and had a large apartment formerly assigned her in the regal
library, fled up straight to Jupiter, to whom she delivered a faithful
account of all that passed between the two parties below; for among the
gods she always tells truth.  Jove, in great concern, convokes a council
in the Milky Way.  The senate assembled, he declares the occasion of
convening them; a bloody battle just impendent between two mighty armies
of ancient and modern creatures, called books, wherein the celestial
interest was but too deeply concerned.  Momus, the patron of the Moderns,
made an excellent speech in their favour, which was answered by Pallas,
the protectress of the Ancients.  The assembly was divided in their
affections; when Jupiter commanded the Book of Fate to be laid before
him.  Immediately were brought by Mercury three large volumes in folio,
containing memoirs of all things past, present, and to come.  The clasps
were of silver double gilt, the covers of celestial turkey leather, and
the paper such as here on earth might pass almost for vellum.  Jupiter,
having silently read the decree, would communicate the import to none,
but presently shut up the book.

Without the doors of this assembly there attended a vast number of light,
nimble gods, menial servants to Jupiter: those are his ministering
instruments in all affairs below.  They travel in a caravan, more or less
together, and are fastened to each other like a link of galley-slaves, by
a light chain, which passes from them to Jupiter's great toe: and yet, in
receiving or delivering a message, they may never approach above the
lowest step of his throne, where he and they whisper to each other
through a large hollow trunk.  These deities are called by mortal men
accidents or events; but the gods call them second causes.  Jupiter
having delivered his message to a certain number of these divinities,
they flew immediately down to the pinnacle of the regal library, and
consulting a few minutes, entered unseen, and disposed the parties
according to their orders.

Meanwhile Momus, fearing the worst, and calling to mind an ancient
prophecy which bore no very good face to his children the Moderns, bent
his flight to the region of a malignant deity called Criticism.  She
dwelt on the top of a snowy mountain in Nova Zembla; there Momus found
her extended in her den, upon the spoils of numberless volumes, half
devoured.  At her right hand sat Ignorance, her father and husband, blind
with age; at her left, Pride, her mother, dressing her up in the scraps
of paper herself had torn.  There was Opinion, her sister, light of foot,
hood-winked, and head-strong, yet giddy and perpetually turning.  About
her played her children, Noise and Impudence, Dulness and Vanity,
Positiveness, Pedantry, and Ill-manners.  The goddess herself had claws
like a cat; her head, and ears, and voice resembled those of an ass; her
teeth fallen out before, her eyes turned inward, as if she looked only
upon herself; her diet was the overflowing of her own gall; her spleen
was so large as to stand prominent, like a dug of the first rate; nor
wanted excrescences in form of teats, at which a crew of ugly monsters
were greedily sucking; and, what is wonderful to conceive, the bulk of
spleen increased faster than the sucking could diminish it.  "Goddess,"
said Momus, "can you sit idly here while our devout worshippers, the
Moderns, are this minute entering into a cruel battle, and perhaps now
lying under the swords of their enemies? who then hereafter will ever
sacrifice or build altars to our divinities?  Haste, therefore, to the
British Isle, and, if possible, prevent their destruction; while I make
factions among the gods, and gain them over to our party."

Momus, having thus delivered himself, stayed not for an answer, but left
the goddess to her own resentment.  Up she rose in a rage, and, as it is
the form on such occasions, began a soliloquy: "It is I" (said she) "who
give wisdom to infants and idiots; by me children grow wiser than their
parents, by me beaux become politicians, and schoolboys judges of
philosophy; by me sophisters debate and conclude upon the depths of
knowledge; and coffee-house wits, instinct by me, can correct an author's
style, and display his minutest errors, without understanding a syllable
of his matter or his language; by me striplings spend their judgment, as
they do their estate, before it comes into their hands.  It is I who have
deposed wit and knowledge from their empire over poetry, and advanced
myself in their stead.  And shall a few upstart Ancients dare to oppose
me?  But come, my aged parent, and you, my children dear, and thou, my
beauteous sister; let us ascend my chariot, and haste to assist our
devout Moderns, who are now sacrificing to us a hecatomb, as I perceive
by that grateful smell which from thence reaches my nostrils."

The goddess and her train, having mounted the chariot, which was drawn by
tame geese, flew over infinite regions, shedding her influence in due
places, till at length she arrived at her beloved island of Britain; but
in hovering over its metropolis, what blessings did she not let fall upon
her seminaries of Gresham and Covent-garden!  And now she reached the
fatal plain of St. James's library, at what time the two armies were upon
the point to engage; where, entering with all her caravan unseen, and
landing upon a case of shelves, now desert, but once inhabited by a
colony of virtuosos, she stayed awhile to observe the posture of both
armies.

But here the tender cares of a mother began to fill her thoughts and move
in her breast: for at the head of a troup of Modern bowmen she cast her
eyes upon her son Wotton, to whom the fates had assigned a very short
thread.  Wotton, a young hero, whom an unknown father of mortal race
begot by stolen embraces with this goddess.  He was the darling of his
mother above all her children, and she resolved to go and comfort him.
But first, according to the good old custom of deities, she cast about to
change her shape, for fear the divinity of her countenance might dazzle
his mortal sight and overcharge the rest of his senses.  She therefore
gathered up her person into an octavo compass: her body grow white and
arid, and split in pieces with dryness; the thick turned into pasteboard,
and the thin into paper; upon which her parents and children artfully
strewed a black juice, or decoction of gall and soot, in form of letters:
her head, and voice, and spleen, kept their primitive form; and that
which before was a cover of skin did still continue so.  In this guise
she marched on towards the Moderns, indistinguishable in shape and dress
from the divine Bentley, Wotton's dearest friend.  "Brave Wotton," said
the goddess, "why do our troops stand idle here, to spend their present
vigour and opportunity of the day? away, let us haste to the generals,
and advise to give the onset immediately."  Having spoke thus, she took
the ugliest of her monsters, full glutted from her spleen, and flung it
invisibly into his mouth, which, flying straight up into his head,
squeezed out his eye-balls, gave him a distorted look, and
half-overturned his brain.  Then she privately ordered two of her beloved
children, Dulness and Ill-manners, closely to attend his person in all
encounters.  Having thus accoutred him, she vanished in a mist, and the
hero perceived it was the goddess his mother.

The destined hour of fate being now arrived, the fight began; whereof,
before I dare adventure to make a particular description, I must, after
the example of other authors, petition for a hundred tongues, and mouths,
and hands, and pens, which would all be too little to perform so immense
a work.  Say, goddess, that presidest over history, who it was that first
advanced in the field of battle!  Paracelsus, at the head of his
dragoons, observing Galen in the adverse wing, darted his javelin with a
mighty force, which the brave Ancient received upon his shield, the point
breaking in the second fold . . . _Hic pauca_
_. . . . desunt_
They bore the wounded aga on their shields to his
chariot . . .
_Desunt_ . . .
_nonnulla_. . . .

Then Aristotle, observing Bacon advance with a furious mien, drew his bow
to the head, and let fly his arrow, which missed the valiant Modern and
went whizzing over his head; but Descartes it hit; the steel point
quickly found a defect in his head-piece; it pierced the leather and the
pasteboard, and went in at his right eye.  The torture of the pain
whirled the valiant bow-man round till death, like a star of superior
influence, drew him into his own vortex _Ingens hiatus_ . . . .
_hic in MS._ . . . .
.  . .  . when Homer appeared at the head of the cavalry, mounted on a
furious horse, with difficulty managed by the rider himself, but which no
other mortal durst approach; he rode among the enemy's ranks, and bore
down all before him.  Say, goddess, whom he slew first and whom he slew
last!  First, Gondibert advanced against him, clad in heavy armour and
mounted on a staid sober gelding, not so famed for his speed as his
docility in kneeling whenever his rider would mount or alight.  He had
made a vow to Pallas that he would never leave the field till he had
spoiled Homer of his armour: madman, who had never once seen the wearer,
nor understood his strength!  Him Homer overthrew, horse and man, to the
ground, there to be trampled and choked in the dirt.  Then with a long
spear he slew Denham, a stout Modern, who from his father's side derived
his lineage from Apollo, but his mother was of mortal race.  He fell, and
bit the earth.  The celestial part Apollo took, and made it a star; but
the terrestrial lay wallowing upon the ground.  Then Homer slew Sam
Wesley with a kick of his horse's heel; he took Perrault by mighty force
out of his saddle, then hurled him at Fontenelle, with the same blow
dashing out both their brains.

On the left wing of the horse Virgil appeared, in shining armour,
completely fitted to his body; he was mounted on a dapple-grey steed, the
slowness of whose pace was an effect of the highest mettle and vigour.  He
cast his eye on the adverse wing, with a desire to find an object worthy
of his valour, when behold upon a sorrel gelding of a monstrous size
appeared a foe, issuing from among the thickest of the enemy's squadrons;
but his speed was less than his noise; for his horse, old and lean, spent
the dregs of his strength in a high trot, which, though it made slow
advances, yet caused a loud clashing of his armour, terrible to hear.  The
two cavaliers had now approached within the throw of a lance, when the
stranger desired a parley, and, lifting up the visor of his helmet, a
face hardly appeared from within which, after a pause, was known for that
of the renowned Dryden.  The brave Ancient suddenly started, as one
possessed with surprise and disappointment together; for the helmet was
nine times too large for the head, which appeared situate far in the
hinder part, even like the lady in a lobster, or like a mouse under a
canopy of state, or like a shrivelled beau from within the penthouse of a
modern periwig; and the voice was suited to the visage, sounding weak and
remote.  Dryden, in a long harangue, soothed up the good Ancient; called
him father, and, by a large deduction of genealogies, made it plainly
appear that they were nearly related.  Then he humbly proposed an
exchange of armour, as a lasting mark of hospitality between them.  Virgil
consented (for the goddess Diffidence came unseen, and cast a mist before
his eyes), though his was of gold and cost a hundred beeves, the other's
but of rusty iron.  However, this glittering armour became the Modern yet
worsen than his own.  Then they agreed to exchange horses; but, when it
came to the trial, Dryden was afraid and utterly unable to mount. . .
_Alter hiatus_
. . . . _in MS._
Lucan appeared upon a fiery horse of admirable shape, but headstrong,
bearing the rider where he list over the field; he made a mighty
slaughter among the enemy's horse; which destruction to stop, Blackmore,
a famous Modern (but one of the mercenaries), strenuously opposed
himself, and darted his javelin with a strong hand, which, falling short
of its mark, struck deep in the earth.  Then Lucan threw a lance; but
AEsculapius came unseen and turned off the point.  "Brave Modern," said
Lucan, "I perceive some god protects you, for never did my arm so deceive
me before: but what mortal can contend with a god?  Therefore, let us
fight no longer, but present gifts to each other."  Lucan then bestowed
on the Modern a pair of spurs, and Blackmore gave Lucan a bridle. . . .
_Pauca desunt_. . . .
. . . .
Creech: but the goddess Dulness took a cloud, formed into the shape of
Horace, armed and mounted, and placed in a flying posture before him.
Glad was the cavalier to begin a combat with a flying foe, and pursued
the image, threatening aloud; till at last it led him to the peaceful
bower of his father, Ogleby, by whom he was disarmed and assigned to his
repose.

Then Pindar slew ---, and --- and Oldham, and ---, and Afra the Amazon,
light of foot; never advancing in a direct line, but wheeling with
incredible agility and force, he made a terrible slaughter among the
enemy's light-horse.  Him when Cowley observed, his generous heart burnt
within him, and he advanced against the fierce Ancient, imitating his
address, his pace, and career, as well as the vigour of his horse and his
own skill would allow.  When the two cavaliers had approached within the
length of three javelins, first Cowley threw a lance, which missed
Pindar, and, passing into the enemy's ranks, fell ineffectual to the
ground.  Then Pindar darted a javelin so large and weighty, that scarce a
dozen Cavaliers, as cavaliers are in our degenerate days, could raise it
from the ground; yet he threw it with ease, and it went, by an unerring
hand, singing through the air; nor could the Modern have avoided present
death if he had not luckily opposed the shield that had been given him by
Venus.  And now both heroes drew their swords; but the Modern was so
aghast and disordered that he knew not where he was; his shield dropped
from his hands; thrice he fled, and thrice he could not escape.  At last
he turned, and lifting up his hand in the posture of a suppliant,
"Godlike Pindar," said he, "spare my life, and possess my horse, with
these arms, beside the ransom which my friends will give when they hear I
am alive and your prisoner."  "Dog!" said Pindar, "let your ransom stay
with your friends; but your carcase shall be left for the fowls of the
air and the beasts of the field."  With that he raised his sword, and,
with a mighty stroke, cleft the wretched Modern in twain, the sword
pursuing the blow; and one half lay panting on the ground, to be trod in
pieces by the horses' feet; the other half was borne by the frighted
steed through the field.  This Venus took, washed it seven times in
ambrosia, then struck it thrice with a sprig of amaranth; upon which the
leather grow round and soft, and the leaves turned into feathers, and,
being gilded before, continued gilded still; so it became a dove, and she
harnessed it to her chariot. . . .
. . . . _Hiatus valde de-_
. . . . _flendus in MS_.




THE EPISODE OF BENTLEY AND WOTTON.


Day being far spent, and the numerous forces of the Moderns half
inclining to a retreat, there issued forth, from a squadron of their
heavy-armed foot, a captain whose name was Bentley, the most deformed of
all the Moderns; tall, but without shape or comeliness; large, but
without strength or proportion.  His armour was patched up of a thousand
incoherent pieces, and the sound of it, as he marched, was loud and dry,
like that made by the fall of a sheet of lead, which an Etesian wind
blows suddenly down from the roof of some steeple.  His helmet was of old
rusty iron, but the vizor was brass, which, tainted by his breath,
corrupted into copperas, nor wanted gall from the same fountain, so that,
whenever provoked by anger or labour, an atramentous quality, of most
malignant nature, was seen to distil from his lips.  In his right hand he
grasped a flail, and (that he might never be unprovided of an offensive
weapon) a vessel full of ordure in his left.  Thus completely armed, he
advanced with a slow and heavy pace where the Modern chiefs were holding
a consult upon the sum of things, who, as he came onwards, laughed to
behold his crooked leg and humped shoulder, which his boot and armour,
vainly endeavouring to hide, were forced to comply with and expose.  The
generals made use of him for his talent of railing, which, kept within
government, proved frequently of great service to their cause, but, at
other times, did more mischief than good; for, at the least touch of
offence, and often without any at all, he would, like a wounded elephant,
convert it against his leaders.  Such, at this juncture, was the
disposition of Bentley, grieved to see the enemy prevail, and
dissatisfied with everybody's conduct but his own.  He humbly gave the
Modern generals to understand that he conceived, with great submission,
they were all a pack of rogues, and fools, and confounded logger-heads,
and illiterate whelps, and nonsensical scoundrels; that, if himself had
been constituted general, those presumptuous dogs, the Ancients, would
long before this have been beaten out of the field.  "You," said he, "sit
here idle, but when I, or any other valiant Modern kill an enemy, you are
sure to seize the spoil.  But I will not march one foot against the foe
till you all swear to me that whomever I take or kill, his arms I shall
quietly possess."  Bentley having spoken thus, Scaliger, bestowing him a
sour look, "Miscreant prater!" said he, "eloquent only in thine own eyes,
thou railest without wit, or truth, or discretion.  The malignity of thy
temper perverteth nature; thy learning makes thee more barbarous; thy
study of humanity more inhuman; thy converse among poets more grovelling,
miry, and dull.  All arts of civilising others render thee rude and
untractable; courts have taught thee ill manners, and polite conversation
has finished thee a pedant.  Besides, a greater coward burdeneth not the
army.  But never despond; I pass my word, whatever spoil thou takest
shall certainly be thy own; though I hope that vile carcase will first
become a prey to kites and worms."

Bentley durst not reply, but, half choked with spleen and rage, withdrew,
in full resolution of performing some great achievement.  With him, for
his aid and companion, he took his beloved Wotton, resolving by policy or
surprise to attempt some neglected quarter of the Ancients' army.  They
began their march over carcases of their slaughtered friends; then to the
right of their own forces; then wheeled northward, till they came to
Aldrovandus's tomb, which they passed on the side of the declining sun.
And now they arrived, with fear, toward the enemy's out-guards, looking
about, if haply they might spy the quarters of the wounded, or some
straggling sleepers, unarmed and remote from the rest.  As when two
mongrel curs, whom native greediness and domestic want provoke and join
in partnership, though fearful, nightly to invade the folds of some rich
grazier, they, with tails depressed and lolling tongues, creep soft and
slow.  Meanwhile the conscious moon, now in her zenith, on their guilty
heads darts perpendicular rays; nor dare they bark, though much provoked
at her refulgent visage, whether seen in puddle by reflection or in
sphere direct; but one surveys the region round, while the other scouts
the plain, if haply to discover, at distance from the flock, some carcase
half devoured, the refuse of gorged wolves or ominous ravens.  So marched
this lovely, loving pair of friends, nor with less fear and
circumspection, when at a distance they might perceive two shining suits
of armour hanging upon an oak, and the owners not far off in a profound
sleep.  The two friends drew lots, and the pursuing of this adventure
fell to Bentley; on he went, and in his van Confusion and Amaze, while
Horror and Affright brought up the rear.  As he came near, behold two
heroes of the Ancient army, Phalaris and AEsop, lay fast asleep.  Bentley
would fain have despatched them both, and, stealing close, aimed his
flail at Phalaris's breast; but then the goddess Affright, interposing,
caught the Modern in her icy arms, and dragged him from the danger she
foresaw; both the dormant heroes happened to turn at the same instant,
though soundly sleeping, and busy in a dream.  For Phalaris was just that
minute dreaming how a most vile poetaster had lampooned him, and how he
had got him roaring in his bull.  And AEsop dreamed that as he and the
Ancient were lying on the ground, a wild ass broke loose, ran about,
trampling and kicking in their faces.  Bentley, leaving the two heroes
asleep, seized on both their armours, and withdrew in quest of his
darling Wotton.

He, in the meantime, had wandered long in search of some enterprise, till
at length he arrived at a small rivulet that issued from a fountain hard
by, called, in the language of mortal men, Helicon.  Here he stopped,
and, parched with thirst, resolved to allay it in this limpid stream.
Thrice with profane hands he essayed to raise the water to his lips, and
thrice it slipped all through his fingers.  Then he stopped prone on his
breast, but, ere his mouth had kissed the liquid crystal, Apollo came,
and in the channel held his shield betwixt the Modern and the fountain,
so that he drew up nothing but mud.  For, although no fountain on earth
can compare with the clearness of Helicon, yet there lies at bottom a
thick sediment of slime and mud; for so Apollo begged of Jupiter, as a
punishment to those who durst attempt to taste it with unhallowed lips,
and for a lesson to all not to draw too deep or far from the spring.

At the fountain-head Wotton discerned two heroes; the one he could not
distinguish, but the other was soon known for Temple, general of the
allies to the Ancients.  His back was turned, and he was employed in
drinking large draughts in his helmet from the fountain, where he had
withdrawn himself to rest from the toils of the war.  Wotton, observing
him, with quaking knees and trembling hands, spoke thus to himself: O
that I could kill this destroyer of our army, what renown should I
purchase among the chiefs! but to issue out against him, man against man,
shield against shield, and lance against lance, what Modern of us dare?
for he fights like a god, and Pallas or Apollo are ever at his elbow.
But, O mother! if what Fame reports be true, that I am the son of so
great a goddess, grant me to hit Temple with this lance, that the stroke
may send him to hell, and that I may return in safety and triumph, laden
with his spoils.  The first part of this prayer the gods granted at the
intercession of his mother and of Momus; but the rest, by a perverse wind
sent from Fate, was scattered in the air.  Then Wotton grasped his lance,
and, brandishing it thrice over his head, darted it with all his might;
the goddess, his mother, at the same time adding strength to his arm.
Away the lance went hizzing, and reached even to the belt of the averted
Ancient, upon which, lightly grazing, it fell to the ground.  Temple
neither felt the weapon touch him nor heard it fall: and Wotton might
have escaped to his army, with the honour of having remitted his lance
against so great a leader unrevenged; but Apollo, enraged that a javelin
flung by the assistance of so foul a goddess should pollute his fountain,
put on the shape of ---, and softly came to young Boyle, who then
accompanied Temple: he pointed first to the lance, then to the distant
Modern that flung it, and commanded the young hero to take immediate
revenge.  Boyle, clad in a suit of armour which had been given him by all
the gods, immediately advanced against the trembling foe, who now fled
before him.  As a young lion in the Libyan plains, or Araby desert, sent
by his aged sire to hunt for prey, or health, or exercise, he scours
along, wishing to meet some tiger from the mountains, or a furious boar;
if chance a wild ass, with brayings importune, affronts his ear, the
generous beast, though loathing to distain his claws with blood so vile,
yet, much provoked at the offensive noise, which Echo, foolish nymph,
like her ill-judging sex, repeats much louder, and with more delight than
Philomela's song, he vindicates the honour of the forest, and hunts the
noisy long-eared animal.  So Wotton fled, so Boyle pursued.  But Wotton,
heavy-armed, and slow of foot, began to slack his course, when his lover
Bentley appeared, returning laden with the spoils of the two sleeping
Ancients.  Boyle observed him well, and soon discovering the helmet and
shield of Phalaris his friend, both which he had lately with his own
hands new polished and gilt, rage sparkled in his eyes, and, leaving his
pursuit after Wotton, he furiously rushed on against this new approacher.
Fain would he be revenged on both; but both now fled different ways: and,
as a woman in a little house that gets a painful livelihood by spinning,
if chance her geese be scattered o'er the common, she courses round the
plain from side to side, compelling here and there the stragglers to the
flock; they cackle loud, and flutter o'er the champaign; so Boyle
pursued, so fled this pair of friends: finding at length their flight was
vain, they bravely joined, and drew themselves in phalanx.  First Bentley
threw a spear with all his force, hoping to pierce the enemy's breast;
but Pallas came unseen, and in the air took off the point, and clapped on
one of lead, which, after a dead bang against the enemy's shield, fell
blunted to the ground.  Then Boyle, observing well his time, took up a
lance of wondrous length and sharpness; and, as this pair of friends
compacted, stood close side by side, he wheeled him to the right, and,
with unusual force, darted the weapon.  Bentley saw his fate approach,
and flanking down his arms close to his ribs, hoping to save his body, in
went the point, passing through arm and side, nor stopped or spent its
force till it had also pierced the valiant Wotton, who, going to sustain
his dying friend, shared his fate.  As when a skilful cook has trussed a
brace of woodcocks, he with iron skewer pierces the tender sides of both,
their legs and wings close pinioned to the rib; so was this pair of
friends transfixed, till down they fell, joined in their lives, joined in
their deaths; so closely joined that Charon would mistake them both for
one, and waft them over Styx for half his fare.  Farewell, beloved,
loving pair; few equals have you left behind: and happy and immortal
shall you be, if all my wit and eloquence can make you.

And now. . . .

_Desunt coetera_.




A MEDITATION UPON A BROOMSTICK.


_According to the Style and Manner of the Hon. Robert Boyle's
Meditations_.

This single stick, which you now behold ingloriously lying in that
neglected corner, I once knew in a flourishing state in a forest.  It was
full of sap, full of leaves, and full of boughs; but now in vain does the
busy art of man pretend to vie with nature, by tying that withered bundle
of twigs to its sapless trunk; it is now at best but the reverse of what
it was, a tree turned upside-down, the branches on the earth, and the
root in the air; it is now handled by every dirty wench, condemned to do
her drudgery, and, by a capricious kind of fate, destined to make other
things clean, and be nasty itself; at length, worn to the stumps in the
service of the maids, it is either thrown out of doors or condemned to
the last use--of kindling a fire.  When I behold this I sighed, and said
within myself, "Surely mortal man is a broomstick!"  Nature sent him into
the world strong and lusty, in a thriving condition, wearing his own hair
on his head, the proper branches of this reasoning vegetable, till the
axe of intemperance has lopped off his green boughs, and left him a
withered trunk; he then flies to art, and puts on a periwig, valuing
himself upon an unnatural bundle of hairs, all covered with powder, that
never grew on his head; but now should this our broomstick pretend to
enter the scene, proud of those birchen spoils it never bore, and all
covered with dust, through the sweepings of the finest lady's chamber, we
should be apt to ridicule and despise its vanity.  Partial judges that we
are of our own excellencies, and other men's defaults!

But a broomstick, perhaps you will say, is an emblem of a tree standing
on its head; and pray what is a man but a topsy-turvy creature, his
animal faculties perpetually mounted on his rational, his head where his
heels should be, grovelling on the earth?  And yet, with all his faults,
he sets up to be a universal reformer and corrector of abuses, a remover
of grievances, rakes into every slut's corner of nature, bringing hidden
corruptions to the light, and raises a mighty dust where there was none
before, sharing deeply all the while in the very same pollutions he
pretends to sweep away.  His last days are spent in slavery to women, and
generally the least deserving; till, worn to the stumps, like his brother
besom, he is either kicked out of doors, or made use of to kindle flames
for others to warm themselves by.




PREDICTIONS FOR THE YEAR 1708.


WHEREIN THE MONTH, AND DAY OF THE MONTH ARE SET DOWN, THE PERSONS NAMED,
AND THE GREAT ACTIONS AND EVENTS OF NEXT YEAR PARTICULARLY RELATED AS
WILL COME TO PASS.

_Written to prevent the people of England from being farther imposed on
by vulgar Almanack-makers_.

BY ISAAC BICKERSTAFF, ESQ.

I have long considered the gross abuse of astrology in this kingdom, and
upon debating the matter with myself, I could not possibly lay the fault
upon the art, but upon those gross impostors who set up to be the
artists.  I know several learned men have contended that the whole is a
cheat; that it is absurd and ridiculous to imagine the stars can have any
influence at all upon human actions, thoughts, or inclinations; and
whoever has not bent his studies that way may be excused for thinking so,
when he sees in how wretched a manner that noble art is treated by a few
mean illiterate traders between us and the stars, who import a yearly
stock of nonsense, lies, folly, and impertinence, which they offer to the
world as genuine from the planets, though they descend from no greater a
height than their own brains.

I intend in a short time to publish a large and rational defence of this
art, and therefore shall say no more in its justification at present than
that it hath been in all ages defended by many learned men, and among the
rest by Socrates himself, whom I look upon as undoubtedly the wisest of
uninspired mortals: to which if we add that those who have condemned this
art, though otherwise learned, having been such as either did not apply
their studies this way, or at least did not succeed in their
applications, their testimony will not be of much weight to its
disadvantage, since they are liable to the common objection of condemning
what they did not understand.

Nor am I at all offended, or think it an injury to the art, when I see
the common dealers in it, the students in astrology, the Philomaths, and
the rest of that tribe, treated by wise men with the utmost scorn and
contempt; but rather wonder, when I observe gentlemen in the country,
rich enough to serve the nation in Parliament, poring in Partridge's
Almanack to find out the events of the year at home and abroad, not
daring to propose a hunting-match till Gadbury or he have fixed the
weather.

I will allow either of the two I have mentioned, or any other of the
fraternity, to be not only astrologers, but conjurers too, if I do not
produce a hundred instances in all their almanacks to convince any
reasonable man that they do not so much as understand common grammar and
syntax; that they are not able to spell any word out of the usual road,
nor even in their prefaces write common sense or intelligible English.
Then for their observations and predictions, they are such as will
equally suit any age or country in the world.  "This month a certain
great person will be threatened with death or sickness."  This the
newspapers will tell them; for there we find at the end of the year that
no month passes without the death of some person of note; and it would be
hard if it should be otherwise, when there are at least two thousand
persons of note in this kingdom, many of them old, and the almanack-maker
has the liberty of choosing the sickliest season of the year where he may
fix his prediction.  Again, "This month an eminent clergyman will be
preferred;" of which there may be some hundreds, half of them with one
foot in the grave.  Then "such a planet in such a house shows great
machinations, plots, and conspiracies, that may in time be brought to
light:" after which, if we hear of any discovery, the astrologer gets the
honour; if not, his prediction still stands good.  And at last, "God
preserve King William from all his open and secret enemies, Amen."  When
if the King should happen to have died, the astrologer plainly foretold
it; otherwise it passes but for the pious ejaculation of a loyal subject;
though it unluckily happened in some of their almanacks that poor King
William was prayed for many months after he was dead, because it fell out
that he died about the beginning of the year.

To mention no more of their impertinent predictions: what have we to do
with their advertisements about pills and drink for disease? or their
mutual quarrels in verse and prose of Whig and Tory, wherewith the stars
have little to do?

Having long observed and lamented these, and a hundred other abuses of
this art, too tedious to repeat, I resolved to proceed in a new way,
which I doubt not will be to the general satisfaction of the kingdom.  I
can this year produce but a specimen of what I design for the future,
having employed most part of my time in adjusting and correcting the
calculations I made some years past, because I would offer nothing to the
world of which I am not as fully satisfied as that I am now alive.  For
these two last years I have not failed in above one or two particulars,
and those of no very great moment.  I exactly foretold the miscarriage at
Toulon, with all its particulars, and the loss of Admiral Shovel, though
I was mistaken as to the day, placing that accident about thirty-six
hours sooner than it happened; but upon reviewing my schemes, I quickly
found the cause of that error.  I likewise foretold the Battle of Almanza
to the very day and hour, with the lose on both sides, and the
consequences thereof.  All which I showed to some friends many months
before they happened--that is, I gave them papers sealed up, to open at
such a time, after which they were at liberty to read them; and there
they found my predictions true in every article, except one or two very
minute.

As for the few following predictions I now offer the world, I forbore to
publish them till I had perused the several almanacks for the year we are
now entered on.  I find them all in the usual strain, and I beg the
reader will compare their manner with mine.  And here I make bold to tell
the world that I lay the whole credit of my art upon the truth of these
predictions; and I will be content that Partridge, and the rest of his
clan, may hoot me for a cheat and impostor if I fail in any single
particular of moment.  I believe any man who reads this paper will look
upon me to be at least a person of as much honesty and understanding as a
common maker of almanacks.  I do not lurk in the dark; I am not wholly
unknown in the world; I have set my name at length, to be a mark of
infamy to mankind, if they shall find I deceive them.

In one thing I must desire to be forgiven, that I talk more sparingly of
home affairs.  As it will be imprudence to discover secrets of State, so
it would be dangerous to my person; but in smaller matters, and that are
not of public consequence, I shall be very free; and the truth of my
conjectures will as much appear from those as the others.  As for the
most signal events abroad, in France, Flanders, Italy, and Spain, I shall
make no scruple to predict them in plain terms.  Some of them are of
importance, and I hope I shall seldom mistake the day they will happen;
therefore I think good to inform the reader that I all along make use of
the Old Style observed in England, which I desire he will compare with
that of the newspapers at the time they relate the actions I mention.

I must add one word more.  I know it hath been the opinion of several of
the learned, who think well enough of the true art of astrology, that the
stars do only incline, and not force the actions or wills of men, and
therefore, however I may proceed by right rules, yet I cannot in prudence
so confidently assure the events will follow exactly as I predict them.

I hope I have maturely considered this objection, which in some cases is
of no little weight.  For example: a man may, by the influence of an over-
ruling planet, be disposed or inclined to lust, rage, or avarice, and yet
by the force of reason overcome that bad influence; and this was the case
of Socrates.  But as the great events of the world usually depend upon
numbers of men, it cannot be expected they should all unite to cross
their inclinations from pursuing a general design wherein they
unanimously agree.  Besides, the influence of the stars reaches to many
actions and events which are not any way in the power of reason, as
sickness, death, and what we commonly call accidents, with many more,
needless to repeat.

But now it is time to proceed to my predictions, which I have begun to
calculate from the time that the sun enters into Aries.  And this I take
to be properly the beginning of the natural year.  I pursue them to the
time that he enters Libra, or somewhat more, which is the busy period of
the year.  The remainder I have not yet adjusted, upon account of several
impediments needless here to mention.  Besides, I must remind the reader
again that this is but a specimen of what I design in succeeding years to
treat more at large, if I may have liberty and encouragement.

My first prediction is but a trifle, yet I will mention it, to show how
ignorant those sottish pretenders to astrology are in their own concerns.
It relates to Partridge, the almanack-maker.  I have consulted the stars
of his nativity by my own rules, and find he will infallibly die upon the
29th of March next, about eleven at night, of a raging fever; therefore I
advise him to consider of it, and settle his affairs in time.

The month of _April_ will be observable for the death of many great
persons.  On the 4th will die the Cardinal de Noailles, Archbishop of
Paris; on the 11th, the young Prince of Asturias, son to the Duke of
Anjou; on the 14th, a great peer of this realm will die at his country
house; on the 19th, an old layman of great fame for learning, and on the
23rd, an eminent goldsmith in Lombard Street.  I could mention others,
both at home and abroad, if I did not consider it is of very little use
or instruction to the reader, or to the world.

As to public affairs: On the 7th of this month there will be an
insurrection in Dauphiny, occasioned by the oppressions of the people,
which will not be quieted in some months.

On the 15th will be a violent storm on the south-east coast of France,
which will destroy many of their ships, and some in the very harbour.

The 11th will be famous for the revolt of a whole province or kingdom,
excepting one city, by which the affairs of a certain prince in the
Alliance will take a better face.

_May_, against common conjectures, will be no very busy month in Europe,
but very signal for the death of the Dauphin, which will happen on the
7th, after a short fit of sickness, and grievous torments with the
strangury.  He dies less lamented by the Court than the kingdom.

On the 9th a Marshal of France will break his leg by a fall from his
horse.  I have not been able to discover whether he will then die or not.

On the 11th will begin a most important siege, which the eyes of all
Europe will be upon: I cannot be more particular, for in relating affairs
that so nearly concern the Confederates, and consequently this kingdom, I
am forced to confine myself for several reasons very obvious to the
reader.

On the 15th news will arrive of a very surprising event, than which
nothing could be more unexpected.

On the 19th three noble ladies of this kingdom will, against all
expectation, prove with child, to the great joy of their husbands.

On the 23rd a famous buffoon of the playhouse will die a ridiculous
death, suitable to his vocation.

_June_.  This month will be distinguished at home by the utter dispersing
of those ridiculous deluded enthusiasts commonly called the Prophets,
occasioned chiefly by seeing the time come that many of their prophecies
should be fulfilled, and then finding themselves deceived by contrary
events.  It is indeed to be admired how any deceiver can be so weak to
foretell things near at hand, when a very few months must of necessity
discover the impostor to all the world; in this point less prudent than
common almanack-makers, who are so wise to wonder in generals, and talk
dubiously, and leave to the reader the business of interpreting.

On the 1st of this month a French general will be killed by a random shot
of a cannon-ball.

On the 6th a fire will break out in the suburbs of Paris, which will
destroy above a thousand houses, and seems to be the foreboding of what
will happen, to the surprise of all Europe, about the end of the
following month.

On the 10th a great battle will be fought, which will begin at four of
the clock in the afternoon, and last till nine at night with great
obstinacy, but no very decisive event.  I shall not name the place, for
the reasons aforesaid, but the commanders on each left wing will be
killed.  I see bonfires and hear the noise of guns for a victory.

On the 14th there will be a false report of the French king's death.

On the 20th Cardinal Portocarero will die of a dysentery, with great
suspicion of poison, but the report of his intention to revolt to King
Charles will prove false.

_July_.  The 6th of this month a certain general will, by a glorious
action, recover the reputation he lost by former misfortunes.

On the 12th a great commander will die a prisoner in the hands of his
enemies.

On the 14th a shameful discovery will be made of a French Jesuit giving
poison to a great foreign general; and when he is put to the torture,
will make wonderful discoveries.

In short, this will prove a month of great action, if I might have
liberty to relate the particulars.

At home, the death of an old famous senator will happen on the 15th at
his country house, worn with age and diseases.

But that which will make this month memorable to all posterity is the
death of the French king, Louis the Fourteenth, after a week's sickness
at Marli, which will happen on the 29th, about six o'clock in the
evening.  It seems to be an effect of the gout in his stomach, followed
by a flux.  And in three days after Monsieur Chamillard will follow his
master, dying suddenly of an apoplexy.

In this month likewise an ambassador will die in London, but I cannot
assign the day.

_August_.  The affairs of France will seem to suffer no change for a
while under the Duke of Burgundy's administration; but the genius that
animated the whole machine being gone, will be the cause of mighty turns
and revolutions in the following year.  The new king makes yet little
change either in the army or the Ministry, but the libels against his
grandfather, that fly about his very Court, give him uneasiness.

I see an express in mighty haste, with joy and wonder in his looks,
arriving by break of day on the 26th of this month, having travelled in
three days a prodigious journey by land and sea.  In the evening I hear
bells and guns, and see the blazing of a thousand bonfires.

A young admiral of noble birth does likewise this month gain immortal
honour by a great achievement.

The affairs of Poland are this month entirely settled; Augustus resigns
his pretensions which he had again taken up for some time: Stanislaus is
peaceably possessed of the throne, and the King of Sweden declares for
the emperor.

I cannot omit one particular accident here at home: that near the end of
this month much mischief will be done at Bartholomew Fair by the fall of
a booth.

_September_.  This month begins with a very surprising fit of frosty
weather, which will last near twelve days.

The Pope, having long languished last month, the swellings in his legs
breaking, and the flesh mortifying, will die on the 11th instant; and in
three weeks' time, after a mighty contest, be succeeded by a cardinal of
the Imperial faction, but native of Tuscany, who is now about sixty-one
years old.

The French army acts now wholly on the defensive, strongly fortified in
their trenches, and the young French king sends overtures for a treaty of
peace by the Duke of Mantua; which, because it is a matter of State that
concerns us here at home, I shall speak no farther of it.

I shall add but one prediction more, and that in mystical terms, which
shall be included in a verse out of Virgil--

   _Alter erit jam Tethys_, _et altera quae vehat Argo_
   _Delectos Heroas_.

Upon the 25th day of this month, the fulfilling of this prediction will
be manifest to everybody.

This is the farthest I have proceeded in my calculations for the present
year.  I do not pretend that these are all the great events which will
happen in this period, but that those I have set down will infallibly
come to pass.  It will perhaps still be objected why I have not spoken
more particularly of affairs at home, or of the success of our armies
abroad, which I might, and could very largely have done; but those in
power have wisely discouraged men from meddling in public concerns, and I
was resolved by no means to give the least offence.  This I will venture
to say, that it will be a glorious campaign for the Allies, wherein the
English forces, both by sea and land, will have their full share of
honour; that Her Majesty Queen Anne will continue in health and
prosperity; and that no ill accident will arrive to any in the chief
Ministry.

As to the particular events I have mentioned, the readers may judge by
the fulfilling of them, whether I am on the level with common
astrologers, who, with an old paltry cant, and a few pothooks for
planets, to amuse the vulgar, have, in my opinion, too long been suffered
to abuse the world.  But an honest physician ought not to be despised
because there are such things as mountebanks.  I hope I have some share
of reputation, which I would not willingly forfeit for a frolic or
humour; and I believe no gentleman who reads this paper will look upon it
to be of the same cast or mould with the common scribblers that are every
day hawked about.  My fortune has placed me above the little regard of
scribbling for a few pence, which I neither value nor want; therefore,
let no wise man too hastily condemn this essay, intended for a good
design, to cultivate and improve an ancient art long in disgrace, by
having fallen into mean and unskilful hands.  A little time will
determine whether I have deceived others or myself; and I think it is no
very unreasonable request that men would please to suspend their
judgments till then.  I was once of the opinion with those who despise
all predictions from the stars, till in the year 1686 a man of quality
showed me, written in his album, that the most learned astronomer,
Captain H---, assured him, he would never believe anything of the stars'
influence if there were not a great revolution in England in the year
1688.  Since that time I began to have other thoughts, and after eighteen
years' diligent study and application, I think I have no reason to repent
of my pains.  I shall detain the reader no longer than to let him know
that the account I design to give of next year's events shall take in the
principal affairs that happen in Europe; and if I be denied the liberty
of offering it to my own country, I shall appeal to the learned world, by
publishing it in Latin, and giving order to have it printed in Holland.




THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE FIRST OF MR. BICKERSTAFF'S PREDICTIONS; BEING
AN ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH OF MR. PARTRIDGE THE ALMANACK-MAKER, UPON THE
29TH INSTANT.


_In a Letter to a Person of Honour_; _Written in the Year_ 1708.

My Lord,--In obedience to your lordship's commands, as well as to satisfy
my own curiosity, I have for some days past inquired constantly after
Partridge the almanack-maker, of whom it was foretold in Mr.
Bickerstaff's predictions, published about a month ago, that he should
die the 29th instant, about eleven at night, of a raging fever.  I had
some sort of knowledge of him when I was employed in the Revenue, because
he used every year to present me with his almanack, as he did other
gentlemen, upon the score of some little gratuity we gave him.  I saw him
accidentally once or twice about ten days before he died, and observed he
began very much to droop and languish, though I hear his friends did not
seem to apprehend him in any danger.  About two or three days ago he grew
ill, was confined first to his chamber, and in a few hours after to his
bed, where Dr. Case and Mrs. Kirleus were sent for, to visit and to
prescribe to him.  Upon this intelligence I sent thrice every day one
servant or other to inquire after his health; and yesterday, about four
in the afternoon, word was brought me that he was past hopes; upon which,
I prevailed with myself to go and see him, partly out of commiseration,
and I confess, partly out of curiosity.  He knew me very well, seemed
surprised at my condescension, and made me compliments upon it as well as
he could in the condition he was.  The people about him said he had been
for some time delirious; but when I saw him, he had his understanding as
well as ever I knew, and spoke strong and hearty, without any seeming
uneasiness or constraint.  After I had told him how sorry I was to see
him in those melancholy circumstances, and said some other civilities
suitable to the occasion, I desired him to tell me freely and
ingenuously, whether the predictions Mr. Bickerstaff had published
relating to his death had not too much affected and worked on his
imagination.  He confessed he had often had it in his head, but never
with much apprehension, till about a fortnight before; since which time
it had the perpetual possession of his mind and thoughts, and he did
verily believe was the true natural cause of his present distemper:
"For," said he, "I am thoroughly persuaded, and I think I have very good
reasons, that Mr. Bickerstaff spoke altogether by guess, and knew no more
what will happen this year than I did myself."  I told him his discourse
surprised me, and I would be glad he were in a state of health to be able
to tell me what reason he had to be convinced of Mr. Bickerstaff's
ignorance.  He replied, "I am a poor, ignorant follow, bred to a mean
trade, yet I have sense enough to know that all pretences of foretelling
by astrology are deceits, for this manifest reason, because the wise and
the learned, who can only know whether there be any truth in this
science, do all unanimously agree to laugh at and despise it; and none
but the poor ignorant vulgar give it any credit, and that only upon the
word of such silly wretches as I and my fellows, who can hardly write or
read."  I then asked him why he had not calculated his own nativity, to
see whether it agreed with Bickerstaff's prediction, at which he shook
his head and said, "Oh, sir, this is no time for jesting, but for
repenting those fooleries, as I do now from the very bottom of my heart."
"By what I can gather from you," said I, "the observations and
predictions you printed with your almanacks were mere impositions on the
people."  He replied, "If it were otherwise I should have the less to
answer for.  We have a common form for all those things; as to
foretelling the weather, we never meddle with that, but leave it to the
printer, who takes it out of any old almanack as he thinks fit; the rest
was my own invention, to make my almanack sell, having a wife to
maintain, and no other way to get my bread; for mending old shoes is a
poor livelihood; and," added he, sighing, "I wish I may not have done
more mischief by my physic than my astrology; though I had some good
receipts from my grandmother, and my own compositions were such as I
thought could at least do no hurt."

I had some other discourse with him, which now I cannot call to mind; and
I fear I have already tired your lordship.  I shall only add one
circumstance, that on his death-bed he declared himself a Nonconformist,
and had a fanatic preacher to be his spiritual guide.  After half an
hour's conversation I took my leave, being half stifled by the closeness
of the room.  I imagined he could not hold out long, and therefore
withdrew to a little coffee-house hard by, leaving a servant at the house
with orders to come immediately and tell me, as nearly as he could, the
minute when Partridge should expire, which was not above two hours after,
when, looking upon my watch, I found it to be above five minutes after
seven; by which it is clear that Mr. Bickerstaff was mistaken almost four
hours in his calculation.  In the other circumstances he was exact
enough.  But, whether he has not been the cause of this poor man's death,
as well as the predictor, may be very reasonably disputed.  However, it
must be confessed the matter is odd enough, whether we should endeavour
to account for it by chance, or the effect of imagination.  For my own
part, though I believe no man has less faith in these matters, yet I
shall wait with some impatience, and not without some expectation, the
fulfilling of Mr. Bickerstaff's second prediction, that the Cardinal do
Noailles is to die upon the 4th of April, and if that should be verified
as exactly as this of poor Partridge, I must own I should be wholly
surprised, and at a loss, and should infallibly expect the accomplishment
of all the rest.




BAUCIS AND PHILEMON.


_Imitated from the Eighth Book of Ovid_.

In ancient times, as story tells,
The saints would often leave their cells,
And stroll about, but hide their quality,
To try good people's hospitality.

It happened on a winter night,
As authors of the legend write,
Two brother hermits, saints by trade,
Taking their tour in masquerade,
Disguised in tattered habits, went
To a small village down in Kent;
Where, in the strollers' canting strain,
They begged from door to door in vain;
Tried every tone might pity win,
But not a soul would let them in.

Our wandering saints in woeful state,
Treated at this ungodly rate,
Having through all the village passed,
To a small cottage came at last,
Where dwelt a good honest old yeoman,
Called, in the neighbourhood, Philemon,
Who kindly did these saints invite
In his poor hut to pass the night;
And then the hospitable Sire
Bid goody Baucis mend the fire;
While he from out the chimney took
A flitch of bacon off the hook,
And freely from the fattest side
Cut out large slices to be fried;
Then stepped aside to fetch 'em drink,
Filled a large jug up to the brink,
And saw it fairly twice go round;
Yet (what is wonderful) they found
'Twas still replenished to the top,
As if they ne'er had touched a drop
The good old couple were amazed,
And often on each other gazed;
For both were frightened to the heart,
And just began to cry,--What art!
Then softly turned aside to view,
Whether the lights were burning blue.
The gentle pilgrims soon aware on't,
Told 'em their calling, and their errant;
"Good folks, you need not be afraid,
We are but saints," the hermits said;
"No hurt shall come to you or yours;
But, for that pack of churlish boors,
Not fit to live on Christian ground,
They and their houses shall be drowned;
Whilst you shall see your cottage rise,
And grow a church before your eyes."

They scarce had spoke; when fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose every beam and rafter,
The heavy wall climbed slowly after.

The chimney widened, and grew higher,
Became a steeple with a spire.

The kettle to the top was hoist,
And there stood fastened to a joist;
But with the upside down, to show
Its inclination for below.
In vain; for a superior force
Applied at bottom, stops its coarse,
Doomed ever in suspense to dwell,
'Tis now no kettle, but a bell.

A wooden jack, which had almost
Lost, by disuse, the art to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increased by new intestine wheels;
And what exalts the wonder more,
The number made the motion slower.
The flyer, though 't had leaden feet,
Turned round so quick, you scarce could see 't;
But slackened by some secret power,
Now hardly moves an inch an hour.
The jack and chimney near allied,
Had never left each other's side;
The chimney to a steeple grown,
The jack would not be left alone;
But up against the steeple reared,
Became a clock, and still adhered;
And still its love to household cares
By a shrill voice at noon declares,
Warning the cook-maid not to burn
That roast meat which it cannot turn.

The groaning chair began to crawl,
Like a huge snail along the wall;
There stuck aloft in public view;
And with small change a pulpit grew.

The porringers, that in a row
Hung high, and made a glittering show,
To a less noble substance changed,
Were now but leathern buckets ranged.

The ballads pasted on the wall,
Of Joan of France, and English Moll,
Fair Rosamond, and Robin Hood,
The Little Children in the Wood,
Now seemed to look abundance better,
Improved in picture, size, and letter;
And high in order placed, describe
The heraldry of every tribe.

A bedstead of the antique mode,
Compact of timber, many a load,
Such as our ancestors did use,
Was metamorphosed into pews:
Which still their ancient nature keep,
By lodging folks disposed to sleep.

The cottage, by such feats as these,
Grown to a church by just degrees,
The hermits then desired their host
To ask for what he fancied most.
Philemon having paused a while,
Returned 'em thanks in homely style;
Then said, "My house is grown so fine,
Methinks I still would call it mine:
I'm old, and fain would live at ease,
Make me the Parson, if you please."

He spoke, and presently he feels
His grazier's coat fall down his heels;
He sees, yet hardly can believe,
About each arm a pudding sleeve;
His waistcoat to a cassock grew,
And both assumed a sable hue;
But being old, continued just
As thread-bare, and as full of dust.
His talk was now of tithes and dues;
He smoked his pipe and read the news;
Knew how to preach old sermons next,
Vamped in the preface and the text;
At christenings well could act his part,
And had the service all by heart;
Wished women might have children fast,
And thought whose sow had farrowed last
Against Dissenters would repine,
And stood up firm for Right divine.
Found his head filled with many a system,
But classic authors,--he ne'er missed 'em.

Thus having furbished up a parson,
Dame Baucis next they played their farce on.
Instead of home-spun coifs were seen
Good pinners edg'd with colberteen;
Her petticoat transformed apace,
Became black satin flounced with lace.
Plain Goody would no longer down,
'Twas Madam, in her grogram gown.
Philemon was in great surprise,
And hardly could believe his eyes,
Amazed to see her look so prim;
And she admired as much at him.

Thus, happy in their change of life,
Were several years this man and wife;
When on a day, which proved their last,
Discoursing o'er old stories past,
They went by chance amidst their talk,
To the church yard to take a walk;
When Baucis hastily cried out,
"My dear, I see your forehead sprout!"
"Sprout," quoth the man, "what's this you tell us?
I hope you don't believe me jealous,
But yet, methinks, I feel it true;
And really, yours is budding too--
Nay,--now I cannot stir my foot;
It feels as if 'twere taking root."

Description would but tire my Muse;
In short, they both were turned to Yews.

Old Goodman Dobson of the green
Remembers he the trees has seen;
He'll talk of them from noon till night,
And goes with folks to show the sight;
On Sundays, after evening prayer,
He gathers all the parish there,
Points out the place of either Yew:
Here Baucis, there Philemon grew,
Till once a parson of our town,
To mend his barn, cut Baucis down;
At which, 'tis hard to be believed
How much the other tree was grieved,
Grow scrubby, died a-top, was stunted:
So the next parson stubbed and burnt it.




THE LOGICIANS REFUTED.


Logicians have but ill defined
As rational, the human kind;
Reason, they say, belongs to man,
But let them prove it, if they can.
Wise Aristotle and Smiglesius,
By ratiocinations specious,
Have strove to prove with great precision,
With definition and division,
_Homo est ratione praeditum_;
But, for my soul, I cannot credit 'em.
And must, in spite of them, maintain
That man and all his ways are vain;
And that this boasted lord of nature
Is both a weak and erring creature.
That instinct is a surer guide
Than reason-boasting mortals pride;
And, that brute beasts are far before 'em,
_Deus est anima brutorum_.
Whoever knew an honest brute,
At law his neighbour prosecute,
Bring action for assault and battery,
Or friend beguile with lies and flattery?
O'er plains they ramble unconfined,
No politics disturb their mind;
They eat their meals, and take their sport,
Nor know who's in or out at court.
They never to the levee go
To treat as dearest friend a foe;
They never importune his grace,
Nor ever cringe to men in place;
Nor undertake a dirty job,
Nor draw the quill to write for Bob.
Fraught with invective they ne'er go
To folks at Paternoster Row:
No judges, fiddlers, dancing-masters,
No pickpockets, or poetasters
Are known to honest quadrupeds:
No single brute his fellows leads.
Brutes never meet in bloody fray,
Nor cut each others' throats for pay.
Of beasts, it is confessed, the ape
Comes nearest us in human shape;
Like man, he imitates each fashion,
And malice is his ruling passion:
But, both in malice and grimaces,
A courtier any ape surpasses.
Behold him humbly cringing wait
Upon the minister of state;
View him, soon after, to inferiors
Aping the conduct of superiors:
He promises, with equal air,
And to perform takes equal care.
He, in his turn, finds imitators,
At court the porters, lacqueys, waiters
Their masters' manners still contract,
And footmen, lords, and dukes can act.
Thus, at the court, both great and small
Behave alike, for all ape all.




THE PUPPET SHOW.


The life of man to represent,
   And turn it all to ridicule,
Wit did a puppet-show invent,
   Where the chief actor is a fool.

The gods of old were logs of wood,
   And worship was to puppets paid;
In antic dress the idol stood,
   And priests and people bowed the head.

No wonder then, if art began
   The simple votaries to frame,
To shape in timber foolish man,
   And consecrate the block to fame.

From hence poetic fancy learned
   That trees might rise from human forms
The body to a trunk be turned,
   And branches issue from the arms.

Thus Daedalus and Ovid too,
   That man's a blockhead have confessed,
Powel and Stretch {1} the hint pursue;
   Life is the farce, the world a jest.

The same great truth South Sea hath proved
   On that famed theatre, the ally,
Where thousands by directors moved
   Are now sad monuments of folly.

What Momus was of old to Jove
   The same harlequin is now;
The former was buffoon above,
   The latter is a Punch below.

This fleeting scene is but a stage,
   Where various images appear,
In different parts of youth and age
   Alike the prince and peasant share.

Some draw our eyes by being great,
   False pomp conceals mere wood within,
And legislators rang'd in state
   Are oft but wisdom in machine.

A stock may chance to wear a crown,
   And timber as a lord take place,
A statue may put on a frown,
   And cheat us with a thinking face.

Others are blindly led away,
   And made to act for ends unknown,
By the mere spring of wires they play,
   And speak in language not their own.

Too oft, alas! a scolding wife
   Usurps a jolly fellow's throne,
And many drink the cup of life
   Mix'd and embittered by a Joan.

In short, whatever men pursue
   Of pleasure, folly, war, or love,
This mimic-race brings all to view,
   Alike they dress, they talk, they move.

Go on, great Stretch, with artful hand,
   Mortals to please and to deride,
And when death breaks thy vital band
   Thou shalt put on a puppet's pride.

Thou shalt in puny wood be shown,
   Thy image shall preserve thy fame,
Ages to come thy worth shall own,
   Point at thy limbs, and tell thy name.

Tell Tom he draws a farce in vain,
   Before he looks in nature's glass;
Puns cannot form a witty scene,
   Nor pedantry for humour pass.

To make men act as senseless wood,
   And chatter in a mystic strain,
Is a mere force on flesh and blood,
   And shows some error in the brain.

He that would thus refine on thee,
   And turn thy stage into a school,
The jest of Punch will ever be,
   And stand confessed the greater fool.




CADENUS AND VANESSA.


_Written Anno 1713_.

The shepherds and the nymphs were seen
Pleading before the Cyprian Queen.
The counsel for the fair began
Accusing the false creature, man.

The brief with weighty crimes was charged,
On which the pleader much enlarged:
That Cupid now has lost his art,
Or blunts the point of every dart;
His altar now no longer smokes;
His mother's aid no youth invokes--
This tempts free-thinkers to refine,
And bring in doubt their powers divine,
Now love is dwindled to intrigue,
And marriage grown a money-league.
Which crimes aforesaid (with her leave)
Were (as he humbly did conceive)
Against our Sovereign Lady's peace,
Against the statutes in that case,
Against her dignity and crown:
Then prayed an answer and sat down.

The nymphs with scorn beheld their foes:
When the defendant's counsel rose,
And, what no lawyer ever lacked,
With impudence owned all the fact.
But, what the gentlest heart would vex,
Laid all the fault on t'other sex.
That modern love is no such thing
As what those ancient poets sing;
A fire celestial, chaste, refined,
Conceived and kindled in the mind,
Which having found an equal flame,
Unites, and both become the same,
In different breasts together burn,
Together both to ashes turn.
But women now feel no such fire,
And only know the gross desire;
Their passions move in lower spheres,
Where'er caprice or folly steers.
A dog, a parrot, or an ape,
Or some worse brute in human shape
Engross the fancies of the fair,
The few soft moments they can spare
From visits to receive and pay,
From scandal, politics, and play,
From fans, and flounces, and brocades,
From equipage and park-parades,
From all the thousand female toys,
From every trifle that employs
The out or inside of their heads
Between their toilets and their beds.

In a dull stream, which, moving slow,
You hardly see the current flow,
If a small breeze obstructs the course,
It whirls about for want of force,
And in its narrow circle gathers
Nothing but chaff, and straws, and feathers:
The current of a female mind
Stops thus, and turns with every wind;
Thus whirling round, together draws
Fools, fops, and rakes, for chaff and straws.
Hence we conclude, no women's hearts
Are won by virtue, wit, and parts;
Nor are the men of sense to blame
For breasts incapable of flame:
The fault must on the nymphs be placed,
Grown so corrupted in their taste.

The pleader having spoke his best,
Had witness ready to attest,
Who fairly could on oath depose,
When questions on the fact arose,
That every article was true;
_Nor further those deponents knew_:
Therefore he humbly would insist,
The bill might be with costs dismissed.

The cause appeared of so much weight,
That Venus from the judgment-seat
Desired them not to talk so loud,
Else she must interpose a cloud:
For if the heavenly folk should know
These pleadings in the Courts below,
That mortals here disdain to love,
She ne'er could show her face above.
For gods, their betters, are too wise
To value that which men despise.
"And then," said she, "my son and I
Must stroll in air 'twixt earth and sky:
Or else, shut out from heaven and earth,
Fly to the sea, my place of birth;
There live with daggled mermaids pent,
And keep on fish perpetual Lent."

But since the case appeared so nice,
She thought it best to take advice.
The Muses, by their king's permission,
Though foes to love, attend the session,
And on the right hand took their places
In order; on the left, the Graces:
To whom she might her doubts propose
On all emergencies that rose.
The Muses oft were seen to frown;
The Graces half ashamed look down;
And 'twas observed, there were but few
Of either sex, among the crew,
Whom she or her assessors knew.
The goddess soon began to see
Things were not ripe for a decree,
And said she must consult her books,
The lovers' Fletas, Bractons, Cokes.
First to a dapper clerk she beckoned,
To turn to Ovid, book the second;
She then referred them to a place
In Virgil (_vide_ Dido's case);
As for Tibullus's reports,
They never passed for law in Courts:
For Cowley's brief, and pleas of Waller,
Still their authority is smaller.

There was on both sides much to say;
She'd hear the cause another day;
And so she did, and then a third,
She heard it--there she kept her word;
But with rejoinders and replies,
Long bills, and answers, stuffed with lies
Demur, imparlance, and essoign,
The parties ne'er could issue join:
For sixteen years the cause was spun,
And then stood where it first begun.

Now, gentle Clio, sing or say,
What Venus meant by this delay.
The goddess, much perplexed in mind,
To see her empire thus declined,
When first this grand debate arose
Above her wisdom to compose,
Conceived a project in her head,
To work her ends; which, if it sped,
Would show the merits of the cause
Far better than consulting laws.

In a glad hour Lucina's aid
Produced on earth a wondrous maid,
On whom the queen of love was bent
To try a new experiment.
She threw her law-books on the shelf,
And thus debated with herself:--

"Since men allege they ne'er can find
Those beauties in a female mind
Which raise a flame that will endure
For ever, uncorrupt and pure;
If 'tis with reason they complain,
This infant shall restore my reign.
I'll search where every virtue dwells,
From Courts inclusive down to cells.
What preachers talk, or sages write,
These I will gather and unite,
And represent them to mankind
Collected in that infant's mind."

This said, she plucks in heaven's high bowers
A sprig of Amaranthine flowers,
In nectar thrice infuses bays,
Three times refined in Titan's rays:
Then calls the Graces to her aid,
And sprinkles thrice the now-born maid.
From whence the tender skin assumes
A sweetness above all perfumes;
From whence a cleanliness remains,
Incapable of outward stains;
From whence that decency of mind,
So lovely in a female kind.
Where not one careless thought intrudes
Less modest than the speech of prudes;
Where never blush was called in aid,
The spurious virtue in a maid,
A virtue but at second-hand;
They blush because they understand.

The Graces next would act their part,
And show but little of their art;
Their work was half already done,
The child with native beauty shone,
The outward form no help required:
Each breathing on her thrice, inspired
That gentle, soft, engaging air
Which in old times adorned the fair,
And said, "Vanessa be the name
By which thou shalt be known to fame;
Vanessa, by the gods enrolled:
Her name on earth--shall not be told."

But still the work was not complete,
When Venus thought on a deceit:
Drawn by her doves, away she flies,
And finds out Pallas in the skies:
Dear Pallas, I have been this morn
To see a lovely infant born:
A boy in yonder isle below,
So like my own without his bow,
By beauty could your heart be won,
You'd swear it is Apollo's son;
But it shall ne'er be said, a child
So hopeful has by me been spoiled;
I have enough besides to spare,
And give him wholly to your care.

Wisdom's above suspecting wiles;
The queen of learning gravely smiles,
Down from Olympus comes with joy,
Mistakes Vanessa for a boy;
Then sows within her tender mind
Seeds long unknown to womankind;
For manly bosoms chiefly fit,
The seeds of knowledge, judgment, wit,
Her soul was suddenly endued
With justice, truth, and fortitude;
With honour, which no breath can stain,
Which malice must attack in vain:
With open heart and bounteous hand:
But Pallas here was at a stand;
She know in our degenerate days
Bare virtue could not live on praise,
That meat must be with money bought:
She therefore, upon second thought,
Infused yet as it were by stealth,
Some small regard for state and wealth:
Of which as she grew up there stayed
A tincture in the prudent maid:
She managed her estate with care,
Yet liked three footmen to her chair,
But lest he should neglect his studies
Like a young heir, the thrifty goddess
(For fear young master should be spoiled)
Would use him like a younger child;
And, after long computing, found
'Twould come to just five thousand pound.

The Queen of Love was pleased and proud
To we Vanessa thus endowed;
She doubted not but such a dame
Through every breast would dart a flame;
That every rich and lordly swain
With pride would drag about her chain;
That scholars would forsake their books
To study bright Vanessa's looks:
As she advanced that womankind
Would by her model form their mind,
And all their conduct would be tried
By her, as an unerring guide.
Offending daughters oft would hear
Vanessa's praise rung in their ear:
Miss Betty, when she does a fault,
Lets fall her knife, or spills the salt,
Will thus be by her mother chid,
"'Tis what Vanessa never did."
Thus by the nymphs and swains adored,
My power shall be again restored,
And happy lovers bless my reign--
So Venus hoped, but hoped in vain.

For when in time the martial maid
Found out the trick that Venus played,
She shakes her helm, she knits her brows,
And fired with indignation, vows
To-morrow, ere the setting sun,
She'd all undo that she had done.

But in the poets we may find
A wholesome law, time out of mind,
Had been confirmed by Fate's decree;
That gods, of whatso'er degree,
Resume not what themselves have given,
Or any brother-god in Heaven;
Which keeps the peace among the gods,
Or they must always be at odds.
And Pallas, if she broke the laws,
Must yield her foe the stronger cause;
A shame to one so much adored
For Wisdom, at Jove's council-board.
Besides, she feared the queen of love
Would meet with better friends above.
And though she must with grief reflect
To see a mortal virgin deck'd
With graces hitherto unknown
To female breasts, except her own,
Yet she would act as best became
A goddess of unspotted fame;
She knew, by augury divine,
Venus would fail in her design:
She studied well the point, and found
Her foe's conclusions were not sound,
From premises erroneous brought,
And therefore the deduction's nought,
And must have contrary effects
To what her treacherous foe expects.

In proper season Pallas meets
The queen of love, whom thus she greets
(For Gods, we are by Homer told,
Can in celestial language scold),
"Perfidious Goddess! but in vain
You formed this project in your brain,
A project for thy talents fit,
With much deceit, and little wit;
Thou hast, as thou shalt quickly see,
Deceived thyself instead of me;
For how can heavenly wisdom prove
An instrument to earthly love?
Know'st thou not yet that men commence
Thy votaries, for want of sense?
Nor shall Vanessa be the theme
To manage thy abortive scheme;
She'll prove the greatest of thy foes,
And yet I scorn to interpose,
But using neither skill nor force,
Leave all things to their natural course."

The goddess thus pronounced her doom,
When, lo, Vanessa in her bloom,
Advanced like Atalanta's star,
But rarely seen, and seen from far:
In a new world with caution stepped,
Watched all the company she kept,
Well knowing from the books she read
What dangerous paths young virgins tread;
Would seldom at the park appear,
Nor saw the play-house twice a year;
Yet not incurious, was inclined
To know the converse of mankind.

First issued from perfumers' shops
A crowd of fashionable fops;
They liked her how she liked the play?
Then told the tattle of the day,
A duel fought last night at two
About a lady--you know who;
Mentioned a new Italian, come
Either from Muscovy or Rome;
Gave hints of who and who's together;
Then fell to talking of the weather:
Last night was so extremely fine,
The ladies walked till after nine.
Then in soft voice, and speech absurd,
With nonsense every second word,
With fustian from exploded plays,
They celebrate her beauty's praise,
Run o'er their cant of stupid lies,
And tell the murders of her eyes.

With silent scorn Vanessa sat,
Scarce list'ning to their idle chat;
Further than sometimes by a frown,
When they grew pert, to pull them down.
At last she spitefully was bent
To try their wisdom's full extent;
And said, she valued nothing less
Than titles, figure, shape, and dress;
That merit should be chiefly placed
In judgment, knowledge, wit, and taste;
And these, she offered to dispute,
Alone distinguished man from brute:
That present times have no pretence
To virtue, in the noble sense
By Greeks and Romans understood,
To perish for our country's good.
She named the ancient heroes round,
Explained for what they were renowned;
Then spoke with censure, or applause,
Of foreign customs, rites, and laws;
Through nature and through art she ranged,
And gracefully her subject changed:
In vain; her hearers had no share
In all she spoke, except to stare.
Their judgment was upon the whole,
--That lady is the dullest soul--
Then tipped their forehead in a jeer,
As who should say--she wants it here;
She may be handsome, young, and rich,
But none will burn her for a witch.

A party next of glittering dames,
From round the purlieus of St. James,
Came early, out of pure goodwill,
To see the girl in deshabille.
Their clamour 'lighting from their chairs,
Grew louder, all the way up stairs;
At entrance loudest, where they found
The room with volumes littered round,
Vanessa held Montaigne, and read,
Whilst Mrs. Susan combed her head:
They called for tea and chocolate,
And fell into their usual chat,
Discoursing with important face,
On ribbons, fans, and gloves, and lace:
Showed patterns just from India brought,
And gravely asked her what she thought,
Whether the red or green were best,
And what they cost?  Vanessa guessed,
As came into her fancy first,
Named half the rates, and liked the worst.
To scandal next--What awkward thing
Was that, last Sunday, in the ring?
I'm sorry Mopsa breaks so fast;
I said her face would never last,
Corinna with that youthful air,
Is thirty, and a bit to spare.
Her fondness for a certain earl
Began, when I was but a girl.
Phyllis, who but a month ago
Was married to the Tunbridge beau,
I saw coquetting t'other night
In public with that odious knight.

They rallied next Vanessa's dress;
That gown was made for old Queen Bess.
Dear madam, let me set your head;
Don't you intend to put on red?
A petticoat without a hoop!
Sure, you are not ashamed to stoop;
With handsome garters at your knees,
No matter what a fellow sees.

Filled with disdain, with rage inflamed,
Both of herself and sex ashamed,
The nymph stood silent out of spite,
Nor would vouchsafe to set them right.
Away the fair detractors went,
And gave, by turns, their censures vent.
She's not so handsome in my eyes:
For wit, I wonder where it lies.
She's fair and clean, and that's the most;
But why proclaim her for a toast?
A baby face, no life, no airs,
But what she learnt at country fairs.
Scarce knows what difference is between
Rich Flanders lace, and Colberteen.
I'll undertake my little Nancy,
In flounces has a better fancy.
With all her wit, I would not ask
Her judgment, how to buy a mask.
We begged her but to patch her face,
She never hit one proper place;
Which every girl at five years old
Can do as soon as she is told.
I own, that out-of-fashion stuff
Becomes the creature well enough.
The girl might pass, if we could get her
To know the world a little better.
(_To know the world_! a modern phrase
For visits, ombre, balls, and plays.)

Thus, to the world's perpetual shame,
The queen of beauty lost her aim,
Too late with grief she understood
Pallas had done more harm than good;
For great examples are but vain,
Where ignorance begets disdain.
Both sexes, armed with guilt and spite,
Against Vanessa's power unite;
To copy her few nymphs aspired;
Her virtues fewer swains admired;
So stars, beyond a certain height,
Give mortals neither heat nor light.

Yet some of either sex, endowed
With gifts superior to the crowd,
With virtue, knowledge, taste, and wit,
She condescended to admit;
With pleasing arts she could reduce
Men's talents to their proper use;
And with address each genius hold
To that wherein it most excelled;
Thus making others' wisdom known,
Could please them and improve her own.
A modest youth said something new,
She placed it in the strongest view.
All humble worth she strove to raise;
Would not be praised, yet loved to praise.
The learned met with free approach,
Although they came not in a coach.
Some clergy too she would allow,
Nor quarreled at their awkward bow.
But this was for Cadenus' sake;
A gownman of a different make.
Whom Pallas, once Vanessa's tutor,
Had fixed on for her coadjutor.

But Cupid, full of mischief, longs
To vindicate his mother's wrongs.
On Pallas all attempts are vain;
One way he knows to give her pain;
Vows on Vanessa's heart to take
Due vengeance, for her patron's sake.
Those early seeds by Venus sown,
In spite of Pallas, now were grown;
And Cupid hoped they would improve
By time, and ripen into love.
The boy made use of all his craft,
In vain discharging many a shaft,
Pointed at colonels, lords, and beaux;
Cadenus warded off the blows,
For placing still some book betwixt,
The darts were in the cover fixed,
Or often blunted and recoiled,
On Plutarch's morals struck, were spoiled.

The queen of wisdom could foresee,
But not prevent the Fates decree;
And human caution tries in vain
To break that adamantine chain.
Vanessa, though by Pallas taught,
By love invulnerable thought,
Searching in books for wisdom's aid,
Was, in the very search, betrayed.

Cupid, though all his darts were lost,
Yet still resolved to spare no cost;
He could not answer to his fame
The triumphs of that stubborn dame,
A nymph so hard to be subdued,
Who neither was coquette nor prude.
I find, says he, she wants a doctor,
Both to adore her, and instruct her:
I'll give her what she most admires,
Among those venerable sires.
Cadenus is a subject fit,
Grown old in politics and wit;
Caressed by Ministers of State,
Of half mankind the dread and hate.
Whate'er vexations love attend,
She need no rivals apprehend
Her sex, with universal voice,
Must laugh at her capricious choice.

Cadenus many things had writ,
Vanessa much esteemed his wit,
And called for his poetic works!
Meantime the boy in secret lurks.
And while the book was in her hand,
The urchin from his private stand
Took aim, and shot with all his strength
A dart of such prodigious length,
It pierced the feeble volume through,
And deep transfixed her bosom too.
Some lines, more moving than the rest,
Struck to the point that pierced her breast;
And, borne directly to the heart,
With pains unknown, increased her smart.

Vanessa, not in years a score,
Dreams of a gown of forty-four;
Imaginary charms can find,
In eyes with reading almost blind;
Cadenus now no more appears
Declined in health, advanced in years.
She fancies music in his tongue,
Nor farther looks, but thinks him young.
What mariner is not afraid
To venture in a ship decayed?
What planter will attempt to yoke
A sapling with a falling oak?
As years increase, she brighter shines,
Cadenus with each day declines,
And he must fall a prey to Time,
While she continues in her prime.

Cadenus, common forms apart,
In every scene had kept his heart;
Had sighed and languished, vowed and writ,
For pastime, or to show his wit;
But time, and books, and State affairs,
Had spoiled his fashionable airs,
He now could praise, esteem, approve,
But understood not what was love.
His conduct might have made him styled
A father, and the nymph his child.
That innocent delight he took
To see the virgin mind her book,
Was but the master's secret joy
In school to hear the finest boy.
Her knowledge with her fancy grew,
She hourly pressed for something new;
Ideas came into her mind
So fact, his lessons lagged behind;
She reasoned, without plodding long,
Nor ever gave her judgment wrong.
But now a sudden change was wrought,
She minds no longer what he taught.
Cadenus was amazed to find
Such marks of a distracted mind;
For though she seemed to listen more
To all he spoke, than e'er before.
He found her thoughts would absent range,
Yet guessed not whence could spring the change.
And first he modestly conjectures,
His pupil might be tired with lectures,
Which helped to mortify his pride,
Yet gave him not the heart to chide;
But in a mild dejected strain,
At last he ventured to complain:
Said, she should be no longer teased,
Might have her freedom when she pleased;
Was now convinced he acted wrong,
To hide her from the world so long,
And in dull studies to engage
One of her tender sex and age.
That every nymph with envy owned,
How she might shine in the _Grande-Monde_,
And every shepherd was undone,
To see her cloistered like a nun.
This was a visionary scheme,
He waked, and found it but a dream;
A project far above his skill,
For Nature must be Nature still.
If she was bolder than became
A scholar to a courtly dame,
She might excuse a man of letters;
Thus tutors often treat their betters,
And since his talk offensive grew,
He came to take his last adieu.

Vanessa, filled with just disdain,
Would still her dignity maintain,
Instructed from her early years
To scorn the art of female tears.

Had he employed his time so long,
To teach her what was right or wrong,
Yet could such notions entertain,
That all his lectures were in vain?
She owned the wand'ring of her thoughts,
But he must answer for her faults.
She well remembered, to her cost,
That all his lessons were not lost.
Two maxims she could still produce,
And sad experience taught her use;
That virtue, pleased by being shown,
Knows nothing which it dare not own;
Can make us without fear disclose
Our inmost secrets to our foes;
That common forms were not designed
Directors to a noble mind.
Now, said the nymph, I'll let you see
My actions with your rules agree,
That I can vulgar forms despise,
And have no secrets to disguise.
I knew by what you said and writ,
How dangerous things were men of wit;
You cautioned me against their charms,
But never gave me equal arms;
Your lessons found the weakest part,
Aimed at the head, but reached the heart.

Cadenus felt within him rise
Shame, disappointment, guilt, surprise.
He know not how to reconcile
Such language, with her usual style:
And yet her words were so expressed,
He could not hope she spoke in jest.
His thoughts had wholly been confined
To form and cultivate her mind.
He hardly knew, till he was told,
Whether the nymph were young or old;
Had met her in a public place,
Without distinguishing her face,
Much less could his declining age
Vanessa's earliest thoughts engage.
And if her youth indifference met,
His person must contempt beget,
Or grant her passion be sincere,
How shall his innocence be clear?
Appearances were all so strong,
The world must think him in the wrong;
Would say he made a treach'rous use.
Of wit, to flatter and seduce;
The town would swear he had betrayed,
By magic spells, the harmless maid;
And every beau would have his jokes,
That scholars were like other folks;
That when Platonic flights were over,
The tutor turned a mortal lover.
So tender of the young and fair;
It showed a true paternal care--
Five thousand guineas in her purse;
The doctor might have fancied worst,--
Hardly at length he silence broke,
And faltered every word he spoke;
Interpreting her complaisance,
Just as a man sans consequence.
She rallied well, he always knew;
Her manner now was something new;
And what she spoke was in an air,
As serious as a tragic player.
But those who aim at ridicule,
Should fix upon some certain rule,
Which fairly hints they are in jest,
Else he must enter his protest;
For let a man be ne'er so wise,
He may be caught with sober lies;
A science which he never taught,
And, to be free, was dearly bought;
For, take it in its proper light,
'Tis just what coxcombs call a bite.

But not to dwell on things minute,
Vanessa finished the dispute,
Brought weighty arguments to prove,
That reason was her guide in love.
She thought he had himself described,
His doctrines when she fist imbibed;
What he had planted now was grown,
His virtues she might call her own;
As he approves, as he dislikes,
Love or contempt her fancy strikes.
Self-love in nature rooted fast,
Attends us first, and leaves us last:
Why she likes him, admire not at her,
She loves herself, and that's the matter.
How was her tutor wont to praise
The geniuses of ancient days!
(Those authors he so oft had named
For learning, wit, and wisdom famed).
Was struck with love, esteem, and awe,
For persons whom he never saw.
Suppose Cadenus flourished then,
He must adore such God-like men.
If one short volume could comprise
All that was witty, learned, and wise,
How would it be esteemed, and read,
Although the writer long were dead?
If such an author were alive,
How all would for his friendship strive;
And come in crowds to see his face?
And this she takes to be her case.
Cadenus answers every end,
The book, the author, and the friend,
The utmost her desires will reach,
Is but to learn what he can teach;
His converse is a system fit
Alone to fill up all her wit;
While ev'ry passion of her mind
In him is centred and confined.

Love can with speech inspire a mute,
And taught Vanessa to dispute.
This topic, never touched before,
Displayed her eloquence the more:
Her knowledge, with such pains acquired,
By this new passion grew inspired.
Through this she made all objects pass,
Which gave a tincture o'er the mass;
As rivers, though they bend and twine,
Still to the sea their course incline;
Or, as philosophers, who find
Some fav'rite system to their mind,
In every point to make it fit,
Will force all nature to submit.

Cadenus, who could ne'er suspect
His lessons would have such effect,
Or be so artfully applied,
Insensibly came on her side;
It was an unforeseen event,
Things took a turn he never meant.
Whoe'er excels in what we prize,
Appears a hero to our eyes;
Each girl, when pleased with what is taught,
Will have the teacher in her thought.
When miss delights in her spinnet,
A fiddler may a fortune get;
A blockhead, with melodious voice
In boarding-schools can have his choice;
And oft the dancing-master's art
Climbs from the toe to touch the heart.
In learning let a nymph delight,
The pedant gets a mistress by't.
Cadenus, to his grief and shame,
Could scarce oppose Vanessa's flame;
But though her arguments were strong,
At least could hardly with them wrong.
Howe'er it came, he could not tell,
But, sure, she never talked so well.
His pride began to interpose,
Preferred before a crowd of beaux,
So bright a nymph to come unsought,
Such wonder by his merit wrought;
'Tis merit must with her prevail,
He never know her judgment fail.
She noted all she ever read,
And had a most discerning head.

'Tis an old maxim in the schools,
That vanity's the food of fools;
Yet now and then your men of wit
Will condescend to take a bit.

So when Cadenus could not hide,
He chose to justify his pride;
Construing the passion she had shown,
Much to her praise, more to his own.
Nature in him had merit placed,
In her, a most judicious taste.
Love, hitherto a transient guest,
Ne'er held possession in his breast;
So long attending at the gate,
Disdain'd to enter in so late.
Love, why do we one passion call?
When 'tis a compound of them all;
Where hot and cold, where sharp and sweet,
In all their equipages meet;
Where pleasures mixed with pains appear,
Sorrow with joy, and hope with fear.
Wherein his dignity and age
Forbid Cadenus to engage.
But friendship in its greatest height,
A constant, rational delight,
On virtue's basis fixed to last,
When love's allurements long are past;
Which gently warms, but cannot burn;
He gladly offers in return;
His want of passion will redeem,
With gratitude, respect, esteem;
With that devotion we bestow,
When goddesses appear below.

While thus Cadenus entertains
Vanessa in exalted strains,
The nymph in sober words intreats
A truce with all sublime conceits.
For why such raptures, flights, and fancies,
To her who durst not read romances;
In lofty style to make replies,
Which he had taught her to despise?
But when her tutor will affect
Devotion, duty, and respect,
He fairly abdicates his throne,
The government is now her own;
He has a forfeiture incurred,
She vows to take him at his word,
And hopes he will not take it strange
If both should now their stations change
The nymph will have her turn, to be
The tutor; and the pupil he:
Though she already can discern
Her scholar is not apt to learn;
Or wants capacity to reach
The science she designs to teach;
Wherein his genius was below
The skill of every common beau;
Who, though he cannot spell, is wise
Enough to read a lady's eyes?
And will each accidental glance
Interpret for a kind advance.

But what success Vanessa met
Is to the world a secret yet;
Whether the nymph, to please her swain,
Talks in a high romantic strain;
Or whether he at last descends
To like with less seraphic ends;
Or to compound the bus'ness, whether
They temper love and books together;
Must never to mankind be told,
Nor shall the conscious muse unfold.

Meantime the mournful queen of love
Led but a weary life above.
She ventures now to leave the skies,
Grown by Vanessa's conduct wise.
For though by one perverse event
Pallas had crossed her first intent,
Though her design was not obtained,
Yet had she much experience gained;
And, by the project vainly tried,
Could better now the cause decide.
She gave due notice that both parties,
_Coram Regina prox' die Martis_,
Should at their peril without fail
Come and appear, and save their bail.
All met, and silence thrice proclaimed,
One lawyer to each side was named.
The judge discovered in her face
Resentments for her late disgrace;
And, full of anger, shame, and grief,
Directed them to mind their brief;
Nor spend their time to show their reading,
She'd have a summary proceeding.
She gathered under every head,
The sum of what each lawyer said;
Gave her own reasons last; and then
Decreed the cause against the men.

But, in a weighty case like this,
To show she did not judge amiss,
Which evil tongues might else report,
She made a speech in open court;
Wherein she grievously complains,
"How she was cheated by the swains."
On whose petition (humbly showing
That women were not worth the wooing,
And that unless the sex would mend,
The race of lovers soon must end);
"She was at Lord knows what expense,
To form a nymph of wit and sense;
A model for her sex designed,
Who never could one lover find,
She saw her favour was misplaced;
The follows had a wretched taste;
She needs must tell them to their face,
They were a senseless, stupid race;
And were she to begin again,
She'd study to reform the men;
Or add some grains of folly more
To women than they had before.
To put them on an equal foot;
And this, or nothing else, would do't.
This might their mutual fancy strike,
Since every being loves its like.

But now, repenting what was done,
She left all business to her son;
She puts the world in his possession,
And let him use it at discretion."

The crier was ordered to dismiss
The court, so made his last O yes!
The goddess would no longer wait,
But rising from her chair of state,
Left all below at six and seven,
Harnessed her doves, and flew to Heaven.




STELLA'S BIRTHDAY, 1718.


Stella this day is thirty-four
(We shan't dispute a year or more)
However, Stella, be not troubled,
Although thy size and years are doubled
Since first I saw thee at sixteen,
The brightest virgin on the green.
So little is thy form declined;
Made up so largely in thy mind.

Oh, would it please the gods to split
Thy beauty, size, and years, and wit,
No age could furnish out a pair
Of nymphs so graceful, wise, and fair:
With half the lustre of your eyes,
With half your wit, your years, and size.
And then, before it grew too late,
How should I beg of gentle fate,
(That either nymph might lack her swain),
To split my worship too in twain.




STELLA'S BIRTHDAY, 1720.


All travellers at first incline
Where'er they see the fairest sign;
And if they find the chambers neat,
And like the liquor and the meat,
Will call again and recommend
The Angel Inn to every friend
What though the painting grows decayed,
The house will never lose its trade:
Nay, though the treach'rous tapster Thomas
Hangs a new angel two doors from us,
As fine as daubers' hands can make it,
In hopes that strangers may mistake it,
We think it both a shame and sin,
To quit the true old Angel Inn.

Now, this is Stella's case in fact,
An angel's face, a little cracked
(Could poets, or could painters fix
How angels look at, thirty-six):
This drew us in at first, to find
In such a form an angel's mind;
And every virtue now supplies
The fainting rays of Stella's eyes.
See, at her levee, crowding swains,
Whom Stella freely entertains,
With breeding, humour, wit, and sense;
And puts them but to small expense;
Their mind so plentifully fills,
And makes such reasonable bills,
So little gets for what she gives,
We really wonder how she lives!
And had her stock been less, no doubt,
She must have long ago run out.

Then who can think we'll quit the place,
When Doll hangs out a newer face;
Or stop and light at Cloe's Head,
With scraps and leavings to be fed.

Then Cloe, still go on to prate
Of thirty-six, and thirty-eight;
Pursue your trade of scandal picking,
Your hints that Stella is no chicken.
Your innuendoes when you tell us,
That Stella loves to talk with fellows;
And let me warn you to believe
A truth, for which your soul should grieve:
That should you live to see the day
When Stella's locks, must all be grey,
When age must print a furrowed trace
On every feature of her face;
Though you and all your senseless tribe,
Could art, or time, or nature bribe
To make you look like beauty's queen,
And hold for ever at fifteen;
No bloom of youth can ever blind
The cracks and wrinkles of your mind;
All men of sense will pass your door,
And crowd to Stella's at fourscore.




STELLA'S BIRTHDAY.


_A great bottle of wine, long buried, being that day dug up_.  _1722_.

Resolved my annual verse to pay,
By duty bound, on Stella's day;
Furnished with paper, pens, and ink,
I gravely sat me down to think:
I bit my nails, and scratched my head,
But found my wit and fancy fled;
Or, if with more than usual pain,
A thought came slowly from my brain,
It cost me Lord knows how much time
To shape it into sense and rhyme;
And, what was yet a greater curse,
Long-thinking made my fancy worse

Forsaken by th' inspiring nine,
I waited at Apollo's shrine;
I told him what the world would sa
If Stella were unsung to-day;
How I should hide my head for shame,
When both the Jacks and Robin came;
How Ford would frown, how Jim would leer,
How Sh---r the rogue would sneer,
And swear it does not always follow,
That _Semel'n anno ridet_ Apollo.
I have assured them twenty times,
That Phoebus helped me in my rhymes,
Phoebus inspired me from above,
And he and I were hand and glove.
But finding me so dull and dry since,
They'll call it all poetic licence.
And when I brag of aid divine,
Think Eusden's right as good as mine.

Nor do I ask for Stella's sake;
'Tis my own credit lies at stake.
And Stella will be sung, while I
Can only be a stander by.

Apollo having thought a little,
Returned this answer to a tittle.

Tho' you should live like old Methusalem,
I furnish hints, and you should use all 'em,
You yearly sing as she grows old,
You'd leave her virtues half untold.
But to say truth, such dulness reigns
Through the whole set of Irish Deans;
I'm daily stunned with such a medley,
Dean W---, Dean D---l, and Dean S---;
That let what Dean soever come,
My orders are, I'm not at home;
And if your voice had not been loud,
You must have passed among the crowd.

But, now your danger to prevent,
You must apply to Mrs. Brent, {2}
For she, as priestess, knows the rites
Wherein the God of Earth delights.
First, nine ways looking, let her stand
With an old poker in her hand;
Let her describe a circle round
In Saunder's {3} cellar on the ground
A spade let prudent Archy {4} hold,
And with discretion dig the mould;
Let Stella look with watchful eye,
Rebecea, Ford, and Grattons by.

Behold the bottle, where it lies
With neck elated tow'rds the skies!
The god of winds, and god of fire,
Did to its wondrous birth conspire;
And Bacchus for the poet's use
Poured in a strong inspiring juice:
See! as you raise it from its tomb,
It drags behind a spacious womb,
And in the spacious womb contains
A sovereign med'cine for the brains.

You'll find it soon, if fate consents;
If not, a thousand Mrs. Brents,
Ten thousand Archys arm'd with spades,
May dig in vain to Pluto's shades.

From thence a plenteous draught infuse,
And boldly then invoke the muse
(But first let Robert on his knees
With caution drain it from the lees);
The muse will at your call appear,
With Stella's praise to crown the year.




STELLA'S BIRTHDAY, 1724.


As when a beauteous nymph decays,
We say she's past her dancing days;
So poets lose their feet by time,
And can no longer dance in rhyme.
Your annual bard had rather chose
To celebrate your birth in prose;
Yet merry folks who want by chance
A pair to make a country dance,
Call the old housekeeper, and get her
To fill a place, for want of better;
While Sheridan is off the hooks,
And friend Delany at his books,
That Stella may avoid disgrace,
Once more the Dean supplies their place.

Beauty and wit, too sad a truth,
Have always been confined to youth;
The god of wit, and beauty's queen,
He twenty-one, and she fifteen;
No poet ever sweetly sung.
Unless he were like Phoebus, young;
Nor ever nymph inspired to rhyme,
Unless like Venus in her prime.
At fifty-six, if this be true,
Am I a poet fit for you;
Or at the age of forty-three,
Are you a subject fit for me?
Adieu bright wit, and radiant eyes;
You must be grave, and I be wise.
Our fate in vain we would oppose,
But I'll be still your friend in prose;
Esteem and friendship to express,
Will not require poetic dress;
And if the muse deny her aid
To have them sung, they may be said.

But, Stella say, what evil tongue
Reports you are no longer young?
That Time sits with his scythe to mow
Where erst sat Cupid with his bow;
That half your locks are turned to grey;
I'll ne'er believe a word they say.
'Tis true, but let it not be known,
My eyes are somewhat dimish grown;
For nature, always in the right,
To your decays adapts my sight,
And wrinkles undistinguished pass,
For I'm ashamed to use a glass;
And till I see them with these eyes,
Whoever says you have them, lies.

No length of time can make you quit
Honour and virtue, sense and wit,
Thus you may still be young to me,
While I can better hear than see:
Oh, ne'er may fortune show her spite,
To make me deaf, and mend my sight.




STELLA'S BIRTHDAY, MARCH 13, 1726.


This day, whate'er the Fates decree,
Shall still be kept with joy by me;
This day, then, let us not be told
That you are sick, and I grown old,
Nor think on our approaching ills,
And talk of spectacles and pills;
To-morrow will be time enough
To hear such mortifying stuff.
Yet, since from reason may be brought
A better and more pleasing thought,
Which can, in spite of all decays,
Support a few remaining days:
From not the gravest of divines
Accept for once some serious lines.

Although we now can form no more
Long schemes of life, as heretofore;
Yet you, while time is running fast,
Can look with joy on what is past.

Were future happiness and pain
A mere contrivance of the brain,
As Atheists argue, to entice,
And fit their proselytes for vice
(The only comfort they propose,
To have companions in their woes).
Grant this the case, yet sure 'tis hard
That virtue, styled its own reward,
And by all sages understood
To be the chief of human good,
Should acting, die, or leave behind
Some lasting pleasure in the mind.
Which by remembrance will assuage
Grief, sickness, poverty, and age;
And strongly shoot a radiant dart,
To shine through life's declining part.

Say, Stella, feel you no content,
Reflecting on a life well spent;
Your skilful hand employed to save
Despairing wretches from the grave;
And then supporting with your store,
Those whom you dragged from death before?
So Providence on mortals waits,
Preserving what it first creates,
You generous boldness to defend
An innocent and absent friend;
That courage which can make you just,
To merit humbled in the dust;
The detestation you express
For vice in all its glittering dress:
That patience under to torturing pain,
Where stubborn stoics would complain.

Must these like empty shadows pass,
Or forms reflected from a glass?
Or mere chimaeras in the mind,
That fly, and leave no marks behind?
Does not the body thrive and grow
By food of twenty years ago?
And, had it not been still supplied,
It must a thousand times have died.
Then, who with reason can maintain
That no effects of food remain?
And, is not virtue in mankind
The nutriment that feeds the mind?
Upheld by each good action past,
And still continued by the last:
Then, who with reason can pretend
That all effects of virtue end?

Believe me, Stella, when you show
That true contempt for things below,
Nor prize your life for other ends
Than merely to oblige your friends,
Your former actions claim their part,
And join to fortify your heart.
 For virtue in her daily race,
Like Janus, bears a double face.
Look back with joy where she has gone,
And therefore goes with courage on.
She at your sickly couch will wait,
And guide you to a better state.

O then, whatever heav'n intends,
Take pity on your pitying friends;
Nor let your ills affect your mind,
To fancy they can be unkind;
Me, surely me, you ought to spare,
Who gladly would your sufferings share;
Or give my scrap of life to you,
And think it far beneath your due;
You to whose care so oft I owe
That I'm alive to tell you so.




TO STELLA,


_Visiting me in my sickness_, _October_, 1727.

Pallas, observing Stella's wit
Was more than for her sex was fit;
And that her beauty, soon or late,
Might breed confusion in the state;
In high concern for human kind,
Fixed honour in her infant mind.

But (not in wranglings to engage
With such a stupid vicious age),
If honour I would here define,
It answers faith in things divine.
As natural life the body warms,
And, scholars teach, the soul informs;
So honour animates the whole,
And is the spirit of the soul.

Those numerous virtues which the tribe
Of tedious moralists describe,
And by such various titles call,
True honour comprehends them all.
Let melancholy rule supreme,
Choler preside, or blood, or phlegm.
It makes no difference in the case.
Nor is complexion honour's place.

But, lest we should for honour take
The drunken quarrels of a rake,
Or think it seated in a scar,
Or on a proud triumphal car,
Or in the payment of a debt,
We lose with sharpers at piquet;
Or, when a whore in her vocation,
Keeps punctual to an assignation;
Or that on which his lordship swears,
When vulgar knaves would lose their ears:
Let Stella's fair example preach
A lesson she alone can teach.

In points of honour to be tried,
All passions must be laid aside;
Ask no advice, but think alone,
Suppose the question not your own;
How shall I act? is not the case,
But how would Brutus in my place;
In such a cause would Cato bleed;
And how would Socrates proceed?

Drive all objections from your mind,
Else you relapse to human kind;
Ambition, avarice, and lust,
And factious rage, and breach of trust,
And flattery tipped with nauseous fleer,
And guilt and shame, and servile fear,
Envy, and cruelty, and pride,
Will in your tainted heart preside.

Heroes and heroines of old,
By honour only were enrolled
Among their brethren in the skies,
To which (though late) shall Stella rise.
Ten thousand oaths upon record
Are not so sacred as her word;
The world shall in its atoms end
Ere Stella can deceive a friend.
By honour seated in her breast,
She still determines what is best;
What indignation in her mind,
Against enslavers of mankind!
Base kings and ministers of state,
Eternal objects of her hate.

She thinks that Nature ne'er designed,
Courage to man alone confined;
Can cowardice her sex adorn,
Which most exposes ours to scorn;
She wonders where the charm appears
In Florimel's affected fears;
For Stella never learned the art
At proper times to scream and start;
Nor calls up all the house at night,
And swears she saw a thing in white.
Doll never flies to cut her lace,
Or throw cold water in her face,
Because she heard a sudden drum,
Or found an earwig in a plum.

Her hearers are amazed from whence
Proceeds that fund of wit and sense;
Which, though her modesty would shroud,
Breaks like the sun behind a cloud,
While gracefulness its art conceals,
And yet through every motion steals.

Say, Stella, was Prometheus blind,
And forming you, mistook your kind?
No; 'twas for you alone he stole
The fire that forms a manly soul;
Then, to complete it every way,
He moulded it with female clay,
To that you owe the nobler flame,
To this, the beauty of your frame.

How would ingratitude delight?
And how would censure glut her spite?
If I should Stella's kindness hide
In silence, or forget with pride,
When on my sickly couch I lay,
Impatient both of night and day,
Lamenting in unmanly strains,
Called every power to ease my pains,
Then Stella ran to my relief
With cheerful face and inward grief;
And though by Heaven's severe decree
She suffers hourly more than me,
No cruel master could require,
From slaves employed for daily hire,
What Stella by her friendship warmed,
With vigour and delight performed.
My sinking spirits now supplies
With cordials in her hands and eyes,
Now with a soft and silent tread,
Unheard she moves about my bed.
I see her taste each nauseous draught,
And so obligingly am caught:
I bless the hand from whence they came,
Nor dare distort my face for shame.

Best pattern of true friends beware,
You pay too dearly for your care;
If while your tenderness secures
My life, it must endanger yours.
For such a fool was never found,
Who pulled a palace to the ground,
Only to have the ruins made
Materials for a house decayed.

_While Dr. Swift was at Sir William Temple's_, _after he left the
University of Dublin_, _he contracted a friendship with two of Sir
William's relations_, _Mrs. Johnson and Mrs. Dingley_, _which continued
to their deaths_.  _The former of these was the amiable Stella_, _so much
celebrated in his works_.  _In the year 1727_, _being in England_, _he
received the melancholy news of her last sickness_, _Mrs. Dingley having
been dead before_.  _He hastened into Ireland_, _where he visited her_,
_not only as a friend_, _but a clergyman_.  _No set form of prayer could
express the sense of his heart on that occasion_.  _He drew up the
following_, _here printed from his own handwriting_.  _She died Jan. 28_,
_1727_.




THE FIRST HE WROTE OCT. 17, 1727.


Most merciful Father, accept our humblest prayers in behalf of this Thy
languishing servant; forgive the sins, the frailties, and infirmities of
her life past.  Accept the good deeds she hath done in such a manner
that, at whatever time Thou shalt please to call her, she may be received
into everlasting habitations.  Give her grace to continue sincerely
thankful to Thee for the many favours Thou hast bestowed upon her, the
ability and inclination and practice to do good, and those virtues which
have procured the esteem and love of her friends, and a most unspotted
name in the world.  O God, Thou dispensest Thy blessings and Thy
punishments, as it becometh infinite justice and mercy; and since it was
Thy pleasure to afflict her with a long, constant, weakly state of
health, make her truly sensible that it was for very wise ends, and was
largely made up to her in other blessings, more valuable and less common.
Continue to her, O Lord, that firmness and constancy of mind wherewith
Thou hast most graciously endowed her, together with that contempt of
worldly things and vanities that she hath shown in the whole conduct of
her life.  O All-powerful Being, the least motion of whose Will can
create or destroy a world, pity us, the mournful friends of Thy
distressed servant, who sink under the weight of her present condition,
and the fear of losing the most valuable of our friends; restore her to
us, O Lord, if it be Thy gracious Will, or inspire us with constancy and
resignation to support ourselves under so heavy an affliction.  Restore
her, O Lord, for the sake of those poor, who by losing her will be
desolate, and those sick, who will not only want her bounty, but her care
and tending; or else, in Thy mercy, raise up some other in her place with
equal disposition and better abilities.  Lessen, O Lord, we beseech thee,
her bodily pains, or give her a double strength of mind to support them.
And if Thou wilt soon take her to Thyself, turn our thoughts rather upon
that felicity which we hope she shall enjoy, than upon that unspeakable
loss we shall endure.  Let her memory be ever dear unto us, and the
example of her many virtues, as far as human infirmity will admit, our
constant imitation.  Accept, O Lord, these prayers poured from the very
bottom of our hearts, in Thy mercy, and for the merits of our blessed
Saviour.  _Amen_.




THE SECOND PRAYER WAS WRITTEN NOV. 6, 1727.


O Merciful Father, who never afflictest Thy children but for their own
good, and with justice, over which Thy mercy always prevaileth, either to
turn them to repentance, or to punish them in the present life, in order
to reward them in a better; take pity, we beseech Thee, upon this Thy
poor afflicted servant, languishing so long and so grievously under the
weight of Thy Hand.  Give her strength, O Lord, to support her weakness,
and patience to endure her pains, without repining at Thy correction.
Forgive every rash and inconsiderate expression which her anguish may at
any time force from her tongue, while her heart continueth in an entire
submission to Thy Will.  Suppress in her, O Lord, all eager desires of
life, and lesson her fears of death, by inspiring into her an humble yet
assured hope of Thy mercy.  Give her a sincere repentance for all her
transgressions and omissions, and a firm resolution to pass the remainder
of her life in endeavouring to her utmost to observe all thy precepts.  We
beseech Thee likewise to compose her thoughts, and preserve to her the
use of her memory and reason during the course of her sickness.  Give her
a true conception of the vanity, folly, and insignificancy of all human
things; and strengthen her so as to beget in her a sincere love of Thee
in the midst of her sufferings.  Accept and impute all her good deeds,
and forgive her all those offences against Thee, which she hath sincerely
repented of, or through the frailty of memory hath forgot.  And now, O
Lord, we turn to Thee in behalf of ourselves, and the rest of her
sorrowful friends.  Let not our grief afflict her mind, and thereby have
an ill effect on her present distemper.  Forgive the sorrow and weakness
of those among us who sink under the grief and terror of losing so dear
and useful a friend.  Accept and pardon our most earnest prayers and
wishes for her longer continuance in this evil world, to do what Thou art
pleased to call Thy service, and is only her bounden duty; that she may
be still a comfort to us, and to all others, who will want the benefit of
her conversation, her advice, her good offices, or her charity.  And
since Thou hast promised that where two or three are gathered together in
Thy Name, Thou wilt be in the midst of them to grant their request, O
Gracious Lord, grant to us who are here met in Thy Name, that those
requests, which in the utmost sincerity and earnestness of our hearts we
have now made in behalf of this Thy distressed servant, and of ourselves,
may effectually be answered; through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord.
_Amen_.




THE BEASTS' CONFESSION (1732).


When beasts could speak (the learned say
They still can do so every day),
It seems, they had religion then,
As much as now we find in men.
It happened when a plague broke out
(Which therefore made them more devout)
The king of brutes (to make it plain,
Of quadrupeds I only mean),
By proclamation gave command,
That every subject in the land
Should to the priest confess their sins;
And thus the pious wolf begins:

Good father, I must own with shame,
That, often I have been to blame:
I must confess, on Friday last,
Wretch that I was, I broke my fast:
But I defy the basest tongue
To prove I did my neighbour wrong;
Or ever went to seek my food
By rapine, theft, or thirst of blood.

The ass approaching next, confessed,
That in his heart he loved a jest:
A wag he was, he needs must own,
And could not let a dunce alone:
Sometimes his friend he would not spare,
And might perhaps be too severe:
But yet, the worst that could be said,
He was a wit both born and bred;
And, if it be a sin or shame,
Nature alone must bear the blame:
One fault he hath, is sorry for't,
His ears are half a foot too short;
Which could he to the standard bring,
He'd show his face before the king:
Then, for his voice, there's none disputes
That he's the nightingale of brutes.

The swine with contrite heart allowed,
His shape and beauty made him proud:
In diet was perhaps too nice,
But gluttony was ne'er his vice:
In every turn of life content,
And meekly took what fortune sent:
Enquire through all the parish round,
A better neighbour ne'er was found:
His vigilance might seine displease;
'Tis true, he hated sloth like pease.

The mimic ape began his chatter,
How evil tongues his life bespatter:
Much of the cens'ring world complained,
Who said his gravity was feigned:
Indeed, the strictness of his morals
Engaged him in a hundred quarrels:
He saw, and he was grieved to see't,
His zeal was sometimes indiscreet:
He found his virtues too severe
For our corrupted times to bear:
Yet, such a lewd licentious age
Might well excuse a stoic's rage.

The goat advanced with decent pace:
And first excused his youthful face;
Forgiveness begged, that he appeared
('Twas nature's fault) without a beard.
'Tis true, he was not much inclined
To fondness for the female kind;
Not, as his enemies object,
From chance or natural defect;
Not by his frigid constitution,
But through a pious resolution;
For he had made a holy vow
Of chastity, as monks do now;
Which he resolved to keep for ever hence,
As strictly, too, as doth his reverence. {5}

Apply the tale, and you shall find
How just it suits with human kind.
Some faults we own: but, can you guess?
Why?--virtue's carried to excess;
Wherewith our vanity endows us,
Though neither foe nor friend allows us.

The lawyer swears, you may rely on't,
He never squeezed a needy client:
And this he makes his constant rule,
For which his brethren call him fool;
His conscience always was so nice,
He freely gave the poor advice;
By which he lost, he may affirm,
A hundred fees last Easter term.
While others of the learned robe
Would break the patience of a Job;
No pleader at the bar could match
His diligence and quick despatch;
Ne'er kept a cause, he well may boast,
Above a term or two at most.

The cringing knave, who seeks a place
Without success, thus tells his case:
Why should he longer mince the matter?
He failed because he could not flatter:
He had not learned to turn his coat,
Nor for a party give his vote.
His crime he quickly understood;
Too zealous for the nation's good:
He found the ministers resent it,
Yet could not for his heart repent it.

The chaplain vows he cannot fawn,
Though it would raise him to the lawn:
He passed his hours among his books;
You find it in his meagre looks:
He might, if he were worldly-wise,
Preferment get, and spare his eyes:
But owned he had a stubborn spirit,
That made him trust alone in merit:
Would rise by merit to promotion;
Alas! a mere chimeric notion.

The doctor, if you will believe him,
Confessed a sin, and God forgive him:
Called up at midnight, ran to save
A blind old beggar from the grave:
But, see how Satan spreads his snares;
He quite forgot to say his prayers.
He cannot help it, for his heart,
Sometimes to act the parson's part,
Quotes from the Bible many a sentence
That moves his patients to repentance:
And, when his medicines do no good,
Supports their minds with heavenly food.
At which, however well intended,
He hears the clergy are offended;
And grown so bold behind his back,
To call him hypocrite and quack.
In his own church he keeps a seat;
Says grace before and after meat;
And calls, without affecting airs,
His household twice a day to prayers.
He shuns apothecaries' shops;
And hates to cram the sick with slops:
He scorns to make his art a trade,
Nor bribes my lady's favourite maid.
Old nurse-keepers would never hire
To recommend him to the Squire;
Which others, whom he will not name,
Have often practised to their shame.

The statesman tells you with a sneer,
His fault is to be too sincere;
And, having no sinister ends,
Is apt to disoblige his friends.
The nation's good, his Master's glory,
Without regard to Whig or Tory,
Were all the schemes he had in view;
Yet he was seconded by few:
Though some had spread a thousand lies,
'Twas he defeated the Excise.
'Twas known, though he had borne aspersion,
That standing troops were his aversion:
His practice was, in every station,
To serve the king, and please the nation.
Though hard to find in every case
The fittest man to fill a place:
His promises he ne'er forgot,
But took memorials on the spot:
His enemies, for want of charity,
Said he affected popularity:
'Tis true, the people understood,
That all he did was for their good;
Their kind affections he has tried;
No love is lost on either side.
He came to court with fortune clear,
Which now he runs out every year;
Must, at the rate that he goes on,
Inevitably be undone.
Oh! if his Majesty would please
To give him but a writ of ease,
Would grant him license to retire,
As it hath long been his desire,
By fair accounts it would be found,
He's poorer by ten thousand pound.
He owns, and hopes it is no sin,
He ne'er was partial to his kin;
He thought it base for men in stations
To crowd the court with their relations:
His country was his dearest mother,
And every virtuous man his brother:
Through modesty or awkward shame
(For which he owns himself to blame),
He found the wisest men he could,
Without respect to friends or blood;
Nor never acts on private views,
When he hath liberty to choose.

The sharper swore he hated play,
Except to pass an hour away:
And well he might; for to his cost,
By want of skill, he always lost.
He heard there was a club of cheats,
Who had contrived a thousand feats;
Could change the stock, or cog a dye,
And thus deceive the sharpest eye:
No wonder how his fortune sunk,
His brothers fleece him when he's drunk.

I own the moral not exact;
Besides, the tale is false in fact;
And so absurd, that, could I raise up
From fields Elysian, fabling AEsop;
I would accuse him to his face,
For libelling the four-foot race.
Creatures of every kind but ours
Well comprehend their natural powers;
While we, whom reason ought to sway,
Mistake our talents every day:
The ass was never known so stupid
To act the part of Tray or Cupid;
Nor leaps upon his master's lap,
There to be stroked, and fed with pap:
As AEsop would the world persuade;
He better understands his trade:
Nor comes whene'er his lady whistles,
But carries loads, and feeds on thistles;
Our author's meaning, I presume, is
A creature _bipes et implumis_;
Wherein the moralist designed
A compliment on human-kind:
For, here he owns, that now and then
Beasts may degenerate into men.




AN ARGUMENT TO PROVE THAT THE ABOLISHING OF CHRISTIANITY IN ENGLAND MAY,
AS THINGS NOW STAND, BE ATTENDED WITH SOME INCONVENIENCES, AND PERHAPS
NOT PRODUCE THOSE MANY GOOD EFFECTS PROPOSED THEREBY.


_Written in the year 1708_.

I am very sensible what a weakness and presumption it is to reason
against the general humour and disposition of the world.  I remember it
was with great justice, and a due regard to the freedom, both of the
public and the press, forbidden upon several penalties to write, or
discourse, or lay wagers against the --- even before it was confirmed by
Parliament; because that was looked upon as a design to oppose the
current of the people, which, besides the folly of it, is a manifest
breach of the fundamental law, that makes this majority of opinions the
voice of God.  In like manner, and for the very same reasons, it may
perhaps be neither safe nor prudent to argue against the abolishing of
Christianity, at a juncture when all parties seem so unanimously
determined upon the point, as we cannot but allow from their actions,
their discourses, and their writings.  However, I know not how, whether
from the affectation of singularity, or the perverseness of human nature,
but so it unhappily falls out, that I cannot be entirely of this opinion.
Nay, though I were sure an order were issued for my immediate prosecution
by the Attorney-General, I should still confess, that in the present
posture of our affairs at home or abroad, I do not yet see the absolute
necessity of extirpating the Christian religion from among us.

This perhaps may appear too great a paradox even for our wise and
paxodoxical age to endure; therefore I shall handle it with all
tenderness, and with the utmost deference to that great and profound
majority which is of another sentiment.

And yet the curious may please to observe, how much the genius of a
nation is liable to alter in half an age.  I have heard it affirmed for
certain by some very odd people, that the contrary opinion was even in
their memories as much in vogue as the other is now; and that a project
for the abolishing of Christianity would then have appeared as singular,
and been thought as absurd, as it would be at this time to write or
discourse in its defence.

Therefore I freely own, that all appearances are against me.  The system
of the Gospel, after the fate of other systems, is generally antiquated
and exploded, and the mass or body of the common people, among whom it
seems to have had its latest credit, are now grown as much ashamed of it
as their betters; opinions, like fashions, always descending from those
of quality to the middle sort, and thence to the vulgar, where at length
they are dropped and vanish.

But here I would not be mistaken, and must therefore be so bold as to
borrow a distinction from the writers on the other side, when they make a
difference betwixt nominal and real Trinitarians.  I hope no reader
imagines me so weak to stand up in the defence of real Christianity, such
as used in primitive times (if we may believe the authors of those ages)
to have an influence upon men's belief and actions.  To offer at the
restoring of that, would indeed be a wild project: it would be to dig up
foundations; to destroy at one blow all the wit, and half the learning of
the kingdom; to break the entire frame and constitution of things; to
ruin trade, extinguish arts and sciences, with the professors of them; in
short, to turn our courts, exchanges, and shops into deserts; and would
be full as absurd as the proposal of Horace, where he advises the Romans,
all in a body, to leave their city, and seek a new seat in some remote
part of the world, by way of a cure for the corruption of their manners.

Therefore I think this caution was in itself altogether unnecessary
(which I have inserted only to prevent all possibility of cavilling),
since every candid reader will easily understand my discourse to be
intended only in defence of nominal Christianity, the other having been
for some time wholly laid aside by general consent, as utterly
inconsistent with all our present schemes of wealth and power.

But why we should therefore cut off the name and title of Christians,
although the general opinion and resolution be so violent for it, I
confess I cannot (with submission) apprehend the consequence necessary.
However, since the undertakers propose such wonderful advantages to the
nation by this project, and advance many plausible objections against the
system of Christianity, I shall briefly consider the strength of both,
fairly allow them their greatest weight, and offer such answers as I
think most reasonable.  After which I will beg leave to show what
inconveniences may possibly happen by such an innovation, in the present
posture of our affairs.

First, one great advantage proposed by the abolishing of Christianity is,
that it would very much enlarge and establish liberty of conscience, that
great bulwark of our nation, and of the Protestant religion, which is
still too much limited by priestcraft, notwithstanding all the good
intentions of the legislature, as we have lately found by a severe
instance.  For it is confidently reported, that two young gentlemen of
real hopes, bright wit, and profound judgment, who, upon a thorough
examination of causes and effects, and by the mere force of natural
abilities, without the least tincture of learning, having made a
discovery that there was no God, and generously communicating their
thoughts for the good of the public, were some time ago, by an
unparalleled severity, and upon I know not what obsolete law, broke for
blasphemy.  And as it has been wisely observed, if persecution once
begins, no man alive knows how far it may reach, or where it will end.

In answer to all which, with deference to wiser judgments, I think this
rather shows the necessity of a nominal religion among us.  Great wits
love to be free with the highest objects; and if they cannot be allowed a
god to revile or renounce, they will speak evil of dignities, abuse the
government, and reflect upon the ministry, which I am sure few will deny
to be of much more pernicious consequence, according to the saying of
Tiberius, _deorum offensa diis curoe_.  As to the particular fact
related, I think it is not fair to argue from one instance, perhaps
another cannot be produced: yet (to the comfort of all those who may be
apprehensive of persecution) blasphemy we know is freely spoke a million
of times in every coffee-house and tavern, or wherever else good company
meet.  It must be allowed, indeed, that to break an English free-born
officer only for blasphemy was, to speak the gentlest of such an action,
a very high strain of absolute power.  Little can be said in excuse for
the general; perhaps he was afraid it might give offence to the allies,
among whom, for aught we know, it may be the custom of the country to
believe a God.  But if he argued, as some have done, upon a mistaken
principle, that an officer who is guilty of speaking blasphemy may, some
time or other, proceed so far as to raise a mutiny, the consequence is by
no means to be admitted: for surely the commander of an English army is
like to be but ill obeyed whose soldiers fear and reverence him as little
as they do a Deity.

It is further objected against the Gospel system that it obliges men to
the belief of things too difficult for Freethinkers, and such who have
shook off the prejudices that usually cling to a confined education.  To
which I answer, that men should be cautious how they raise objections
which reflect upon the wisdom of the nation.  Is not everybody freely
allowed to believe whatever he pleases, and to publish his belief to the
world whenever he thinks fit, especially if it serves to strengthen the
party which is in the right?  Would any indifferent foreigner, who should
read the trumpery lately written by Asgil, Tindal, Toland, Coward, and
forty more, imagine the Gospel to be our rule of faith, and to be
confirmed by Parliaments?  Does any man either believe, or say he
believes, or desire to have it thought that he says he believes, one
syllable of the matter?  And is any man worse received upon that score,
or does he find his want of nominal faith a disadvantage to him in the
pursuit of any civil or military employment?  What if there be an old
dormant statute or two against him, are they not now obsolete, to a
degree, that Empson and Dudley themselves, if they were now alive, would
find it impossible to put them in execution?

It is likewise urged, that there are, by computation, in this kingdom,
above ten thousand parsons, whose revenues, added to those of my lords
the bishops, would suffice to maintain at least two hundred young
gentlemen of wit and pleasure, and free-thinking, enemies to priestcraft,
narrow principles, pedantry, and prejudices, who might be an ornament to
the court and town: and then again, so a great number of able [bodied]
divines might be a recruit to our fleet and armies.  This indeed appears
to be a consideration of some weight; but then, on the other side,
several things deserve to be considered likewise: as, first, whether it
may not be thought necessary that in certain tracts of country, like what
we call parishes, there should be one man at least of abilities to read
and write.  Then it seems a wrong computation that the revenues of the
Church throughout this island would be large enough to maintain two
hundred young gentlemen, or even half that number, after the present
refined way of living, that is, to allow each of them such a rent as, in
the modern form of speech, would make them easy.  But still there is in
this project a greater mischief behind; and we ought to beware of the
woman's folly, who killed the hen that every morning laid her a golden
egg.  For, pray what would become of the race of men in the next age, if
we had nothing to trust to beside the scrofulous consumptive production
furnished by our men of wit and pleasure, when, having squandered away
their vigour, health, and estates, they are forced, by some disagreeable
marriage, to piece up their broken fortunes, and entail rottenness and
politeness on their posterity?  Now, here are ten thousand persons
reduced, by the wise regulations of Henry VIII., to the necessity of a
low diet, and moderate exercise, who are the only great restorers of our
breed, without which the nation would in an age or two become one great
hospital.

Another advantage proposed by the abolishing of Christianity is the clear
gain of one day in seven, which is now entirely lost, and consequently
the kingdom one seventh less considerable in trade, business, and
pleasure; besides the loss to the public of so many stately structures
now in the hands of the clergy, which might be converted into
play-houses, exchanges, market-houses, common dormitories, and other
public edifices.

I hope I shall be forgiven a hard word if I call this a perfect cavil.  I
readily own there hath been an old custom, time out of mind, for people
to assemble in the churches every Sunday, and that shops are still
frequently shut, in order, as it is conceived, to preserve the memory of
that ancient practice; but how this can prove a hindrance to business or
pleasure is hard to imagine.  What if the men of pleasure are forced, one
day in the week, to game at home instead of the chocolate-house?  Are not
the taverns and coffee-houses open?  Can there be a more convenient
season for taking a dose of physic?  Is not that the chief day for
traders to sum up the accounts of the week, and for lawyers to prepare
their briefs?  But I would fain know how it can be pretended that the
churches are misapplied?  Where are more appointments and rendezvouses of
gallantry?  Where more care to appear in the foremost box, with greater
advantage of dress?  Where more meetings for business?  Where more
bargains driven of all sorts?  And where so many conveniences or
incitements to sleep?

There is one advantage greater than any of the foregoing, proposed by the
abolishing of Christianity, that it will utterly extinguish parties among
us, by removing those factious distinctions of high and low church, of
Whig and Tory, Presbyterian and Church of England, which are now so many
mutual clogs upon public proceedings, and are apt to prefer the
gratifying themselves or depressing their adversaries before the most
important interest of the State.

I confess, if it were certain that so great an advantage would redound to
the nation by this expedient, I would submit, and be silent; but will any
man say, that if the words, whoring, drinking, cheating, lying, stealing,
were, by Act of Parliament, ejected out of the English tongue and
dictionaries, we should all awake next morning chaste and temperate,
honest and just, and lovers of truth?  Is this a fair consequence?  Or if
the physicians would forbid us to pronounce the words pox, gout,
rheumatism, and stone, would that expedient serve like so many talismen
to destroy the diseases themselves?  Are party and faction rooted in
men's hearts no deeper than phrases borrowed from religion, or founded
upon no firmer principles?  And is our language so poor that we cannot
find other terms to express them?  Are envy, pride, avarice, and ambition
such ill nomenclators, that they cannot furnish appellations for their
owners?  Will not heydukes and mamalukes, mandarins and patshaws, or any
other words formed at pleasure, serve to distinguish those who are in the
ministry from others who would be in it if they could?  What, for
instance, is easier than to vary the form of speech, and instead of the
word church, make it a question in politics, whether the monument be in
danger?  Because religion was nearest at hand to furnish a few convenient
phrases, is our invention so barren we can find no other?  Suppose, for
argument sake, that the Tories favoured Margarita, the Whigs, Mrs. Tofts,
and the Trimmers, Valentini, would not Margaritians, Toftians, and
Valentinians be very tolerable marks of distinction?  The Prasini and
Veniti, two most virulent factions in Italy, began, if I remember right,
by a distinction of colours in ribbons, which we might do with as good a
grace about the dignity of the blue and the green, and serve as properly
to divide the Court, the Parliament, and the kingdom between them, as any
terms of art whatsoever, borrowed from religion.  And therefore I think
there is little force in this objection against Christianity, or prospect
of so great an advantage as is proposed in the abolishing of it.

It is again objected, as a very absurd, ridiculous custom, that a set of
men should be suffered, much less employed and hired, to bawl one day in
seven against the lawfulness of those methods most in use towards the
pursuit of greatness, riches, and pleasure, which are the constant
practice of all men alive on the other six.  But this objection is, I
think, a little unworthy so refined an age as ours.  Let us argue this
matter calmly.  I appeal to the breast of any polite Free-thinker,
whether, in the pursuit of gratifying a pre-dominant passion, he hath not
always felt a wonderful incitement, by reflecting it was a thing
forbidden; and therefore we see, in order to cultivate this test, the
wisdom of the nation hath taken special care that the ladies should be
furnished with prohibited silks, and the men with prohibited wine.  And
indeed it were to be wished that some other prohibitions were promoted,
in order to improve the pleasures of the town, which, for want of such
expedients, begin already, as I am told, to flag and grow languid, giving
way daily to cruel inroads from the spleen.

'Tis likewise proposed, as a great advantage to the public, that if we
once discard the system of the Gospel, all religion will of course be
banished for ever, and consequently along with it those grievous
prejudices of education which, under the names of conscience, honour,
justice, and the like, are so apt to disturb the peace of human minds,
and the notions whereof are so hard to be eradicated by right reason or
free-thinking, sometimes during the whole course of our lives.

Here first I observe how difficult it is to get rid of a phrase which the
world has once grown fond of, though the occasion that first produced it
be entirely taken away.  For some years past, if a man had but an ill-
favoured nose, the deep thinkers of the age would, some way or other
contrive to impute the cause to the prejudice of his education.  From
this fountain were said to be derived all our foolish notions of justice,
piety, love of our country; all our opinions of God or a future state,
heaven, hell, and the like; and there might formerly perhaps have been
some pretence for this charge.  But so effectual care hath been since
taken to remove those prejudices, by an entire change in the methods of
education, that (with honour I mention it to our polite innovators) the
young gentlemen, who are now on the scene, seem to have not the least
tincture left of those infusions, or string of those weeds, and by
consequence the reason for abolishing nominal Christianity upon that
pretext is wholly ceased.

For the rest, it may perhaps admit a controversy, whether the banishing
all notions of religion whatsoever would be inconvenient for the vulgar.
Not that I am in the least of opinion with those who hold religion to
have been the invention of politicians, to keep the lower part of the
world in awe by the fear of invisible powers; unless mankind were then
very different from what it is now; for I look upon the mass or body of
our people here in England to be as Freethinkers, that is to say, as
staunch unbelievers, as any of the highest rank.  But I conceive some
scattered notions about a superior power to be of singular use for the
common people, as furnishing excellent materials to keep children quiet
when they grow peevish, and providing topics of amusement in a tedious
winter night.

Lastly, it is proposed, as a singular advantage, that the abolishing of
Christianity will very much contribute to the uniting of Protestants, by
enlarging the terms of communion, so as to take in all sorts of
Dissenters, who are now shut out of the pale upon account of a few
ceremonies, which all sides confess to be things indifferent.  That this
alone will effectually answer the great ends of a scheme for
comprehension, by opening a large noble gate, at which all bodies may
enter; whereas the chaffering with Dissenters, and dodging about this or
t'other ceremony, is but like opening a few wickets, and leaving them at
jar, by which no more than one can get in at a time, and that not without
stooping, and sideling, and squeezing his body.

To all this I answer, that there is one darling inclination of mankind
which usually affects to be a retainer to religion, though she be neither
its parent, its godmother, nor its friend.  I mean the spirit of
opposition, that lived long before Christianity, and can easily subsist
without it.  Let us, for instance, examine wherein the opposition of
sectaries among us consists.  We shall find Christianity to have no share
in it at all.  Does the Gospel anywhere prescribe a starched, squeezed
countenance, a stiff formal gait, a singularity of manners and habit, or
any affected forms and modes of speech different from the reasonable part
of mankind?  Yet, if Christianity did not lend its name to stand in the
gap, and to employ or divert these humours, they must of necessity be
spent in contraventions to the laws of the land, and disturbance of the
public peace.  There is a portion of enthusiasm assigned to every nation,
which, if it hath not proper objects to work on, will burst out, and set
all into a flame.  If the quiet of a State can be bought by only flinging
men a few ceremonies to devour, it is a purchase no wise man would
refuse.  Let the mastiffs amuse themselves about a sheep's skin stuffed
with hay, provided it will keep them from worrying the flock.  The
institution of convents abroad seems in one point a strain of great
wisdom, there being few irregularities in human passions which may not
have recourse to vent themselves in some of those orders, which are so
many retreats for the speculative, the melancholy, the proud, the silent,
the politic, and the morose, to spend themselves, and evaporate the
noxious particles; for each of whom we in this island are forced to
provide a several sect of religion to keep them quiet; and whenever
Christianity shall be abolished, the Legislature must find some other
expedient to employ and entertain them.  For what imports it how large a
gate you open, if there will be always left a number who place a pride
and a merit in not coming in?

Having thus considered the most important objections against
Christianity, and the chief advantages proposed by the abolishing
thereof, I shall now, with equal deference and submission to wiser
judgments, as before, proceed to mention a few inconveniences that may
happen if the Gospel should be repealed, which, perhaps, the projectors
may not have sufficiently considered.

And first, I am very sensible how much the gentlemen of wit and pleasure
are apt to murmur, and be choked at the sight of so many daggle-tailed
parsons that happen to fall in their way, and offend their eyes; but at
the same time, these wise reformers do not consider what an advantage and
felicity it is for great wits to be always provided with objects of scorn
and contempt, in order to exercise and improve their talents, and divert
their spleen from falling on each other, or on themselves, especially
when all this may be done without the least imaginable danger to their
persons.

And to urge another argument of a parallel nature: if Christianity were
once abolished, how could the Freethinkers, the strong reasoners, and the
men of profound learning be able to find another subject so calculated in
all points whereon to display their abilities?  What wonderful
productions of wit should we be deprived of from those whose genius, by
continual practice, hath been wholly turned upon raillery and invectives
against religion, and would therefore never be able to shine or
distinguish themselves upon any other subject?  We are daily complaining
of the great decline of wit among as, and would we take away the
greatest, perhaps the only topic we have left?  Who would ever have
suspected Asgil for a wit, or Toland for a philosopher, if the
inexhaustible stock of Christianity had not been at hand to provide them
with materials?  What other subject through all art or nature could have
produced Tindal for a profound author, or furnished him with readers?  It
is the wise choice of the subject that alone adorns and distinguishes the
writer.  For had a hundred such pens as these been employed on the side
of religion, they would have immediately sunk into silence and oblivion.

Nor do I think it wholly groundless, or my fears altogether imaginary,
that the abolishing of Christianity may perhaps bring the Church in
danger, or at least put the Senate to the trouble of another securing
vote.  I desire I may not be mistaken; I am far from presuming to affirm
or think that the Church is in danger at present, or as things now stand;
but we know not how soon it may be so when the Christian religion is
repealed.  As plausible as this project seems, there may be a dangerous
design lurk under it.  Nothing can be more notorious than that the
Atheists, Deists, Socinians, Anti-Trinitarians, and other subdivisions of
Freethinkers, are persons of little zeal for the present ecclesiastical
establishment: their declared opinion is for repealing the sacramental
test; they are very indifferent with regard to ceremonies; nor do they
hold the _Jus Divinum_ of episcopacy: therefore they may be intended as
one politic step towards altering the constitution of the Church
established, and setting up Presbytery in the stead, which I leave to be
further considered by those at the helm.

In the last place, I think nothing can be more plain, than that by this
expedient we shall run into the evil we chiefly pretend to avoid; and
that the abolishment of the Christian religion will be the readiest
course we can take to introduce Popery.  And I am the more inclined to
this opinion because we know it has been the constant practice of the
Jesuits to send over emissaries, with instructions to personate
themselves members of the several prevailing sects amongst us.  So it is
recorded that they have at sundry times appeared in the guise of
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independents, and Quakers, according as any
of these were most in credit; so, since the fashion hath been taken up of
exploding religion, the Popish missionaries have not been wanting to mix
with the Freethinkers; among whom Toland, the great oracle of the Anti-
Christians, is an Irish priest, the son of an Irish priest; and the most
learned and ingenious author of a book called the "Rights of the
Christian Church," was in a proper juncture reconciled to the Romish
faith, whose true son, as appears by a hundred passages in his treatise,
he still continues.  Perhaps I could add some others to the number; but
the fact is beyond dispute, and the reasoning they proceed by is right:
for supposing Christianity to be extinguished the people will never he at
ease till they find out some other method of worship, which will as
infallibly produce superstition as this will end in Popery.

And therefore, if, notwithstanding all I have said, it still be thought
necessary to have a Bill brought in for repealing Christianity, I would
humbly offer an amendment, that instead of the word Christianity may be
put religion in general, which I conceive will much better answer all the
good ends proposed by the projectors of it.  For as long as we leave in
being a God and His Providence, with all the necessary consequences which
curious and inquisitive men will be apt to draw from such promises, we do
not strike at the root of the evil, though we should ever so effectually
annihilate the present scheme of the Gospel; for of what use is freedom
of thought if it will not produce freedom of action, which is the sole
end, how remote soever in appearance, of all objections against
Christianity? and therefore, the Freethinkers consider it as a sort of
edifice, wherein all the parts have such a mutual dependence on each
other, that if you happen to pull out one single nail, the whole fabric
must fall to the ground.  This was happily expressed by him who had heard
of a text brought for proof of the Trinity, which in an ancient
manuscript was differently read; he thereupon immediately took the hint,
and by a sudden deduction of a long Sorites, most logically concluded:
why, if it be as you say, I may safely drink on, and defy the parson.
From which, and many the like instances easy to be produced, I think
nothing can be more manifest than that the quarrel is not against any
particular points of hard digestion in the Christian system, but against
religion in general, which, by laying restraints on human nature, is
supposed the great enemy to the freedom of thought and action.

Upon the whole, if it shall still be thought for the benefit of Church
and State that Christianity be abolished, I conceive, however, it may be
more convenient to defer the execution to a time of peace, and not
venture in this conjuncture to disoblige our allies, who, as it falls
out, are all Christians, and many of them, by the prejudices of their
education, so bigoted as to place a sort of pride in the appellation.  If,
upon being rejected by them, we are to trust to an alliance with the
Turk, we shall find ourselves much deceived; for, as he is too remote,
and generally engaged in war with the Persian emperor, so his people
would be more scandalised at our infidelity than our Christian
neighbours.  For they are not only strict observers of religions worship,
but what is worse, believe a God; which is more than is required of us,
even while we preserve the name of Christians.

To conclude, whatever some may think of the great advantages to trade by
this favourite scheme, I do very much apprehend that in six months' time
after the Act is passed for the extirpation of the Gospel, the Bank and
East India stock may fall at least one per cent.  And since that is fifty
times more than ever the wisdom of our age thought fit to venture for the
preservation of Christianity, there is no reason we should be at so great
a loss merely for the sake of destroying it.




HINTS TOWARDS AN ESSAY ON CONVERSATION.


I have observed few obvious subjects to have been so seldom, or at least
so slightly, handled as this; and, indeed, I know few so difficult to be
treated as it ought, nor yet upon which there seemeth so much to be said.

Most things pursued by men for the happiness of public or private life
our wit or folly have so refined, that they seldom subsist but in idea; a
true friend, a good marriage, a perfect form of government, with some
others, require so many ingredients, so good in their several kinds, and
so much niceness in mixing them, that for some thousands of years men
have despaired of reducing their schemes to perfection.  But in
conversation it is or might be otherwise; for here we are only to avoid a
multitude of errors, which, although a matter of some difficulty, may be
in every man's power, for want of which it remaineth as mere an idea as
the other.  Therefore it seemeth to me that the truest way to understand
conversation is to know the faults and errors to which it is subject, and
from thence every man to form maxims to himself whereby it may be
regulated, because it requireth few talents to which most men are not
born, or at least may not acquire without any great genius or study.  For
nature bath left every man a capacity of being agreeable, though not of
shining in company; and there are a hundred men sufficiently qualified
for both, who, by a very few faults that they might correct in half an
hour, are not so much as tolerable.

I was prompted to write my thoughts upon this subject by mere
indignation, to reflect that so useful and innocent a pleasure, so fitted
for every period and condition of life, and so much in all men's power,
should be so much neglected and abused.

And in this discourse it will be necessary to note those errors that are
obvious, as well as others which are seldomer observed, since there are
few so obvious or acknowledged into which most men, some time or other,
are not apt to run.

For instance, nothing is more generally exploded than the folly of
talking too much; yet I rarely remember to have seen five people together
where some one among them hath not been predominant in that kind, to the
great constraint and disgust of all the rest.  But among such as deal in
multitudes of words, none are comparable to the sober deliberate talker,
who proceedeth with much thought and caution, maketh his preface,
brancheth out into several digressions, findeth a hint that putteth him
in mind of another story, which he promiseth to tell you when this is
done; cometh back regularly to his subject, cannot readily call to mind
some person's name, holdeth his head, complaineth of his memory; the
whole company all this while in suspense; at length, says he, it is no
matter, and so goes on.  And, to crown the business, it perhaps proveth
at last a story the company hath heard fifty times before; or, at best,
some insipid adventure of the relater.

Another general fault in conversation is that of those who affect to talk
of themselves.  Some, without any ceremony, will run over the history of
their lives; will relate the annals of their diseases, with the several
symptoms and circumstances of them; will enumerate the hardships and
injustice they have suffered in court, in parliament, in love, or in law.
Others are more dexterous, and with great art will lie on the watch to
hook in their own praise.  They will call a witness to remember they
always foretold what would happen in such a case, but none would believe
them; they advised such a man from the beginning, and told him the
consequences just as they happened, but he would have his own way.  Others
make a vanity of telling their faults.  They are the strangest men in the
world; they cannot dissemble; they own it is a folly; they have lost
abundance of advantages by it; but, if you would give them the world,
they cannot help it; there is something in their nature that abhors
insincerity and constraint; with many other unsufferable topics of the
same altitude.

Of such mighty importance every man is to himself, and ready to think he
is so to others, without once making this easy and obvious reflection,
that his affairs can have no more weight with other men than theirs have
with him; and how little that is he is sensible enough.

Where company hath met, I often have observed two persons discover by
some accident that they were bred together at the same school or
university, after which the rest are condemned to silence, and to listen
while these two are refreshing each other's memory with the arch tricks
and passages of themselves and their comrades.

I know a great officer of the army, who will sit for some time with a
supercilious and impatient silence, full of anger and contempt for those
who are talking; at length of a sudden demand audience; decide the matter
in a short dogmatical way; then withdraw within himself again, and
vouchsafe to talk no more, until his spirits circulate again to the same
point.

There are some faults in conversation which none are so subject to as the
men of wit, nor ever so much as when they are with each other.  If they
have opened their mouths without endeavouring to say a witty thing, they
think it is so many words lost.  It is a torment to the hearers, as much
as to themselves, to see them upon the rack for invention, and in
perpetual constraint, with so little success.  They must do something
extraordinary, in order to acquit themselves, and answer their character,
else the standers by may be disappointed and be apt to think them only
like the rest of mortals.  I have known two men of wit industriously
brought together, in order to entertain the company, where they have made
a very ridiculous figure, and provided all the mirth at their own
expense.

I know a man of wit, who is never easy but where he can be allowed to
dictate and preside; he neither expecteth to be informed or entertained,
but to display his own talents.  His business is to be good company, and
not good conversation, and therefore he chooseth to frequent those who
are content to listen, and profess themselves his admirers.  And, indeed,
the worst conversation I ever remember to have heard in my life was that
at Will's coffee-house, where the wits, as they were called, used
formerly to assemble; that is to say, five or six men who had written
plays, or at least prologues, or had share in a miscellany, came thither,
and entertained one another with their trifling composures in so
important an air, as if they had been the noblest efforts of human
nature, or that the fate of kingdoms depended on them; and they were
usually attended with a humble audience of young students from the inns
of courts, or the universities, who, at due distance, listened to these
oracles, and returned home with great contempt for their law and
philosophy, their heads filled with trash under the name of politeness,
criticism, and belles lettres.

By these means the poets, for many years past, were all overrun with
pedantry.  For, as I take it, the word is not properly used; because
pedantry is the too front or unseasonable obtruding our own knowledge in
common discourse, and placing too great a value upon it; by which
definition men of the court or the army may be as guilty of pedantry as a
philosopher or a divine; and it is the same vice in women when they are
over copious upon the subject of their petticoats, or their fans, or
their china.  For which reason, although it be a piece of prudence, as
well as good manners, to put men upon talking on subjects they are best
versed in, yet that is a liberty a wise man could hardly take; because,
beside the imputation of pedantry, it is what he would never improve by.

This great town is usually provided with some player, mimic, or buffoon,
who hath a general reception at the good tables; familiar and domestic
with persons of the first quality, and usually sent for at every meeting
to divert the company, against which I have no objection.  You go there
as to a farce or a puppet-show; your business is only to laugh in season,
either out of inclination or civility, while this merry companion is
acting his part.  It is a business he hath undertaken, and we are to
suppose he is paid for his day's work.  I only quarrel when in select and
private meetings, where men of wit and learning are invited to pass an
evening, this jester should be admitted to run over his circle of tricks,
and make the whole company unfit for any other conversation, besides the
indignity of confounding men's talents at so shameful a rate.

Raillery is the finest part of conversation; but, as it is our usual
custom to counterfeit and adulterate whatever is too dear for us, so we
have done with this, and turned it all into what is generally called
repartee, or being smart; just as when an expensive fashion cometh up,
those who are not able to reach it content themselves with some paltry
imitation.  It now passeth for raillery to run a man down in discourse,
to put him out of countenance, and make him ridiculous, sometimes to
expose the defects of his person or understanding; on all which occasions
he is obliged not to be angry, to avoid the imputation of not being able
to take a jest.  It is admirable to observe one who is dexterous at this
art, singling out a weak adversary, getting the laugh on his side, and
then carrying all before him.  The French, from whom we borrow the word,
have a quite different idea of the thing, and so had we in the politer
age of our fathers.  Raillery was, to say something that at first
appeared a reproach or reflection, but, by some turn of wit unexpected
and surprising, ended always in a compliment, and to the advantage of the
person it was addressed to.  And surely one of the best rules in
conversation is, never to say a thing which any of the company can
reasonably wish we had rather left unsaid; nor can there anything be well
more contrary to the ends for which people meet together, than to part
unsatisfied with each other or themselves.

There are two faults in conversation which appear very different, yet
arise from the same root, and are equally blamable; I mean, an impatience
to interrupt others, and the uneasiness of being interrupted ourselves.
The two chief ends of conversation are, to entertain and improve those we
are among, or to receive those benefits ourselves; which whoever will
consider, cannot easily run into either of those two errors; because,
when any man speaketh in company, it is to be supposed he doth it for his
hearers' sake, and not his own; so that common discretion will teach us
not to force their attention, if they are not willing to lend it; nor, on
the other side, to interrupt him who is in possession, because that is in
the grossest manner to give the preference to our own good sense.

There are some people whose good manners will not suffer them to
interrupt you; but, what is almost as bad, will discover abundance of
impatience, and lie upon the watch until you have done, because they have
started something in their own thoughts which they long to be delivered
of.  Meantime, they are so far from regarding what passes, that their
imaginations are wholly turned upon what they have in reserve, for fear
it should slip out of their memory; and thus they confine their
invention, which might otherwise range over a hundred things full as
good, and that might be much more naturally introduced.

There is a sort of rude familiarity, which some people, by practising
among their intimates, have introduced into their general conversation,
and would have it pass for innocent freedom or humour, which is a
dangerous experiment in our northern climate, where all the little
decorum and politeness we have are purely forced by art, and are so ready
to lapse into barbarity.  This, among the Romans, was the raillery of
slaves, of which we have many instances in Plautus.  It seemeth to have
been introduced among us by Cromwell, who, by preferring the scum of the
people, made it a court-entertainment, of which I have heard many
particulars; and, considering all things were turned upside down, it was
reasonable and judicious; although it was a piece of policy found out to
ridicule a point of honour in the other extreme, when the smallest word
misplaced among gentlemen ended in a duel.

There are some men excellent at telling a story, and provided with a
plentiful stock of them, which they can draw out upon occasion in all
companies; and considering how low conversation runs now among us, it is
not altogether a contemptible talent; however, it is subject to two
unavoidable defects: frequent repetition, and being soon exhausted; so
that whoever valueth this gift in himself hath need of a good memory, and
ought frequently to shift his company, that he may not discover the
weakness of his fund; for those who are thus endowed have seldom any
other revenue, but live upon the main stock.

Great speakers in public are seldom agreeable in private conversation,
whether their faculty be natural, or acquired by practice and often
venturing.  Natural elocution, although it may seem a paradox, usually
springeth from a barrenness of invention and of words, by which men who
have only one stock of notions upon every subject, and one set of phrases
to express them in, they swim upon the superficies, and offer themselves
on every occasion; therefore, men of much learning, and who know the
compass of a language, are generally the worst talkers on a sudden, until
much practice hath inured and emboldened them; because they are
confounded with plenty of matter, variety of notions, and of words, which
they cannot readily choose, but are perplexed and entangled by too great
a choice, which is no disadvantage in private conversation; where, on the
other side, the talent of haranguing is, of all others, most
insupportable.

Nothing hath spoiled men more for conversation than the character of
being wits; to support which, they never fail of encouraging a number of
followers and admirers, who list themselves in their service, wherein
they find their accounts on both sides by pleasing their mutual vanity.
This hath given the former such an air of superiority, and made the
latter so pragmatical, that neither of them are well to be endured.  I
say nothing here of the itch of dispute and contradiction, telling of
lies, or of those who are troubled with the disease called the wandering
of the thoughts, that they are never present in mind at what passeth in
discourse; for whoever labours under any of these possessions is as unfit
for conversation as madmen in Bedlam.

I think I have gone over most of the errors in conversation that have
fallen under my notice or memory, except some that are merely personal,
and others too gross to need exploding; such as lewd or profane talk; but
I pretend only to treat the errors of conversation in general, and not
the several subjects of discourse, which would be infinite.  Thus we see
how human nature is most debased, by the abuse of that faculty, which is
held the great distinction between men and brutes; and how little
advantage we make of that which might be the greatest, the most lasting,
and the most innocent, as well as useful pleasure of life: in default of
which, we are forced to take up with those poor amusements of dress and
visiting, or the more pernicious ones of play, drink, and vicious amours,
whereby the nobility and gentry of both sexes are entirely corrupted both
in body and mind, and have lost all notions of love, honour, friendship,
and generosity; which, under the name of fopperies, have been for some
time laughed out of doors.

This degeneracy of conversation, with the pernicious consequences thereof
upon our humours and dispositions, hath been owing, among other causes,
to the custom arisen, for some time past, of excluding women from any
share in our society, further than in parties at play, or dancing, or in
the pursuit of an amour.  I take the highest period of politeness in
England (and it is of the same date in France) to have been the peaceable
part of King Charles I.'s reign; and from what we read of those times, as
well as from the accounts I have formerly met with from some who lived in
that court, the methods then used for raising and cultivating
conversation were altogether different from ours; several ladies, whom we
find celebrated by the poets of that age, had assemblies at their houses,
where persons of the best understanding, and of both sexes, met to pass
the evenings in discoursing upon whatever agreeable subjects were
occasionally started; and although we are apt to ridicule the sublime
Platonic notions they had, or personated in love and friendship, I
conceive their refinements were grounded upon reason, and that a little
grain of the romance is no ill ingredient to preserve and exalt the
dignity of human nature, without which it is apt to degenerate into
everything that is sordid, vicious, and low.  If there were no other use
in the conversation of ladies, it is sufficient that it would lay a
restraint upon those odious topics of immodesty and indecencies, into
which the rudeness of our northern genius is so apt to fall.  And,
therefore, it is observable in those sprightly gentlemen about the town,
who are so very dexterous at entertaining a vizard mask in the park or
the playhouse, that, in the company of ladies of virtue and honour, they
are silent and disconcerted, and out of their element.

There are some people who think they sufficiently acquit themselves and
entertain their company with relating of facts of no consequence, nor at
all out of the road of such common incidents as happen every day; and
this I have observed more frequently among the Scots than any other
nation, who are very careful not to omit the minutest circumstances of
time or place; which kind of discourse, if it were not a little relieved
by the uncouth terms and phrases, as well as accent and gesture peculiar
to that country, would be hardly tolerable.  It is not a fault in company
to talk much; but to continue it long is certainly one; for, if the
majority of those who are got together be naturally silent or cautious,
the conversation will flag, unless it be often renewed by one among them
who can start new subjects, provided he doth not dwell upon them, but
leaveth room for answers and replies.




THOUGHTS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.


We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to make us
love one another.

Reflect on things past as wars, negotiations, factions, etc.  We enter so
little into those interests, that we wonder how men could possibly be so
busy and concerned for things so transitory; look on the present times,
we find the same humour, yet wonder not at all.

A wise man endeavours, by considering all circumstances, to make
conjectures and form conclusions; but the smallest accident intervening
(and in the course of affairs it is impossible to foresee all) does often
produce such turns and changes, that at last he is just as much in doubt
of events as the most ignorant and inexperienced person.

Positiveness is a good quality for preachers and orators, because he that
would obtrude his thoughts and reasons upon a multitude, will convince
others the more, as he appears convinced himself.

How is it possible to expect that mankind will take advice, when they
will not so much as take warning?

I forget whether Advice be among the lost things which Aristo says are to
be found in the moon; that and Time ought to have been there.

No preacher is listened to but Time, which gives us the same train and
turn of thought that older people have tried in vain to put into our
heads before.

When we desire or solicit anything, our minds run wholly on the good side
or circumstances of it; when it is obtained, our minds run wholly on the
bad ones.

In a glass-house the workmen often fling in a small quantity of fresh
coals, which seems to disturb the fire, but very much enlivens it.  This
seems to allude to a gentle stirring of the passions, that the mind may
not languish.

Religion seems to have grown an infant with age, and requires miracles to
nurse it, as it had in its infancy.

All fits of pleasure are balanced by an equal degree of pain or languor;
it is like spending this year part of the next year's revenue.

The latter part of a wise man's life is taken up in curing the follies,
prejudices, and false opinions he had contracted in the former.

Would a writer know how to behave himself with relation to posterity, let
him consider in old books what he finds that he is glad to know, and what
omissions he most laments.

Whatever the poets pretend, it is plain they give immortality to none but
themselves; it is Homer and Virgil we reverence and admire, not Achilles
or AEneas.  With historians it is quite the contrary; our thoughts are
taken up with the actions, persons, and events we read, and we little
regard the authors.

When a true genius appears in the world you may know him by this sign;
that the dunces are all in confederacy against him.

Men who possess all the advantages of life, are in a state where there
are many accidents to disorder and discompose, but few to please them.

It is unwise to punish cowards with ignominy, for if they had regarded
that they would not have been cowards; death is their proper punishment,
because they fear it most.

The greatest inventions were produced in the times of ignorance, as the
use of the compass, gunpowder, and printing, and by the dullest nation,
as the Germans.

One argument to prove that the common relations of ghosts and spectres
are generally false, may be drawn from the opinion held that spirits are
never seen by more than one person at a time; that is to say, it seldom
happens to above one person in a company to be possessed with any high
degree of spleen or melancholy.

I am apt to think that, in the day of Judgment, there will be small
allowance given to the wise for their want of morals, nor to the ignorant
for their want of faith, because both are without excuse.  This renders
the advantages equal of ignorance and knowledge.  But, some scruples in
the wise, and some vices in the ignorant, will perhaps be forgiven upon
the strength of temptation to each.

The value of several circumstances in story lessens very much by distance
of time, though some minute circumstances are very valuable; and it
requires great judgment in a writer to distinguish.

It is grown a word of course for writers to say, "This critical age," as
divines say, "This sinful age."

It is pleasant to observe how free the present age is in laying taxes on
the next.  _Future ages shall talk of this_; _this shall be famous to all
posterity_.  Whereas their time and thoughts will be taken up about
present things, as ours are now.

The chameleon, who is said to feed upon nothing but air, hath, of all
animals, the nimblest tongue.

When a man is made a spiritual peer he loses his surname; when a
temporal, his Christian name.

It is in disputes as in armies, where the weaker side sets up false
lights, and makes a great noise, to make the enemy believe them more
numerous and strong than they really are.

Some men, under the notions of weeding out prejudices, eradicate virtue,
honesty, and religion.

In all well-instituted commonwealths, care has been taken to limit men's
possessions; which is done for many reasons, and among the rest, for one
which perhaps is not often considered: that when bounds are set to men's
desires, after they have acquired as much as the laws will permit them,
their private interest is at an end, and they have nothing to do but to
take care of the public.

There are but three ways for a man to revenge himself of the censure of
the world: to despise it, to return the like, or to endeavour to live so
as to avoid it.  The first of these is usually pretended, the last is
almost impossible; the universal practice is for the second.

I never heard a finer piece of satire against lawyers than that of
astrologers, when they pretend by rules of art to tell when a suit will
end, and whether to the advantage of the plaintiff or defendant; thus
making the matter depend entirely upon the influence of the stars,
without the least regard to the merits of the cause.

The expression in Apocrypha about Tobit and his dog following him I have
often heard ridiculed, yet Homer has the same words of Telemachus more
than once; and Virgil says something like it of Evander.  And I take the
book of Tobit to be partly poetical.

I have known some men possessed of good qualities, which were very
serviceable to others, but useless to themselves; like a sun-dial on the
front of a house, to inform the neighbours and passengers, but not the
owner within.

If a man would register all his opinions upon love, politics, religion,
learning, etc., beginning from his youth and so go on to old age, what a
bundle of inconsistencies and contradictions would appear at last!

What they do in heaven we are ignorant of; what they do not we are told
expressly: that they neither marry, nor are given in marriage.

It is a miserable thing to live in suspense; it is the life of a spider.

The Stoical scheme of supplying our wants by lopping off our desires, is
like cutting off our feet when we want shoes.

Physicians ought not to give their judgment of religion, for the same
reason that butchers are not admitted to be jurors upon life and death.

The reason why so few marriages are happy, is, because young ladies spend
their time in making nets, not in making cages.

If a man will observe as he walks the streets, I believe he will find the
merriest countenances in mourning coaches.

Nothing more unqualifies a man to act with prudence than a misfortune
that is attended with shame and guilt.

The power of fortune is confessed only by the miserable; for the happy
impute all their success to prudence or merit.

Ambition often puts men upon doing the meanest offices; so climbing is
performed in the same posture with creeping.

Censure is the tax a man pays to the public for being eminent.

Although men are accused for not knowing their own weakness, yet perhaps
as few know their own strength.  It is, in men as in soils, where
sometimes there is a vein of gold which the owner knows not of.

Satire is reckoned the easiest of all wit, but I take it to be otherwise
in very bad times: for it is as hard to satirise well a man of
distinguished vices, as to praise well a man of distinguished virtues.  It
is easy enough to do either to people of moderate characters.

Invention is the talent of youth, and judgment of age; so that our
judgment grows harder to please, when we have fewer things to offer it:
this goes through the whole commerce of life.  When we are old, our
friends find it difficult to please us, and are less concerned whether we
be pleased or no.

No wise man ever wished to be younger.

An idle reason lessens the weight of the good ones you gave before.

The motives of the best actions will not bear too strict an inquiry.  It
is allowed that the cause of most actions, good or bad, may he resolved
into the love of ourselves; but the self-love of some men inclines them
to please others, and the self-love of others is wholly employed in
pleasing themselves.  This makes the great distinction between virtue and
vice.  Religion is the best motive of all actions, yet religion is
allowed to be the highest instance of self-love.

Old men view best at a distance with the eyes of their understanding as
well as with those of nature.

Some people take more care to hide their wisdom than their folly.

Anthony Henley's farmer, dying of an asthma, said, "Well, if I can get
this breath once _out_, I'll take care it never got _in_ again."

The humour of exploding many things under the name of trifles, fopperies,
and only imaginary goods, is a very false proof either of wisdom or
magnanimity, and a great check to virtuous actions.  For instance, with
regard to fame, there is in most people a reluctance and unwillingness to
be forgotten.  We observe, even among the vulgar, how fond they are to
have an inscription over their grave.  It requires but little philosophy
to discover and observe that there is no intrinsic value in all this;
however, if it be founded in our nature as an incitement to virtue, it
ought not to be ridiculed.

Complaint is the largest tribute heaven receives, and the sincerest part
of our devotion.

The common fluency of speech in many men, and most women, is owing to a
scarcity of matter, and a scarcity of words; for whoever is a master of
language, and hath a mind full of ideas, will be apt, in speaking, to
hesitate upon the choice of both; whereas common speakers have only one
set of ideas, and one set of words to clothe them in, and these are
always ready at the mouth.  So people come faster out of a church when it
is almost empty, than when a crowd is at the door.

Few are qualified to shine in company; but it is in most men's power to
be agreeable.  The reason, therefore, why conversation runs so low at
present, is not the defect of understanding, but pride, vanity,
ill-nature, affectation, singularity, positiveness, or some other vice,
the effect of a wrong education.

To be vain is rather a mark of humility than pride.  Vain men delight in
telling what honours have been done them, what great company they have
kept, and the like, by which they plainly confess that these honours were
more than their due, and such as their friends would not believe if they
had not been told: whereas a man truly proud thinks the greatest honours
below his merit, and consequently scorns to boast.  I therefore deliver
it as a maxim, that whoever desires the character of a proud man, ought
to conceal his vanity.

Law, in a free country, is, or ought to be, the determination of the
majority of those who have property in land.

One argument used to the disadvantage of Providence I take to be a very
strong one in its defence.  It is objected that storms and tempests,
unfruitful seasons, serpents, spiders, flies, and other noxious or
troublesome animals, with many more instances of the like kind, discover
an imperfection in nature, because human life would be much easier
without them; but the design of Providence may clearly be perceived in
this proceeding.  The motions of the sun and moon--in short, the whole
system of the universe, as far as philosophers have been able to discover
and observe, are in the utmost degree of regularity and perfection; but
wherever God hath left to man the power of interposing a remedy by
thought or labour, there he hath placed things in a state of
imperfection, on purpose to stir up human industry, without which life
would stagnate, or, indeed, rather, could not subsist at all: _Curis
accuunt mortalia corda_.

Praise is the daughter of present power.

How inconsistent is man with himself!

I have known several persons of great fame for wisdom in public affairs
and counsels governed by foolish servants.

I have known great Ministers, distinguished for wit and learning, who
preferred none but dunces.

I have known men of great valour cowards to their wives.

I have known men of the greatest cunning perpetually cheated.

I knew three great Ministers, who could exactly compute and settle the
accounts of a kingdom, but were wholly ignorant of their own economy.

The preaching of divines helps to preserve well-inclined men in the
course of virtue, but seldom or never reclaims the vicious.

Princes usually make wiser choices than the servants whom they trust for
the disposal of places: I have known a prince, more than once, choose an
able Minister, but I never observed that Minister to use his credit in
the disposal of an employment to a person whom he thought the fittest for
it.  One of the greatest in this age owned and excused the matter from
the violence of parties and the unreasonableness of friends.

Small causes are sufficient to make a man uneasy when great ones are not
in the way.  For want of a block he will stumble at a straw.

Dignity, high station, or great riches, are in some sort necessary to old
men, in order to keep the younger at a distance, who are otherwise too
apt to insult them upon the score of their age.

Every man desires to live long; but no man would be old.

Love of flattery in most men proceeds from the mean opinion they have of
themselves; in women from the contrary.

If books and laws continue to increase as they have done for fifty years
past, I am in some concern for future ages how any man will be learned,
or any man a lawyer.

Kings are commonly said to have _long hands_; I wish they had as _long
ears_.

Princes in their infancy, childhood, and youth are said to discover
prodigious parts and wit, to speak things that surprise and astonish.
Strange, so many hopeful princes, and so many shameful kings!  If they
happen to die young, they would have been prodigies of wisdom and virtue.
If they live, they are often prodigies indeed, but of another sort.

Politics, as the word is commonly understood, are nothing but
corruptions, and consequently of no use to a good king or a good
ministry; for which reason Courts are so overrun with politics.

A nice man is a man of nasty ideas.

Apollo was held the god of physic and sender of diseases.  Both were
originally the same trade, and still continue.

Old men and comets have been reverenced for the same reason: their long
beards, and pretences to foretell events.

A person was asked at court, what he thought of an ambassador and his
train, who were all embroidery and lace, full of bows, cringes, and
gestures; he said, it was Solomon's importation, gold and apes.

Most sorts of diversion in men, children, and other animals, is an
imitation of fighting.

Augustus meeting an ass with a lucky name foretold himself good fortune.
I meet many asses, but none of them have lucky names.

If a man makes me keep my distance, the comfort is he keeps his at the
same time.

Who can deny that all men are violent lovers of truth when we see them so
positive in their errors, which they will maintain out of their zeal to
truth, although they contradict themselves every day of their lives?

That was excellently observed, say I, when I read a passage in an author,
where his opinion agrees with mine.  When we differ, there I pronounce
him to be mistaken.

Very few men, properly speaking, live at present, but are providing to
live another time.

Laws penned with the utmost care and exactness, and in the vulgar
language, are often perverted to wrong meanings; then why should we
wonder that the Bible is so?

Although men are accused for not knowing their weakness, yet perhaps as
few know their own strength.

A man seeing a wasp creeping into a vial filled with honey, that was hung
on a fruit tree, said thus: "Why, thou sottish animal, art thou mad to go
into that vial, where you see many hundred of your kind there dying in it
before you?"  "The reproach is just," answered the wasp, "but not from
you men, who are so far from taking example by other people's follies,
that you will not take warning by your own.  If after falling several
times into this vial, and escaping by chance, I should fall in again, I
should then but resemble you."

An old miser kept a tame jackdaw, that used to steal pieces of money, and
hide them in a hole, which the cat observing, asked why he would hoard up
those round shining things that he could make no use of?  "Why," said the
jackdaw, "my master has a whole chest full, and makes no more use of them
than I."

Men are content to be laughed at for their wit, but not for their folly.

If the men of wit and genius would resolve never to complain in their
works of critics and detractors, the next age would not know that they
ever had any.

After all the maxims and systems of trade and commerce, a stander-by
would think the affairs of the world were most ridiculously contrived.

There are few countries which, if well cultivated, would not support
double the number of their inhabitants, and yet fewer where one-third of
the people are not extremely stinted even in the necessaries of life.  I
send out twenty barrels of corn, which would maintain a family in bread
for a year, and I bring back in return a vessel of wine, which half a
dozen good follows would drink in less than a month, at the expense of
their health and reason.

A man would have but few spectators, if he offered to show for threepence
how he could thrust a red-hot iron into a barrel of gunpowder, and it
should not take fire.




FOOTNOTES:


{1}  Two puppet-show men.

{2}  The house-keeper.

{3}  The butler.

{4}  The footman.

{5}  The priest his confessor.




THE BICKERSTAFF-PARTRIDGE PAPERS

by Jonathan Swift


Jonathan Swift, et al. The Bickerstaff-Partridge Papers, etc. Annus
Mirabilis




Predictions For The Year 1708


Wherein the month, and day of the month are set down, the persons named,
and the great actions and events of next year particularly related, as
will come to pass.

Written to prevent the people of England from being farther imposed on
by vulgar almanack-makers.

By Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq.


I have long consider'd the gross abuse of astrology in this kingdom, and
upon debating the matter with myself, I could not possibly lay the
fault upon the art, but upon those gross impostors, who set up to be the
artists. I know several learned men have contended that the whole is a
cheat; that it is absurd and ridiculous to imagine, the stars can have
any influence at all upon human actions, thoughts, or inclinations: And
whoever has not bent his studies that way, may be excused for thinking
so, when he sees in how wretched a manner that noble art is treated by
a few mean illiterate traders between us and the stars; who import a
yearly stock of nonsense, lyes, folly, and impertinence, which they
offer to the world as genuine from the planets, tho' they descend from
no greater a height than their own brains.

I intend in a short time to publish a large and rational defence of this
art, and therefore shall say no more in its justification at present,
than that it hath been in all ages defended by many learned men, and
among the rest by Socrates himself, whom I look upon as undoubtedly the
wisest of uninspir'd mortals: To which if we add, that those who have
condemned this art, though otherwise learned, having been such as either
did not apply their studies this way, or at least did not succeed in
their applications; their testimony will not be of much weight to
its disadvantage, since they are liable to the common objection of
condemning what they did not understand.

Nor am I at all offended, or think it an injury to the art, when I see
the common dealers in it, the students in astrology, the philomaths, and
the rest of that tribe, treated by wise men with the utmost scorn and
contempt; but rather wonder, when I observe gentlemen in the country,
rich enough to serve the nation in parliament, poring in Partridge's
almanack, to find out the events of the year at home and abroad; not
daring to propose a hunting-match, till Gadbury or he have fixed the
weather.

I will allow either of the two I have mentioned, or any other of the
fraternity, to be not only astrologers, but conjurers too, if I do not
produce a hundred instances in all their almanacks, to convince any
reasonable man, that they do not so much as understand common grammar
and syntax; that they are not able to spell any word out of the usual
road, nor even in their prefaces write common sense or intelligible
English. Then for their observations and predictions, they are such as
will equally suit any age or country in the world. "This month a certain
great person will be threatened with death or sickness." This the
news-papers will tell them; for there we find at the end of the year,
that no month passes without the death of some person of note; and it
would be hard if it should be otherwise, when there are at least two
thousand persons of not in this kingdom, many of them old, and the
almanack-maker has the liberty of chusing the sickliest season of the
year where he may fix his prediction. Again, "This month an eminent
clergyman will be preferr'd;" of which there may be some hundreds half
of them with one foot in the grave. Then "such a planet in such a house
shews great machinations, plots and conspiracies, that may in time
be brought to light:" After which, if we hear of any discovery, the
astrologer gets the honour; if not, his prediction still stands good.
And at last, "God preserve King William from all his open and secret
enemies, Amen." When if the King should happen to have died, the
astrologer plainly foretold it; otherwise it passes but for the pious
ejaculation of a loyal subject: Though it unluckily happen'd in some of
their almanacks, that poor King William was pray'd for many months after
he was dead, because it fell out that he died about the beginning of the
year.

To mention no more of their impertinent predictions: What have we to
do with their advertisements about pills and drink for the venereal
disease? Or their mutual quarrels in verse and prose of Whig and Tory,
wherewith the stars have little to do?

Having long observed and lamented these, and a hundred other abuses of
this art, too tedious to repeat, I resolved to proceed in a new way,
which I doubt not will be to the general satisfaction of the kingdom:
I can this year produce but a specimen of what I design for the future;
having employ'd most part of my time in adjusting and correcting the
calculations I made some years past, because I would offer nothing to
the world of which I am not as fully satisfied, as that I am now
alive. For these two last years I have not failed in above one or two
particulars, and those of no very great moment. I exactly foretold the
miscarriage at Toulon, with all its particulars; and the loss of Admiral
Shovel, tho' I was mistaken as to the day, placing that accident about
thirty-six hours sooner than it happen'd; but upon reviewing my schemes,
I quickly found the cause of that error. I likewise foretold the Battle
of Almanza to the very day and hour, with the loss on both sides, and
the consequences thereof. All which I shewed to some friends many months
before they happened, that is, I gave them papers sealed up, to open at
such a time, after which they were at liberty to read them; and there
they found my predictions true in every article, except one or two, very
minute.

As for the few following predictions I now offer the world, I forbore
to publish them till I had perused the several almanacks for the year we
are now enter'd on. I find them in all the usual strain, and I beg the
reader will compare their manner with mine: And here I make bold to tell
the world, that I lay the whole credit of my art upon the truth of these
predictions; and I will be content, that Partridge, and the rest of his
clan, may hoot me for a cheat and impostor, if I fail in any singular
particular of moment. I believe, any man who reads this paper, will look
upon me to be at least a person of as much honesty and understanding, as
a common maker of almanacks. I do not lurk in the dark; I am not wholly
unknown in the world; I have set my name at length, to be a mark of
infamy to mankind, if they shall find I deceive them.

In one thing I must desire to be forgiven, that I talk more sparingly of
home-affairs: As it will be imprudence to discover secrets of state, so
it would be dangerous to my person; but in smaller matters, and that are
not of publick consequence, I shall be very free; and the truth of my
conjectures will as much appear from those as the other. As for the most
signal events abroad in France, Flanders, Italy and Spain, I shall
make no scruple to predict them in plain terms: Some of them are of
importance, and I hope I shall seldom mistake the day they will happen;
therefore, I think good to inform the reader, that I all along make use
of the Old Style observed in England, which I desire he will compare
with that of the news-papers, at the time they relate the actions I
mention.

I must add one word more: I know it hath been the opinion of several of
the learned, who think well enough of the true art of astrology, That
the stars do only incline, and not force the actions or wills of men:
And therefore, however I may proceed by right rules, yet I cannot in
prudence so confidently assure the events will follow exactly as I
predict them.

I hope I have maturely considered this objection, which in some cases
is of no little weight. For example: A man may, by the influence of an
over-ruling planet, be disposed or inclined to lust, rage, or avarice,
and yet by the force of reason overcome that bad influence; and this
was the case of Socrates: But as the great events of the world usually
depend upon numbers of men, it cannot be expected they should all unite
to cross their inclinations, from pursuing a general design, wherein
they unanimously agree. Besides the influence of the stars reaches to
many actions and events which are not any way in the power of reason;
as sickness, death, and what we commonly call accidents, with many more,
needless to repeat.

But now it is time to proceed to my predictions, which I have begun to
calculate from the time that the Sun enters into Aries. And this I take
to be properly the beginning of the natural year. I pursue them to the
time that he enters Libra, or somewhat more, which is the busy period of
the year. The remainder I have not yet adjusted, upon account of several
impediments needless here to mention: Besides, I must remind the reader
again, that this is but a specimen of what I design in succeeding years
to treat more at large, if I may have liberty and encouragement.

My first prediction is but a trifle, yet I will mention it, to show
how ignorant those sottish pretenders to astrology are in their own
concerns: It relates to Partridge the almanack-maker; I have consulted
the stars of his nativity by my own rules, and find he will infallibly
die upon the 29th of March next, about eleven at night, of a raging
fever; therefore I advise him to consider of it, and settle his affairs
in time.

The month of April will be observable for the death of many great
persons. On the 4th will die the Cardinal de Noailles, Archbishop of
Paris: On the 11th the young Prince of Asturias, son to the Duke
of Anjou: On the 14th a great peer of this realm will die at his
country-house: On the 19th an old layman of great fame for learning:
and on the 23rd an eminent goldsmith in Lombard-Street. I could mention
others, both at home and abroad, if I did not consider it is of very
little use or instruction to the reader, or to the world.

As to publick affairs: On the 7th of this month there will be an
insurrection in Dauphine, occasion'd by the oppressions of the people,
which will not be quieted in some months.

On the 15th will be a violent storm on the south-east coast of France,
which will destroy many of their ships, and some in the very harbour.

The 19th will be famous for the revolt of a whole province or kingdom,
excepting one city, by which the affairs of a certain prince in the
alliance will take a better face.

May, against common conjectures, will be no very busy month in Europe,
but very signal for the death of the Dauphin, which will happen on
the 7th, after a short fit of sickness, and grievous torments with the
strangury. He dies less lamented by the court than the kingdom.

On the 9th a Mareschal of France will break his leg by a fall from his
horse. I have not been able to discover whether he will then die or not.

On the 11th will begin a most important siege, which the eyes of all
Europe will be upon: I cannot be more particular: for in relating
affairs that so nearly concern the Confederates, and consequently this
Kingdom, I am forced to confine myself, for several reasons very obvious
to the reader.

On the 15th news will arrive of a very surprizing event, than which
nothing could be more unexpected.

On the 19th three noble ladies of this Kingdom will, against all
expectation, prove with child, to the great joy of their husbands.

On the 23rd a famous buffoon of the play-house will die a ridiculous
death, suitable to his vocation.

June. This month will be distinguish'd at home, by the utter dispersing
of those ridiculous deluded enthusiasts, commonly call'd the Prophets;
occasion'd chiefly by seeing the time come that many of their prophecies
should be fulfill'd, and then finding themselves deceiv'd by contrary
events. It is indeed to be admir'd how any deceiver can be so weak, to
foretel things near at hand, when a very few months must of necessity
discover the impostor to all the world; in this point less prudent than
common almanack-makers, who are so wise to wonder in generals, and talk
dubiously, and leave to the reader the business of interpreting.

On the 1st of this month a French general will be killed by a random
shot of a cannon-ball.

On the 6th a fire will break out in the suburbs of Paris, which will
destroy above a thousand houses; and seems to be the foreboding of
what will happen, to the surprize of all Europe, about the end of the
following month.

On the 10th a great battle will be fought, which will begin at four
of the clock in the afternoon; and last till nine at night with great
obstinacy, but no very decisive event. I shall not name the place, for
the reasons aforesaid; but the commanders on each left wing will be
killed.--I see bonfires, and hear the noise of guns for a victory.

On the 14th there will be a false report of the French king's death.

On the 20th Cardinal Portocarero will die of a dysentery, with great
suspicion of poison; but the report of his intention to revolt to King
Charles, will prove false.

July. The 6th of this month a certain general will, by a glorious
action, recover the reputation he lost by former misfortunes.

On the 12th a great commander will die a prisoner in the hands of his
enemies.

On the 14th a shameful discovery will be made of a French Jesuit, giving
poison to a great foreign general; and when he is put to the torture,
will make wonderful discoveries.

In short this will prove a month of great action, if I might have
liberty to relate the particulars.

At home, the death of an old famous senator will happen on the 15th at
his country-house, worn with age and diseases.

But that which will make this month memorable to all posterity, is the
death of the French King, Lewis the fourteenth, after a week's sickness
at Marli, which will happen on the 29th, about six o'clock in the
evening. It seems to be an effect of the gout in his stomach, followed
by a flux. And in three days after Monsieur Chamillard will follow his
master, dying suddenly of an appoplexy.

In this month likewise an ambassador will die in London; but I cannot
assign the day.

August. The affairs of France will seem to suffer no change for a
while under the Duke of Burgundy's administration; but the genius that
animated the whole machine being gone, will be the cause of mighty turns
and revolutions in the following year. The new King makes yet little
change either in the army or the ministry; but the libels against his
grandfather, that fly about his very court, give him uneasiness.

I see an express in mighty haste, with joy and wonder in his looks,
arriving by break of day on the 26th of this month, having travell'd in
three days a prodigious journey by land and sea. In the evening I hear
bells and guns, and see the blazing of a thousand bonfires.

A young admiral of noble birth, does likewise this month gain immortal
honour by a great achievement.

The affairs of Poland are this month entirely settled: Augustus resigns
his pretensions which he had again taken up for some time: Stanislaus is
peaceably possess'd of the throne; and the King of Sweden declares for
the Emperor.

I cannot omit one particular accident here at home; that near the end of
this month much mischief will be done at Bartholomew Fair, by the fall
of a booth.

September. This month begins with a very surprizing fit of frosty
weather, which will last near twelve days.

The Pope having long languish'd last month, the swellings in his legs
breaking, and the flesh mortifying, will die on the 11th instant; and in
three weeks time, after a mighty contest, be succeeded by a cardinal of
the imperial faction, but native of Tuscany, who is now about sixty-one
years old.

The French army acts now wholly on the defensive, strongly fortify'd in
their trenches; and the young French King sends overtures for a treaty
of peace by the Duke of Mantua; which, because it is a matter of state
that concerns us here at home, I shall speak no farther of it.

I shall add but one prediction more, and that in mystical terms, which
shall be included in a verse out of Virgil,

Alter erit jam Tethys, & altera quae vehat Argo. Delectos heroas.

Upon the 25th day of this month, the fulfilling of this prediction will
be manifest to every body.

This is the farthest I have proceeded in my calculations for the present
year. I do not pretend, that these are all the great events which will
happen in this period, but that those I have set down will infallibly
come to pass. It will perhaps still be objected, why I have not spoke
more particularly of affairs at home, or of the success of our armies
abroad, which I might, and could very largely have done; but those in
power have wisely discouraged men from meddling in publick concerns,
and I was resolv'd by no means to give the least offence. This I will
venture to say, That it will be a glorious campaign for the allies,
wherein the English forces, both by sea and land, will have their full
share of honour: That her Majesty Queen Anne will continue in health
and prosperity: And that no ill accident will arrive to any of the chief
ministry.

As to the particular events I have mention'd, the readers may judge
by the fulfilling of 'em, whether I am on the level with common
astrologers; who, with an old paultry cant, and a few pothook for
planets, to amuse the vulgar, have, in my opinion, too long been
suffer'd to abuse the world: But an honest physician ought not to be
despis'd, because there are such things as mountebanks. I hope I have
some share of reputation, which I would not willingly forfeit for a
frolick or humour: And I believe no gentleman, who reads this paper,
will look upon it to be of the same cast or mould with the common
scribblers that are every day hawk'd about. My fortune has placed me
above the little regard of scribbling for a few pence, which I neither
value or want: Therefore let no wise men too hastily condemn this essay,
intended for a good design, to cultivate and improve an ancient art,
long in disgrace, by having fallen into mean and unskilful hands. A
little time will determine whether I have deceived others or myself:
and I think it is no very unreasonable request, that men would please to
suspend their judgments till then. I was once of the opinion with those
who despise all predictions from the stars, till the year 1686, a man
of quality shew'd me, written in his album, That the most learned
astronomer, Captain H. assured him, he would never believe any thing of
the stars' influence, if there were not a great revolution in England in
the year 1688. Since that time I began to have other thoughts, and after
eighteen years diligent study and application, I think I have no reason
to repent of my pains. I shall detain the reader no longer, than to let
him know, that the account I design to give of next year's events, shall
take in the principal affairs that happen in Europe; and if I be denied
the liberty of offering it to my own country, I shall appeal to the
learned world, by publishing it in Latin, and giving order to have it
printed in Holland.


*****




The Accomplishment of the First of Mr Bickerstaff's Predictions;

being an account of the death of Mr Partridge, the almanack-maker, upon
the 29th instant.

In a letter to a person of honour Written in the year 1708

My Lord,

In obedience to your Lordship's commands, as well as to satisfy my own
curiosity, I have for some days past enquired constantly after Partridge
the almanack-maker, of whom it was foretold in Mr. Bickerstaff's
predictions, publish'd about a month ago, that he should die on the
29th instant about eleven at night of a raging fever. I had some sort
of knowledge of him when I was employ'd in the Revenue, because he used
every year to present me with his almanack, as he did other gentlemen,
upon the score of some little gratuity we gave him. I saw him
accidentally once or twice about ten days before he died, and observed
he began very much to droop and languish, tho' I hear his friends did
not seem to apprehend him in any danger. About two or three days ago
he grew ill, and was confin'd first to his chamber, and in a few hours
after to his bed, where Dr. Case and Mrs. Kirleus were sent for to
visit, and to prescribe to him. Upon this intelligence I sent thrice
every day one servant or other to enquire after his health; and
yesterday, about four in the afternoon, word was brought me that he
was past hopes: Upon which, I prevailed with myself to go and see him,
partly out of commiseration, and I confess, partly out of curiosity.
He knew me very well, seem'd surpriz'd at my condescension, and made me
compliments upon it as well as he could, in the condition he was. The
people about him said, he had been for some time delirious; but when
I saw him, he had his understanding as well as ever I knew, and spake
strong and hearty, without any seeming uneasiness or constraint. After
I told him how sorry I was to see him in those melancholy circumstances,
and said some other civilities, suitable to the occasion, I desired
him to tell me freely and ingeniously, whether the predictions Mr.
Bickerstaff had publish'd relating to his death, had not too much
affected and worked on his imagination. He confess'd he had often had
it in his head, but never with much apprehension, till about a fortnight
before; since which time it had the perpetual possession of his mind and
thoughts, and he did verily believe was the true natural cause of his
present distemper: For, said he, I am thoroughly persuaded, and I think
I have very good reasons, that Mr. Bickerstaff spoke altogether by
guess, and knew no more what will happen this year than I did myself.
I told him his discourse surprized me; and I would be glad he were in a
state of health to be able to tell me what reason he had to be convinc'd
of Mr. Bickerstaff's ignorance. He reply'd, I am a poor ignorant fellow,
bred to a mean trade, yet I have sense enough to know that all pretences
of foretelling by astrology are deceits, for this manifest reason,
because the wise and the learned, who can only know whether there be any
truth in this science, do all unanimously agree to laugh at and despise
it; and none but the poor ignorant vulgar give it any credit, and that
only upon the word of such silly wretches as I and my fellows, who can
hardly write or read. I then asked him why he had not calculated his
own nativity, to see whether it agreed with Bickerstaff's prediction? at
which he shook his head, and said, Oh! sir, this is no time for jesting,
but for repenting those fooleries, as I do now from the very bottom of
my heart. By what I can gather from you, said I, the observations and
predictions you printed, with your almanacks, were mere impositions on
the people. He reply'd, if it were otherwise I should have the less
to answer for. We have a common form for all those things, as to
foretelling the weather, we never meddle with that, but leave it to the
printer, who takes it out of any old almanack, as he thinks fit; the
rest was my own invention, to make my almanack sell, having a wife to
maintain, and no other way to get my bread; for mending old shoes is
a poor livelihood; and, (added he, sighing) I wish I may not have done
more mischief by my physick than my astrology; tho' I had some good
receipts from my grandmother, and my own compositions were such as I
thought could at least do no hurt.

I had some other discourse with him, which now I cannot call to mind;
and I fear I have already tired your Lordship. I shall only add one
circumstance, That on his death-bed he declared himself a Nonconformist,
and had a fanatick preacher to be his spiritual guide. After half an
hour's conversation I took my leave, being half stifled by the closeness
of the room. I imagine he could not hold out long, and therefore
withdrew to a little coffee-house hard by, leaving a servant at the
house with orders to come immediately, and tell me, as near as he could,
the minute when Partridge should expire, which was not above two hours
after; when, looking upon my watch, I found it to be above five minutes
after seven; by which it is clear that Mr. Bickerstaff was mistaken
almost four hours in his calculation. In the other circumstances he was
exact enough. But whether he has not been the cause of this poor man's
death, as well as the predictor, may be very reasonably disputed.
However, it must be confess'd the matter is odd enough, whether
we should endeavour to account for it by chance, or the effect of
imagination: For my own part, tho' I believe no man has less faith in
these matters, yet I shall wait with some impatience, and not without
some expectation, the fulfilling of Mr. Bickerstaff's second prediction,
that the Cardinal de Noailles is to die upon the fourth of April, and if
that should be verified as exactly as this of poor Partridge, I must
own I should be wholly surprized, and at a loss, and should infallibly
expect the accomplishment of all the rest.


*****




An Elegy on the supposed Death of Partridge, the Almanack-Maker.

          Well, 'tis as Bickerstaff has guess'd,
          Tho' we all took it for a jest;
          Partridge is dead, nay more, he dy'd
          E're he could prove the good 'Squire ly'd.
          Strange, an Astrologer shou'd die,
          Without one Wonder in the Sky!
          Not one of all his Crony Stars
          To pay their Duty at his Herse?
          No Meteor, no Eclipse appear'd?
          No Comet with a flaming Beard?
          The Sun has rose, and gone to Bed,
          Just as if partridge were not dead:
          Nor hid himself behind the Moon,
          To make a dreadful Night at Noon.
          He at fit Periods walks through Aries,
          Howe'er our earthly Motion varies;
          And twice a Year he'll cut th' Equator,
          As if there had been no such Matter.

          Some Wits have wonder'd what Analogy
          There is 'twixt Cobbling* and Astrology:
          How Partridge made his Optics rise,
          From a Shoe-Sole, to reach the Skies.

          A List of Coblers Temples Ties,
          To keep the Hair out of their Eyes;
          From whence 'tis plain the Diadem
          That Princes wear, derives from them.
          And therefore Crowns are now-a-days
          Adorn'd with Golden Stars and Rays,
          Which plainly shews the near Alliance
          'Twixt cobling and the Planets Science.

          Besides, that slow-pac'd Sign Bootes,
          As 'tis miscall'd, we know not who 'tis?
          But Partridge ended all Disputes,
          He knew his Trade, and call'd it **Boots.

          The Horned Moon, which heretofore
          Upon their Shoes the Romans wore,
          Whose Wideness kept their Toes from Corns,
          And whence we claim our Shooing-Horns;
          Shows how the Art of Cobling bears
          A near Resemblance to the Spheres.

          A Scrap of Parchment hung by Geometry
          (A great Refinement in Barometry)
          Can, like the Stars, foretel the Weather;
          And what is Parchment else but Leather?
          Which an Astrologer might use,
          Either for Almanacks or Shoes.

          Thus Partridge, by his Wit and Parts,
          At once did practise both these Arts;
          And as the boading Owl (or rather
          The Bat, because her Wings are Leather)
          Steals from her private Cell by Night,
          And flies about the Candle-Light;
          So learned Partridge could as well
          Creep in the Dark from Leathern Cell,
          And, in his Fancy, fly as fair,
          To peep upon a twinkling Star.

          Besides, he could confound the Spheres,
          And set the Planets by the Ears;
          To shew his Skill, he Mars could join
          To Venus in Aspect Mali'n;
          Then call in Mercury for Aid,
          And cure the Wounds that Venus made.

          Great Scholars have in Lucian read,
          When Philip, King of Greece was dead,
          His Soul and Spirit did divide,
          And each Part took a diff'rent Side;
          One rose a Star, the other fell
          Beneath, and mended Shoes in Hell.

          Thus Partridge still shines in each Art,
          The Cobling and Star-gazing Part,
          And is install'd as good a Star
          As any of the Caesars are.

          Triumphant Star! some Pity shew
          On Coblers militant below,
          Whom roguish Boys in stormy Nights
          Torment, by pissing out their Lights;
          Or thro' a Chink convey their Smoke;
          Inclos'd Artificers to choke.

          Thou, high exalted in thy Sphere,
          May'st follow still thy Calling there.
          To thee the Bull will lend his hide,
          By Phoebus newly tann'd and dry'd.
          For thee they Argo's Hulk will tax,
          And scrape her pitchy Sides for Wax.
          Then Ariadne kindly lends
          Her braided Hair to make thee Ends.
          The Point of Sagittarius' Dart
          Turns to an awl, by heav'nly Art;
          And Vulcan, wheedled by his Wife,
          Will forge for thee a Paring-Knife.
          For want of Room, by Virgo's Side,
          She'll strain a Point, and sit astride***,
          To take thee kindly in between,
          And then the Signs will be Thirteen.

     *Partridge was a Cobler.

     ** See his Almanack

     ***Tibi brachia contrahet ingens Scorpius, etc.


*****




An Epitaph on Partridge.

          Here, five Foot deep, lies on his Back,
          A Cobler, Starmonger, and Quack;
          Who to the Stars in pure Good-will,
          Does to his best look upward still.
          Weep all you Customers that use
          His Pills, his Almanacks, or Shoes;
          And you that did your Fortunes seek,
          Step to his Grave but once a Week:
          This Earth which bears his Body's Print,
          You'll find has so much Vertue in't,
          That I durst pawn my Ears 'twill tell
          Whate'er concerns you full as well,
          In Physick, Stolen Goods, or Love,
          As he himself could, when above.


*****




Partridge's reply

'Squire Bickerstaff detected; or, the astrological impostor convicted;

by John Partridge, student in physick and astrology.

It is hard, my dear countrymen of these united nations, it is very
hard that a Briton born, a Protestant astrologer, a man of revolution
principles, an assertor of the liberty and property of the people,
should cry out, in vain, for justice against a Frenchman, a Papist, an
illiterate pretender to science; that would blast my reputation,
most inhumanly bury me alive, and defraud my native country of those
services, that, in my double capacity, I daily offer to the publick.

What great provocations I have receiv'd, let the impartial reader judge,
and how unwillingly, even in my own defence, I now enter the lists
against falsehood, ignorance and envy: But I am exasperated, at length,
to drag out this cacus from the den of obscurity where he lurks, detect
him by the light of those stars he has so impudently traduced, and
shew there's not a monster in the skies so pernicious and malevolent to
mankind, as an ignorant pretender to physick and astrology. I shall
not directly fall on the many gross errors, nor expose the notorious
absurdities of this prostituted libeller, till I have let the learned
world fairly into the controversy depending, and then leave the
unprejudiced to judge of the merits and justice of the cause.

It was towards the conclusion of the year 1707, when an impudent
pamphlet crept into the world, intituled, 'Predictions, etc.' by Isaac
Bickerstaff, Esq;--Amongst the many arrogant assertions laid down by
that lying spirit of divination, he was pleas'd to pitch on the Cardinal
de Noailles and myself, among many other eminent and illustrious
persons, that were to die within the compass of the ensuing year; and
peremptorily fixes the month, day, and hour of our deaths: This, I
think, is sporting with great men, and publick spirits, to the scandal
of religion, and reproach of power; and if sovereign princes and
astrologers must make diversion for the vulgar---- why then farewel, say
I, to all governments, ecclesiastical and civil. But, I thank my better
stars, I am alive to confront this false and audacious predictor, and to
make him rue the hour he ever affronted a man of science and resentment.
The Cardinal may take what measures he pleases with him; as his
excellency is a foreigner, and a papist, he has no reason to rely on me
for his justification; I shall only assure the world he is alive---- but
as he was bred to letters, and is master of a pen, let him use it in
his own defence. In the mean time I shall present the publick with a
faithful narrative of the ungenerous treatment and hard usage I have
received from the virulent papers and malicious practices of this
pretended astrologer.

A true and impartial account of the proceedings of Isaac Bickerstaff,
Esq; against me----

The 28th of March, Anno Dom. 1708, being the night this sham-prophet had
so impudently fix'd for my last, which made little impression on myself;
but I cannot answer for my whole family; for my wife, with a concern
more than usual, prevailed on me to take somewhat to sweat for a cold;
and, between the hours of eight and nine, to go to bed: The maid, as she
was warming my bed, with a curiosity natural to young wenches, runs to
the window, and asks of one passing the street, who the bell toll'd for?
Dr. Partridge, says he, that famous almanack-maker, who died suddenly
this evening: The poor girl provoked, told him he ly'd like a rascal;
the other very sedately reply'd, the sexton had so informed him, and if
false, he was to blame for imposing upon a stranger. She asked a second,
and a third, as they passed, and every one was in the same tone. Now I
don't say these are accomplices to a certain astrological 'squire, and
that one Bickerstaff might be sauntring thereabouts; because I will
assert nothing here but what I dare attest, and plain matter of fact. My
wife at this fell into a violent disorder; and I must own I was a little
discomposed at the oddness of the accident. In the mean time one knocks
at my door, Betty runs down, and opening, finds a sober grave person,
who modestly enquires if this was Dr. Partridge's? She taking him for
some cautious city-patient, that came at that time for privacy, shews
him into the dining room. As soon as I could compose myself, I went to
him, and was surprized to find my gentleman mounted on a table with a
two-foot rule in his hand, measuring my walls, and taking the dimensions
of the room. Pray sir, says I, not to interrupt you, have you any
business with me? Only, sir, replies he, order the girl to bring me a
better light, for this is but a very dim one. Sir, says I, my name is
Partridge: Oh! the Doctor's brother, belike, cries he; the stair-case,
I believe, and these two apartments hung in close mourning, will be
sufficient, and only a strip of bays round the other rooms. The Doctor
must needs die rich, he had great dealings in his way for many years;
if he had no family coat, you had as good use the escutcheons of the
company, they are as showish, and will look as magnificent as if he
was descended from the blood royal. With that I assumed a great air of
authority, and demanded who employ'd him, or how he came there? Why,
I was sent, sir, by the Company of Undertakers, says he, and they were
employed by the honest gentleman, who is executor to the good Doctor
departed; and our rascally porter, I believe, is fallen fast asleep with
the black cloth and sconces, or he had been here, and we might have been
tacking up by this time. Sir, says I, pray be advis'd by a friend, and
make the best of your speed out of my doors, for I hear my wife's voice,
(which by the by, is pretty distinguishable) and in that corner of the
room stands a good cudgel, which somebody has felt e're now; if that
light in her hands, and she know the business you come about, without
consulting the stars, I can assure you it will be employed very much to
the detriment of your person. Sir, cries he, bowing with great civility,
I perceive extreme grief for the loss of the Doctor disorders you a
little at present, but early in the morning I'll wait on you with all
necessary materials. Now I mention no Mr. Bickerstaff, nor do I say,
that a certain star-gazing 'squire has been playing my executor before
his time; but I leave the world to judge, and if he puts things and
things fairly together, it won't be much wide of the mark.

Well, once more I got my doors clos'd, and prepar'd for bed, in hopes of
a little repose after so many ruffling adventures; just as I was putting
out my light in order to it, another bounces as hard as he can knock;
I open the window, and ask who's there, and what he wants? I am Ned the
sexton, replies he, and come to know whether the Doctor left any orders
for a funeral sermon, and where he is to be laid, and whether his grave
is to be plain or bricked? Why, sirrah, says I, you know me well enough;
you know I am not dead, and how dare you affront me in this manner?
Alack-a-day, replies the fellow, why 'tis in print, and the whole town
knows you are dead; why, there's Mr. White the joiner is but fitting
screws to your coffin, he'll be here with it in an instant: he was
afraid you would have wanted it before this time. Sirrah, Sirrah, says
I, you shall know tomorrow to your cost, that I am alive, and alive like
to be. Why, 'tis strange, sir, says he, you should make such a secret
of your death to us that are your neighbours; it looks as if you had a
design to defraud the church of its dues; and let me tell you, for one
that has lived so long by the heavens, that's unhandsomely done. Hist,
Hist, says another rogue that stood by him, away Doctor, in your flannel
gear as fast as you can, for here's a whole pack of dismals coming to
you with their black equipage, and how indecent will it look for you
to stand fright'ning folks at your window, when you should have been
in your coffin this three hours? In short, what with undertakers,
imbalmers, joiners, sextons, and your damn'd elegy hawkers, upon a late
practitioner in physick and astrology, I got not one wink of sleep that
night, nor scarce a moment's rest ever since. Now I doubt not but this
villainous 'squire has the impudence to assert, that these are entirely
strangers to him; he, good man, knows nothing of the matter, and honest
Isaac Bickerstaff, I warrant you, is more a man of honour, than to be an
accomplice with a pack of rascals, that walk the streets on nights, and
disturb good people in their beds; but he is out, if he thinks the whole
world is blind; for there is one John Partridge can smell a knave as
far as Grubstreet,--tho' he lies in the most exalted garret, and writes
himself 'Squire:--

But I'll keep my temper, and proceed in the narration.

I could not stir out of doors for the space of three months after this,
but presently one comes up to me in the street; Mr Partridge, that
coffin you was last buried in I have not been yet paid for: Doctor,
cries another dog, How d'ye think people can live by making of graves
for nothing? Next time you die, you may e'en toll out the bell yourself
for Ned. A third rogue tips me by the elbow, and wonders how I have the
conscience to sneak abroad without paying my funeral expences. Lord,
says one, I durst have swore that was honest Dr. Partridge, my old
friend; but poor man, he is gone. I beg your pardon, says another, you
look so like my old acquaintance that I used to consult on some private
occasions; but, alack, he's gone the way of all flesh---- Look, look,
look, cries a third, after a competent space of staring at me, would not
one think our neighbour the almanack-maker, was crept out of his grave
to take t'other peep at the stars in this world, and shew how much he is
improv'd in fortune-telling by having taken a journey to the other?

Nay, the very reader, of our parish, a good sober, discreet person, has
sent two or three times for me to come and be buried decently, or send
him sufficient reasons to the contrary, if I have been interr'd in any
other parish, to produce my certificate, as the act requires. My poor
wife is almost run distracted with being called Widow Partridge, when
she knows its false; and once a term she is cited into the court, to
take out letters of administration. But the greatest grievance is, a
paultry quack, that takes up my calling just under my nose, and in his
printed directions with N.B. says, He lives in the house of the late
ingenious Mr. John Partridge, an eminent practitioner in leather,
physick and astrology.

But to show how far the wicked spirit of envy, malice and resentment can
hurry some men, my nameless old persecutor had provided me a monument at
the stone-cutter's and would have erected it in the parish-church; and
this piece of notorious and expensive villany had actually succeeded,
had I not used my utmost interest with the vestry, where it was carried
at last but by two voices, that I am still alive. That stratagem
failing, out comes a long sable elegy, bedeck'd with hour-glasses,
mattocks, sculls, spades, and skeletons, with an epitaph as confidently
written to abuse me, and my profession, as if I had been under ground
these twenty years.

And, after such barbarous treatment as this, can the world blame me,
when I ask, What is become of the freedom of an Englishman? And where
is the liberty and property that my old glorious friend came over to
assert? We have drove popery out of the nation, and sent slavery to
foreign climes. The arts only remain in bondage, when a man of science
and character shall be openly insulted in the midst of the many useful
services he is daily paying to the publick. Was it ever heard, even in
Turkey or Algiers, that a state-astrologer was banter'd out of his
life by an ignorant impostor, or bawl'd out of the world by a pack of
villanous, deep-mouth'd hawkers? Though I print almanacks, and publish
advertisements; though I produce certificates under the ministers
and church-wardens hands I am alive, and attest the same on oath at
quarter-sessions, out comes a full and true relation of the death and
interment of John Partridge; Truth is bore down, attestations neglected,
the testimony of sober persons despised, and a man is looked upon by his
neighbours as if he had been seven years dead, and is buried alive in
the midst of his friends and acquaintance.

Now can any man of common sense think it consistent with the honour of
my profession, and not much beneath the dignity of a philosopher, to
stand bawling before his own door?---- Alive! Alive ho! The famous Dr.
Partridge! No counterfeit, but all alive!---- As if I had the twelve
celestial monsters of the zodiac to shew within, or was forced for a
livelihood to turn retailer to May and Bartholomew Fairs. Therefore, if
Her Majesty would but graciously be pleased to think a hardship of this
nature worthy her royal consideration, and the next parliament, in their
great wisdom cast but an eye towards the deplorable case of their old
philomath, that annually bestows his poetical good wishes on them, I am
sure there is one Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq; would soon be truss'd up for
his bloody predictions, and putting good subjects in terror of their
lives: And that henceforward to murder a man by way of prophecy, and
bury him in a printed letter, either to a lord or commoner, shall as
legally entitle him to the present possession of Tyburn, as if he robb'd
on the highway, or cut your throat in bed.

I shall demonstrate to the judicious, that France and Rome are at the
bottom of this horrid conspiracy against me; and that culprit aforesaid
is a popish emissary, has paid his visits to St. Germains, and is now in
the measures of Lewis XIV. That in attempting my reputation, there is
a general massacre of learning designed in these realms; and through my
sides there is a wound given to all the Protestant almanack-makers in
the universe.

Vivat Regina.


*****




A vindication of Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq;

against what is objected to him by Mr. Partridge in his almanack for the
present year 1709.

By the said Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq;

Written in the year 1709.

Mr. Partridge hath been lately pleased to treat me after a very rough
manner, in that which is called, his almanack for the present year: Such
usage is very undecent from one gentleman to another, and does not at
all contribute to the discovery of truth, which ought to be the great
end in all disputes of the learned. To call a man fool and villain,
and impudent fellow, only for differing from him in a point meer
speculative, is, in my humble opinion, a very improper style for a
person of his education. I appeal to the learned world, whether in
my last year's predictions I gave him the least provocation for such
unworthy treatment. Philosophers have differed in all ages; but the
discreetest among them have always differed as became philosophers.
Scurrility and passion, in a controversy among scholars, is just so much
of nothing to the purpose, and at best, a tacit confession of a weak
cause: My concern is not so much for my own reputation, as that of the
Republick of Letters, which Mr. Partridge hath endeavoured to wound
through my sides. If men of publick spirit must be superciliously
treated for their ingenious attempts, how will true useful knowledge
be ever advanced? I wish Mr. Partridge knew the thoughts which foreign
universities have conceived of his ungenerous proceedings with me; but
I am too tender of his reputation to publish them to the world. That
spirit of envy and pride, which blasts so many rising genius's in
our nation, is yet unknown among professors abroad: The necessity of
justifying myself will excuse my vanity, when I tell the reader that I
have near a hundred honorary letters from several parts of Europe (some
as far as Muscovy) in praise of my performance. Besides several others,
which, as I have been credibly informed, were open'd in the post-office
and never sent me. 'Tis true the Inquisition in Portugal was pleased to
burn my predictions, and condem the author and readers of them; but I
hope at the same time, it will be consider'd in how deplorable a state
learning lies at present in that kingdom: And with the profoundest
veneration for crown'd heads, I will presume to add, that it a little
concerned His Majesty of Portugal, to interpose his authority in behalf
of a scholar and a gentleman, the subject of a nation with which he
is now in so strict an alliance. But the other kingdoms and states of
Europe have treated me with more candor and generosity. If I had leave
to print the Latin letters transmitted to me from foreign parts,
they would fill a volume, and be a full defence against all that Mr.
Partridge, or his accomplices of the Portugal Inquisition, will be able
to object; who, by the way, are the only enemies my predictions have
ever met with at home or abroad. But I hope I know better what is due to
the honour of a learned correspondence in so tender a point. Yet some
of those illustrious persons will perhaps excuse me from transcribing a
passage or two in my own vindication. The most learned Monsieur Leibnits
thus addresses to me his third letter: Illustrissimo Bickerstaffio
Astrologiae instauratori, etc. Monsieur le Clerc, quoting my predictions
in a treatise he published last year, is pleased to say, Ita nuperrime
Bickerstaffius magnum illud Angliae fidus. Another great professor
writing of me, has these words: Bickerstaffius, nobilis Anglus,
Astrologorum hujusce Saeculi facile Princeps. Signior Magliabecchi, the
Great Duke's famous library-keeper, spends almost his whole letter in
compliments and praises. 'Tis true, the renowned Professor of Astronomy
at Utrecht, seems to differ from me in one article; but it is in a
modest manner, that becomes a philosopher; as, Pace tanti viri dixerim:
And pag.55, he seems to lay the error upon the printer (as indeed
it ought) and says, vel forsan error typographi, cum alioquin
Bickerstaffius ver doctissimus, etc.

If Mr. Partridge had followed this example in the controversy between
us, he might have spared me the trouble of justifying myself in so
publick a manner. I believe few men are readier to own their errors than
I, or more thankful to those who will please to inform me of them. But
it seems this gentleman, instead of encouraging the progress of his own
art, is pleased to look upon all attempts of that kind as an invasion
of his province. He has been indeed so wise to make no objection against
the truth of my predictions, except in one single point, relating
to himself: And to demonstrate how much men are blinded by their own
partiality, I do solemnly assure the reader, that he is the only person
from whom I ever heard that objection offered; which consideration
alone, I think, will take off all its weight.

With my utmost endeavours, I have not been able to trace above two
objections ever made against the truth of my last year's prophecies: The
first was of a French man, who was pleased to publish to the world, that
the Cardinal de Noailles was still alive, notwithstanding the pretended
prophecy of Monsieur Biquerstaffe: But how far a Frenchman, a papist,
and an enemy is to be believed in his own case against an English
Protestant, who is true to his government, I shall leave to the candid
and impartial reader.

The other objection is the unhappy occasion of this discourse, and
relates to an article in my predictions, which foretold the death of Mr.
Partridge, to happen on March 29, 1708. This he is pleased to contradict
absolutely in the almanack he has published for the present year, and
in that ungentlemanly manner (pardon the expression) as I have above
related. In that work he very roundly asserts, That he is not only now
alive, but was likewise alive upon that very 29th of March, when I had
foretold he should die. This is the subject of the present controversy
between us; which I design to handle with all brevity, perspicuity, and
calmness: In this dispute, I am sensible the eyes not only of England,
but of all Europe, will be upon us; and the learned in every country
will, I doubt not, take part on that side, where they find most
appearance of reason and truth.

Without entering into criticisms of chronology about the hour of his
death, I shall only prove that Mr. Partridge is not alive. And my first
argument is thus: Above a thousand gentelmen having bought his almanacks
for this year, merely to find what he said against me; at every line
they read, they would lift up their eyes, and cry out, betwixt rage and
laughter, "They were sure no man alive ever writ such damn'd stuff
as this." Neither did I ever hear that opinion disputed: So that Mr.
Partridge lies under a dilemma, either of disowning his almanack, or
allowing himself to be "no man alive". But now if an uninformed
carcase walks still about, and is pleased to call itself Partridge, Mr.
Bickerstaff does not think himself any way answerable for that. Neither
had the said carcase any right to beat the poor boy who happen'd to pass
by it in the street, crying, "A full and true account of Dr. Partridge's
death, etc."

Secondly, Mr. Partridge pretends to tell fortunes, and recover stolen
goods; which all the parish says he must do by conversing with the
devil and other evil spirits: And no wise man will ever allow he could
converse personally with either, till after he was dead.

Thirdly, I will plainly prove him to be dead out of his own almanack for
this year, and from the very passage which he produces to make us think
him alive. He there says, "He is not only now alive, but was also alive
on the very 29th of March, which I foretold he should die on": By this,
he declares his opinion, that a man may be alive now, who was not
alive a twelvemonth ago. And indeed, there lies the sophistry of this
argument. He dares not assert, he was alive ever since that 29th of
March, but that he is now alive, and was so on that day: I grant the
latter; for he did not die till night, as appears by the printed account
of his death, in a letter to a lord; and whether he is since revived
I leave the world to judge. This indeed is perfect cavilling, and I am
ashamed to dwell any longer upon it.

Fourthly, I will appeal to Mr. Partridge himself, whether it be probable
I could have been so indiscreet, to begin my predictions with the only
falsehood that ever was pretended to be in them; and this in an affair
at home, where I had so many opportunities to be exact; and must have
given such advantages against me to a person of Mr. Partridge's wit and
learning, who, if he could possibly have raised one single objection
more against the truth of my prophecies, would hardly have spared me.

And here I must take occasion to reprove the above mention'd writer of
the relation of Mr. Partridge's death, in a letter to a lord; who was
pleased to tax me with a mistake of four whole hours in my calculation
of that event. I must confess, this censure pronounced with an air
of certainty, in a matter that so nearly concerned me, and by a grave
judicious author, moved me not a little. But tho' I was at that time out
of town, yet several of my friends, whose curiosity had led them to be
exactly informed (for as to my own part, having no doubt at all in the
matter, I never once thought of it) assured me, I computed to something
under half an hour: which (I speak my private opinion) is an error of no
very great magnitude, that men should raise a clamour about it. I shall
only say, it would not be amiss, if that author would henceforth be more
tender of other men's reputations as well as his own. It is well there
were no more mistakes of that kind; if there had, I presume he would
have told me of them with as little ceremony.

There is one objection against Mr. Partridge's death, which I have
sometimes met with, though indeed very slightly offered, That he still
continues to write almanacks. But this is no more than what is common
to all that profession; Gadbury, Poor Robin, Dove, Wing, and several
others, do yearly publish their almanacks, though several of them have
been dead since before the Revolution. Now the natural reason of this
I take to be, that whereas it is the privilege of other authors to live
after their deaths; almanack-makers are alone excluded, because their
dissertations treating only upon the minutes as they pass, become
useless as those go off. In consideration of which, Time, whose
registers they are, gives them a lease in reversion, to continue their
works after their death.

I should not have given the publick or myself the trouble of this
vindication, if my name had not been made use of by several persons,
to whom I never lent it; one of which, a few days ago, was pleased to
father on me a new sett of predictions. But I think those are things too
serious to be trifled with. It grieved me to the heart, when I saw my
labours, which had cost me so much thought and watching, bawl'd about by
common hawkers, which I only intended for the weighty consideration of
the gravest persons. This prejudiced the world so much at first, that
several of my friends had the assurance to ask me whether I were in
jest? To which I only answered coldly, that the event would shew. But
it is the talent of our age and nation, to turn things of the greatest
importance into ridicule. When the end of the year had verified all my
predictions, out comes Mr. Partridge's almanack, disputing the point
of his death; so that I am employed, like the general who was forced to
kill his enemies twice over, whom a necromancer had raised to life. If
Mr. Partridge has practised the same experiment upon himself, and
be again alive, long may he continue so; that does not in the least
contradict my veracity: But I think I have clearly proved, by invincible
demonstration, that he died at farthest within half an hour of the time
I foretold, and not four hours sooner, as the above-mentioned author, in
his letter to a lord, hath maliciously suggested, with design to blast
my credit, by charging me with so gross a mistake.


*****




A famous prediction of Merlin, the British wizard.

Written above a thousand years ago, and relating to the year 1709, with
explanatory notes.

Last year was publish'd a paper of predictions, pretended to be written
by one Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq; but the true design of it was to
ridicule the art of astrology, and expose its professors as ignorant
or impostors. Against this imputation, Dr. Partridge hath vindicated
himself in his almanack for that year.

For a farther vindication of this famous art, I have thought fit to
present the world with the following prophecy. The original is said to
be of the famous Merlin, who lived about a thousand years ago; and
the following translation is two hundred years old, for it seems to be
written near the end of Henry the Seventh's reign. I found it in an old
edition of Merlin's Prophecies, imprinted at London by John Hawkins
in the year 1530, page 39. I set it down word for word in the old
orthography, and shall take leave to subjoin a few explanatory notes.

          Seven and Ten addyd to Nyne,
          Of Fraunce her Woe this is the Sygne,
          Tamys Rivere twys y-frozen,
          Walke sans wetyng Shoes ne Hozen.
          Then comyth foorthe, ich understonde,
          From Town of Stoffe to farryn Londe,
          An herdye Chyftan, woe the Morne
          To Fraunce, that evere he was born.
          Than shall the fyshe beweyle his Bosse;
          Nor shall grin Berrys make up the Losse.
          Yonge Symnele shall again miscarrye:
          And Norways Pryd again shall marrye.
          And from the tree where Blosums feele,
          Ripe Fruit shall come, and all is wele,
          Reaums shall daunce Honde in Honde,
          And it shall be merrye in old Inglonde,
          Then old Inglonde shall be no more,
          And no man shall be sorre therefore.
          Geryon shall have three Hedes agayne,
          Till Hapsburge makyth them but twayne.

Explanatory notes.

Seven and Ten. This line describes the year when these events shall
happen. Seven and ten makes seventeen, which I explain seventeen
hundred, and this number added to nine, makes the year we are now in;
for it must be understood of the natural year, which begins the first of
January.

Tamys Rivere twys, etc. The River Thames, frozen twice in one year, so
as men to walk on it, is a very signal accident, which perhaps hath not
fallen out for several hundred years before, and is the reason why some
astrologers have thought that this prophecy could never be fulfilled,
because they imagine such a thing would never happen in our climate.

From Town of Stoffe, etc. This is a plain designation of the Duke of
Marlborough: One kind of stuff used to fatten land is called marle,
and every body knows that borough is a name for a town; and this way
of expression is after the usual dark manner of old astrological
predictions.

Then shall the Fyshe, etc. By the fish, is understood the Dauphin of
France, as their kings eldest sons are called: 'Tis here said, he shall
lament the loss of the Duke of Burgundy, called the Bosse, which is an
old English word for hump-shoulder, or crook-back, as that Duke is known
to be; and the prophecy seems to mean, that he should be overcome or
slain. By the green berrys, in the next line, is meant the young Duke
of Berry, the Dauphin's third son, who shall not have valour or fortune
enough to supply the loss of his eldest brother.

Yonge Symnele, etc. By Symnele is meant the pretended Prince of Wales,
who, if he offers to attempt anything against England, shall miscarry as
he did before. Lambert Symnele is the name of a young man, noted in our
histories for personating the son (as I remember) of Edward the fourth.

And Norway's Pryd, etc. I cannot guess who is meant by Norway's Pride,
perhaps the reader may, as well as the sense of the two following lines.

Reaums shall, etc. Reums, or, as the word is now, realms, is the old
name for kingdoms: And this is a very plain prediction of our happy
Union, with the felicities that shall attend it. It is added that Old
England shall be no more, and yet no man shall be sorry for it. And
indeed, properly speaking, England is now no more, for the whole island
is one Kingdom, under the name of Britain.

Geryon shall, etc. This prediction, tho' somewhat obscure, is
wonderfully adapt. Geryon is said to have been a king of Spain, whom
Hercules slew. It was a fiction of the poets, that he had three heads,
which the author says he shall have again: That is, Spain shall have
three kings; which is now wonderfully verified; for besides the King of
Portugal, which properly is part of Spain, there are now two rivals for
Spain, Charles and Philip: But Charles being descended fro the Count of
Hapsburgh, founder of the Austrian family, shall soon make those heads
but two; by overturning Philip, and driving him out of Spain.

Some of these predictions are already fulfilled; and it is highly
probable the rest may be in due time; and, I think, I have not forced
the words, by my explication, into any other sense than what they will
naturally bear. If this be granted, I am sure it must be also allow'd,
that the author (whoever he were) was a person of extraordinary
sagacity; and that astrology brought to such perfection as this, is by
no means an art to be despised, whatever Mr. Bickerstaff, or other
merry gentlemen are pleased to think. As to the tradition of these lines
having been writ in the original by Merlin, I confess I lay not much
weight upon it: But it is enough to justify their authority, that the
book from whence I have transcrib'd them, was printed 170 years ago, as
appears by the title-page. For the satisfaction of any gentleman, who
may be either doubtful of the truth, or curious to be inform'd; I shall
give order to have the very book sent to the printer of this paper, with
directions to let anybody see it that pleases, because I believe it is
pretty scarce.


*****




Dr. John Arbuthnot and Alexander Pope

Annus Mirabilis: or, The wonderful effects of the approaching
conjunction of the planets Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn.

By Mart. Scriblerus, Philomath.

In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas corpora.....

I suppose every body is sufficiently appriz'd of, and duly prepar'd
for, the famous conjunction to be celebrated the 29th of this instant
December, 1722, foretold by all the sages of antiquity, under the name
of the Annus Mirabilis, or the metamorphostical conjunction: a word
which denotes the mutual transformation of sexes, (the effect of that
configuration of the celestial bodies) the human males being turn'd into
females, and the human females into males.

The Egyptians have represented this great transformation by several
significant hieroglyphicks, particularly one very remarkable. There are
carv'd upon an obelisk, a barber and a midwife; the barber delivers
his razor to the midwife, and she her swadling-cloaths to the barber.
Accordingly Thales Milesius (who like the rest of his countrymen,
borrow'd his learning from the Egyptians) after having computed the
time of this famous conjunction, "Then," says he, "shall men and women
mutually exchange the pangs of shaving and child-bearing."

Anaximander modestly describes this metamorphosis in mathematical terms:
"Then," says he, "shall the negative quantity of the women be turn'd
into positive, their - into +;" (i.e.) their minus into plus.

Plato not only speaks of this great change, but describes all the
preparations towards it. "Long before the bodily transformation, (says
he) nature shall begin the most difficult part of her work, by changing
the ideas and inclinations of the two sexes: Men shall turn effeminate,
and women manly; wives shall domineer, and husbands obey; ladies shall
ride a horseback, dress'd like cavaliers; princes and nobles appear in
night-rails and petticoats; men shall squeak upon theatres with female
voices, and women corrupt virgins; lords shall knot and cut paper; and
even the northern people.........:" A Greek phrase (which for modesty's
sake I forbear to translate) which denotes a vice too frequent amongst
us.

That the Ministry foresaw this great change, is plain from the
Callico-Act; whereby it is now become the occupation of women all
over England, to convert their useless female habits into beds,
window-curtains, chairs, and joint-stools; undressing themselves (as it
were) before their transformation.

The philosophy of this transformation will not seem surprizing to people
who search into the bottom of things. Madam Bourignon, a devout French
lady, has shewn us, how man was at first created male and female in
one individual, having the faculty of propagation within himself:
A circumstance necessary to the state of innocence, wherein a man's
happiness was not to depend upon the caprice of another. It was not till
after he had made a faux pas, that he had his female mate. Many such
transformations of individuals have been well attested; particularly
one by Montaigne, and another by the late Bishop of Salisbury. From
all which it appears, that this system of male and female has already
undergone and may hereafter suffer, several alterations. Every smatterer
in anatomy knows, that a woman is but an introverted man; a new fusion
and flatus will turn the hollow bottom of a bottle into a convexity; but
I forbear, (for the sake of my modest men-readers, who are in a few days
to be virgins.)

In some subjects, the smallest alterations will do: some men are
sufficiently spread about the hips, and contriv'd with female softness,
that they want only the negative quantity to make them buxom wenches;
and there are women who are, as it were, already the ebauche of a good
sturdy man. If nature cou'd be puzzl'd, it will be how to bestow the
redundant matter of the exuberant bubbies that now appear about town, or
how to roll out the short dapper fellows into well-siz'd women.

This great conjunction will begin to operate on Saturday the 29th
instant. Accordingly, about eight at night, as Senezino shall begin at
the Opera, si videte, he shall be observ'd to make an unusual motion;
upon which the audience will be affected with a red suffusion over their
countenance: And because a strong succession of the muscles of the belly
is necessary towards performing this great operation, both sexes will
be thrown into a profuse involuntary laughter. Then (to use the modest
terms of Anaximander) shall negative quantity be turn'd into positive,
etc. Time never beheld, nor will it ever assemble, such a number
of untouch'd virgins within those walls! but alas! such will be the
impatience and curiosity of people to act in their new capacity, that
many of them will be compleated men and women that very night. To
prevent the disorders that may happen upon this occasion, is the chief
design of this paper.

Gentlemen have begun already to make use of this conjunction to compass
their filthy purposes. They tell the ladies forsooth, that it is only
parting with a perishable commodity, hardly of so much value as a
callico under-petticoat; since, like its mistress, it will be useless in
the form it is now in. If the ladies have no regard to the dishonour and
immorality of the action, I desire they will consider, that nature who
never destroys her own productions, will exempt big-belly'd women till
the time of their lying-in; so that not to be transformed, will be the
same as to be pregnant. If they don't think it worth while to defend a
fortress that is to be demolish'd in a few days, let them reflect that
it will be a melancholy thing nine months hence, to be brought to bed of
a bastard; a posthumous bastard as it were, to which the quondam father
can be no more than a dry nurse.

This wonderful transformation is the instrument of nature, to balance
matters between the sexes. The cruelty of scornful mistresses shall be
return'd; the slighted maid shall grow into an imperious gallant, and
reward her undoer with a big belly, and a bastard.

It is hardly possible to imagine the revolutions that this wonderful
phaenomenon will occasion over the face of the earth. I long impatiently
to see the proceedings of the Parliament of Paris, as to the title
of succession to the crown, this being a case not provided for by the
salique law. There will be no preventing disorders amongst friars and
monks; for certainly vows of chastity do not bind but under the sex in
which they were made. The same will hold good with marriages, tho' I
think it will be a scandal amongst Protestants for husbands and wives
to part, since there remains still a possibility to perform the debitus
conjugale, by the husband being femme couverte. I submit it to the
judgment of the gentlemen of the long robe, whether this transformation
does not discharge all suits of rapes?

The Pope must undergo a new groping; but the false prophet Mahomet has
contriv'd matters well for his successors; for as the Grand Signior
has now a great many fine women, he will then have as many fine young
gentelmen, at his devotion.

These are surprizing scenes; but I beg leave to affirm, that the solemn
operations of nature are subjects of contemplation, not of ridicule.
Therefore I make it my earnest request to the merry fellows, and
giggling girls about town, that they would not put themselves in a high
twitter, when they go to visit a general lying-in of his first child;
his officers serving as midwives, nurses and rockers dispensing caudle;
or if they behold the reverend prelates dressing the heads and airing
the linnen at court, I beg they will remember that these offices must be
fill'd with people of the greatest regularity, and best characters. For
the same reason, I am sorry that a certain prelate, who notwithstanding
his confinement (in December 1723), still preserves his healthy,
chearful countenance, cannot come in time to be a nurse at court.

I likewise earnestly intreat the maids of honour, (then ensigns and
captains of the guard) that, at their first setting out, they have some
regard to their former station, and do not run wild through all the
infamous houses about town: That the present grooms of the bed-chamber
(then maids of honour) would not eat chalk and lime in their
green-sickness: And in general, that the men would remember they are
become retromingent, and not by inadvertency lift up against walls and
posts.

Petticoats will not be burdensome to the clergy; but balls and
assemblies will be indecent for some time.

As for you, coquettes, bawds, and chamber-maids, (the future ministers,
plenipotentiaries, and cabinet-counsellors to the princes of the earth,)
manage the great intrigues that will be committed to your charge, with
your usual secrecy and conduct; and the affairs of your masters will go
better than ever.

O ye exchange women! (our right worshipful representatives that are to
be) be not so griping in the sale of your ware as your predecessors,
but consider that the nation, like a spend-thrift heir, has run out:
Be likewise a little more continent in your tongues than you are at
present, else the length of debates will spoil your dinners.

You housewifely good women, who not preside over the confectionary,
(henceforth commissioners of the Treasury) be so good as to dispense the
sugar-plumbs of the Government with a more impartial and frugal hand.

Ye prudes and censorious old maids, (the hopes of the Bench) exert
but your usual talent of finding faults, and the laws will be strictly
executed; only I would not have you proceed upon such slender evidences
as you have done hitherto.

It is from you, eloquent oyster-merchants of Billingsgate, (just ready
to be called to the Bar, and quoif'd like your sister-serjants,) that we
expect the shortening the time, and lessening the expences of law-suits:
For I think you are observ'd to bring your debates to a short issue; and
even custom will restrain you from taking the oyster, and leaving only
the shell to your client.

O ye physicians, (who in the figure of old women are to clean the tripe
in the markets) scour it as effectually as you have done that of your
patients, and the town will fare most deliciously on Saturdays.

I cannot but congratulate human nature, upon this happy transformation;
the only expedient left to restore the liberties and tranquillity of
mankind. This is so evident, that it is almost an affront to common
sense to insist upon the proof: If there can be any such stupid
creature as to doubt it, I desire he will make but the following obvious
reflection. There are in Europe alone, at present, about a million of
sturdy fellows, under the denomination of standing forces, with arms in
their hands: That those are masters of the lives, liberties and fortunes
of all the rest, I believe no body will deny. It is no less true in
fact, that reams of paper, and above a square mile of skins of vellum
have been employ'd to no purpose, to settle peace among those sons
of violence. Pray, who is he that will say unto them, Go and disband
yourselves? But lo! by this transformation it is done at once, and the
halcyon days of publick tranquillity return: For neither the military
temper nor discipline can taint the soft sex for a whole age to
come: Bellaque matribus invisa, War odious to mothers, will not grow
immediately palatable in their paternal state.

Nor will the influence of this transformation be less in family
tranquillity, than it is in national. Great faults will be amended, and
frailties forgiven, on both sides. A wife who has been disturb'd with
late hours, and choak'd with the hautgout of a sot, will remember her
sufferings, and avoid the temptations; and will, for the same reason,
indulge her mate in his female capacity in some passions, which she is
sensible from experience are natural to the sex. Such as vanity of fine
cloaths, being admir'd, etc. And how tenderly must she use her mate
under the breeding qualms and labour-pains which she hath felt her self?
In short, all unreasonable demands upon husbands must cease, because
they are already satisfy'd from natural experience that they are
impossible.

That the ladies may govern the affairs of the world, and the gentlemen
those of their household, better than either of them have hitherto done,
is the hearty desire of, Their most sincere well-wisher, M.S.




THE JOURNAL TO STELLA

By Jonathan Swift

With preface, introduction and notes by George A. Aitken.

(Numbers thus (5) refer to the Notes at the end, which are arranged by
"Introduction" or by "Letter 'number'".)




PREFACE


The history of the publication of the Journal to Stella is somewhat
curious. On Swift's death twenty-five of the letters, forming the
closing portion of the series, fell into the hands of Dr. Lyon, a
clergyman who had been in charge of Swift for some years. The letters
passed to a man named Wilkes, who sold them for publication. They
accordingly appeared in 1766 in the tenth volume of Dr. Hawkesworth's
quarto edition of Swift's works; but the editor made many changes in
the text, including a suppression of most of the "little language." The
publishers, however, fortunately for us, were public-spirited enough to
give the manuscripts (with one exception) to the British Museum, where,
after many years, they were examined by John Forster, who printed in his
unfinished "Life of Swift" numerous passages from the originals, showing
the manner in which the text had been tampered with by Hawkesworth.
Swift himself, too, in his later years, obliterated many words and
sentences in the letters, and Forster was able to restore not a few of
these omissions. His zeal, however, sometimes led him to make guesses at
words which are quite undecipherable. Besides Forster's work, I have had
the benefit of the careful collation made by Mr. Ryland for his edition
of 1897. Where these authorities differ I have usually found myself in
agreement with Mr. Ryland, but I have felt justified in accepting some
of Forster's readings which were rejected by him as uncertain; and the
examination of the manuscripts has enabled me to make some additions and
corrections of my own. Swift's writing is extremely small, and abounds
in abbreviations. The difficulty of arriving at the true reading is
therefore considerable, apart from the erasures.

The remainder of the Journal, consisting of the first forty letters,
was published in 1768 by Deane Swift, Dr. Swift's second cousin. These
letters had been given to Mrs. Whiteway in 1788, and by her to her
son-in-law, Deane Swift. The originals have been lost, with the
exception of the first, which, by some accident, is in the British
Museum; but it is evident that Deane Swift took even greater liberties
with the text than Hawkesworth. He substituted for "Ppt" the word
"Stella," a name which Swift seems not to have used until some years
later; he adopted the name "Presto" for Swift, and in other ways tried
to give a greater literary finish to the letters. The whole of the
correspondence was first brought together, under the title of the
"Journal to Stella", in Sheridan's edition of 1784.

Previous editions of the Journal have been but slightly annotated.
Swift's letters abound with allusions to people of all classes with whom
he came in contact in London, and to others known to Esther Johnson in
Ireland; and a large proportion of these persons have been passed over
in discreet silence by Sir Walter Scott and others. The task of
the annotator has, of course, been made easier of late years by the
publication of contemporary journals and letters, and of useful works
of reference dealing with Parliament, the Army, the Church, the Civil
Service, and the like, besides the invaluable Dictionary of National
Biography. I have also been assisted by a collection of MS. notes kindly
placed at my disposal by Mr. Thomas Seccombe. I have aimed at brevity
and relevance, but it is hoped that the reader will find all the
information that is necessary. Here and there a name has baffled
research, but I have been able to give definite particulars of a very
large number of people--noblemen and ladies in society in London or
Dublin, Members of Parliament, doctors, clergymen, Government officials,
and others who have hitherto been but names to the reader of the
Journal. I have corrected a good many errors in the older notes, but in
dealing with so large a number of persons, some of whom it is difficult
to identify, I cannot hope that I myself have escaped pitfalls.

G. A. A.




INTRODUCTION.

When Swift began to write the letters known as the Journal to Stella, he
was forty-two years of age, and Esther Johnson twenty-nine. Perhaps the
most useful introduction to the correspondence will be a brief setting
forth of what is known of their friendship from Stella's childhood, the
more specially as the question has been obscured by many assertions and
theories resting on a very slender basis of fact.

Jonathan Swift, born in 1667 after his father's death, was educated
by his uncle Godwin, and after a not very successful career at Trinity
College, Dublin, went to stay with his mother, Abigail Erick, at
Leicester. Mrs. Swift feared that her son would fall in love with a girl
named Betty Jones, but, as Swift told a friend, he had had experience
enough "not to think of marriage till I settle my fortune in the world,
which I am sure will not be in some years; and even then, I am so hard
to please that I suppose I shall put it off to the other world." Soon
afterwards an opening for Swift presented itself. Sir William Temple,
now living in retirement at Moor Park, near Farnham, had been, like his
father, Master of the Irish Rolls, and had thus become acquainted with
Swift's uncle Godwin. Moreover, Lady Temple was related to Mrs. Swift,
as Lord Orrery tells us. Thanks to these facts, the application to
Sir William Temple was successful, and Swift went to live at Moor Park
before the end of 1689. There he read to Temple, wrote for him, and kept
his accounts, and growing into confidence with his employer, "was
often trusted with matters of great importance." The story--afterwards
improved upon by Lord Macaulay--that Swift received only 20 pounds
and his board, and was not allowed to sit at table with his master, is
wholly untrustworthy. Within three years of their first intercourse,
Temple had introduced his secretary to William the Third, and sent
him to London to urge the King to consent to a bill for triennial
Parliaments.

When Swift took up his residence at Moor Park he found there a little
girl of eight, daughter of a merchant named Edward Johnson, who had died
young. Swift says that Esther Johnson was born on March 18, 1681; in
the parish register of Richmond,(1) which shows that she was baptized on
March 20, 1680-81, her name is given as Hester; but she signed her
will "Esther," the name by which she was always known. Swift says, "Her
father was a younger brother of a good family in Nottinghamshire, her
mother of a lower degree; and indeed she had little to boast in her
birth." Mrs. Johnson had two children, Esther and Ann, and lived at
Moor Park as companion to Lady Giffard, Temple's widowed sister. Another
member of the household, afterwards to be Esther's constant companion,
was Rebecca Dingley, a relative of the Temple family.(2) She was a year
or two older than Swift.

The lonely young man of twenty-two was both playfellow and teacher
of the delicate child of eight. How he taught her to write has been
charmingly brought before us in the painting exhibited by Miss Dicksee
at the Royal Academy a few years ago; he advised her what books to read,
and instructed her, as he says, "in the principles of honour and virtue,
from which she never swerved in any one action or moment of her life."

By 1694 Swift had grown tired of his position, and finding that Temple,
who valued his services, was slow in finding him preferment, he left
Moor Park in order to carry out his resolve to go into the Church. He
was ordained, and obtained the prebend of Kilroot, near Belfast, where
he carried on a flirtation with a Miss Waring, whom he called Varina.
But in May 1696 Temple made proposals which induced Swift to return
to Moor Park, where he was employed in preparing Temple's memoirs and
correspondence for publication, and in supporting the side taken by
Temple in the Letters of Phalaris controversy by writing The Battle of
the Books, which was, however, not published until 1704. On his return
to Temple's house, Swift found his old playmate grown from a sickly
child into a girl of fifteen, in perfect health. She came, he says, to
be "looked upon as one of the most beautiful, graceful, and agreeable
young women in London, only a little too fat. Her hair was blacker than
a raven, and every feature of her face in perfection."

On his death in January 1699, Temple left a will,(3) dated 1694,
directing the payment of 20 pounds each, with half a year's wages, to
Bridget Johnson "and all my other servants"; and leaving a lease of some
land in Monistown, County Wicklow, to Esther Johnson, "servant to my
sister Giffard." By a codicil of February 1698, Temple left 100 pounds
to "Mr. Jonathan Swift, now living with me." It may be added that by her
will of 1722, proved in the following year, Lady Giffard gave 20 pounds
to Mrs. Moss--Mrs. Bridget Johnson, who had married Richard Mose or
Moss, Lady Giffard's steward. The will proceeds: "To Mrs. Hester (sic)
Johnson I give 10 pounds, with the 100 pounds I put into the Exchequer
for her life and my own, and declare the 100 pounds to be hers which I
am told is there in my name upon the survivorship, and for which she has
constantly sent over her certificate and received the interest. I give
her besides my two little silver candlesticks."

Temple left in Swift's hands the task of publishing his posthumous
works, a duty which afterwards led to a quarrel with Lady Giffard and
other members of the family. Many years later Swift told Lord Palmerston
that he stopped at Moor Park solely for the benefit of Temple's
conversation and advice, and the opportunity of pursuing his studies. At
Temple's death he was "as far to seek as ever." In the summer of 1699,
however, he was offered and accepted the post of secretary and chaplain
to the Earl of Berkeley, one of the Lords Justices, but when he reached
Ireland he found that the secretaryship had been given to another. He
soon, however, obtained the living of Laracor, Agher, and Rathbeggan,
and the prebend of Dunlavin in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. The
total value of these preferments was about 230 pounds a year, an
income which Miss Waring seems to have thought enough to justify him in
marrying. Swift's reply to the lady whom he had "singled out at first
from the rest of women" could only have been written with the intention
of breaking off the connection, and accordingly we hear no more of poor
Varina.

At Laracor, a mile or two from Trim, and twenty miles from Dublin, Swift
ministered to a congregation of about fifteen persons, and had abundant
leisure for cultivating his garden, making a canal (after the Dutch
fashion of Moor Park), planting willows, and rebuilding the vicarage. As
chaplain to Lord Berkeley, he spent much of his time in Dublin. He was
on intimate terms with Lady Berkeley and her daughters, one of whom is
best known by her married name of Lady Betty Germaine; and through them
he had access to the fashionable society of Dublin. When Lord Berkeley
returned to England in April 1701, Swift, after taking his Doctor's
degree at Dublin, went with him, and soon afterwards published,
anonymously, a political pamphlet, A Discourse on the Contests and
Dissentions in Athens and Rome. When he returned to Ireland in September
he was accompanied by Stella--to give Esther Johnson the name by which
she is best known--and her friend Mrs. Dingley. Stella's fortune was
about 1500 pounds, and the property Temple had left her was in County
Wicklow. Swift, very much for his "own satisfaction, who had few
friends or acquaintance in Ireland," persuaded Stella--now twenty years
old--that living was cheaper there than in England, and that a better
return was obtainable on money. The ladies took his advice, and made
Ireland their home. At first they felt themselves strangers in Dublin;
"the adventure looked so like a frolic," Swift says, "the censure held
for some time as if there were a secret history in such a removal: which
however soon blew off by her excellent conduct." Swift took every
step that was possible to avoid scandal. When he was away, the ladies
occupied his rooms; when he returned, they went into their own lodgings.
When he was absent, they often stopped at the vicarage at Laracor, but
if he were there, they moved to Trim, where they visited the vicar, Dr.
Raymond, or lived in lodgings in the town or neighbourhood. Swift was
never with Stella except in the presence of a third person, and in 1726
he said that he had not seen her in a morning "these dozen years, except
once or twice in a journey."

During a visit to England in the winter of 1703-4 we find Swift in
correspondence with the Rev. William Tisdall, a Dublin incumbent whom he
had formerly known at Belfast. Tisdall was on friendly terms with Stella
and Mrs. Dingley, and Swift sent messages to them through him. "Pray put
them upon reading," he wrote, "and be always teaching something to
Mrs. Johnson, because she is good at comprehending, remembering and
retaining." But the correspondence soon took a different turn. Tisdall
paid his addresses to Stella, and charged Swift with opposing his suit.
Tisdall's letters are missing, but Swift's reply of April 20, 1704,
puts things sufficiently clearly. "My conjecture is," he says, "that
you think I obstructed your inclinations to please my own, and that my
intentions were the same with yours. In answer to all which I will, upon
my conscience and honour, tell you the naked truth. First, I think I
have said to you before that, if my fortunes and humour served me to
think of that state, I should certainly, among all persons upon earth,
make your choice; because I never saw that person whose conversation I
entirely valued but hers; this was the utmost I ever gave way to. And
secondly, I must assure you sincerely that this regard of mine never
once entered into my head to be an impediment to you." He had thought
Tisdall not rich enough to marry; "but the objection of your fortune
being removed, I declare I have no other; nor shall any consideration
of my own misfortune, in losing so good a friend and companion as her,
prevail on me, against her interest and settlement in the world, since
it is held so necessary and convenient a thing for ladies to marry, and
that time takes off from the lustre of virgins in all other eyes but
mine. I appeal to my letters to herself whether I was your friend or not
in the whole concern, though the part I designed to act in it was purely
passive." He had even thought "it could not be decently broken," without
disadvantage to the lady's credit, since he supposed it was known to the
town; and he had always spoken of her in a manner far from discouraging.
Though he knew many ladies of rank, he had "nowhere met with an humour,
a wit, or conversation so agreeable, a better portion of good sense, or
a truer judgment of men or things." He envied Tisdall his prudence and
temper, and love of peace and settlement, "the reverse of which has been
the great uneasiness of my life, and is likely to continue so."

This letter has been quoted at some length because of its great
importance. It is obviously capable of various interpretations, and
some, like Dr. Johnson, have concluded that Swift was resolved to keep
Stella in his power, and therefore prevented an advantageous match
by making unreasonable demands. I cannot see any ground for this
interpretation, though it is probable that Tisdall's appearance as
a suitor was sufficiently annoying. There is no evidence that Stella
viewed Tisdall's proposal with any favour, unless it can be held to
be furnished by Swift's belief that the town thought--rightly or
wrongly--that there was an engagement. In any case, there could be no
mistake in future with regard to Swift's attitude towards Stella. She
was dearer to him than anyone else, and his feeling for her would not
change, but for marriage he had neither fortune nor humour. Tisdall
consoled himself by marrying another lady two years afterwards; and
though for a long time Swift entertained for him feelings of dislike,
in later life their relations improved, and Tisdall was one of the
witnesses to Swift's will.

The Tale of a Tub was published in 1704, and Swift was soon in constant
intercourse with Addison and the other wits. While he was in England in
1705, Stella and Mrs. Dingley made a short visit to London. This and a
similar visit in 1708 are the only occasions on which Stella is known to
have left Ireland after taking up her residence in that country. Swift's
influence over women was always very striking. Most of the toasts of the
day were his friends, and he insisted that any lady of wit and quality
who desired his acquaintance should make the first advances. This, he
says--writing in 1730--had been an established rule for over twenty
years. In 1708 a dispute on this question with one toast, Mrs. Long,
was referred for settlement to Ginckel Vanhomrigh, the son of the house
where it was proposed that the meeting should take place; and by the
decision--which was in Swift's favour--"Mrs. Vanhomrigh and her fair
daughter Hessy" were forbidden to aid Mrs. Long in her disobedience
for the future. This is the first that we hear of Hester or Esther
Vanhomrigh, who was afterwards to play so marked a part in the story
of Swift's life. Born on February 14, 1690, she was now eighteen. Her
father, Bartholomew Vanhomrigh, a Dublin merchant of Dutch origin,
had died in 1703, leaving his wife a fortune of some sixteen thousand
pounds. On the income from this money Mrs. Vanhomrigh, with her two
daughters, Hester and Mary, were able to mix in fashionable society in
London. Swift was introduced to them by Sir Andrew Fountaine early in
1708, but evidently Stella did not make their acquaintance, nor indeed
hear much, if anything, of them until the time of the Journal.

Swift's visit to London in 1707-9 had for its object the obtaining for
the Irish Church of the surrender by the Crown of the First-Fruits and
Twentieths, which brought in about 2500 pounds a year. Nothing came
of Swift's interviews with the Whig statesmen, and after many
disappointments he returned to Laracor (June 1709), and conversed with
none but Stella and her card-playing friends, and Addison, now secretary
to Lord Wharton.(4) Next year came the fall of the Whigs, and a request
to Swift from the Irish bishops that he would renew the application for
the First-Fruits, in the hope that there would be greater success with
the Tories. Swift reached London in September 1710, and began the series
of letters, giving details of the events of each day, which now form the
Journal to Stella. "I will write something every day to MD," he says,
"and make it a sort of journal; and when it is full I will send it,
whether MD writes or no; and so that will be pretty; and I shall always
be in conversation with MD, and MD with Presto." It is interesting to
note that by way of caution these letters were usually addressed to Mrs.
Dingley, and not to Stella.

The story of Swift's growing intimacy with the Tory leaders, of the
success of his mission, of the increasing coolness towards older
acquaintances, and of his services to the Government, can best be read
in the Journal itself. In the meantime the intimacy with the Vanhomrighs
grew rapidly. They were near neighbours of Swift's, and in a few weeks
after his arrival in town we find frequent allusions to the dinners at
their house (where he kept his best gown and periwig), sometimes with
the explanation that he went there "out of mere listlessness," or
because it was wet, or because another engagement had broken down. Only
thrice does he mention the "eldest daughter": once on her birthday; once
on the occasion of a trick played him, when he received a message that
she was suddenly very ill ("I rattled off the daughter"); and once to
state that she was come of age, and was going to Ireland to look after
her fortune. There is evidence that "Miss Essy," or Vanessa, to give her
the name by which she will always be known, was in correspondence with
Swift in July 1710--while he was still in Ireland--and in the spring of
1711;(5) and early in 1711 Stella seems to have expressed surprise at
Swift's intimacy with the family, for in February he replied, "You say
they are of no consequence; why, they keep as good female company as
I do male; I see all the drabs of quality at this end of the town
with them." In the autumn Swift seems to have thought that Vanessa was
keeping company with a certain Hatton, but Mrs. Long--possibly meaning
to give him a warning hint--remarked that if this were so "she is not
the girl I took her for; but to me she seems melancholy."

In 1712 occasional letters took the place of the daily journal to "MD,"
but there is no change in the affectionate style in which Swift wrote.
In the spring he had a long illness, which affected him, indeed,
throughout the year. Other reasons which he gives for the falling off in
his correspondence are his numerous business engagements, and the hope
of being able to send some good news of an appointment for himself.
There is only one letter to Stella between July 19 and September 15,
and Dr. Birkbeck Hill argues that the poem "Cadenus and Vanessa" was
composed at that time.(6) If this be so, it must have been altered next
year, because it was not until 1713 that Swift was made a Dean. Writing
on April 19, 1726, Swift said that the poem "was written at Windsor near
fourteen years ago, and dated: it was a task performed on a frolic among
some ladies, and she it was addressed to died some time ago in Dublin,
and on her death the copy shewn by her executor." Several copies were in
circulation, and he was indifferent what was done with it; it was "only
a cavalier business," and if those who would not give allowances were
malicious, it was only what he had long expected.

From this letter it would appear that this remarkable poem was written
in the summer of 1712; whereas the title-page of the pamphlet says it
was "written at Windsor, 1713." Swift visited Windsor in both years,
but he had more leisure in 1712, and we know that Vanessa was also at
Windsor in that year. In that year, too, he was forty-four, the
age mentioned in the poem. Neither Swift nor Vanessa forgot this
intercourse: years afterwards Swift wrote to her, "Go over the scenes
of Windsor.... Cad thinks often of these"; and again, "Remember the
indisposition at Windsor." We know that this poem was revised in 1719,
when in all probability Swift added the lines to which most exception
can be taken. Cadenus was to be Vanessa's instructor:--

     "His conduct might have made him styled
      A father, and the nymph his child."

He had "grown old in politics and wit," and "in every scene had kept
his heart," so that he now "understood not what was love." But he
had written much, and Vanessa admired his wit. Cadenus found that her
thoughts wandered--

     "Though she seemed to listen more
      To all he spoke than e'er before."

When she confessed her love, he was filled with "shame, disappointment,
guilt, surprise." He had aimed only at cultivating the mind, and had
hardly known whether she was young or old. But he was flattered, and
though he could not give her love, he offered her friendship, "with
gratitude, respect, esteem." Vanessa took him at his word, and said she
would now be tutor, though he was not apt to learn:--

     "But what success Vanessa met
      Is to the world a secret yet.
      Whether the nymph to please her swain
      Talks in a high romantic strain;
      Or whether he at last descends
      To act with less seraphic ends;
      Or, to compound the business, whether
      They temper love and books together,
      Must never to mankind be told,
      Nor shall the conscious Muse unfold."

Such is the poem as we now have it, written, it must be remembered, for
Vanessa's private perusal. It is to be regretted, for her own sake, that
she did not destroy it.

Swift received the reward of his services to the Government--the
Deanery of St. Patrick's, Dublin--in April 1713. Disappointed at what he
regarded as exile, he left London in June. Vanessa immediately began to
send him letters which brought home to him the extent of her passion;
and she hinted at jealousy in the words, "If you are very happy, it is
ill-natured of you not to tell me so, except 'tis what is inconsistent
with my own." In his reply Swift dwelt upon the dreariness of his
surroundings at Laracor, and reminded her that he had said he would
endeavour to forget everything in England, and would write as seldom as
he could.

Swift was back again in the political strife in London in September,
taking Oxford's part in the quarrel between that statesman and
Bolingbroke. On the fall of the Tories at the death of Queen Anne, he
saw that all was over, and retired to Ireland, not to return again
for twelve years. In the meantime the intimacy with Vanessa had been
renewed. Her mother had died, leaving debts, and she pressed Swift for
advice in the management of her affairs. When she suggested coming to
Ireland, where she had property, he told her that if she took this
step he would "see her very seldom." However, she took up her abode at
Celbridge, only a few miles from Dublin. Swift gave her many cautions,
out of "the perfect esteem and friendship" he felt for her, but he often
visited her. She was dissatisfied, however, begging him to speak kindly,
and at least to counterfeit his former indulgent friendship. "What can
be wrong," she wrote, "in seeing and advising an unhappy young woman?
You cannot but know that your frowns make my life unsupportable."
Sometimes he treated the matter lightly; sometimes he showed annoyance;
sometimes he assured her of his esteem and love, but urged her not
to make herself or him "unhappy by imaginations." He was uniformly
unsuccessful in stopping Vanessa's importunity. He endeavoured, she
said, by severities to force her from him; she knew she was the cause of
uneasy reflections to him; but nothing would lessen her "inexpressible
passion."

Unfortunately he failed--partly no doubt from mistaken considerations
of kindness, partly because he shrank from losing her affection--to take
effective steps to put an end to Vanessa's hopes. It would have been
better if he had unhesitatingly made it clear to her that he could
not return her passion, and that if she could not be satisfied with
friendship the intimacy must cease. To quote Sir Henry Craik, "The
friendship had begun in literary guidance: it was strengthened by
flattery: it lived on a cold and almost stern repression, fed by
confidences as to literary schemes, and by occasional literary
compliments: but it never came to have a real hold over Swift's heart."

With 1716 we come to the alleged marriage with Stella. In 1752, seven
years after Swift's death, Lord Orrery, in his Remarks on Swift, said
that Stella was "the concealed, but undoubted, wife of Dr. Swift....
If my informations are right, she was married to Dr. Swift in the year
1716, by Dr. Ashe, then Bishop of Clogher." Ten years earlier, in 1742,
in a letter to Deane Swift which I have not seen quoted before, Orrery
spoke of the advantage of a wife to a man in his declining years; "nor
had the Dean felt a blow, or wanted a companion, had he been married,
or, in other words, had Stella lived." What this means is not at all
clear. In 1754, Dr. Delany, an old friend of Swift's, wrote, in comment
upon Orrery's Remarks, "Your account of his marriage is, I am satisfied,
true." In 1789, George Monck Berkeley, in his Literary Relics, said
that Swift and Stella were married by Dr. Ashe, "who himself related
the circumstances to Bishop Berkeley, by whose relict the story was
communicated to me." Dr. Ashe cannot have told Bishop Berkeley by
word of mouth, because Ashe died in 1717, the year after the supposed
marriage, and Berkeley was then still abroad. But Berkeley was at
the time tutor to Ashe's son, and may therefore have been informed by
letter, though it is difficult to believe that Ashe would write about
such a secret so soon after the event. Thomas Sheridan, on information
received from his father, Dr. Sheridan, Swift's friend, accepted the
story of the marriage in his book (1784), adding particulars which are
of very doubtful authenticity; and Johnson, in his Lives of the Poets,
says that Dr. Madden told him that Stella had related her "melancholy
story" to Dr. Sheridan before her death. On the other hand, Dr. Lyon,
Swift's attendant in his later years, disbelieved the story of the
marriage, which was, he said, "founded only on hearsay"; and Mrs.
Dingley "laughed at it as an idle tale," founded on suspicion.

Sir Henry Craik is satisfied with the evidence for the marriage. Mr.
Leslie Stephen is of opinion that it is inconclusive, and Forster could
find no evidence that is at all reasonably sufficient; while Mr. Stanley
Lane-Poole, Mr. Churton Collins, and others are strongly of opinion
that no such marriage ever took place. A full discussion of the evidence
would involve the consideration of the reliability of the witnesses, and
the probability of their having authentic information, and would be out
of place here. My own opinion is that the evidence for the marriage is
very far from convincing, and this view seems to be confirmed by all
that we know from his own letters of Swift's relations with Stella. It
has been suggested that she was pained by reports of Swift's intercourse
with Vanessa, and felt that his feelings towards herself were growing
colder; but this is surmise, and no satisfactory explanation has been
given to account for a form of marriage being gone through after so
many years of the closest friendship. There is no reason to suppose that
there was at the time any gossip in circulation about Stella, and if her
reputation was in question, a marriage of which the secret was carefully
kept would obviously be of no benefit to her. Moreover, we are told that
there was no change in their mode of life; if they were married, what
reason could there be for keeping it a secret, or for denying themselves
the closer relationship of marriage? The only possible benefit to
Stella was that Swift would be prevented marrying anyone else. It is
impossible, of course, to disprove a marriage which we are told was
secretly performed, without banns or licence or witnesses; but we may
reasonably require strong evidence for so startling a step. If we
reject the tale, the story of Swift's connection with Stella is at least
intelligible; while the acceptance of this marriage introduces many
puzzling circumstances, and makes it necessary to believe that during
the remainder of Stella's life Swift repeatedly spoke of his wife as a
friend, and of himself as one who had never married.(7) What right have
we to put aside Swift's plain and repeated statements? Moreover, his
attitude towards Vanessa for the remaining years of her life becomes
much more culpable if we are to believe that he had given Stella the
claim of a wife upon him.(8)

From 1719 onwards we have a series of poems to Stella, written chiefly
in celebration of her birthday. She was now thirty-eight (Swift says,
"Thirty-four--we shan't dispute a year or more"), and the verses abound
in laughing allusions to her advancing years and wasting form. Hers was
"an angel's face a little cracked," but all men would crowd to her door
when she was fourscore. His verses to her had always been

     "Without one word of Cupid's darts,
      Of killing eyes, or bleeding hearts;
      With friendship and esteem possessed,
      I ne'er admitted Love a guest."

Her only fault was that she could not bear the lightest touch of blame.
Her wit and sense, her loving care in illness--to which he owed that
fact that he was alive to say it--made her the "best pattern of true
friends." She replied, in lines written on Swift's birthday in 1721,
that she was his pupil and humble friend. He had trained her judgment
and refined her fancy and taste:--

     "You taught how I might youth prolong
      By knowing what was right and wrong;
      How from my heart to bring supplies
      Of lustre to my fading eyes;
      How soon a beauteous mind repairs
      The loss of changed or falling hairs;
      How wit and virtue from within
      Send out a smoothness o'er the skin
      Your lectures could my fancy fix,
      And I can please at thirty-six."

In 1723 Vanessa is said to have written to Stella or to Swift--there are
discrepancies in the versions given by Sheridan and Lord Orrery, both
of whom are unreliable--asking whether the report that they were married
was true. Swift, we are told, rode to Celbridge, threw down Vanessa's
letter in a great rage, and left without speaking a word.(9) Vanessa,
whose health had been failing for some time, died shortly afterwards,
having cancelled a will in Swift's favour. She left "Cadenus and
Vanessa" for publication, and when someone said that she must have been
a remarkable woman to inspire such a poem, Stella replied that it was
well known that the Dean could write finely upon a broomstick.

Soon after this tragedy Swift became engrossed in the Irish agitation
which led to the publication of the Drapier's Letters, and in 1726 he
paid a long-deferred visit to London, taking with him the manuscript
of Gulliver's Travels. While in England he was harassed by bad news of
Stella, who had been in continued ill-health for some years. His letters
to friends in Dublin show how greatly he suffered. To the Rev. John
Worrall he wrote, in a letter which he begged him to burn, "What you
tell me of Mrs. Johnson I have long expected with great oppression
and heaviness of heart. We have been perfect friends these thirty-five
years. Upon my advice they both came to Ireland, and have been ever
since my constant companions; and the remainder of my life will be a
very melancholy scene, when one of them is gone, whom I most esteemed,
upon the score of every good quality that can possibly recommend a human
creature." He would not for the world be present at her death: "I should
be a trouble to her, and a torment to myself." If Stella came to Dublin,
he begged that she might be lodged in some airy, healthy part, and not
in the Deanery, where too it would be improper for her to die. "There
is not a greater folly," he thinks, "than to contract too great and
intimate a friendship, which must always leave the survivor miserable."
To Dr. Stopford he wrote in similar terms of the "younger of the two"
"oldest and dearest friends I have in the world." "This was a person
of my own rearing and instructing from childhood, who excelled in every
good quality that can possibly accomplish a human creature.... I know
not what I am saying; but believe me that violent friendship is much
more lasting and as much engaging as violent love." To Dr. Sheridan he
said, "I look upon this to be the greatest event that can ever happen
to me; but all my preparation will not suffice to make me bear it like
a philosopher nor altogether like a Christian. There hath been the most
intimate friendship between us from our childhood, and the greatest
merit on her side that ever was in one human creature towards
another."(10) Pope alludes in a letter to Sheridan to the illness of
Swift's "particular friend," but with the exception of another reference
by Pope, and of a curiously flippant remark by Bolingbroke, the subject
is nowhere mentioned in Swift's correspondence with his literary and
fashionable friends in London.

Swift crossed to Ireland in August, fearing the worst; but Stella
rallied, and in the spring of 1727 he returned to London. In August,
however, there came alarming news, when Swift was himself suffering from
giddiness and deafness. To Dr. Sheridan he wrote that the last act of
life was always a tragedy at best: "it is a bitter aggravation to have
one's best friend go before one." Life was indifferent to him; if he
recovered from his disorder it would only be to feel the loss of "that
person for whose sake only life was worth preserving. I brought both
those friends over that we might be happy together as long as God should
please; the knot is broken, and the remaining person you know has ill
answered the end; and the other, who is now to be lost, is all that was
valuable." To Worrall he again wrote (in Latin) that Stella ought not
to be lodged at the Deanery; he had enemies who would place a bad
interpretation upon it if she died there.

Swift left London for Dublin in September; he was detained some days at
Holyhead by stress of weather, and in the private journal which he kept
during that time he speaks of the suspense he was in about his "dearest
friend."(11) In December Stella made a will--signed "Esther Johnson,
spinster"--disposing of her property in the manner Swift had suggested.
Her allusions to Swift are incompatible with any such feeling of
resentment as is suggested by Sheridan. She died on January 28, 1728.
Swift could not bear to be present, but on the night of her death he
began to write his very interesting Character of Mrs. Johnson, from
which passages have already been quoted. He there calls her "the truest,
most virtuous and valuable friend that I, or perhaps any other person,
was ever blessed with." Combined with excellent gifts of the mind, "she
had a gracefulness, somewhat more than human, in every motion, word, and
action. Never was so happy a conjunction of civility, freedom, easiness,
and sincerity." Everyone treated her with marked respect, yet everyone
was at ease in her society. She preserved her wit, judgment, and
vivacity to the last, but often complained of her memory. She chose
men rather than women for her companions, "the usual topic of ladies'
discourse being such as she had little knowledge of and less relish."
"Honour, truth, liberality, good nature, and modesty were the virtues
she chiefly possessed, and most valued in her acquaintance." In some
Prayers used by Swift during her last sickness, he begged for pity for
"the mournful friends of Thy distressed servant, who sink under the
weight of her present condition, and the fear of losing the most
valuable of our friends." He was too ill to be present at the funeral at
St. Patrick's. Afterwards, we are told, a lock of her hair was found in
his desk, wrapped in a paper bearing the words, "Only a woman's hair."

Swift continued to produce pamphlets manifesting growing misanthropy,
though he showed many kindnesses to people who stood in need of help. He
seems to have given Mrs. Dingley fifty guineas a year, pretending that
it came from a fund for which he was trustee. The mental decay which he
had always feared--"I shall be like that tree," he once said, "I shall
die at the top"--became marked about 1738. Paralysis was followed by
aphasia, and after acute pain, followed by a long period of apathy,
death relieved him in October 1745. He was buried by Stella's side, in
accordance with his wishes. The bulk of his fortune was left to found a
hospital for idiots and lunatics.

There has been much rather fruitless discussion respecting the reason or
reasons why Swift did not marry Stella; for if there was any marriage,
it was nothing more than a form. Some have supposed that Swift resolved
to remain unmarried because the insanity of an uncle and the fits and
giddiness to which he was always subject led him to fear insanity in his
own case. Others, looking rather to physical causes, have dwelt upon his
coldness of temperament and indisposition to love; upon the repugnance
he often showed towards marriage, and the tone of some of the verses
on the subject written in his later years. Others, again, have found a
cause in his parsimonious habits, in his dread of poverty, the effects
of which he had himself felt, and in the smallness of his income, at
least until he was middle-aged.(12) It may well be that one or all of
these things influenced Swift's action. We cannot say more. He himself,
as we have seen, said, as early as 1704, that if his humour and means
had permitted him to think of marriage, his choice would have been
Stella. Perhaps, however, there is not much mystery in the matter. Swift
seems to have been wanting in passion; probably he was satisfied with
the affection which Stella gave him, and did not wish for more. Such an
attachment as his usually results in marriage, but not necessarily.
It is not sufficiently remembered that the affection began in Stella's
childhood. They were "perfect friends" for nearly forty years, and her
advancing years in no way lessened his love, which was independent
of beauty. Whether Stella was satisfied, who shall say? Mrs. Oliphant
thought that few women would be disposed to pity Stella, or think her
life one of blight or injury. Mr. Leslie Stephen says, "She might
and probably did regard his friendship as a full equivalent for the
sacrifice.... Is it better to be the most intimate friend of a man of
genius or the wife of a commonplace Tisdall?" Whatever we may surmise,
there is nothing to prove that she was disappointed. She was the one
star which brightened Swift's storm-tossed course; it is well that she
was spared seeing the wreck at the end.


The Journal to Stella is interesting from many points of view: for its
bearing upon Swift's relations with Stella and upon his own character;
for the light which it throws upon the history of the time and upon
prominent men of the day; and for the illustrations it contains of the
social life of people of various classes in London and elsewhere. The
fact that it was written without any thought of publication is one of
its greatest attractions. Swift jotted down his opinions, his hopes, his
disappointments, without thought of their being seen by anybody but his
correspondents. The letters are transparently natural. It has been said
more than once that the Journal, by the nature of the case, contains
no full-length portraits, and hardly any sketches. Swift mentions the
people he met, but rarely stops to draw a picture of them. But though
this is true, the casual remarks which he makes often give a vivid
impression of what he thought of the person of whom he is speaking, and
in many cases those few words form a chief part of our general estimate
of the man. There are but few people of note at the time who are not
mentioned in these pages. We see Queen Anne holding a Drawing-room in
her bedroom: "she looked at us round with her fan in her mouth, and once
a minute said about three words to some that were nearest her." We see
Harley, afterwards the Earl of Oxford, "a pure trifler," who was always
putting off important business; Bolingbroke, "a thorough rake"; the
prudent Lord Dartmouth, the other Secretary of State, from whom Swift
could never "work out a dinner." There is Marlborough, "covetous as
Hell, and ambitious as the prince of it," yet a great general and unduly
pressed by the Tories; and the volatile Earl of Peterborough, "above
fifty, and as active as one of five-and-twenty"--"the ramblingest lying
rogue on earth." We meet poor Congreve, nearly blind, and in fear
of losing his commissionership; the kindly Arbuthnot, the Queen's
physician; Addison, whom Swift met more and more rarely, busy with the
preparation and production of Cato; Steele, careless as ever, neglecting
important appointments, and "governed by his wife most abominably";
Prior, poet and diplomatist, with a "lean carcass"; and young
Berkeley of Trinity College, Dublin, "a very ingenious man and great
philosopher," whom Swift determined to favour as much as he could. Mrs.
Masham, the Duchess of Somerset, the Duchess of Shrewsbury, the Duchess
of Hamilton, Lady Betty Germaine, and many other ladies appear with more
or less distinctness; besides a host of people of less note, of whom we
often know little but what Swift tells us.

Swift throws much light, too, on the daily life of his time. The bellman
on his nightly rounds, calling "Paaast twelvvve o'clock"; the dinner
at three, or at the latest, four; the meetings at coffee-houses; the
book-sales; the visit to the London sights--the lions at the Tower,
Bedlam, the tombs in Westminster Abbey, and the puppet-show; the
terrible Mohocks, of whom Swift stood in so much fear; the polite
"howdees" sent to friends by footmen; these and more are all described
in the Journal. We read of curious habits and practices of fashionable
ladies; of the snuff used by Mrs. Dingley and others; of the
jokes--"bites," puns, and the like--indulged in by polite persons.
When Swift lodged at Chelsea, he reached London either by boat, or
by coach,--which was sometimes full when he wanted it,--or by walking
across the "Five Fields," not without fear of robbers at night. The
going to or from Ireland was a serious matter; after the long journey
by road came the voyage (weather permitting) of some fifteen hours,
with the risk of being seized or pursued by French privateers; and when
Ireland was reached the roads were of the worst. We have glimpses of
fashionable society in Dublin, of the quiet life at Laracor and Trim,
and of the drinking of the waters at Wexford, where visitors had to put
up with primitive arrangements: "Mrs. Dingley never saw such a place in
her life."

Swift's own characteristics come out in the clearest manner in the
Journal, which gives all his hopes and fears during three busy years. He
was pleased to find on his arrival in London how great a value was set
on his friendship by both political parties: "The Whigs were ravished to
see me, and would lay hold on me as a twig while they are drowning;"
but Godolphin's coldness enraged him, so that he was "almost vowing
vengeance." Next day he talked treason heartily against the Whigs, their
baseness and ingratitude, and went home full of schemes of revenge. "The
Tories drily tell me I may make my fortune, if I please; but I do not
understand them, or rather, I DO understand them." He realised that the
Tories might not be more grateful than others, but he thought they were
pursuing the true interests of the public, and was glad to contribute
what was in his power. His vanity was gratified by Harley inviting him
to the private dinners with St. John and Harcourt which were given on
Saturdays, and by their calling him Jonathan; but he did not hope too
much from their friendship: "I said I believed they would leave me
Jonathan, as they found me... but I care not."

Of Swift's frugal habits there is abundant evidence in the Journal.
When he came to town he took rooms on a first floor, "a dining-room and
bed-chamber, at eight shillings a week; plaguy dear, but I spend nothing
for eating, never go to a tavern, and very seldom in a coach; yet after
all it will be expensive." In November he mentions that he had a fire:
"I am spending my second half-bushel of coals." In another place
he says, "People have so left the town, that I am at a loss for a
dinner.... It cost me eighteenpence in coach-hire before I could find
a place to dine in." Elsewhere we find: "This paper does not cost me a
farthing: I have it from the Secretary's office." He often complains
of having to take a coach owing to the dirty condition of the streets:
"This rain ruins me in coach-hire; I walked away sixpennyworth, and came
within a shilling length, and then took a coach, and got a lift back for
nothing."(13)

Swift's arrogance--the arrogance, sometimes, of a man who is morbidly
suspicious that he may be patronised--is shown in the manner in which
he speaks of the grand ladies with whom he came in contact. He calls the
Duke of Ormond's daughters "insolent drabs," and talks of his "mistress,
Ophy Butler's wife, who is grown a little charmless." When the Duchess
of Shrewsbury reproached him for not dining with her, Swift said that
was not so soon done; he expected more advances from ladies,
especially duchesses. On another occasion he was to have supped at Lady
Ashburnham's, "but the drab did not call for us in her coach, as she
promised, but sent for us, and so I sent my excuses." The arrogance was,
however, often only on the surface. It is evident that Swift was very
kind in many cases. He felt deeply for Mrs. Long in her misfortunes,
living and dying in an obscure country town. On the last illness of the
poet Harrison he says, "I am very much afflicted for him, as he is my
own creature.... I was afraid to knock at the door; my mind misgave me."
He was "heartily sorry for poor Mrs. Parnell's death; she seemed to be
an excellent good-natured young woman, and I believe the poor lad
is much afflicted; they appeared to live perfectly well together."
Afterwards he helped Parnell by introducing him to Bolingbroke and
Oxford. He found kind words for Mrs. Manley in her illness, and Lady
Ashburnham's death was "extremely moving.... She was my greatest
favourite, and I am in excessive concern for her loss." Lastly, he was
extraordinarily patient towards his servant Patrick, who drank, stopped
out at night, and in many ways tried Swift's temper. There were good
points about Patrick, but no doubt the great consideration which Swift
showed him was due in part to the fact that he was a favourite of the
ladies in Dublin, and had Mrs. Vanhomrigh to intercede for him.

But for the best example of the kindly side of Swift's nature, we
must turn to what he tells us in the Journal about Stella herself. The
"little language" which Swift used when writing to her was the language
he employed when playing with Stella as a little child at Moor Park.
Thackeray, who was not much in sympathy with Swift, said that he knew of
"nothing more manly, more tender, more exquisitely touching, than some
of these notes." Swift says that when he wrote plainly, he felt as if
they were no longer alone, but "a bad scrawl is so snug it looks like
a PMD." In writing his fond and playful prattle, he made up his mouth
"just as if he were speaking it."(14)

Though Mrs. Dingley is constantly associated with Stella in the
affectionate greetings in the Journal, she seems to have been included
merely as a cloak to enable him to express the more freely his
affection for her companion. Such phrases as "saucy girls," "sirrahs,"
"sauceboxes," and the like, are often applied to both; and sometimes
Swift certainly writes as if the one were as dear to him as the other;
thus we find, "Farewell, my dearest lives and delights, I love you
better than ever, if possible, as hope saved, I do, and ever will....
I can count upon nothing, nor will, but upon MD's love and kindness....
And so farewell, dearest MD, Stella, Dingley, Presto, all together,
now and for ever, all together." But as a rule, notwithstanding
Swift's caution, the greetings intended for Stella alone are easily
distinguishable in tone. He often refers to her weak eyes and delicate
health. Thus he writes, "The chocolate is a present, madam, for Stella.
Don't read this, you little rogue, with your little eyes; but give it to
Dingley, pray now; and I will write as plain as the skies." And again,
"God Almighty bless poor Stella, and her eyes and head: what shall we do
to cure them, poor dear life?" Or, "Now to Stella's little postscript;
and I am almost crazed that you vex yourself for not writing. Can't you
dictate to Dingley, and not strain your dear little eyes? I am sure
'tis the grief of my soul to think you are out of order." They had been
keeping his birthday; Swift wished he had been with them, rather than
in London, where he had no manner of pleasure: "I say Amen with all my
heart and vitals, that we may never be asunder again ten days together
while poor Presto lives." A few days later he says, "I wish I were at
Laracor, with dear charming MD," and again, "Farewell, dearest beloved
MD, and love poor poor Presto, who has not had one happy day since he
left you." "I will say no more, but beg you to be easy till Fortune
takes his course, and to believe MD's felicity is the great goal I aim
at in all my pursuits." "How does Stella look, Madam Dingley?" he asks;
"pretty well, a handsome young woman still? Will she pass in a crowd?
Will she make a figure in a country church?" Elsewhere he writes, on
receipt of a letter, "God Almighty bless poor dear Stella, and send her
a great many birthdays, all happy and healthy and wealthy, and with
me ever together, and never asunder again, unless by chance.... I can
hardly imagine you absent when I am reading your letter or writing to
you. No, faith, you are just here upon this little paper, and therefore
I see and talk with you every evening constantly, and sometimes in the
morning." The letters lay under Swift's pillow, and he fondled them as
if he were caressing Stella's hand.

Of Stella herself we naturally have no direct account in the Journal,
but we hear a good deal of her life in Ireland, and can picture what she
was. Among her friends in and about Trim and Laracor were Dr. Raymond,
the vicar of Trim, and his wife, the Garret Wesleys, the Percevals, and
Mr. Warburton, Swift's curate. At Dublin there were Archdeacon Walls and
his family; Alderman Stoyte, his wife and sister-in-law; Dean Sterne
and the Irish Postmaster-General, Isaac Manley. For years these friends
formed a club which met in Dublin at each other's houses, to sup and
play cards ("ombre and claret, and toasted oranges"), and we have
frequent allusions to Stella's indifferent play, and the money which
she lost, much to Mrs. Dingley's chagrin: "Poor Dingley fretted to
see Stella lose that four and elevenpence t'other night." Mrs. Dingley
herself could hardly play well enough to hold the cards while Stella
went into the next room. If at dinner the mutton was underdone, and
"poor Stella cannot eat, poor dear rogue," then "Dingley is so vexed."
Swift was for ever urging Stella to walk and ride; she was "naturally a
stout walker," and "Dingley would do well enough if her petticoats were
pinned up." And we see Stella setting out on and returning from her
ride, with her riband and mask: "Ah, that riding to Laracor gives me
short sighs as well as you," he says; "all the days I have passed here
have been dirt to those."

If the Journal shows us some of Swift's less attractive qualities, it
shows still more how great a store of humour, tenderness, and affection
there was in him. In these letters we see his very soul; in his literary
work we are seldom moved to anything but admiration of his wit and
genius. Such daily outpourings could never have been written for
publication, they were meant only for one who understood him perfectly;
and everything that we know of Stella--her kindliness, her wit, her
vivacity, her loyalty--shows that she was worthy of the confidence.




JOURNAL TO STELLA




LETTER 1.(1)

CHESTER, Sept. 2, 1710.

Joe(2) will give you an account of me till I got into the boat; after
which the rogues made a new bargain, and forced me to give them two
crowns, and talked as if we should not be able to overtake any ship: but
in half an hour we got to the yacht; for the ships lay by (to) wait for
my Lord Lieutenant's steward. We made our voyage in fifteen hours
just. Last night I came to this town, and shall leave it, I believe, on
Monday. The first man I met in Chester was Dr. Raymond.(3) He and Mrs.
Raymond were here about levying a fine, in order to have power to sell
their estate. They have found everything answer very well. They both
desire to present their humble services to you: they do not think of
Ireland till next year. I got a fall off my horse, riding here from
Parkgate,(4) but no hurt; the horse understanding falls very well, and
lying quietly till I get up. My duty to the Bishop of Clogher.(5) I saw
him returning from Dunleary; but he saw not me. I take it ill he was not
at Convocation, and that I have not his name to my powers.(6) I beg you
will hold your resolution of going to Trim, and riding there as much as
you can. Let the Bishop of Clogher remind the Bishop of Killala(7) to
send me a letter, with one enclosed to the Bishop of Lichfield.(8) Let
all who write to me, enclose to Richard Steele, Esq., at his office at
the Cockpit, near Whitehall.(9) But not MD; I will pay for their letters
at St. James's Coffee-house,(10) that I may have them the sooner. My
Lord Mountjoy(11) is now in the humour that we should begin our journey
this afternoon; so that I have stole here again to finish this letter,
which must be short or long accordingly. I write this post to Mrs.
Wesley,(12) and will tell her, that I have taken care she may have her
bill of one hundred and fifteen pounds whenever she pleases to send for
it; and in that case I desire you will send it her enclosed and sealed,
and have it ready so, in case she should send for it: otherwise keep it.
I will say no more till I hear whether I go to-day or no: if I do, the
letter is almost at an end. My cozen Abigail is grown prodigiously old.
God Almighty bless poo dee richar MD; and, for God's sake, be merry, and
get oo health. I am perfectly resolved to return as soon as I have done
my commission, whether it succeeds or no. I never went to England with
so little desire in my life. If Mrs. Curry(13) makes any difficulty
about the lodgings, I will quit them and pay her from July 9 last, and
Mrs. Brent(14) must write to Parvisol(15) with orders accordingly. The
post is come from London, and just going out; so I have only time to
pray God to bless poor richr MD FW FW MD MD ME ME ME.




LETTER 2.

LONDON, Sept. 9, 1710.

Got here last Thursday,(1) after five days' travelling, weary the first,
almost dead the second, tolerable the third, and well enough the rest;
and am now glad of the fatigue, which has served for exercise; and I am
at present well enough. The Whigs were ravished to see me, and would
lay hold on me as a twig while they are drowning,(2) and the great men
making me their clumsy apologies, etc. But my Lord Treasurer(3) received
me with a great deal of coldness, which has enraged me so, I am almost
vowing revenge. I have not yet gone half my circle; but I find all my
acquaintance just as I left them. I hear my Lady Giffard(4) is much at
Court, and Lady Wharton(5) was ridiculing it t'other day; so I have
lost a friend there. I have not yet seen her, nor intend it; but I will
contrive to see Stella's mother(6) some other way. I writ to the Bishop
of Clogher from Chester; and I now write to the Archbishop of Dublin.(7)
Everything is turning upside down; every Whig in great office will, to a
man, be infallibly put out; and we shall have such a winter as hath not
been seen in England. Everybody asks me, how I came to be so long in
Ireland, as naturally as if here were my being; but no soul offers to
make it so: and I protest I shall return to Dublin, and the Canal at
Laracor,(8) with more satisfaction than ever I did in my life. The
Tatler(9) expects every day to be turned out of his employment; and the
Duke of Ormond,(10) they say, will be Lieutenant of Ireland. I hope you
are now peaceably in Presto's(11) lodgings; but I resolve to turn you
out by Christmas; in which time I shall either do my business, or find
it not to be done. Pray be at Trim by the time this letter comes to
you; and ride little Johnson, who must needs be now in good case. I have
begun this letter unusually, on the post-night, and have already written
to the Archbishop; and cannot lengthen this. Henceforth I will write
something every day to MD, and make it a sort of journal; and when it
is full, I will send it, whether MD writes or no; and so that will
be pretty: and I shall always be in conversation with MD, and MD with
Presto. Pray make Parvisol pay you the ten pounds immediately; so I
ordered him. They tell me I am grown fatter, and look better; and,
on Monday, Jervas(12) is to retouch my picture. I thought I saw Jack
Temple(13) and his wife pass by me to-day in their coach; but I took no
notice of them. I am glad I have wholly shaken off that family. Tell the
Provost,(14) I have obeyed his commands to the Duke of Ormond; or let
it alone, if you please. I saw Jemmy Leigh(15) just now at the
Coffee-house, who asked after you with great kindness: he talks of going
in a fortnight to Ireland. My service to the Dean,(16) and Mrs. Walls,
and her Archdeacon.(17) Will Frankland's(18) wife is near bringing
to-bed, and I have promised to christen the child. I fancy you had my
Chester letter the Tuesday after I writ. I presented Dr. Raymond to Lord
Wharton(19) at Chester. Pray let me know when Joe gets his money.(20)
It is near ten, and I hate to send by the bellman.(21) MD shall have
a longer letter in a week, but I send this only to tell I am safe in
London; and so farewell, etc.




LETTER 3.

LONDON, Sept. 9, 1710.

After seeing the Duke of Ormond, dining with Dr. Cockburn,(1) passing
some part of the afternoon with Sir Matthew Dudley(2) and Will
Frankland, the rest at St. James's Coffee-house, I came home, and writ
to the Archbishop of Dublin and MD, and am going to bed. I forgot to
tell you, that I begged Will Frankland to stand Manley's(3) friend with
his father in this shaking season for places. He told me, his father
was in danger to be out; that several were now soliciting for Manley's
place; that he was accused of opening letters; that Sir Thomas
Frankland(4) would sacrifice everything to save himself; and in that, I
fear, Manley is undone, etc.

10. To-day I dined with Lord Mountjoy at Kensington; saw my mistress,
Ophy Butler's(5) wife, who is grown a little charmless. I sat till ten
in the evening with Addison and Steele: Steele will certainly lose his
Gazetteer's place, all the world detesting his engaging in parties.(6)
At ten I went to the Coffee-house, hoping to find Lord Radnor,(7) whom I
had not seen. He was there; and for an hour and a half we talked treason
heartily against the Whigs, their baseness and ingratitude. And I
am come home, rolling resentments in my mind, and framing schemes of
revenge: full of which (having written down some hints) I go to bed.
I am afraid MD dined at home, because it is Sunday; and there was the
little half-pint of wine: for God's sake, be good girls, and all will be
well. Ben Tooke(8) was with me this morning.

11. Seven, morning. I am rising to go to Jervas to finish my picture,
and 'tis shaving-day, so good-morrow MD; but don't keep me now, for I
can't stay; and pray dine with the Dean, but don't lose your money. I
long to hear from you, etc.--Ten at night. I sat four hours this morning
to Jervas, who has given my picture quite another turn, and now approves
it entirely; but we must have the approbation of the town. If I were
rich enough, I would get a copy of it, and bring it over. Mr. Addison
and I dined together at his lodgings, and I sat with him part of this
evening; and I am now come home to write an hour. Patrick(9) observes,
that the rabble here are much more inquisitive in politics than
in Ireland. Every day we expect changes, and the Parliament to be
dissolved. Lord Wharton expects every day to be out: he is working like
a horse for elections; and, in short, I never saw so great a ferment
among all sorts of people. I had a miserable letter from Joe last
Saturday, telling me Mr. Pratt(10) refuses payment of his money. I
have told it Mr. Addison, and will to Lord Wharton; but I fear with no
success. However, I will do all I can.

12. To-day I presented Mr. Ford(11) to the Duke of Ormond; and paid my
first visit to Lord President,(12) with whom I had much discourse; but
put him always off when he began to talk of Lord Wharton in relation
to me, till he urged it: then I said, he knew I never expected anything
from Lord Wharton, and that Lord Wharton knew that I understood it so.
He said that he had written twice to Lord Wharton about me, who both
times said nothing at all to that part of his letter. I am advised not
to meddle in the affair of the First-Fruits, till this hurry is a little
over, which still depends, and we are all in the dark. Lord President
told me he expects every day to be out, and has done so these two
months. I protest, upon my life, I am heartily weary of this town, and
wish I had never stirred.

13. I went this morning to the city, to see Mr. Stratford the Hamburg
merchant, my old schoolfellow;(13) but calling at Bull's(14) on Ludgate
Hill, he forced me to his house at Hampstead to dinner among a great
deal of ill company; among the rest Mr. Hoadley,(15) the Whig clergyman,
so famous for acting the contrary part to Sacheverell:(16) but
tomorrow I design again to see Stratford. I was glad, however, to be
at Hampstead, where I saw Lady Lucy(17) and Moll Stanhope. I hear very
unfortunate news of Mrs. Long;(18) she and her comrade(19) have broke up
house, and she is broke for good and all, and is gone to the country: I
should be extremely sorry if this be true.

14. To-day, I saw Patty Rolt,(20) who heard I was in town; and I dined
with Stratford at a merchant's in the city, where I drank the first
Tokay wine I ever saw; and it is admirable, yet not to the degree
I expected. Stratford is worth a plum,(21) and is now lending the
Government forty thousand pounds; yet we were educated together at the
same school and university.(22) We hear the Chancellor(23) is to be
suddenly out, and Sir Simon Harcourt(24) to succeed him: I am come early
home, not caring for the Coffee-house.

15. To-day Mr. Addison, Colonel Freind,(25) and I, went to see the
million lottery(26) drawn at Guildhall. The jackanapes of bluecoat boys
gave themselves such airs in pulling out the tickets, and showed white
hands open to the company, to let us see there was no cheat. We dined
at a country-house near Chelsea, where Mr. Addison often retires; and
to-night, at the Coffee-house, we hear Sir Simon Harcourt is made
Lord Keeper; so that now we expect every moment the Parliament will be
dissolved; but I forgot that this letter will not go in three or four
days, and that my news will be stale, which I should therefore put in
the last paragraph. Shall I send this letter before I hear from MD,
or shall I keep it to lengthen? I have not yet seen Stella's mother,
because I will not see Lady Giffard; but I will contrive to go there
when Lady Giffard is abroad. I forgot to mark my two former letters; but
I remember this is Number 3, and I have not yet had Number 1 from MD;
but I shall by Monday, which I reckon will be just a fortnight after you
had my first. I am resolved to bring over a great deal of china. I loved
it mightily to-day.(27) What shall I bring?

16. Morning. Sir John Holland,(28) Comptroller of the Household, has
sent to desire my acquaintance: I have a mind to refuse him, because he
is a Whig, and will, I suppose, be out among the rest; but he is a man
of worth and learning. Tell me, do you like this journal way of writing?
Is it not tedious and dull?

Night. I dined to-day with a cousin, a printer,(29) where Patty Rolt
lodges, and then came home, after a visit or two; and it has been a very
insipid day. Mrs. Long's misfortune is confirmed to me; bailiffs were
in her house; she retired to private lodgings; thence to the country,
nobody knows where: her friends leave letters at some inn, and they
are carried to her; and she writes answers without dating them from any
place. I swear, it grieves me to the soul.

17. To-day I dined six miles out of town, with Will Pate,(30) the
learned woollen-draper; Mr. Stratford went with me; six miles here is
nothing: we left Pate after sunset, and were here before it was dark.
This letter shall go on Tuesday, whether I hear from MD or no. My health
continues pretty well; pray God Stella may give me a good account
of hers! and I hope you are now at Trim, or soon designing it. I was
disappointed to-night: the fellow gave me a letter, and I hoped to
see little MD's hand; and it was only to invite me to a venison pasty
to-day: so I lost my pasty into the bargain. Pox on these declining
courtiers! Here is Mr. Brydges,(31) the Paymaster-General, desiring my
acquaintance; but I hear the Queen sent Lord Shrewsbury(32) to assure
him he may keep his place; and he promises me great assistance in the
affair of the First-Fruits. Well, I must turn over this leaf to-night,
though the side would hold another line; but pray consider this is
a whole sheet; it holds a plaguy deal, and you must be content to
be weary; but I'll do so no more. Sir Simon Harcourt is made
Attorney-General, and not Lord Keeper.

18. To-day I dined with Mr. Stratford at Mr. Addison's retirement near
Chelsea; then came to town; got home early, and began a letter to the
Tatler,(33) about the corruptions of style and writing, etc., and,
having not heard from you, am resolved this letter shall go to-night.
Lord Wharton was sent for to town in mighty haste, by the Duke of
Devonshire:(34) they have some project in hand; but it will not do, for
every hour we expect a thorough revolution, and that the Parliament will
be dissolved. When you see Joe, tell him Lord Wharton is too busy to
mind any of his affairs; but I will get what good offices I can from
Mr. Addison, and will write to-day to Mr. Pratt; and bid Joe not to
be discouraged, for I am confident he will get the money under any
Government; but he must have patience.

19. I have been scribbling this morning, and I believe shall hardly
fill this side to-day, but send it as it is; and it is good enough for
naughty girls that won't write to a body, and to a good boy like Presto.
I thought to have sent this to-night, but was kept by company, and could
not; and, to say the truth, I had a little mind to expect one post more
for a letter from MD. Yesterday at noon died the Earl of Anglesea,(35)
the great support of the Tories; so that employment of Vice-Treasurer of
Ireland is again vacant. We were to have been great friends, and I could
hardly have a loss that could grieve me more. The Bishop of Durham(36)
died the same day. The Duke of Ormond's daughter(37) was to visit me
to-day at a third place by way of advance,(38) and I am to return
it to-morrow. I have had a letter from Lady Berkeley, begging me for
charity to come to Berkeley Castle, for company to my lord,(39) who
has been ill of a dropsy; but I cannot go, and must send my excuse
to-morrow. I am told that in a few hours there will be more removals.

20. To-day I returned my visits to the Duke's daughters;(40) the
insolent drabs came up to my very mouth to salute me. Then I heard the
report confirmed of removals; my Lord President Somers; the Duke of
Devonshire, Lord Steward; and Mr. Boyle,(41) Secretary of State, are all
turned out to-day. I never remember such bold steps taken by a Court: I
am almost shocked at it, though I did not care if they were all hanged.
We are astonished why the Parliament is not yet dissolved, and why they
keep a matter of that importance to the last. We shall have a strange
winter here, between the struggles of a cunning provoked discarded
party, and the triumphs of one in power; of both which I shall be an
indifferent spectator, and return very peaceably to Ireland, when I have
done my part in the affair I am entrusted with, whether it succeeds
or no. To-morrow I change my lodgings in Pall Mall for one in Bury
Street,(42) where I suppose I shall continue while I stay in London. If
anything happens tomorrow, I will add it.--Robin's Coffee-house.(43) We
have great news just now from Spain; Madrid taken, and Pampeluna. I am
here ever interrupted.

21. I have just received your letter, which I will not answer now;
God be thanked all things are so well. I find you have not yet had my
second: I had a letter from Parvisol, who tells me he gave Mrs. Walls a
bill of twenty pounds for me, to be given to you; but you have not sent
it. This night the Parliament is dissolved: great news from Spain;
King Charles and Stanhope are at Madrid, and Count Staremberg has taken
Pampeluna. Farewell. This is from St. James's Coffee-house. I will begin
my answer to your letter to-night, but not send it this week. Pray tell
me whether you like this journal way of writing.--I don't like your
reasons for not going to Trim. Parvisol tells me he can sell your horse.
Sell it, with a pox? Pray let him know that he shall sell his soul as
soon. What? sell anything that Stella loves, and may sometimes ride? It
is hers, and let her do as she pleases: pray let him know this by the
first that you know goes to Trim. Let him sell my grey, and be hanged.




LETTER 4.

LONDON, Sept. 21, 1710.

Here must I begin another letter, on a whole sheet, for fear saucy
little MD should be angry, and think MUCH that the paper is too LITTLE.
I had your letter this night, as told you just and no more in my last;
for this must be taken up in answering yours, saucebox. I believe I told
you where I dined to-day; and to-morrow I go out of town for two days to
dine with the same company on Sunday; Molesworth(1) the Florence Envoy,
Stratford, and some others. I heard to-day that a gentlewoman from Lady
Giffard's house had been at the Coffee-house to inquire for me. It was
Stella's mother, I suppose. I shall send her a penny-post letter(2)
to-morrow, and contrive to see her without hazarding seeing Lady
Giffard, which I will not do until she begs my pardon.

22. I dined to-day at Hampstead with Lady Lucy, etc., and when I got
home found a letter from Joe, with one enclosed to Lord Wharton, which I
will send to his Excellency, and second it as well as I can; but to talk
of getting the Queen's order is a jest. Things are in such a combustion
here, that I am advised not to meddle yet in the affair I am upon, which
concerns the clergy of a whole kingdom; and does he think anybody will
trouble the Queen about Joe? We shall, I hope, get a recommendation from
the Lord Lieutenant to the trustees for the linen business, and I hope
that will do; and so I will write to him in a few days, and he must have
patience. This is an answer to part of your letter as well as his. I
lied; it is to-morrow I go to the country, and I won't answer a bit more
of your letter yet.

23. Here is such a stir and bustle with this little MD of ours; I must
be writing every night; I can't go to bed without a word to them; I
can't put out my candle till I have bid them good-night: O Lord, O
Lord! Well, I dined the first time to-day, with Will Frankland and his
fortune: she is not very handsome. Did I not say I would go out of town
to-day? I hate lying abroad and clutter; I go tomorrow in Frankland's
chariot, and come back at night. Lady Berkeley has invited me
to Berkeley Castle, and Lady Betty Germaine(3) to Drayton in
Northamptonshire; and I'll go to neither. Let me alone, I must finish my
pamphlet. I have sent a long letter to Bickerstaff:(4) let the Bishop
of Clogher smoke(5) it if he can. Well, I'll write to the Bishop of
Killala; but you might have told him how sudden and unexpected my
journey was though. Deuce take Lady S---; and if I know D---y, he is a
rawboned-faced fellow, not handsome, nor visibly so young as you say:
she sacrifices two thousand pounds a year, and keeps only six hundred.
Well, you have had all my land journey in my second letter, and so much
for that. So, you have got into Presto's lodgings; very fine, truly! We
have had a fortnight of the most glorious weather on earth, and still
continues: I hope you have made the best of it. Ballygall(6) will be a
pure(7) good place for air, if Mrs. Ashe makes good her promise. Stella
writes like an emperor: I am afraid it hurts your eyes; take care of
that pray, pray, Mrs. Stella. Can't you do what you will with your own
horse? Pray don't let that puppy Parvisol sell him. Patrick is drunk
about three times a week, and I bear it, and he has got the better of
me; but one of these days I will positively turn him off to the wide
world, when none of you are by to intercede for him.--Stuff--how can
I get her husband into the Charter-house? get a ---- into the
Charter-house.--Write constantly! Why, sirrah, don't I write every day,
and sometimes twice a day to MD? Now I have answered all your letter,
and the rest must be as it can be: send me my bill. Tell Mrs. Brent what
I say of the Charter-house. I think this enough for one night; and so
farewell till this time to-morrow.

24. To-day I dined six miles out of town at Will Pate's, with Stratford,
Frankland, and the Molesworths,(8) and came home at night, and was weary
and lazy. I can say no more now, but good-night.

25. I was so lazy to-day that I dined at next door,(9) and have sat at
home since six, writing to the Bishop of Clogher, Dean Sterne, and Mr.
Manley: the last, because I am in fear for him about his place, and have
sent him my opinion, what I and his other friends here think he ought
to do. I hope he will take it well. My advice was, to keep as much in
favour as possible with Sir Thomas Frankland, his master here.

26. Smoke how I widen the margin by lying in bed when I write. My bed
lies on the wrong side for me, so that I am forced often to write when
I am up. Manley, you must know, has had people putting in for his place
already; and has been complained of for opening letters. Remember that
last Sunday, September 24, 1710, was as hot as midsummer. This was
written in the morning; it is now night, and Presto in bed. Here's a
clutter, I have gotten MD's second letter, and I must answer it here.
I gave the bill to Tooke, and so--Well, I dined to-day with Sir John
Holland the Comptroller, and sat with him till eight; then came home,
and sent my letters, and writ part of a lampoon,(10) which goes on very
slow: and now I am writing to saucy MD; no wonder, indeed, good boys
must write to naughty girls. I have not seen your mother yet; my
penny-post letter, I suppose, miscarried: I will write another. Mr.
S---- came to see me; and said M---- was going to the country next
morning with her husband (who I find is a surly brute); so I could only
desire my service to her.

27. To-day all our company dined at Will Frankland's, with Steele and
Addison too. This is the first rainy day since I came to town; I cannot
afford to answer your letter yet. Morgan,(11) the puppy, writ me a long
letter, to desire I would recommend him for purse-bearer or secretary to
the next Lord Chancellor that would come with the next Governor. I
will not answer him; but beg you will say these words to his father
Raymond,(12) or anybody that will tell him: That Dr. Swift has received
his letter; and would be very ready to serve him, but cannot do it in
what he desires, because he has no sort of interest in the persons to
be applied to. These words you may write, and let Joe, or Mr.
Warburton,(13) give them to him: a pox on him! However, it is by these
sort of ways that fools get preferment. I must not end yet, because I
cannot say good-night without losing a line, and then MD would scold;
but now, good-night.

28. I have the finest piece of Brazil tobacco for Dingley that ever
was born.(14) You talk of Leigh; why, he won't be in Dublin these two
months: he goes to the country, then returns to London, to see how the
world goes here in Parliament. Good-night, sirrahs; no, no, not night;
I writ this in the morning, and looking carelessly I thought it had
been of last night. I dined to-day with Mrs. Barton(15) alone at her
lodgings; where she told me for certain, that Lady S---- was with
child when she was last in England, and pretended a tympany, and saw
everybody; then disappeared for three weeks, her tympany was gone, and
she looked like a ghost, etc. No wonder she married when she was so ill
at containing. Connolly(16) is out; and Mr. Roberts in his place, who
loses a better here, but was formerly a Commissioner in Ireland. That
employment cost Connolly three thousand pounds to Lord Wharton; so he
has made one ill bargain in his life.

29. I wish MD a merry Michaelmas. I dined with Mr. Addison, and Jervas
the painter, at Addison's country place; and then came home, and writ
more to my lampoon. I made a Tatler since I came: guess which it is, and
whether the Bishop of Clogher smokes it. I saw Mr. Sterne(17) to-day: he
will do as you order, and I will give him chocolate for Stella's health.
He goes not these three weeks. I wish I could send it some other way.
So now to your letter, brave boys. I don't like your way of saving
shillings: nothing vexes me but that it does not make Stella a coward
in a coach.(18) I don't think any lady's advice about my ear signifies
twopence: however I will, in compliance to you, ask Dr. Cockburn.
Radcliffe(19) I know not, and Barnard(20) I never see. Walls will
certainly be stingier for seven years, upon pretence of his robbery. So
Stella puns again; why, 'tis well enough; but I'll not second it,
though I could make a dozen: I never thought of a pun since I left
Ireland.--Bishop of Clogher's bill? Why, he paid it to me; do you think
I was such a fool to go without it? As for the four shillings, I will
give you a bill on Parvisol for it on t'other side of this paper; and
pray tear off the two letters I shall write to him and Joe, or let
Dingley transcribe and send them; though that to Parvisol, I believe, he
must have my hand for. No, no, I'll eat no grapes; I ate about six
the other day at Sir John Holland's; but would not give sixpence for a
thousand, they are so bad this year. Yes, faith, I hope in God Presto
and MD will be together this time twelvemonth. What then? Last year I
suppose I was at Laracor; but next I hope to eat my Michaelmas goose
at my two little gooses' lodgings. I drink no aile (I suppose you mean
ale); but yet good wine every day, of five and six shillings a bottle.
O Lord, how much Stella writes! pray don't carry that too far, young
women, but be temperate, to hold out. To-morrow I go to Mr. Harley.(21)
Why, small hopes from the Duke of Ormond: he loves me very well, I
believe, and would, in my turn, give me something to make me easy; and I
have good interest among his best friends. But I don't think of anything
further than the business I am upon. You see I writ to Manley before
I had your letter, and I fear he will be out. Yes, Mrs. Owl, Bligh's
corpse(22) came to Chester when I was there; and I told you so in my
letter, or forgot it. I lodge in Bury Street, where I removed a week
ago. I have the first floor, a dining-room, and bed-chamber, at eight
shillings a week; plaguy deep, but I spend nothing for eating, never
go to a tavern, and very seldom in a coach; yet after all it will
be expensive. Why do you trouble yourself, Mistress Stella, about my
instrument? I have the same the Archbishop gave me; and it is as good
now the bishops are away. The Dean friendly! the Dean be poxed: a
great piece of friendship indeed, what you heard him tell the Bishop of
Clogher; I wonder he had the face to talk so: but he lent me money, and
that's enough. Faith, I would not send this these four days, only for
writing to Joe and Parvisol. Tell the Dean that when the bishops send me
any packets, they must not write to me at Mr. Steele's; but direct
for Mr. Steele, at his office at the Cockpit, and let the enclosed be
directed for me: that mistake cost me eighteenpence the other day.

30. I dined with Stratford to-day, but am not to see Mr. Harley till
Wednesday: it is late, and I send this before there is occasion for the
bell; because I would have Joe have his letter, and Parvisol too; which
you must so contrive as not to cost them double postage. I can say no
more, but that I am, etc.




LETTER 5.

LONDON, Sept. 30, 1710.

Han't I brought myself into a fine praemunire,(1) to begin writing
letters in whole sheets? and now I dare not leave it off. I cannot tell
whether you like these journal letters: I believe they would be dull
to me to read them over; but, perhaps, little MD is pleased to know how
Presto passes his time in her absence. I always begin my last the same
day I ended my former. I told you where I dined to-day at a tavern with
Stratford: Lewis,(2) who is a great favourite of Harley's, was to have
been with us; but he was hurried to Hampton Court, and sent his excuse;
and that next Wednesday he would introduce me to Harley. 'Tis good to
see what a lamentable confession the Whigs all make me of my ill
usage: but I mind them not. I am already represented to Harley as a
discontented person, that was used ill for not being Whig enough; and
I hope for good usage from him. The Tories drily tell me, I may make
my fortune, if I please; but I do not understand them--or rather, I do
understand them.

Oct. 1. To-day I dined at Molesworth's, the Florence Envoy; and sat this
evening with my friend Darteneuf,(3) whom you have heard me talk of;
the greatest punner of this town next myself. Have you smoked the Tatler
that I writ?(4) It is much liked here, and I think it a pure(5) one.
To-morrow I go with Delaval,(6) the Portugal Envoy, to dine with Lord
Halifax near Hampton Court.(7) Your Manley's brother, a Parliament-man
here, has gotten an employment;(8) and I am informed uses much interest
to preserve his brother: and, to-day, I spoke to the elder Frankland
to engage his father (Postmaster here); and I hope he will be safe,
although he is cruelly hated by all the Tories of Ireland. I have almost
finished my lampoon, and will print it for revenge on a certain great
person.(9) It has cost me but three shillings in meat and drink since I
came here, as thin as the town is. I laugh to see myself so disengaged
in these revolutions. Well, I must leave off, and go write to Sir John
Stanley,(10) to desire him to engage Lady Hyde as my mistress to engage
Lord Hyde(11) in favour of Mr. Pratt.(12)

2. Lord Halifax was at Hampton Court at his lodgings, and I dined
with him there with Methuen,(13) and Delaval, and the late
Attorney-General.(14) I went to the Drawing-room before dinner (for
the Queen was at Hampton Court), and expected to see nobody; but I
met acquaintance enough. I walked in the gardens, saw the cartoons
of Raphael, and other things; and with great difficulty got from Lord
Halifax, who would have kept me to-morrow to show me his house and park,
and improvements. We left Hampton Court at sunset, and got here in a
chariot and two horses time enough by starlight. That's something charms
me mightily about London; that you go dine a dozen miles off in October,
stay all day, and return so quickly: you cannot do anything like this in
Dublin.(15) I writ a second penny post letter to your mother, and hear
nothing of her. Did I tell you that Earl Berkeley died last Sunday was
se'nnight, at Berkeley Castle, of a dropsy? Lord Halifax began a health
to me to-day; it was the Resurrection of the Whigs, which I refused
unless he would add their Reformation too and I told him he was the only
Whig in England I loved, or had any good opinion of.

3. This morning Stella's sister(16) came to me with a letter from her
mother, who is at Sheen; but will soon be in town, and will call to see
me: she gave me a bottle of palsy water,(17) a small one, and desired I
would send it you by the first convenience, as I will; and she promises
a quart bottle of the same: your sister looked very well, and seems a
good modest sort of girl. I went then to Mr. Lewis, first secretary to
Lord Dartmouth,(18) and favourite to Mr. Harley, who is to introduce
me to-morrow morning. Lewis had with him one Mr. Dyot,(19) a Justice of
Peace, worth twenty thousand pounds, a Commissioner of the Stamp Office,
and married to a sister of Sir Philip Meadows,(20) Envoy to the Emperor.
I tell you this, because it is odds but this Mr. Dyot will be hanged;
for he is discovered to have counterfeited stamped paper, in which he
was a Commissioner; and, with his accomplices, has cheated the Queen of
a hundred thousand pounds. You will hear of it before this come to you,
but may be not so particularly; and it is a very odd accident in such a
man. Smoke Presto writing news to MD. I dined to-day with Lord Mountjoy
at Kensington, and walked from thence this evening to town like an
emperor. Remember that yesterday, October 2, was a cruel hard frost,
with ice; and six days ago I was dying with heat. As thin as the town
is, I have more dinners than ever; and am asked this month by some
people, without being able to come for pre-engagements. Well, but
I should write plainer, when I consider Stella cannot read,(21) and
Dingley is not so skilful at my ugly hand. I had tonight a letter from
Mr. Pratt, who tells me Joe will have his money when there are trustees
appointed by the Lord Lieutenant for receiving and disposing the linen
fund; and whenever those trustees are appointed, I will solicit whoever
is Lord Lieutenant, and am in no fear of succeeding. So pray tell or
write him word, and bid him not be cast down; for Ned Southwell(22)
and Mr. Addison both think Pratt in the right. Don't lose your money at
Manley's to-night, sirrahs.

4. After I had put out my candle last night, my landlady came into my
room, with a servant of Lord Halifax, to desire I would go dine with him
at his house near Hampton Court; but I sent him word, I had business
of great importance that hindered me, etc. And to-day I was brought
privately to Mr. Harley, who received me with the greatest respect and
kindness imaginable: he has appointed me an hour on Saturday at four,
afternoon, when I will open my business to him; which expression I would
not use if I were a woman. I know you smoked it; but I did not till I
writ it. I dined to-day at Mr. Delaval's, the Envoy for Portugal, with
Nic Rowe(23) the poet, and other friends; and I gave my lampoon to be
printed. I have more mischief in my heart; and I think it shall go
round with them all, as this hits, and I can find hints. I am certain I
answered your 2d letter, and yet I do not find it here. I suppose it was
in my 4th: and why N. 2d, 3d; is it not enough to say, as I do, 1, 2, 3?
etc. I am going to work at another Tatler:(24) I'll be far enough but
I say the same thing over two or three times, just as I do when I am
talking to little MD; but what care I? they can read it as easily as I
can write it: I think I have brought these lines pretty straight again.
I fear it will be long before I finish two sides at this rate. Pray,
dear MD, when I occasionally give you any little commission mixed with
my letters, don't forget it, as that to Morgan and Joe, etc., for I
write just as I can remember, otherwise I would put them all together.
I was to visit Mr. Sterne to-day, and give him your commission about
handkerchiefs: that of chocolate I will do myself, and send it him when
he goes, and you'll pay me when the GIVER'S BREAD,(25) etc. To-night I
will read a pamphlet, to amuse myself. God preserve your dear healths!

5. This morning Delaval came to see me, and we went together to
Kneller's,(26) who was not in town. In the way we met the electors for
Parliament-men:(27) and the rabble came about our coach, crying, "A
Colt, a Stanhope," etc. We were afraid of a dead cat, or our glasses
broken, and so were always of their side. I dined again at Delaval's;
and in the evening, at the Coffee-house, heard Sir Andrew Fountaine(28)
was come to town. This has been but an insipid sort of day, and I have
nothing to remark upon it worth threepence: I hope MD had a better, with
the Dean, the Bishop, or Mrs. Walls.(29) Why, the reason you lost four
and eightpence last night but one at Manley's was, because you played
bad games: I took notice of six that you had ten to one against you:
Would any but a mad lady go out twice upon Manilio; Basto, and two small
diamonds?(30) Then in that game of spades, you blundered when you had
ten-ace; I never saw the like of you: and now you are in a huff because
I tell you this. Well, here's two and eightpence halfpenny towards your
loss.

6. Sir Andrew Fountaine came this morning, and caught me writing in bed.
I went into the city with him; and we dined at the Chop-house with
Will Pate,(31) the learned woollen-draper: then we sauntered at
China-shops(32) and booksellers; went to the tavern, drank two pints of
white wine, and never parted till ten: and now I am come home, and must
copy out some papers I intend for Mr. Harley, whom I am to see, as I
told you, to-morrow afternoon; so that this night I shall say little to
MD, but that I heartily wish myself with them, and will come as soon as
I either fail, or compass my business. We now hear daily of elections;
and, in a list I saw yesterday of about twenty, there are seven or eight
more Tories than in the last Parliament; so that I believe they need
not fear a majority, with the help of those who will vote as the Court
pleases. But I have been told that Mr. Harley himself would not let
the Tories be too numerous, for fear they should be insolent, and
kick against him; and for that reason they have kept several Whigs
in employments, who expected to be turned out every day; as Sir John
Holland the Comptroller, and many others. And so get you gone to your
cards, and your claret and orange, at the Dean's; and I'll go write.

7. I wonder when this letter will be finished: it must go by Tuesday,
that's certain; and if I have one from MD before, I will not answer it,
that's as certain too. 'Tis now morning, and I did not finish my papers
for Mr. Harley last night; for you must understand Presto was sleepy,
and made blunders and blots. Very pretty that I must be writing to young
women in a morning fresh and fasting, faith. Well, good-morrow to
you; and so I go to business, and lay aside this paper till night,
sirrahs.--At night. Jack How(33) told Harley that if there were a lower
place in hell than another, it was reserved for his porter, who tells
lies so gravely, and with so civil a manner. This porter I have had to
deal with, going this evening at four to visit Mr. Harley, by his own
appointment. But the fellow told me no lie, though I suspected every
word he said. He told me his master was just gone to dinner, with much
company, and desired I would come an hour hence: which I did, expecting
to hear Mr. Harley was gone out; but they had just done dinner. Mr.
Harley came out to me, brought me in, and presented to me his son-in-law
Lord Doblane(34) (or some such name) and his own son,(35) and, among
others, Will Penn(36) the Quaker: we sat two hours drinking as good wine
as you do; and two hours more he and I alone; where he heard me tell my
business; entered into it with all kindness; asked for my powers, and
read them; and read likewise a memorial(37) I had drawn up, and put it
in his pocket to show the Queen; told me the measures he would take;
and, in short, said everything I could wish: told me, he must bring Mr.
St. John(38) (Secretary of State) and me acquainted; and spoke so many
things of personal kindness and esteem for me, that I am inclined half
to believe what some friends have told me, that he would do everything
to bring me over. He has desired to dine with me (what a comical mistake
was that!). I mean he has desired me to dine with him on Tuesday; and
after four hours being with him, set me down at St. James's Coffee-house
in a hackney-coach. All this is odd and comical, if you consider him and
me. He knew my Christian name very well. I could not forbear saying thus
much upon this matter, although you will think it tedious. But I'll tell
you; you must know, 'tis fatal(39) to me to be a scoundrel and a prince
the same day: for, being to see him at four, I could not engage myself
to dine at any friend's; so I went to Tooke,(40) to give him a ballad,
and dine with him; but he was not at home: so I was forced to go to
a blind(41) chop-house, and dine for tenpence upon gill-ale,(42) bad
broth, and three chops of mutton; and then go reeking from thence to the
First Minister of State. And now I am going in charity to send Steele
a Tatler, who is very low of late. I think I am civiller than I used
to be; and have not used the expression of "you in Ireland" and "we
in England" as I did when I was here before, to your great
indignation.--They may talk of the you know what;(43) but, gad, if it
had not been for that, I should never have been able to get the access I
have had; and if that helps me to succeed, then that same thing will be
serviceable to the Church. But how far we must depend upon new friends,
I have learnt by long practice, though I think among great Ministers,
they are just as good as old ones. And so I think this important day has
made a great hole in this side of the paper; and the fiddle-faddles of
tomorrow and Monday will make up the rest; and, besides, I shall see
Harley on Tuesday before this letter goes.

8. I must tell you a great piece of refinement(44) of Harley. He charged
me to come to him often: I told him I was loth to trouble him in so much
business as he had, and desired I might have leave to come at his levee;
which he immediately refused, and said, that was not a place for friends
to come to. 'Tis now but morning; and I have got a foolish trick, I must
say something to MD when I wake, and wish them a good-morrow; for this
is not a shaving-day, Sunday, so I have time enough: but get you gone,
you rogues, I must go write: Yes, 'twill vex me to the blood if any
of these long letters should miscarry: if they do, I will shrink to
half-sheets again; but then what will you do to make up the journal?
there will be ten days of Presto's life lost; and that will be a sad
thing, faith and troth.--At night. I was at a loss today for a dinner,
unless I would have gone a great way, so I dined with some friends
that board hereabout,(45) as a spunger;(46) and this evening Sir Andrew
Fountaine would needs have me go to the tavern; where, for two bottles
of wine, Portugal and Florence, among three of us, we had sixteen
shillings to pay; but if ever he catches me so again, I'll spend as many
pounds: and therefore I have it among my extraordinaries but we had a
neck of mutton dressed a la Maintenon, that the dog could not eat: and
it is now twelve o'clock, and I must go sleep. I hope this letter will
go before I have MD's third. Do you believe me? and yet, faith, I long
for MD's third too and yet I would have it to say, that I writ five for
two. I am not fond at all of St. James's Coffee-house,(47) as I used to
be. I hope it will mend in winter; but now they are all out of town at
elections, or not come from their country houses. Yesterday I was going
with Dr. Garth(48) to dine with Charles Main,(49) near the Tower, who
has an employment there: he is of Ireland; the Bishop of Clogher knows
him well: an honest, good-natured fellow, a thorough hearty laugher,
mightily beloved by the men of wit: his mistress is never above a
cook-maid. And so, good-night, etc.

9. I dined to-day at Sir John Stanley's; my Lady Stanley(50) is one
of my favourites: I have as many here as the Bishop of Killala has in
Ireland. I am thinking what scurvy company I shall be to MD when I come
back: they know everything of me already: I will tell you no more, or
I shall have nothing to say, no story to tell, nor any kind of thing.
I was very uneasy last night with ugly, nasty, filthy wine, that turned
sour on my stomach. I must go to the tavern: oh, but I told you that
before. To-morrow I dine at Harley's, and will finish this letter at my
return; but I can write no more now, because of the Archbishop: faith,
'tis true; for I am going now to write to him an account of what I have
done in the business with Harley:(51) and, faith, young women, I'll tell
you what you must count upon, that I never will write one word on the
third side in these long letters.

10. Poor MD's letter was lying so huddled up among papers, I could not
find it: I mean poor Presto's letter. Well, I dined with Mr. Harley
to-day, and hope some things will be done; but I must say no more: and
this letter must be sent to the post-house, and not by the bellman.(52)
I am to dine again there on Sunday next; I hope to some good issue. And
so now, soon as ever I can in bed, I must begin my 6th to MD as gravely
as if I had not written a word this month: fine doings, faith! Methinks
I don't write as I should, because I am not in bed: see the ugly wide
lines. God Almighty ever bless you, etc.

Faith, this is a whole treatise; I'll go reckon the lines on the other
sides. I've reckoned them.(53)




LETTER 6.

LONDON, Oct. 10, 1710.

So, as I told you just now in the letter I sent half an hour ago, I
dined with Mr. Harley to-day, who presented me to the Attorney-General,
Sir Simon Harcourt, with much compliment on all sides, etc. Harley told
me he had shown my memorial to the Queen, and seconded it very heartily;
and he desires me to dine with him again on Sunday, when he promises
to settle it with Her Majesty, before she names a Governor:(1) and I
protest I am in hopes it will be done, all but the forms, by that time;
for he loves the Church. This is a popular thing, and he would not have
a Governor share in it; and, besides, I am told by all hands, he has a
mind to gain me over. But in the letter I writ last post (yesterday) to
the Archbishop, I did not tell him a syllable of what Mr. Harley said to
me last night, because he charged me to keep it secret; so I would not
tell it to you, but that, before this goes, I hope the secret will be
over. I am now writing my poetical "Description of a Shower in London,"
and will send it to the Tatler.(2) This is the last sheet of a whole
quire I have written since I came to town. Pray, now it comes into my
head, will you, when you go to Mrs. Walls, contrive to know whether
Mrs. Wesley(3) be in town, and still at her brother's, and how she is
in health, and whether she stays in town. I writ to her from Chester,
to know what I should do with her note; and I believe the poor woman is
afraid to write to me: so I must go to my business, etc.

11. To-day at last I dined with Lord Mountrath,(4) and carried Lord
Mountjoy, and Sir Andrew Fountaine with me; and was looking over them
at ombre till eleven this evening like a fool: they played running ombre
half-crowns; and Sir Andrew Fountaine won eight guineas of Mr. Coote;(5)
so I am come home late, and will say but little to MD this night. I have
gotten half a bushel of coals, and Patrick, the extravagant whelp, had
a fire ready for me; but I picked off the coals before I went to bed. It
is a sign London is now an empty place, when it will not furnish me with
matter for above five or six lines in a day. Did you smoke in my last
how I told you the very day and the place you were playing at ombre? But
I interlined and altered a little, after I had received a letter from
Mr. Manley, that said you were at it in his house, while he was writing
to me; but without his help I guessed within one day. Your town is
certainly much more sociable than ours. I have not seen your mother yet,
etc.

12. I dined to-day with Dr. Garth and Mr. Addison, at the Devil
Tavern(6) by Temple Bar, and Garth treated; and 'tis well I dine every
day, else I should be longer making out my letters: for we are yet in a
very dull state, only inquiring every day after new elections, where
the Tories carry it among the new members six to one. Mr. Addison's
election(7) has passed easy and undisputed; and I believe if he had a
mind to be chosen king, he would hardly be refused. An odd accident has
happened at Colchester: one Captain Lavallin,(8) coming from Flanders or
Spain, found his wife with child by a clerk of Doctors' Commons, whose
trade, you know, it is to prevent fornications: and this clerk was the
very same fellow that made the discovery of Dyot's(9) counterfeiting the
stamp-paper. Lavallin has been this fortnight hunting after the clerk,
to kill him; but the fellow was constantly employed at the Treasury,
about the discovery he made: the wife had made a shift to patch up the
business, alleging that the clerk had told her her husband was dead
and other excuses; but t'other day somebody told Lavallin his wife had
intrigues before he married her: upon which he goes down in a rage,
shoots his wife through the head, then falls on his sword; and, to make
the matter sure, at the same time discharges a pistol through his own
head, and died on the spot, his wife surviving him about two hours, but
in what circumstances of mind and body is terrible to imagine. I have
finished my poem on the "Shower," all but the beginning; and am going on
with my Tatler. They have fixed about fifty things on me since I came: I
have printed but three.(10) One advantage I get by writing to you daily,
or rather you get, is, that I shall remember not to write the same
things twice; and yet, I fear, I have done it often already: but I will
mind and confine myself to the accidents of the day; and so get you gone
to ombre, and be good girls, and save your money, and be rich against
Presto comes, and write to me now and then: I am thinking it would be a
pretty thing to hear sometimes from saucy MD; but do not hurt your eyes,
Stella, I charge you.

13. O Lord, here is but a trifle of my letter written yet; what shall
Presto do for prattle-prattle, to entertain MD? The talk now grows
fresher of the Duke of Ormond for Ireland; though Mr. Addison says he
hears it will be in commission, and Lord Galway(11) one. These letters
of mine are a sort of journal, where matters open by degrees; and, as I
tell true or false, you will find by the event whether my intelligence
be good; but I do not care twopence whether it be or no.--At night.
To-day I was all about St. Paul's, and up at the top like a fool, with
Sir Andrew Fountaine and two more; and spent seven shillings for my
dinner like a puppy: this is the second time he has served me so; but
I will never do it again, though all mankind should persuade me,
unconsidering puppies! There is a young fellow here in town we are
all fond of, and about a year or two come from the University, one
Harrison,(12) a little pretty fellow, with a great deal of wit, good
sense, and good nature; has written some mighty pretty things; that in
your 6th Miscellanea,(13) about the Sprig of an Orange, is his: he
has nothing to live on but being governor to one of the Duke of
Queensberry's(14) sons for forty pounds a year. The fine fellows are
always inviting him to the tavern, and make him pay his club. Henley(15)
is a great crony of his: they are often at the tavern at six or seven
shillings reckoning, and he always makes the poor lad pay his full
share. A colonel and a lord were at him and me the same way to-night: I
absolutely refused, and made Harrison lag behind, and persuaded him not
to go to them. I tell you this, because I find all rich fellows have
that humour of using all people without any consideration of their
fortunes; but I will see them rot before they shall serve me so. Lord
Halifax is always teasing me to go down to his country house, which will
cost me a guinea to his servants, and twelve shillings coach-hire; and
he shall be hanged first. Is not this a plaguy silly story? But I am
vexed at the heart; for I love the young fellow, and am resolved to stir
up people to do something for him: he is a Whig, and I will put him upon
some of my cast Whigs; for I have done with them; and they have, I hope,
done with this kingdom for our time. They were sure of the four members
for London above all places, and they have lost three in the four.(16)
Sir Richard Onslow,(17) we hear, has lost for Surrey; and they are
overthrown in most places. Lookee, gentlewomen, if I write long letters,
I must write you news and stuff, unless I send you my verses; and some I
dare not; and those on the "Shower in London" I have sent to the Tatler,
and you may see them in Ireland. I fancy you will smoke me in the Tatler
I am going to write; for I believe I have told you the hint. I had a
letter sent me tonight from Sir Matthew Dudley, and found it on my table
when I came in. Because it is extraordinary, I will transcribe it from
beginning to end. It is as follows: "Is the Devil in you? Oct. 13,
1710." I would have answered every particular passage in it, only I
wanted time. Here is enough for to-night, such as it is, etc.

14. Is that tobacco at the top of the paper,(18) or what? I do not
remember I slobbered. Lord, I dreamt of Stella, etc., so confusedly last
night, and that we saw Dean Bolton(19) and Sterne(20) go into a shop:
and she bid me call them to her, and they proved to be two parsons I
know not; and I walked without till she was shifting, and such stuff,
mixed with much melancholy and uneasiness, and things not as they should
be, and I know not how: and it is now an ugly gloomy morning.--At night.
Mr. Addison and I dined with Ned Southwell, and walked in the Park; and
at the Coffee-house I found a letter from the Bishop of Clogher, and
a packet from MD. I opened the Bishop's letter; but put up MD's, and
visited a lady just come to town; and am now got into bed, and going to
open your little letter: and God send I may find MD well, and happy, and
merry, and that they love Presto as they do fires. Oh, I will not open
it yet! yes I will! no I will not! I am going; I cannot stay till I turn
over.(21) What shall I do? My fingers itch; and now I have it in my left
hand; and now I will open it this very moment.--I have just got it, and
am cracking the seal, and cannot imagine what is in it; I fear only some
letter from a bishop, and it comes too late; I shall employ nobody's
credit but my own. Well, I see though-- Pshaw, 'tis from Sir Andrew
Fountaine. What, another! I fancy that's from Mrs. Barton;(22) she told
me she would write to me; but she writes a better hand than this: I wish
you would inquire; it must be at Dawson's(23) office at the Castle.
I fear this is from Patty Rolt, by the scrawl. Well, I will read MD's
letter. Ah, no; it is from poor Lady Berkeley, to invite me to Berkeley
Castle this winter; and now it grieves my heart: she says, she hopes my
lord is in a fair way of recovery;(24) poor lady! Well, now I go to MD's
letter: faith, it is all right; I hoped it was wrong. Your letter, N.3,
that I have now received, is dated Sept. 26; and Manley's letter, that
I had five days ago, was dated Oct. 3, that's a fortnight difference:
I doubt it has lain in Steele's office, and he forgot. Well, there's
an end of that: he is turned out of his place;(25) and you must desire
those who send me packets, to enclose them in a paper directed to Mr.
Addison, at St. James's Coffee-house: not common letters, but packets:
the Bishop of Clogher may mention it to the Archbishop when he sees him.
As for your letter, it makes me mad: slidikins, I have been the best
boy in Christendom, and you come with your two eggs a penny.--Well; but
stay, I will look over my book: adad, I think there was a chasm between
my N.2 and N.3. Faith, I will not promise to write to you every week;
but I will write every night, and when it is full I will send it; that
will be once in ten days, and that will be often enough: and if you
begin to take up the way of writing to Presto, only because it is
Tuesday, a Monday bedad it will grow a task; but write when you have
a mind.--No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no--Agad, agad, agad, agad,
agad, agad; no, poor Stellakins.(26) Slids, I would the horse were in
your--chamber! Have not I ordered Parvisol to obey your directions about
him? And han't I said in my former letters that you may pickle him, and
boil him, if you will? What do you trouble me about your horses for?
Have I anything to do with them?--Revolutions a hindrance to me in
my business? Revolutions to me in my business? If it were not for
the revolutions, I could do nothing at all; and now I have all hopes
possible, though one is certain of nothing; but to-morrow I am to have
an answer, and am promised an effectual one. I suppose I have said
enough in this and a former letter how I stand with new people; ten
times better than ever I did with the old; forty times more caressed.
I am to dine to-morrow at Mr. Harley's; and if he continues as he has
begun, no man has been ever better treated by another. What you say
about Stella's mother, I have spoken enough to it already. I believe she
is not in town; for I have not yet seen her. My lampoon is cried up to
the skies; but nobody suspects me for it, except Sir Andrew Fountaine:
at least they say nothing of it to me. Did not I tell you of a great man
who received me very coldly?(27) That's he; but say nothing; 'twas
only a little revenge. I will remember to bring it over. The Bishop of
Clogher has smoked my Tatler,(28) about shortening of words, etc. But,
God So!(29) etc.

15. I will write plainer if I can remember it; for Stella must not spoil
her eyes, and Dingley can't read my hand very well; and I am afraid my
letters are too long: then you must suppose one to be two, and read them
at twice. I dined to-day with Mr. Harley: Mr. Prior(30) dined with us.
He has left my memorial with the Queen, who has consented to give the
First-Fruits and Twentieth Parts,(31) and will, we hope, declare it
to-morrow in the Cabinet. But I beg you to tell it to no person alive;
for so I am ordered, till in public: and I hope to get something of
greater value. After dinner came in Lord Peterborow:(32) we renewed our
acquaintance, and he grew mightily fond of me. They began to talk of a
paper of verses called "Sid Hamet." Mr. Harley repeated part, and then
pulled them out, and gave them to a gentleman at the table to read,
though they had all read them often. Lord Peterborow would let nobody
read them but himself: so he did; and Mr. Harley bobbed(33) me at every
line, to take notice of the beauties. Prior rallied Lord Peterborow for
author of them; and Lord Peterborow said he knew them to be his; and
Prior then turned it upon me, and I on him. I am not guessed at all
in town to be the author; yet so it is: but that is a secret only to
you.(34) Ten to one whether you see them in Ireland; yet here they run
prodigiously. Harley presented me to Lord President of Scotland,(35) and
Mr. Benson,(36) Lord of the Treasury. Prior and I came away at nine, and
sat at the Smyrna(37) till eleven, receiving acquaintance.

16. This morning early I went in a chair, and Patrick before it, to Mr.
Harley, to give him another copy of my memorial, as he desired; but he
was full of business, going to the Queen, and I could not see him;
but he desired I would send up the paper, and excused himself upon his
hurry. I was a little baulked; but they tell me it is nothing. I shall
judge by next visit. I tipped his porter with half a crown; and so I am
well there for a time at least. I dined at Stratford's in the City, and
had Burgundy and Tokay: came back afoot like a scoundrel: then went with
Mr. Addison and supped with Lord Mountjoy, which made me sick all night.
I forgot that I bought six pounds of chocolate for Stella, and a little
wooden box; and I have a great piece of Brazil tobacco for Dingley,(38)
and a bottle of palsy-water(39) for Stella: all which, with the two
handkerchiefs that Mr. Sterne has bought, and you must pay him for,
will be put in the box, directed to Mrs. Curry's, and sent by Dr.
Hawkshaw,(40) whom I have not seen; but Sterne has undertaken it. The
chocolate is a present, madam, for Stella. Don't read this, you little
rogue, with your little eyes; but give it to Dingley, pray now; and I
will write as plain as the skies: and let Dingley write Stella's part,
and Stella dictate to her, when she apprehends her eyes, etc.

17. This letter should have gone this post, if I had not been taken
up with business, and two nights being late out; so it must stay till
Thursday. I dined to-day with your Mr. Sterne,(41) by invitation, and
drank Irish wine;(42) but, before we parted, there came in the prince
of puppies, Colonel Edgworth;(43) so I went away. This day came out the
Tatler, made up wholly of my "Shower," and a preface to it. They say it
is the best thing I ever writ, and I think so too. I suppose the Bishop
of Clogher will show it you. Pray tell me how you like it. Tooke is
going on with my Miscellany.(44) I'd give a penny the letter to the
Bishop of Killaloe(45) was in it: 'twould do him honour. Could not you
contrive to say, you hear they are printing my things together; and that
you with the bookseller had that letter among the rest: but don't say
anything of it as from me. I forget whether it was good or no; but only
having heard it much commended, perhaps it may deserve it. Well, I have
to-morrow to finish this letter in, and then I will send it next day. I
am so vexed that you should write your third to me, when you had but my
second, and I had written five, which now I hope you have all: and so I
tell you, you are saucy, little, pretty, dear rogues, etc.

18. To-day I dined, by invitation, with Stratford and others, at a young
merchant's in the City, with Hermitage and Tokay, and stayed till nine,
and am now come home. And that dog Patrick is abroad, and drinking, and
I cannot I get my night-gown. I have a mind to turn that puppy away: he
has been drunk ten times in three weeks. But I han't time to say more;
so good-night, etc.

19. I am come home from dining in the city with Mr. Addison, at a
merchant's; and just now, at the Coffee-house, we have notice that the
Duke of Ormond was this day declared Lord Lieutenant at Hampton Court,
in Council. I have not seen Mr. Harley since; but hope the affair is
done about First-Fruits. I will see him, if possible, to-morrow morning;
but this goes to-night. I have sent a box to Mr. Sterne, to send to you
by some friend: I have directed it for Mr. Curry, at his house; so you
have warning when it comes, as I hope it will soon. The handkerchiefs
will be put in some friend's pocket, not to pay custom. And so here ends
my sixth, sent when I had but three of MD's: now I am beforehand, and
will keep so; and God Almighty bless dearest MD, etc.




LETTER 7.

LONDON, Oct. 19, 1710.

Faith, I am undone! this paper is larger than the other, and yet I am
condemned to a sheet; but, since it is MD, I did not value though I were
condemned to a pair. I told you in my letter to-day where I had been,
and how the day passed; and so, etc.

20. To-day I went to Mr. Lewis, at the Secretary's office, to know when
I might see Mr. Harley; and by and by comes up Mr. Harley himself, and
appoints me to dine with him to-morrow. I dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh,(1)
and went to wait on the two Lady Butlers;(2) but the porter answered
they were not at home: the meaning was, the youngest, Lady Mary, is
to be married to-morrow to Lord Ashburnham,(3) the best match now in
England, twelve thousand pounds a year, and abundance of money. Tell me
how my "Shower" is liked in Ireland: I never knew anything pass better
here. I spent the evening with Wortley Montagu(4) and Mr. Addison, over
a bottle of Irish wine. Do they know anything in Ireland of my greatness
among the Tories? Everybody reproaches me of it here; but I value them
not. Have you heard of the verses about the "Rod of Sid Hamet"? Say
nothing of them for your life. Hardly anybody suspects me for them; only
they think nobody but Prior or I could write them. But I doubt they
have not reached you. There is likewise a ballad full of puns on the
Westminster Election,(5) that cost me half an hour: it runs, though it
be good for nothing. But this is likewise a secret to all but MD. If you
have them not, I will bring them over.

21. I got MD's fourth to-day at the Coffee-house. God Almighty bless
poor, dear Stella, and her eyes and head! What shall we do to cure them?
poor, dear life! Your disorders are a pull-back for your good qualities.
Would to Heaven I were this minute shaving your poor, dear head, either
here or there! Pray do not write, nor read this letter, nor anything
else; and I will write plainer for Dingley to read from henceforward,
though my pen is apt to ramble when I think whom I am writing to. I will
not answer your letter until I tell you that I dined this day with Mr.
Harley, who presented me to the Earl of Stirling,(6) a Scotch lord; and
in the evening came in Lord Peterborow. I stayed till nine before Mr.
Harley would let me go, or tell me anything of my affair. He says the
Queen has now granted the First-Fruits and Twentieth Parts; but he will
not give me leave to write to the Archbishop, because the Queen designs
to signify it to the Bishops in Ireland in form; and to take notice,
that it was done upon a memorial from me; which, Mr. Harley tells me he
does to make it look more respectful to me, etc.; and I am to see him
on Tuesday. I know not whether I told you that, in my memorial which was
given to the Queen, I begged for two thousand pounds a year more, though
it was not in my commission; but that, Mr. Harley says, cannot yet be
done, and that he and I must talk of it further: however, I have started
it, and it may follow in time. Pray say nothing of the First-Fruits
being granted, unless I give leave at the bottom of this. I believe
never anything was compassed so soon, and purely done by my personal
credit with Mr. Harley, who is so excessively obliging, that I know not
what to make of it, unless to show the rascals of the other party that
they used a man unworthily who had deserved better. The memorial given
to the Queen from me speaks with great plainness of Lord Wharton. I
believe this business is as important to you as the Convocation disputes
from Tisdall.(7) I hope in a month or two all the forms of settling this
matter will be over; and then I shall have nothing to do here. I will
only add one foolish thing more, because it is just come into my head.
When this thing is made known, tell me impartially whether they give
any of the merit to me, or no; for I am sure I have so much, that I will
never take it upon me.--Insolent sluts! because I say Dublin, Ireland,
therefore you must say London, England: that is Stella's malice.--Well,
for that I will not answer your letter till to-morrow-day, and so and
so: I will go write something else, and it will not be much; for 'tis
late.

22. I was this morning with Mr. Lewis, the under-secretary to Lord
Dartmouth, two hours, talking politics, and contriving to keep Steele in
his office of stamped paper: he has lost his place of Gazetteer, three
hundred pounds a year, for writing a Tatler,(8) some months ago, against
Mr. Harley, who gave it him at first, and raised the salary from sixty
to three hundred pounds. This was devilish ungrateful; and Lewis was
telling me the particulars: but I had a hint given me, that I might save
him in the other employment: and leave was given me to clear matters
with Steele. Well, I dined with Sir Matthew Dudley, and in the evening
went to sit with Mr. Addison, and offer the matter at distance to him,
as the discreeter person; but found party had so possessed him, that
he talked as if he suspected me, and would not fall in with anything I
said. So I stopped short in my overture, and we parted very drily; and
I shall say nothing to Steele, and let them do as they will; but, if
things stand as they are, he will certainly lose it, unless I save him;
and therefore I will not speak to him, that I may not report to his
disadvantage. Is not this vexatious? and is there so much in the proverb
of proffered service? When shall I grow wise? I endeavour to act in the
most exact points of honour and conscience; and my nearest friends will
not understand it so. What must a man expect from his enemies? This
would vex me, but it shall not; and so I bid you good-night, etc.

23. I know 'tis neither wit nor diversion to tell you every day where I
dine; neither do I write it to fill my letter; but I fancy I shall,
some time or other, have the curiosity of seeing some particulars how
I passed my life when I was absent from MD this time; and so I tell you
now that I dined to-day at Molesworth's, the Florence Envoy, then
went to the Coffee-house, where I behaved myself coldly enough to Mr.
Addison, and so came home to scribble. We dine together to-morrow and
next day by invitation; but I shall alter my behaviour to him, till he
begs my pardon, or else we shall grow bare acquaintance. I am weary of
friends; and friendships are all monsters, but MD's.

24. I forgot to tell you, that last night I went to Mr. Harley's,
hoping--faith, I am blundering, for it was this very night at six; and I
hoped he would have told me all things were done and granted: but he
was abroad, and came home ill, and was gone to bed, much out of order,
unless the porter lied. I dined to-day at Sir Matthew Dudley's, with Mr.
Addison, etc.

25. I was to-day to see the Duke of Ormond; and, coming out, met Lord
Berkeley of Stratton,(9) who told me that Mrs. Temple,(10) the widow,
died last Saturday, which, I suppose, is much to the outward grief and
inward joy of the family. I dined to-day with Addison and Steele, and
a sister of Mr. Addison, who is married to one Mons. Sartre,(11) a
Frenchman, prebendary of Westminster, who has a delicious house and
garden; yet I thought it was a sort of monastic life in those cloisters,
and I liked Laracor better. Addison's sister is a sort of a wit, very
like him. I am not fond of her, etc.

26. I was to-day to see Mr. Congreve,(12) who is almost blind with
cataracts growing on his eyes; and his case is, that he must wait two or
three years, until the cataracts are riper, and till he is quite blind,
and then he must have them couched; and, besides, he is never rid of the
gout, yet he looks young and fresh, and is as cheerful as ever. He is
younger by three years or more than I; and I am twenty years younger
than he. He gave me a pain in the great toe, by mentioning the gout. I
find such suspicions frequently, but they go off again. I had a second
letter from Mr. Morgan,(13) for which I thank you: I wish you were
whipped, for forgetting to send him that answer I desired you in one of
my former, that I could do nothing for him of what he desired, having
no credit at all, etc. Go, be far enough, you negligent baggages. I have
had also a letter from Parvisol, with an account how my livings are set;
and that they are fallen, since last year, sixty pounds. A comfortable
piece of news! He tells me plainly that he finds you have no mind to
part with the horse, because you sent for him at the same time you sent
him my letter; so that I know not what must be done. It is a sad thing
that Stella must have her own horse, whether Parvisol will or no. So now
to answer your letter that I had three or four days ago. I am not now in
bed, but am come home by eight; and, it being warm, I write up. I never
writ to the Bishop of Killala, which, I suppose, was the reason he had
not my letter. I have not time, there is the short of it.--As fond as
the Dean(14) is of my letter, he has not written to me. I would only
know whether Dean Bolton(15) paid him the twenty pounds; and for the
rest, he may kiss--And that you may ask him, because I am in pain about
it, that Dean Bolton is such a whipster. 'Tis the most obliging thing
in the world in Dean Sterne to be so kind to you. I believe he knows it
will please me, and makes up, that way, his other usage.(16) No, we
have had none of your snow, but a little one morning; yet I think it
was great snow for an hour or so, but no longer. I had heard of Will
Crowe's(17) death before, but not the foolish circumstance that hastened
his end. No, I have taken care that Captain Pratt(18) shall not suffer
by Lord Anglesea's death.(19) I will try some contrivance to get a copy
of my picture from Jervas. I will make Sir Andrew Fountaine buy one as
for himself, and I will pay him again, and take it, that is, provided I
have money to spare when I leave this.--Poor John! is he gone? and
Madam Parvisol(20) has been in town! Humm. Why, Tighe(21) and I, when he
comes, shall not take any notice of each other; I would not do it
much in this town, though we had not fallen out.--I was to-day at Mr.
Sterne's lodging: he was not within; and Mr. Leigh is not come to town;
but I will do Dingley's errand when I see him. What do I know whether
china be dear or no? I once took a fancy of resolving to grow mad for
it, but now it is off; I suppose I told you in some former letter. And
so you only want some salad-dishes, and plates, and etc. Yes, yes, you
shall. I suppose you have named as much as will cost five pounds.--Now
to Stella's little postscript; and I am almost crazed that you vex
yourself for not writing. Cannot you dictate to Dingley, and not strain
your little, dear eyes? I am sure it is the grief of my soul to think
you are out of order. Pray be quiet; and, if you will write, shut your
eyes, and write just a line, and no more, thus, "How do you do, Mrs.
Stella?" That was written with my eyes shut. Faith, I think it is better
than when they are open: and then Dingley may stand by, and tell you
when you go too high or too low.--My letters of business, with packets,
if there be any more occasion for such, must be enclosed to Mr. Addison,
at St. James's Coffee-house: but I hope to hear, as soon as I see Mr.
Harley, that the main difficulties are over, and that the rest will be
but form.--Take two or three nutgalls, take two or three----galls, stop
your receipt in your--I have no need on't. Here is a clutter! Well, so
much for your letter, which I will now put up in my letter-partition in
my cabinet, as I always do every letter as soon as I answer it. Method
is good in all things. Order governs the world. The Devil is the author
of confusion. A general of an army, a minister of state; to descend
lower, a gardener, a weaver, etc. That may make a fine observation,
if you think it worth finishing; but I have not time. Is not this a
terrible long piece for one evening? I dined to-day with Patty Rolt at
my cousin Leach's,(22) with a pox, in the City: he is a printer, and
prints the Postman, oh hoo, and is my cousin, God knows how, and he
married Mrs. Baby Aires of Leicester; and my cousin Thomson was with us:
and my cousin Leach offers to bring me acquainted with the author of the
Postman;(23) and says he does not doubt but the gentleman will be glad
of my acquaintance; and that he is a very ingenious man, and a great
scholar, and has been beyond sea. But I was modest and said, may be the
gentleman was shy, and not fond of new acquaintance; and so put it off:
and I wish you could hear me repeating all I have said of this in its
proper tone, just as I am writing it. It is all with the same cadence
with "Oh hoo," or as when little girls say, "I have got an apple, miss,
and I won't give you some." It is plaguy twelvepenny weather this last
week, and has cost me ten shillings in coach and chair hire. If the
fellow that has your money will pay it, let me beg you to buy Bank Stock
with it, which is fallen near thirty per cent. and pays eight pounds per
cent. and you have the principal when you please: it will certainly soon
rise. I would to God Lady Giffard would put in the four hundred pounds
she owes you,(24) and take the five per cent. common interest, and give
you the remainder. I will speak to your mother about it when I see her.
I am resolved to buy three hundred pounds of it for myself, and take
up what I have in Ireland; and I have a contrivance for it, that I hope
will do, by making a friend of mine buy it as for himself, and I will
pay him when I can get in my money. I hope Stratford will do me that
kindness. I'll ask him tomorrow or next day.

27. Mr. Rowe(25) the poet desired me to dine with him to-day. I went to
his office (he is under-secretary in Mr. Addison's place that he had
in England), and there was Mr. Prior; and they both fell commending my
"Shower" beyond anything that has been written of the kind: there never
was such a "Shower" since Danae's, etc. You must tell me how it is liked
among you. I dined with Rowe; Prior could not come: and after dinner
we went to a blind tavern,(26) where Congreve, Sir Richard Temple,(27)
Estcourt,(28) and Charles Main,(29) were over a bowl of bad punch. The
knight sent for six flasks of his own wine for me, and we stayed till
twelve. But now my head continues pretty well; I have left off my
drinking, and only take a spoonful mixed with water, for fear of the
gout, or some ugly distemper; and now, because it is late, I will, etc.

28. Garth and Addison and I dined to-day at a hedge(30) tavern; then I
went to Mr. Harley, but he was denied, or not at home: so I fear I
shall not hear my business is done before this goes. Then I visited Lord
Pembroke,(31) who is just come to town; and we were very merry talking
of old things; and I hit him with one pun. Then I went to see the Ladies
Butler, and the son of a whore of a porter denied them: so I sent them a
threatening message by another lady, for not excepting me always to the
porter. I was weary of the Coffee-house, and Ford(32) desired me to sit
with him at next door; which I did, like a fool, chatting till twelve,
and now am got into bed. I am afraid the new Ministry is at a terrible
loss about money: the Whigs talk so, it would give one the spleen; and I
am afraid of meeting Mr. Harley out of humour. They think he will never
carry through this undertaking. God knows what will come of it. I should
be terribly vexed to see things come round again: it will ruin the
Church and clergy for ever; but I hope for better. I will send this on
Tuesday, whether I hear any further news of my affair or not.

29. Mr. Addison and I dined to-day with Lord Mountjoy; which is all the
adventures of this day.--I chatted a while to-night in the Coffee-house,
this being a full night; and now am come home, to write some business.

30. I dined to-day at Mrs. Vanhomrigh's, and sent a letter to poor Mrs.
Long,(33) who writes to us, but is God knows where, and will not tell
anybody the place of her residence. I came home early, and must go
write.

31. The month ends with a fine day; and I have been walking, and
visiting Lewis, and concerting where to see Mr. Harley. I have no news
to send you. Aire,(34) they say, is taken, though the Whitehall letters
this morning say quite the contrary: 'tis good, if it be true. I dined
with Mr. Addison and Dick Stewart, Lord Mountjoy's brother;(35) a treat
of Addison's. They were half-fuddled, but not I; for I mixed water with
my wine, and left them together between nine and ten; and I must send
this by the bellman, which vexes me, but I will put it off no longer.
Pray God it does not miscarry. I seldom do so; but I can put off little
MD no longer. Pray give the under note to Mrs. Brent.

I am a pretty gentleman; and you lose all your money at cards, sirrah
Stella. I found you out; I did so.

I am staying before I can fold up this letter, till that ugly D is dry
in the last line but one. Do not you see it? O Lord, I am loth to leave
you, faith--but it must be so, till the next time. Pox take that D; I
will blot it, to dry it.




LETTER 8.

LONDON, Oct. 31, 1710.

So, now I have sent my seventh to your fourth, young women; and now I
will tell you what I would not in my last, that this morning, sitting
in my bed, I had a fit of giddiness: the room turned round for about a
minute, and then it went off, leaving me sickish, but not very: and so I
passed the day as I told you; but I would not end a letter with telling
you this, because it might vex you: and I hope in God I shall have no
more of it. I saw Dr. Cockburn(1) to-day, and he promises to send me the
pills that did me good last year; and likewise has promised me an oil
for my ear, that he has been making for that ailment for somebody else.

Nov. 1. I wish MD a merry new year. You know this is the first day of
it with us.(2) I had no giddiness to-day; but I drank brandy, and have
bought a pint for two shillings. I sat up the night before my giddiness
pretty late, and writ very much; so I will impute it to that. But I
never eat fruit, nor drink ale; but drink better wine than you do, as I
did to-day with Mr. Addison at Lord Mountjoy's: then went at five to
see Mr. Harley, who could not see me for much company; but sent me his
excuse, and desired I would dine with him on Friday; and then I expect
some answer to this business, which must either be soon done, or begun
again; and then the Duke of Ormond and his people will interfere for
their honour, and do nothing. I came home at six, and spent my time in
my chamber, without going to the Coffee-house, which I grow weary of;
and I studied at leisure, writ not above forty lines, some inventions
of my own, and some hints, and read not at all, and this because I would
take care of Presto, for fear little MD should be angry.

2. I took my four pills last night, and they lay an hour in my throat,
and so they will do to-night. I suppose I could swallow four affronts
as easily. I dined with Dr. Cockburn to-day, and came home at seven; but
Mr. Ford has been with me till just now, and it is near eleven. I have
had no giddiness to-day. Mr. Dopping(3) I have seen; and he tells me
coldly, my "Shower" is liked well enough; there's your Irish judgment!
I writ this post to the Bishop of Clogher. It is now just a fortnight
since I heard from you. I must have you write once a fortnight, and then
I will allow for wind and weather. How goes ombre? Does Mrs. Walls(4)
win constantly, as she used to do? And Mrs. Stoyte;(5) I have not
thought of her this long time: how does she? I find we have a cargo of
Irish coming for London: I am sorry for it; but I never go near them.
And Tighe is landed; but Mrs. Wesley,(6) they say, is going home to her
husband, like a fool. Well, little monkeys mine, I must go write; and so
goodnight.

3. I ought to read these letters I write, after I have done; for,
looking over thus much, I found two or three literal mistakes, which
should not be when the hand is so bad. But I hope it does not puzzle
little Dingley to read, for I think I mend: but methinks, when I write
plain, I do not know how, but we are not alone, all the world can see
us. A bad scrawl is so snug, it looks like a PMD.(7) We have scurvy
Tatlers of late: so pray do not suspect me. I have one or two hints I
design to send him, and never any more: he does not deserve it. He is
governed by his wife most abominably,(8) as bad as ----. I never saw
her since I came; nor has he ever made me an invitation: either he dares
not, or is such a thoughtless Tisdall(9) fellow, that he never minds(10)
it. So what care I for his wit? for he is the worst company in the
world, till he has a bottle of wine in his head. I cannot write
straighter in bed, so you must be content.--At night in bed. Stay, let
me see where's this letter to MD among these papers? Oh! here. Well, I
will go on now; but I am very busy (smoke the new pen.) I dined with Mr.
Harley to-day, and am invited there again on Sunday. I have now leave
to write to the Primate and Archbishop of Dublin, that the Queen has
granted the First-Fruits; but they are to take no notice of it, till a
letter is sent them by the Queen's orders from Lord Dartmouth, Secretary
of State, to signify it. The bishops are to be made a corporation, to
dispose of the revenue, etc.; and I shall write to the Archbishop of
Dublin to-morrow (I have had no giddiness to-day). I know not whether
they will have any occasion for me longer to be here; nor can I judge
till I see what letter the Queen sends to the bishops, and what they
will do upon it. If despatch be used, it may be done in six weeks; but
I cannot judge. They sent me to-day a new Commission, signed by the
Primate and Archbishop of Dublin,(11) and promise me letters to the two
archbishops here; but mine a ---- for it all. The thing is done, and has
been so these ten days; though I had only leave to tell it to-day. I had
this day likewise a letter from the Bishop of Clogher, who complains of
my not writing; and, what vexes me, says he knows you have long letters
from me every week. Why do you tell him so? 'Tis not right, faith: but
I won't be angry with MD at distance. I writ to him last post, before I
had his; and will write again soon, since I see he expects it, and that
Lord and Lady Mountjoy(12) put him off upon me, to give themselves ease.
Lastly, I had this day a letter from a certain naughty rogue called MD,
and it was N. 5; which I shall not answer to-night, I thank you. No,
faith, I have other fish to fry; but to-morrow or next day will be time
enough. I have put MD's commissions in a memorandum paper. I think I
have done all before, and remember nothing but this to-day about glasses
and spectacles and spectacle cases. I have no commission from Stella,
but the chocolate and handkerchiefs; and those are bought, and I expect
they will be soon sent. I have been with, and sent to, Mr. Sterne, two
or three times to know; but he was not within. Odds my life, what am I
doing? I must go write and do business.

4. I dined to-day at Kensington, with Addison, Steele, etc., came home,
and writ a short letter to the Archbishop of Dublin, to let him know
the Queen has granted the thing, etc. I writ in the Coffee-house, for
I stayed at Kensington till nine, and am plaguy weary; for Colonel
Proud(13) was very ill company, and I will never be of a party with him
again; and I drank punch, and that and ill company has made me hot.

5. I was with Mr. Harley from dinner to seven this night, and went to
the Coffee-house, where Dr. Davenant(14) would fain have had me gone and
drink a bottle of wine at his house hard by, with Dr. Chamberlen,(15)
but the puppy used so many words, that I was afraid of his company; and
though we promised to come at eight, I sent a messenger to him, that
Chamberlen was going to a patient, and therefore we would put it off
till another time: so he, and the Comptroller,(16) and I, were prevailed
on by Sir Matthew Dudley to go to his house, where I stayed till twelve,
and left them. Davenant has been teasing me to look over some of his
writings that he is going to publish; but the rogue is so fond of his
own productions, that I hear he will not part with a syllable; and he
has lately put out a foolish pamphlet, called The Third Part of Tom
Double; to make his court to the Tories, whom he had left.

6. I was to-day gambling(17) in the City to see Patty Rolt, who is going
to Kingston, where she lodges; but, to say the truth, I had a mind for a
walk to exercise myself, and happened to be disengaged: for dinners are
ten times more plentiful with me here than ever, or than in Dublin. I
won't answer your letter yet, because I am busy. I hope to send this
before I have another from MD: it would be a sad thing to answer two
letters together, as MD does from Presto. But when the two sides are
full, away the letter shall go, that is certain, like it or not like it;
and that will be about three days hence, for the answering-night will be
a long one.

7. I dined to-day at Sir Richard Temple's, with Congreve, Vanbrugh,
Lieutenant-General Farrington,(18) etc. Vanbrugh, I believe I told you,
had a long quarrel with me about those verses on his house;(19) but we
were very civil and cold. Lady Marlborough used to tease him with them,
which had made him angry, though he be a good-natured fellow. It was a
Thanksgiving-day,(20) and I was at Court, where the Queen passed us by
with all Tories about her; not one Whig: Buckingham,(21) Rochester,(22)
Leeds,(23) Shrewsbury, Berkeley of Stratton, Lord Keeper Harcourt, Mr.
Harley, Lord Pembroke, etc.; and I have seen her without one Tory. The
Queen made me a curtsey, and said, in a sort of familiar way to Presto,
"How does MD?" I considered she was a Queen, and so excused her.(24) I
do not miss the Whigs at Court; but have as many acquaintance there as
formerly.

8. Here's ado and a clutter! I must now answer MD's fifth; but first
you must know I dined at the Portugal Envoy's(25) to-day, with Addison,
Vanbrugh, Admiral Wager,(26) Sir Richard Temple,(27) Methuen,(28) etc. I
was weary of their company, and stole away at five, and came home like a
good boy, and studied till ten, and had a fire, O ho! and now am in bed.
I have no fireplace in my bed-chamber; but 'tis very warm weather when
one's in bed. Your fine cap,(29) Madam Dingley, is too little, and too
hot: I will have that fur taken off; I wish it were far enough; and my
old velvet cap is good for nothing. Is it velvet under the fur? I was
feeling, but cannot find: if it be, 'twill do without it else I will
face it; but then I must buy new velvet: but may be I may beg a piece.
What shall I do? Well, now to rogue MD's letter. God be thanked for
Stella's eyes mending; and God send it holds; but faith you writ too
much at a time: better write less, or write it at ten times. Yes, faith,
a long letter in a morning from a dear friend is a dear thing. I smoke
a compliment, little mischievous girls, I do so. But who are those WIGGS
that think I am turned Tory? Do you mean Whigs? Which WIGGS and WAT do
you mean? I know nothing of Raymond, and only had one letter from him a
little after I came here.(Pray remember Morgan.) Raymond is indeed
like to have much influence over me in London, and to share much of
my conversation. I shall, no doubt, introduce him to Harley, and Lord
Keeper, and the Secretary of State. The Tatler upon Ithuriel's spear(30)
is not mine, madam. What a puzzle there is betwixt you and your
judgment! In general you may be sometimes sure of things, as that about
STYLE,(31) because it is what I have frequently spoken of; but guessing
is mine a----, and I defy mankind, if I please. Why, I writ a pamphlet
when I was last in London, that you and a thousand have seen, and never
guessed it to be mine. Could you have guessed the "Shower in Town" to be
mine? How chance you did not see that before your last letter went? but
I suppose you in Ireland did not think it worth mentioning. Nor am I
suspected for the lampoon; only Harley said he smoked me; (have I told
you so before?) and some others knew it. 'Tis called "The Rod of Sid
Hamet." And I have written several other things that I hear commended,
and nobody suspects me for them; nor you shall not know till I see you
again. What do you mean, "That boards near me, that I dine with now and
then?" I know no such person: I do not dine with boarders. What the pox!
You know whom I have dined with every day since I left you, better than
I do. What do you mean, sirrah? Slids, my ailment has been over these
two months almost. Impudence, if you vex me, I will give ten shillings
a week for my lodging; for I am almost st--k out of this with the sink,
and it helps me to verses in my "Shower."(32) Well, Madam Dingley, what
say you to the world to come? What ballad? Why go look, it was not good
for much: have patience till I come back: patience is a gay thing as,
etc. I hear nothing of Lord Mountjoy's coming for Ireland. When
is Stella's birthday? in March? Lord bless me, my turn at Christ
Church;(33) it is so natural to hear you write about that, I believe
you have done it a hundred times; it is as fresh in my mind, the verger
coming to you; and why to you? Would he have you preach for me? O, pox
on your spelling of Latin, Johnsonibus atque, that is the way. How did
the Dean get that name by the end? 'Twas you betrayed me: not I, faith;
I'll not break his head. Your mother is still in the country, I suppose;
for she promised to see me when she came to town. I writ to her four
days ago, to desire her to break it to Lady Giffard, to put some money
for you in the Bank, which was then fallen thirty per cent. Would to God
mine had been here, I should have gained one hundred pounds, and got
as good interest as in Ireland, and much securer. I would fain have
borrowed three hundred pounds; but money is so scarce here, there is no
borrowing, by this fall of stocks. 'Tis rising now, and I knew it would:
it fell from one hundred and twenty-nine to ninety-six. I have not heard
since from your mother. Do you think I would be so unkind not to see
her, that you desire me in a style so melancholy? Mrs. Raymond,(34)
you say, is with child: I am sorry for it; and so is, I believe, her
husband. Mr. Harley speaks all the kind things to me in the world; and,
I believe, would serve me, if I were to stay here; but I reckon in time
the Duke of Ormond may give me some addition to Laracor. Why should
the Whigs think I came to England to leave them? Sure my journey was no
secret. I protest sincerely, I did all I could to hinder it, as the Dean
can tell you, although now I do not repent it. But who the Devil cares
what they think? Am I under obligations in the least to any of them all?
Rot 'em, for ungrateful dogs; I will make them repent their usage before
I leave this place. They say here the same thing of my leaving the
Whigs; but they own they cannot blame me, considering the treatment I
have had. I will take care of your spectacles, as I told you before,
and of the Bishop of Killala's; but I will not write to him, I have not
time. What do you mean by my fourth, Madam Dinglibus? Does not Stella
say you have had my fifth, Goody Blunder? You frighted me till I looked
back. Well, this is enough for one night. Pray give my humble service to
Mrs. Stoyte and her sister, Kate is it, or Sarah?(35) I have forgot her
name, faith. I think I will even (and to Mrs. Walls and the Archdeacon)
send this to-morrow: no, faith, that will be in ten days from the last.
I will keep it till Saturday, though I write no more. But what if a
letter from MD should come in the meantime? Why then I would only say,
"Madam, I have received your sixth letter; your most humble servant to
command, Presto"; and so conclude. Well, now I will write and think a
little, and so to bed, and dream of MD.

9. I have my mouth full of water, and was going to spit it out, because
I reasoned with myself, how could I write when my mouth was full? Han't
you done things like that, reasoned wrong at first thinking? Well, I was
to see Mr. Lewis this morning, and am to dine a few days hence, as he
tells me, with Mr. Secretary St. John; and I must contrive to see Harley
soon again, to hasten this business from the Queen. I dined to-day at
Lord Mountrath's,(36) with Lord Mountjoy,(37) etc.; but the wine was not
good, so I came away, stayed at the Coffee-house till seven, then came
home to my fire, the maidenhead of my second half-bushel, and am now
in bed at eleven, as usual. 'Tis mighty warm; yet I fear I should catch
cold this wet weather, if I sat an evening in my room after coming from
warm places: and I must make much of myself, because MD is not here to
take care of Presto; and I am full of business, writing, etc., and do
not care for the Coffee-house; and so this serves for all together, not
to tell it you over and over, as silly people do; but Presto is a wiser
man, faith, than so, let me tell you, gentlewomen. See, I am got to
the third side; but, faith, I will not do that often; but I must say
something early to-day, till the letter is done, and on Saturday it
shall go; so I must leave something till to-morrow, till to-morrow and
next day.

10. O Lord, I would this letter was with you with all my heart! If it
should miscarry, what a deal would be lost! I forgot to leave a gap
in the last line but one for the seal, like a puppy; but I should have
allowed for night, goodnight; but when I am taking leave, I cannot leave
a bit, faith; but I fancy the seal will not come there. I dined to-day
at Lady Lucy's, where they ran down my "Shower"; and said, "Sid Hamet"
was the silliest poem they ever read; and told Prior so, whom they
thought to be author of it. Don't you wonder I never dined there before?
But I am too busy, and they live too far off; and, besides, I do not
like women so much as I did. (MD, you must know, are not women.) I
supped to-night at Addison's, with Garth, Steele, and Mr. Dopping; and
am come home late. Lewis has sent to me to desire I will dine with
some company I shall like. I suppose it is Mr. Secretary St. John's
appointment. I had a letter just now from Raymond, who is at Bristol,
and says he will be at London in a fortnight, and leave his wife behind
him; and desires any lodging in the house where I am: but that must not
be. I shall not know what to do with him in town: to be sure, I will
not present him to any acquaintance of mine; and he will live a delicate
life, a parson and a perfect stranger! Paaast twelvvve o'clock,(38) and
so good-night, etc. Oh! but I forgot, Jemmy Leigh is come to town;
says he has brought Dingley's things, and will send them with the first
convenience. My parcel, I hear, is not sent yet. He thinks of going for
Ireland in a month, etc. I cannot write tomorrow, because--what, because
of the Archbishop; because I will seal my letter early; because I am
engaged from noon till night; because of many kind of things; and yet
I will write one or two words to-morrow morning, to keep up my journal
constant, and at night I will begin my ninth.

11. Morning by candlelight. You must know that I am in my nightgown
every morning between six and seven, and Patrick is forced to ply me
fifty times before I can get on my nightgown; and so now I will take my
leave of my own dear MD for this letter, and begin my next when I come
home at night. God Almighty bless and protect dearest MD. Farewell, etc.

This letter's as long as a sermon, faith.




LETTER 9.

LONDON, Nov. 11, 1710.

I dined to-day, by invitation, with the Secretary of State, Mr. St.
John. Mr. Harley came in to us before dinner, and made me his excuses
for not dining with us, because he was to receive people who came to
propose advancing money to the Government: there dined with us only
Mr. Lewis, and Dr. Freind(1) (that writ "Lord Peterborow's Actions in
Spain"). I stayed with them till just now between ten and eleven, and
was forced again to give my eighth to the bellman, which I did with my
own hands, rather than keep it till next post. The Secretary used me
with all the kindness in the world. Prior came in after dinner; and,
upon an occasion, he (the Secretary) said, "The best thing I ever read
is not yours, but Dr. Swift's on Vanbrugh"; which I do not reckon so
very good neither.(2) But Prior was damped, until I stuffed him with two
or three compliments. I am thinking what a veneration we used to have
for Sir William Temple, because he might have been Secretary of State at
fifty; and here is a young fellow, hardly thirty, in that employment.(3)
His father is a man of pleasure,(4) that walks the Mall, and frequents
St. James's Coffee-house, and the chocolate-houses; and the young son is
principal Secretary of State. Is there not something very odd in that?
He told me, among other things, that Mr. Harley complained he could keep
nothing from me, I had the way so much of getting into him. I knew that
was a refinement; and so I told him, and it was so: indeed, it is hard
to see these great men use me like one who was their betters, and the
puppies with you in Ireland hardly regarding me: but there are some
reasons for all this, which I will tell you when we meet. At coming
home, I saw a letter from your mother, in answer to one I sent her two
days ago. It seems she is in town; but cannot come out in a morning,
just as you said; and God knows when I shall be at leisure in an
afternoon: for if I should send her a penny-post letter, and afterwards
not be able to meet her, it would vex me; and, besides, the days are
short, and why she cannot come early in a morning, before she is wanted,
I cannot imagine. I will desire her to let Lady Giffard know that she
hears I am in town; and that she would go to see me, to inquire after
you. I wonder she will confine herself so much to that old beast's
humour. You know I cannot in honour see Lady Giffard, and consequently
not go into her house. This I think is enough for the first time.

12. And how could you write with such thin paper? (I forgot to say this
in my former.) Cannot you get thicker? Why, that's a common caution that
writing-masters give their scholars; you must have heard it a hundred
times. 'Tis this:

     "If paper be thin,
      Ink will slip in;
      But, if it be thick,
      You may write with a stick."(5)

I had a letter to-day from poor Mrs. Long,(6) giving me an account of
her present life, obscure in a remote country town, and how easy she
is under it. Poor creature! 'tis just such an alteration in life, as if
Presto should be banished from MD, and condemned to converse with Mrs.
Raymond. I dined to-day with Ford, Sir Richard Levinge,(7) etc., at a
place where they board, hard by. I was lazy, and not very well, sitting
so long with company yesterday. I have been very busy writing this
evening at home, and had a fire: I am spending my second half-bushel of
coals; and now am in bed, and 'tis late.

13. I dined to-day in the City, and then went to christen Will
Frankland's(8) child; and Lady Falconbridge(9) was one of the
godmothers: this is a daughter of Oliver Cromwell, and extremely like
him by his pictures that I have seen. I stayed till almost eleven, and
am now come home and gone to bed. My business in the City was, to thank
Stratford for a kindness he has done me, which now I will tell you. I
found Bank Stock was fallen thirty-four in the hundred, and was mighty
desirous to buy it; but I was a little too late for the cheapest time,
being hindered by business here; for I was so wise to guess to a day
when it would fall. My project was this: I had three hundred pounds in
Ireland; and so I writ to Mr. Stratford in the City, to desire he would
buy me three hundred pounds in Bank Stock, and that he should keep the
papers, and that I would be bound to pay him for them; and, if it
should rise or fall, I would take my chance, and pay him interest in the
meantime. I showed my letter to one or two people who understand those
things; and they said money was so hard to be got here, that no man
would do it for me. However, Stratford, who is the most generous man
alive, has done it: but it costs one hundred pounds and a half, that is,
ten shillings; so that three hundred pounds cost me three hundred pounds
and thirty shillings. This was done about a week ago, and I can have
five pounds for my bargain already. Before it fell, it was one hundred
and thirty pounds; and we are sure it will be the same again. I told
you I writ to your mother, to desire that Lady Giffard would do the same
with what she owes you; but she tells your mother she has no money.
I would to God all you had in the world was there. Whenever you lend
money, take this rule, to have two people bound, who have both visible
fortunes; for they will hardly die together; and, when one dies, you
fall upon the other, and make him add another security: and if Rathburn
(now I have his name) pays you in your money, let me know, and I will
direct Parvisol accordingly: however, he shall wait on you and know. So,
ladies, enough of business for one night. Paaaaast twelvvve o'clock. I
must only add, that, after a long fit of rainy weather, it has been fair
two or three days, and is this day grown cold and frosty; so that you
must give poor little Presto leave to have a fire in his chamber morning
and evening too; and he will do as much for you.

14. What, has your Chancellor(10) lost his senses, like Will Crowe?(11)
I forgot to tell Dingley that I was yesterday at Ludgate, bespeaking the
spectacles at the great shop there, and shall have them in a day or two.
This has been an insipid day. I dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, and came
gravely home, after just visiting the Coffee-house. Sir Richard Cox,(12)
they say, is sure of going over Lord Chancellor, who is as arrant a
puppy as ever ate bread: but the Duke of Ormond has a natural affection
to puppies; which is a thousand pities, being none himself. I have been
amusing myself at home till now, and in bed bid you good-night.

15. I have been visiting this morning, but nobody was at home, Secretary
St. John, Sir Thomas Hanmer,(13) Sir Chancellor Cox-comb, etc. I
attended the Duke of Ormond with about fifty other Irish gentlemen at
Skinners' Hall, where the Londonderry Society laid out three hundred
pounds to treat us and his Grace with a dinner. Three great tables
with the dessert laid in mighty figure. Sir Richard Levinge and I got
discreetly to the head of the second table, to avoid the crowd at the
first: but it was so cold, and so confounded a noise with the trumpets
and hautboys, that I grew weary, and stole away before the second course
came on; so I can give you no account of it, which is a thousand pities.
I called at Ludgate for Dingley's glasses, and shall have them in a day
or two; and I doubt it will cost me thirty shillings for a microscope,
but not without Stella's permission; for I remember she is a virtuoso.
Shall I buy it or no? 'Tis not the great bulky ones, nor the common
little ones, to impale a louse (saving your presence) upon a needle's
point; but of a more exact sort, and clearer to the sight, with all its
equipage in a little trunk that you may carry in your pocket. Tell me,
sirrah, shall I buy it or not for you? I came home straight, etc.

16. I dined to-day in the city with Mr. Manley,(14) who invited Mr.
Addison and me, and some other friends, to his lodging, and entertained
us very handsomely. I returned with Mr. Addison, and loitered till nine
in the Coffee-house, where I am hardly known, by going so seldom. I am
here soliciting for Trounce; you know him: he was gunner in the former
yacht, and would fain be so in the present one if you remember him,
a good, lusty, fresh-coloured fellow. Shall I stay till I get another
letter from MD before I close up this? Mr. Addison and I meet a little
seldomer than formerly, although we are still at bottom as good friends
as ever, but differ a little about party.

17. To-day I went to Lewis at the Secretary's office; where I saw and
spoke to Mr. Harley, who promised, in a few days, to finish the rest of
my business. I reproached him for putting me on the necessity of minding
him of it, and rallied him, etc., which he took very well. I dined
to-day with one Mr. Gore, elder brother to a young merchant of my
acquaintance; and Stratford and my other friend merchants dined with us,
where I stayed late, drinking claret and burgundy; and am just got to
bed, and will say no more, but that it now begins to be time to have a
letter from my own little MD; for the last I had above a fortnight ago,
and the date was old too.

18. To-day I dined with Lewis and Prior at an eating-house, but
with Lewis's wine. Lewis went away, and Prior and I sat on, where we
complimented one another for an hour or two upon our mutual wit and
poetry. Coming home at seven, a gentleman unknown stopped me in the Pall
Mall, and asked my advice; said he had been to see the Queen (who was
just come to town), and the people in waiting would not let him see her;
that he had two hundred thousand men ready to serve her in the war; that
he knew the Queen perfectly well, and had an apartment at Court, and
if she heard he was there, she would send for him immediately; that she
owed him two hundred thousand pounds, etc., and he desired my opinion,
whether he should go try again whether he could see her; or because,
perhaps, she was weary after her journey, whether he had not better stay
till to-morrow. I had a mind to get rid of my companion, and begged
him of all love to go and wait on her immediately; for that, to my
knowledge, the Queen would admit him; that this was an affair of great
importance, and required despatch: and I instructed him to let me know
the success of his business, and come to the Smyrna Coffee-house, where
I would wait for him till midnight; and so ended this adventure. I would
have fain given the man half a crown; but was afraid to offer it him,
lest he should be offended; for, beside his money, he said he had a
thousand pounds a year. I came home not early; and so, madams both,
goodnight, etc.

19. I dined to-day with poor Lord Mountjoy, who is ill of the gout; and
this evening I christened our coffee-man Elliot's(15) child, where the
rogue had a most noble supper, and Steele and I sat among some scurvy
company over a bowl of punch; so that I am come home late, young women,
and can't stay to write to little rogues.

20. I loitered at home, and dined with Sir Andrew Fountaine at his
lodging, and then came home: a silly day.

21. I was visiting all this morning, and then went to the Secretary's
office, and found Mr. Harley, with whom I dined; and Secretary St. John,
etc., and Harley promised in a very few days to finish what remains
of my business. Prior was of the company, and we all dine at the
Secretary's to-morrow. I saw Stella's mother this morning: she came
early, and we talked an hour. I wish you would propose to Lady Giffard
to take the three hundred pounds out of her hands, and give her common
interest for life, and security that you will pay her: the Bishop of
Clogher, or any friend, would be security for you, if you gave them
counter-security; and it may be argued that it will pass better to be
in your hands than hers, in case of mortality, etc. Your mother says,
if you write, she will second it; and you may write to your mother, and
then it will come from her. She tells me Lady Giffard has a mind to see
me, by her discourse; but I told her what to say, with a vengeance. She
told Lady Giffard she was going to see me: she looks extremely well. I
am writing(16) in my bed like a tiger; and so good-night, etc.

22. I dined with Secretary St. John; and Lord Dartmouth, who is t'other
Secretary, dined with us, and Lord Orrery(17) and Prior, etc. Harley
called, but could not dine with us, and would have had me away while I
was at dinner; but I did not like the company he was to have. We stayed
till eight, and I called at the Coffee-house, and looked where the
letters lie; but no letter directed for Mr. Presto: at last I saw a
letter to Mr. Addison, and it looked like a rogue's hand; so I made the
fellow give it me, and opened it before him, and saw three letters all
for myself: so, truly, I put them in my pocket, and came home to my
lodging. Well, and so you shall hear: well, and so I found one of
them in Dingley's hand, and t'other in Stella's, and the third in
Domville's.(18) Well, so you shall hear; so, said I to myself, What now,
two letters from MD together? But I thought there was something in the
wind; so I opened one, and I opened t'other; and so you shall hear, one
was from Walls. Well, but t'other was from our own dear MD; yes it was.
O faith, have you received my seventh, young women, already? Then I must
send this to-morrow, else there will be old(19) doings at our house,
faith.--Well, I won't answer your letter in this: no, faith, catch me
at that, and I never saw the like. Well; but as to Walls, tell him
(with service to him and wife, etc.) that I have no imagination of Mr.
Pratt's(20) losing his place: and while Pratt continues, Clements is in
no danger; and I have already engaged Lord Hyde(21) he speaks of, for
Pratt and twenty others; but, if such a thing should happen, I will
do what I can. I have above ten businesses of other people's now on my
hands, and, I believe, shall miscarry in half. It is your sixth I now
have received. I writ last post to the Bishop of Clogher again. Shall I
send this to-morrow? Well, I will, to oblige MD. Which would you rather,
a short letter every week, or a long one every fortnight? A long one;
well, it shall be done, and so good-night. Well, but is this a long one?
No, I warrant you: too long for naughty girls.

23. I only ask, have you got both the ten pounds, or only the first; I
hope you mean both. Pray be good housewives; and I beg you to walk when
you can, for health. Have you the horse in town? and do you ever ride
him? how often? Confess. Ahhh, sirrah, have I caught you? Can you
contrive to let Mrs. Fenton(22) know, that the request she has made me
in her letter I will use what credit I have to bring about, although I
hear it is very difficult, and I doubt I shall not succeed? Cox is not
to be your Chancellor: all joined against him. I have been supping with
Lord Peterborow at his house, with Prior, Lewis, and Dr. Freind. 'Tis
the ramblingest lying rogue on earth. Dr. Raymond is come to town: 'tis
late, and so I bid you good-night.

24. I tell you, pretty management! Ned Southwell told me the other day
he had a letter from the bishops of Ireland, with an address to the Duke
of Ormond, to intercede with the Queen to take off the First-Fruits. I
dined with him to-day, and saw it, with another letter to him from the
Bishop of Kildare,(23) to call upon me for the papers, etc.; and I had
last post one from the Archbishop of Dublin, telling me the reason of
this proceeding; that, upon hearing the Duke of Ormond was declared Lord
Lieutenant, they met; and the bishops were for this project, and talked
coldly of my being solicitor, as one that was favoured by t'other party,
etc., but desired that I would still solicit.(24) Now the wisdom of this
is admirable; for I had given the Archbishop an account of my reception
from Mr. Harley, and how he had spoken to the Queen, and promised it
should be done; but Mr. Harley ordered me to tell no person alive. Some
time after, he gave me leave to let the Primate and Archbishop know that
the Queen had remitted the First-Fruits; and that in a short time they
should have an account of it in form from Lord Dartmouth, Secretary of
State. So while their letter was on the road to the Duke of Ormond and
Southwell, mine was going to them with an account of the thing being
done. I writ a very warm answer(25) to the Archbishop immediately; and
showed my resentments, as I ought, against the bishops; only, in good
manners, excepting himself. I wonder what they will say when they hear
the thing is done. I was yesterday forced to tell Southwell so, that
the Queen had done it, etc.; for he said, my Lord Duke would think of
it some months hence, when he was going for Ireland; and he had it three
years in doing formerly, without any success. I give you free leave to
say, on occasion, that it is done; and that Mr. Harley prevailed on the
Queen to do it, etc., as you please. As I hope to live, I despise the
credit of it, out of an excess of pride; and desire you will not give
me the least merit when you talk of it; but I would vex the bishops, and
have it spread that Mr. Harley had done it: pray do so. Your mother
sent me last night a parcel of wax candles, and a bandbox full of small
plumcakes. I thought it had been something for you; and, without opening
them, sent answer by the maid that brought them, that I would take care
to send the things, etc.; but I will write her thanks. Is this a long
letter, sirrahs? Now, are you satisfied? I have had no fit since the
first: I drink brandy every morning, and take pills every night. Never
fear, I an't vexed at this puppy business of the bishops, although I was
a little at first. I will tell you my reward: Mr. Harley will think he
has done me a favour; the Duke of Ormond, perhaps, that I have put a
neglect on him; and the bishops in Ireland, that I have done nothing at
all. So goes the world. But I have got above all this, and, perhaps, I
have better reason for it than they know: and so you shall hear no more
of First-Fruits, dukes, Harleys, archbishops, and Southwells.

I have slipped off Raymond upon some of his countrymen, to show him the
town, etc., and I lend him Patrick. He desires to sit with me in the
evenings; upon which I have given Patrick positive orders that I am not
within at evenings.




LETTER 10.

LONDON, Nov. 25, 1710.

I will tell you something that's plaguy silly: I had forgot to say on
the 23d in my last, where I dined; and because I had done it constantly,
I thought it was a great omission, and was going to interline it; but at
last the silliness of it made me cry, Pshah, and I let it alone. I was
to-day to see the Parliament meet; but only saw a great crowd; and Ford
and I went to see the tombs at Westminster, and sauntered so long I
was forced to go to an eating-house for my dinner. Bromley(1) is chosen
Speaker, nemine contradicente: Do you understand those two words?
And Pompey, Colonel Hill's(2) black, designs to stand Speaker for the
footmen.(3) I am engaged to use my interest for him, and have spoken to
Patrick to get him some votes. We are now all impatient for the Queen's
speech, what she will say about removing the Ministry, etc. I have got
a cold, and I don't know how; but got it I have, and am hoarse: I don't
know whether it will grow better or worse. What's that to you? I won't
answer your letter to-night. I'll keep you a little longer in suspense:
I can't send it. Your mother's cakes are very good, and one of them
serves me for a breakfast, and so I'll go sleep like a good boy.

26. I have got a cruel cold, and stayed within all this day in my
nightgown, and dined on sixpennyworth of victuals, and read and writ,
and was denied to everybody. Dr. Raymond(4) called often, and I was
denied; and at last, when I was weary, I let him come up, and asked him,
without consequence, how Patrick denied me, and whether he had the
art of it? So by this means he shall be used to have me denied to him;
otherwise he would be a plaguy trouble and hindrance to me: he has sat
with me two hours, and drank a pint of ale cost me fivepence, and smoked
his pipe, and it is now past eleven that he is just gone. Well, my
eighth is with you now, young women; and your seventh to me is somewhere
in a post-boy's bag; and so go to your gang of deans, and Stoytes, and
Walls, and lose your money; go, sauceboxes: and so good-night, and be
happy, dear rogues. Oh, but your box was sent to Dr. Hawkshaw by Sterne,
and you will have it with Hawkshaw, and spectacles, etc., etc.

27. To-day Mr. Harley met me in the Court of Requests,(5) and whispered
me to dine with him. At dinner I told him what those bishops had done,
and the difficulty I was under. He bid me never trouble myself; he would
tell the Duke of Ormond the business was done, and that he need not
concern himself about it. So now I am easy, and they may hang themselves
for a parcel of insolent, ungrateful rascals. I suppose I told you in
my last, how they sent an address to the Duke of Ormond, and a letter to
Southwell, to call on me for the papers, after the thing was over; but
they had not received my letter, though the Archbishop might, by what
I writ to him, have expected it would be done. Well, there is an end of
that; and in a little time the Queen will send them notice, etc. And
so the methods will be settled; and then I shall think of returning,
although the baseness of those bishops makes me love Ireland less than I
did.

28. Lord Halifax sent to invite me to dinner; where I stayed till six,
and crossed him in all his Whig talk, and made him often come over to
me. I know he makes court to the new men, although he affects to talk
like a Whig. I had a letter to-day from the Bishop of Clogher; but
I writ to him lately, that I would obey his commands to the Duke of
Ormond. He says I bid him read the London "Shaver," and that you both
swore it was "Shaver," and not "Shower."(6) You all lie, and you are
puppies, and can't read Presto's hand. The Bishop is out entirely in his
conjectures of my share in the Tatlers.--I have other things to mind,
and of much greater importance;(7) else I have little to do to be
acquainted with a new Ministry, who consider me a little more than Irish
bishops do.

29. Now for your saucy, good dear letter: let me see, what does it
say? come then. I dined to-day with Ford, and went home early; he
debauched(8) me to his chamber again with a bottle of wine till twelve:
so good-night. I cannot write an answer now, you rogues.

30. To-day I have been visiting, which I had long neglected; and I dined
with Mrs. Barton alone; and sauntered at the Coffee-house till past
eight, and have been busy till eleven, and now I'll answer your letter,
saucebox. Well, let me see now again. My wax candle's almost out, but
however I'll begin. Well then, do not be so tedious, Mr. Presto;
what can you say to MD's letter? Make haste, have done with your
preambles--Why, I say I am glad you are so often abroad; your mother
thinks it is want of exercise hurts you, and so do I. (She called here
to-night, but I was not within, that's by the bye.) Sure you do not
deceive me, Stella, when you say you are in better health than you were
these three weeks; for Dr. Raymond told me yesterday, that Smyth of the
Blind Quay had been telling Mr. Leigh that he left you extremely ill;
and in short, spoke so, that he almost put poor Leigh into tears, and
would have made me run distracted; though your letter is dated the 11th
instant, and I saw Smyth in the city above a fortnight ago, as I passed
by in a coach. Pray, pray, don't write, Stella, until you are mighty,
mighty, mighty, mighty well in your eyes, and are sure it won't do you
the least hurt. Or come, I'll tell you what; you, Mistress Stella, shall
write your share at five or six sittings, one sitting a day; and then
comes Dingley all together, and then Stella a little crumb towards
the end, to let us see she remembers Presto; and then conclude with
something handsome and genteel, as your most humblecumdumble, or, etc.
O Lord! does Patrick write word of my not coming till spring? Insolent
man! he know my secrets? No; as my Lord Mayor said, No; if I thought my
shirt knew, etc. Faith, I will come as soon as it is any way proper for
me to come; but, to say the truth, I am at present a little involved
with the present Ministry in some certain things (which I tell you as a
secret); and soon as ever I can clear my hands, I will stay no longer;
for I hope the First-Fruit business will be soon over in all its forms.
But, to say the truth, the present Ministry have a difficult task,
and want me, etc. Perhaps they may be just as grateful as others:
but, according to the best judgment I have, they are pursuing the true
interest of the public; and therefore I am glad to contribute what is
in my power. For God's sake, not a word of this to any alive.--Your
Chancellor?(9) Why, madam, I can tell you he has been dead this
fortnight. Faith, I could hardly forbear our little language about a
nasty dead Chancellor, as you may see by the blot.(10) Ploughing? A pox
plough them; they'll plough me to nothing. But have you got your money,
both the ten pounds? How durst he pay you the second so soon? Pray be
good huswifes. Ay, well, and Joe, why, I had a letter lately from Joe,
desiring I would take some care of their poor town,(11) who, he says,
will lose their liberties. To which I desired Dr. Raymond would return
answer, that the town had behaved themselves so ill to me, so little
regarded the advice I gave them, and disagreed so much among themselves,
that I was resolved never to have more to do with them; but that
whatever personal kindness I could do to Joe, should be done. Pray, when
you happen to see Joe, tell him this, lest Raymond should have blundered
or forgotten--Poor Mrs. Wesley!--Why these poligyes(12) for being
abroad? Why should you be at home at all, until Stella is quite
well?--So, here is Mistress Stella again, with her two eggs, etc. My
"Shower" admired with you; why, the Bishop of Clogher says, he has seen
something of mine of the same sort, better than the "Shower." I suppose
he means "The Morning";(13) but it is not half so good. I want your
judgment of things, and not your country's. How does MD like it? and do
they taste it ALL? etc. I am glad Dean Bolton(14) has paid the twenty
pounds. Why should not I chide the Bishop of Clogher for writing to the
Archbishop of Cashel,(15) without sending the letter first to me? It
does not signify a ----; for he has no credit at Court. Stuff--they are
all puppies. I will break your head in good earnest, young woman, for
your nasty jest about Mrs. Barton.(16) Unlucky sluttikin, what a word is
there! Faith, I was thinking yesterday, when I was with her, whether she
could break them or no, and it quite spoilt my imagination. "Mrs. Walls,
does Stella win as she pretends?" "No indeed, Doctor; she loses always,
and will play so VENTERSOMELY, how can she win?" See here now; an't
you an impudent lying slut? Do, open Domville's letter; what does it
signify, if you have a mind? Yes, faith, you write smartly with your
eyes shut; all was well but the _n_. See how I can do it; MADAM STELLA,
YOUR HUMBLE SERVANT.(17) O, but one may look whether one goes crooked or
no, and so write on. I will tell you what you may do; you may write with
your eyes half shut, just as when one is going to sleep: I have done
so for two or three lines now; it is but just seeing enough to go
straight.--Now, Madam Dingley, I think I bid you tell Mr. Walls that, in
case there be occasion, I will serve his friend as far as I can; but I
hope there will be none. Yet I believe you will have a new Parliament;
but I care not whether you have or no a better. You are mistaken in all
your conjectures about the Tatlers. I have given him one or two
hints, and you have heard me talk about the Shilling.(18) Faith, these
answering letters are very long ones: you have taken up almost the room
of a week in journals; and I will tell you what, I saw fellows wearing
crosses to-day,(19) and I wondered what was the matter; but just this
minute I recollect it is little Presto's birthday; and I was resolved
these three days to remember it when it came, but could not. Pray, drink
my health to-day at dinner; do, you rogues. Do you like "Sid Hamet's
Rod"? Do you understand it all? Well, now at last I have done with your
letter, and so I will lay me down to sleep, and about, fair maids; and I
hope merry maids all.

Dec. 1. Morning. I wish Smyth were hanged. I was dreaming the most
melancholy things in the world of poor Stella, and was grieving and
crying all night.--Pshah, it is foolish: I will rise and divert myself;
so good-morrow; and God of His infinite mercy keep and protect you!
The Bishop of Clogher's letter is dated Nov. 21. He says you thought of
going with him to Clogher. I am heartily glad of it, and wish you would
ride there, and Dingley go in a coach. I have had no fit since my first,
although sometimes my head is not quite in good order.--At night. I was
this morning to visit Mr. Pratt, who is come over with poor, sick Lord
Shelburne: they made me dine with them; and there I stayed, like a
booby, till eight, looking over them at ombre, and then came home. Lord
Shelburne's giddiness is turned into a colic, and he looks miserably.

2. Steele, the rogue, has done the imprudentest thing in the world:
he said something in a Tatler,(20) that we ought to use the word Great
Britain, and not England, in common conversation, as, "The finest lady
in Great Britain," etc. Upon this, Rowe, Prior, and I sent him a letter,
turning this into ridicule. He has to-day printed the letter,(21) and
signed it J.S., M.P., and N.R., the first letters of all our names.
Congreve told me to-day, he smoked it immediately. Congreve and I, and
Sir Charles Wager, dined to-day at Delaval's, the Portugal Envoy; and I
stayed there till eight, and came home, and am now writing to you before
I do business, because that dog Patrick is not at home, and the fire
is not made, and I am not in my gear. Pox take him!--I was looking
by chance at the top of this side, and find I make plaguy mistakes
in words; so that you must fence against that as well as bad writing.
Faith, I can't nor won't read what I have written. (Pox of this puppy!)
Well, I'll leave you till I am got to bed, and then I will say a word or
two.--Well, 'tis now almost twelve, and I have been busy ever since,
by a fire too (I have my coals by half a bushel at a time, I'll assure
you), and now I am got to bed. Well, and what have you to say to Presto
now he is abed? Come now, let us hear your speeches. No, 'tis a lie; I
an't sleepy yet. Let us sit up a little longer, and talk. Well, where
have you been to-day, that you are but just this minute come home in a
coach? What have you lost? Pay the coachman, Stella. No, faith, not I,
he'll grumble.--What new acquaintance have you got? come, let us hear.
I have made Delaval promise to send me some Brazil tobacco from
Portugal for you, Madam Dingley. I hope you will have your chocolate and
spectacles before this comes to you.

3. Pshaw, I must be writing to these dear saucy brats every night,
whether I will or no, let me have what business I will, or come home
ever so late, or be ever so sleepy; but an old saying, and a true one,

     "Be you lords, or be you earls,
      You must write to naughty girls."

I was to-day at Court, and saw Raymond among the Beefeaters, staying to
see the Queen: so I put him in a better station, made two or three
dozen of bows, and went to church, and then to Court again, to pick up
a dinner, as I did with Sir John Stanley; and then we went to visit Lord
Mountjoy, and just now left him; and 'tis near eleven at night, young
women; and methinks this letter comes pretty near to the bottom, and
'tis but eight days since the date, and don't think I'll write on
the other side, I thank you for nothing. Faith, if I would use you to
letters on sheets as broad as this room, you would always expect them
from me. O, faith, I know you well enough; but an old saying, etc.,

     "Two sides in a sheet,
      And one in a street."

I think that's but a silly old saying; and so I'll go to sleep, and do
you so too.

4. I dined to-day with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, and then came home, and studied
till eleven. No adventure at all to-day.

5. So I went to the Court of Requests (we have had the Devil and all of
rain by the bye) to pick up a dinner; and Henley made me go dine
with him and one Colonel Bragg(22) at a tavern; cost me money, faith.
Congreve was to be there, but came not. I came with Henley to the
Coffee-house, where Lord Salisbury(23) seemed mighty desirous to talk
with me; and, while he was wriggling himself into my favour, that dog
Henley asked me aloud, whether I would go to see Lord Somers as I had
promised (which was a lie); and all to vex poor Lord Salisbury, who is a
high Tory. He played two or three other such tricks; and I was forced
to leave my lord, and I came home at seven, and have been writing ever
since, and will now go to bed. The other day I saw Jack Temple(24) in
the Court of Requests: it was the first time of seeing him; so we talked
two or three careless words, and parted. Is it true that your Recorder
and Mayor, and fanatic aldermen, a month or two ago, at a solemn feast,
drank Mr. Harley's, Lord Rochester's,(25) and other Tory healths? Let me
know; it was confidently said here.--The scoundrels! It shan't do, Tom.

6. When is this letter to go, I wonder? harkee, young women, tell me
that. Saturday next for certain, and not before: then it will be just
a fortnight; time enough for naughty girls, and long enough for two
letters, faith. Congreve and Delaval have at last prevailed on Sir
Godfrey Kneller to entreat me to let him draw my picture for nothing;
but I know not yet when I shall sit.(26)--It is such monstrous rainy
weather, that there is no doing with it. Secretary St. John sent to me
this morning, that my dining with him to-day was put off till to-morrow;
so I peaceably sat with my neighbour Ford, dined with him, and came home
at six, and am now in bed as usual; and now it is time to have another
letter from MD, yet I would not have it till this goes; for that would
look like two letters for one. Is it not whimsical that the Dean has
never once written to me? And I find the Archbishop very silent to that
letter I sent him with an account that the business was done. I believe
he knows not what to write or say; and I have since written twice to
him, both times with a vengeance.(27) Well, go to bed, sirrahs, and so
will I. But have you lost to-day? Three shillings! O fie, O fie!

7. No, I won't send this letter to-day, nor till Saturday, faith; and I
am so afraid of one from MD between this and that; if it comes, I will
just say I received a letter, and that is all. I dined to-day with Mr.
Secretary St. John, where were Lord Anglesea,(28) Sir Thomas Hanmer,
Prior, Freind, etc., and then made a debauch after nine at Prior's
house, and have eaten cold pie, and I hate the thoughts of it, and I am
full, and I don't like it, and I will go to bed, and it is late, and so
good-night.

8. To-day I dined with Mr. Harley and Prior; but Mr. St. John did not
come, though he promised: he chid me for not seeing him oftener. Here is
a damned, libellous pamphlet come out against Lord Wharton, giving the
character first, and then telling some of his actions: the character is
very well, but the facts indifferent.(29) It has been sent by dozens to
several gentlemen's lodgings, and I had one or two of them; but nobody
knows the author or printer. We are terribly afraid of the plague; they
say it is at Newcastle.(30) I begged Mr. Harley for the love of God to
take some care about it, or we are all ruined. There have been orders
for all ships from the Baltic to pass their quarantine before they land;
but they neglect it. You remember I have been afraid these two years.

9. O, faith, you are a saucy rogue. I have had your sixth letter just
now, before this is gone; but I will not answer a word of it, only
that I never was giddy since my first fit; but I have had a cold just a
fortnight, and cough with it still morning and evening; but it will go
off. It is, however, such abominable weather that no creature can walk.
They say here three of your Commissioners will be turned out, Ogle,
South, and St. Quintin;(31) and that Dick Stewart(32) and Ludlow will
be two of the new ones. I am a little soliciting for another: it is poor
Lord Abercorn,(33) but that is a secret; I mean, that I befriend him
is a secret; but I believe it is too late, by his own fault and ill
fortune. I dined with him to-day. I am heartily sorry you do not go
to Clogher, faith, I am; and so God Almighty protect poor, dear,
dear, dear, dearest MD. Farewell till to-night. I'll begin my eleventh
to-night; so I am always writing to little MD.




LETTER 11.

LONDON, Dec. 9, 1710.

So, young women, I have just sent my tenth to the post-office, and, as I
told you, have received your seventh (faith, I am afraid I mistook,
and said your sixth, and then we shall be all in confusion this month.)
Well, I told you I dined with Lord Abercorn to-day; and that is
enough till by and bye; for I must go write idle things, and twittle
twattle.(1) What's here to do with your little MD's? and so I put this
by for a while. 'Tis now late, and I can only say MD is a dear, saucy
rogue, and what then? Presto loves them the better.

10. This son of a b---- Patrick is out of the way, and I can do nothing;
am forced to borrow coals: 'tis now six o'clock, and I am come home
after a pure walk in the park; delicate weather, begun only to-day.
A terrible storm last night: we hear one of your packet-boats is cast
away, and young Beau Swift(2) in it, and General Sankey:(3) I know not
the truth; you will before me. Raymond talks of leaving the town in a
few days, and going in a month to Ireland, for fear his wife should be
too far gone, and forced to be brought to bed here. I think he is in the
right; but perhaps this packet-boat will fright him. He has no relish
for London; and I do not wonder at it. He has got some Templars from
Ireland that show him the town. I do not let him see me above twice a
week, and that only while I am dressing in the morning.--So, now the
puppy's come in, and I have got my own ink, but a new pen; and so now
you are rogues and sauceboxes till I go to bed; for I must go study,
sirrahs. Now I think of it, tell the Bishop of Clogher, he shall not
cheat me of one inch of my bell metal. You know it is nothing but to
save the town money; and Enniskillen can afford it better than Laracor:
he shall have but one thousand five hundred weight. I have been reading,
etc., as usual, and am now going to bed; and I find this day's article
is long enough: so get you gone till to-morrow, and then. I dined with
Sir Matthew Dudley.

11. I am come home again as yesterday, and the puppy had again locked up
my ink, notwithstanding all I said to him yesterday; but he came home a
little after me, so all is well: they are lighting my fire, and I'll go
study. The fair weather is gone again, and it has rained all day. I do
not like this open weather, though some say it is healthy. They say
it is a false report about the plague at Newcastle.(4) I have no news
to-day: I dined with Mrs. Vanhomrigh, to desire them to buy me a scarf;
and Lady Abercorn(5) is to buy me another, to see who does best: mine is
all in rags. I saw the Duke of Richmond(6) yesterday at Court again, but
would not speak to him: I believe we are fallen out. I am now in bed;
and it has rained all this evening, like wildfire: have you so much rain
in your town? Raymond was in a fright, as I expected, upon the news of
this shipwreck; but I persuaded him, and he leaves this town in a week.
I got him acquainted with Sir Robert Raymond,(7) the Solicitor-General,
who owns him to be of his family; and I believe it may do him a
kindness, by being recommended to your new Lord Chancellor.--I had a
letter from Mrs. Long, that has quite turned my stomach against her:
no less than two nasty jests in it, with dashes to suppose them. She is
corrupted in that country town(8) with vile conversation.--I will not
answer your letter till I have leisure: so let this go on as it will,
what care I? what cares saucy Presto?

12. I was to-day at the Secretary's office with Lewis, and in came Lord
Rivers;(9) who took Lewis out and whispered him; and then came up to me
to desire my acquaintance, etc., so we bowed and complimented a while,
and parted and I dined with Phil. Savage(10) and his Irish Club, at
their boarding-place; and, passing an evening scurvily enough, did not
come home till eight. Mr. Addison and I hardly meet once a fortnight;
his Parliament and my different friendships keep us asunder. Sir Matthew
Dudley turned away his butler yesterday morning; and at night the poor
fellow died suddenly in the streets: was not it an odd event? But what
care you? But then I knew the butler.--Why, it seems your packet-boat is
not lost: psha, how silly that is, when I had already gone through the
forms, and said it was a sad thing, and that I was sorry for it! But
when must I answer this letter of our MD's? Here it is, it lies between
this paper on t'other side of the leaf: one of these odd-come-shortly's
I'll consider, and so good-night.

13. Morning. I am to go trapesing with Lady Kerry(11) and Mrs. Pratt(12)
to see sights all this day: they engaged me yesterday morning at tea.
You hear the havoc making in the army: Meredith, Maccartney, and Colonel
Honeywood(13) are obliged to sell their commands at half-value, and
leave the army, for drinking destruction to the present Ministry, and
dressing up a hat on a stick, and calling it Harley; then drinking a
glass with one hand, and discharging a pistol with the other at the
maukin,(14) wishing it were Harley himself; and a hundred other such
pretty tricks, as inflaming their soldiers, and foreign Ministers,
against the late changes at Court. Cadogan(15) has had a little paring:
his mother(16) told me yesterday he had lost the place of Envoy; but I
hope they will go no further with him, for he was not at those mutinous
meetings.--Well, these saucy jades take up so much of my time with
writing to them in a morning; but, faith, I am glad to see you whenever
I can: a little snap and away; and so hold your tongue, for I must rise:
not a word, for your life. How nowww? So, very well; stay till I come
home, and then, perhaps, you may hear further from me. And where will
you go to-day, for I can't be with you for these ladies? It is a rainy,
ugly day. I'd have you send for Walls, and go to the Dean's; but don't
play small games when you lose. You'll be ruined by Manilio, Basto,
the queen, and two small trumps, in red.(17) I confess 'tis a good hand
against the player: but then there are Spadilio, Punto, the king, strong
trumps, against you, which, with one trump more, are three tricks ten
ace: for, suppose you play your Manilio--Oh, silly, how I prate, and
can't get away from this MD in a morning! Go, get you gone, dear naughty
girls, and let me rise. There, Patrick locked up my ink again the third
time last night: the rogue gets the better of me; but I will rise
in spite of you, sirrahs.--At night. Lady Kerry, Mrs. Pratt, Mrs.
Cadogan,(18) and I, in one coach; Lady Kerry's son(19) and his governor,
and two gentlemen, in another; maids, and misses and little master
(Lord Shelburne's(20) children, in a third, all hackneys, set out at ten
o'clock this morning from Lord Shelburne's house in Piccadilly to the
Tower, and saw all the sights, lions,(21) etc.; then to Bedlam;(22) then
dined at the chop-house behind the Exchange; then to Gresham College(23)
(but the keeper was not at home); and concluded the night at the
Puppet-show,(24) whence we came home safe at eight, and I left them. The
ladies were all in mobs(25) (how do you call it?), undrest; and it was
the rainiest day that ever dripped; and I am weary; and it is now past
eleven.

14. Stay, I'll answer some of your letter this morning in bed: let me
see; come and appear, little letter. Here I am, says he: and what
say you to Mrs. MD this morning fresh and fasting? Who dares think MD
negligent? I allow them a fortnight; and they give it me. I could fill
a letter in a week; but it is longer every day; and so I keep it a
fortnight, and then 'tis cheaper by one half. I have never been giddy,
dear Stella, since that morning: I have taken a whole box of pills,
and kecked(26) at them every night, and drank a pint of brandy at
mornings.--Oh then, you kept Presto's little birthday:(27) would to
God I had been with you! I forgot it, as I told you before. REdiculous,
madam? I suppose you mean rIdiculous: let me have no more of that; 'tis
the author of the Atalantis's(28) spelling. I have mended it in your
letter. And can Stella read this writing without hurting her dear eyes?
O, faith, I am afraid not. Have a care of those eyes, pray, pray, pretty
Stella.--'Tis well enough what you observe, that, if I writ better,
perhaps you would not read so well, being used to this manner; 'tis an
alphabet you are used to: you know such a pot-hook makes a letter; and
you know what letter, and so and so.--I'll swear he told me so, and that
they were long letters too; but I told him it was a gasconnade of
yours, etc. I am talking of the Bishop of Clogher, how he forgot. Turn
over.(29) I had not room on t'other side to say that, so I did it on
this: I fancy that's a good Irish blunder. Ah, why do not you go down to
Clogher, nautinautinautideargirls; I dare not say nauti without dear: O,
faith, you govern me. But, seriously, I'm sorry you don't go, as far as
I can judge at this distance. No, we would get you another horse; I will
make Parvisol get you one. I always doubted that horse of yours: prythee
sell him, and let it be a present to me. My heart aches when I think you
ride him. Order Parvisol to sell him, and that you are to return me the
money: I shall never be easy until he is out of your hands. Faith,
I have dreamt five or six times of horses stumbling since I had your
letter. If he can't sell him, let him run this winter. Faith, if I was
near you, I would whip your ---- to some tune, for your grave, saucy
answer about the Dean and Johnsonibus; I would, young women. And did the
Dean preach for me?(30) Very well. Why, would they have me stand here
and preach to them? No, the Tatler of the Shilling(31) was not mine,
more than the hint, and two or three general heads for it. I have much
more important business on my hands; and, besides, the Ministry hate
to think that I should help him, and have made reproaches on it; and I
frankly told them I would do it no more. This is a secret though, Madam
Stella. You win eight shillings? you win eight fiddlesticks. Faith, you
say nothing of what you lose, young women.--I hope Manley is in no great
danger; for Ned Southwell is his friend, and so is Sir Thomas Frankland;
and his brother John Manley stands up heartily for him. On t'other
side, all the gentlemen of Ireland here are furiously against him. Now,
Mistress Dingley, an't you an impudent slut, to expect a letter next
packet from Presto, when you confess yourself that you had so lately
two letters in four days? Unreasonable baggage! No, little Dingley, I am
always in bed by twelve; I mean my candle is out by twelve, and I take
great care of myself. Pray let everybody know, upon occasion, that Mr.
Harley got the First-Fruits from the Queen for the clergy of Ireland,
and that nothing remains but the forms, etc. So you say the Dean and
you dined at Stoyte's, and Mrs. Stoyte was in raptures that I remembered
her. I must do it but seldom, or it will take off her rapture. But what
now, you saucy sluts? all this written in a morning, and I must rise and
go abroad. Pray stay till night: do not think I will squander mornings
upon you, pray, good madam. Faith, if I go on longer in this trick of
writing in the morning, I shall be afraid of leaving it off, and think
you expect it, and be in awe. Good-morrow, sirrahs, I will rise.--At
night. I went to-day to the Court of Requests (I will not answer the
rest of your letter yet, that by the way, in hopes to dine with Mr.
Harley: but Lord Dupplin,(32) his son-in-law, told me he did not dine at
home; so I was at a loss, until I met with Mr. Secretary St. John, and
went home and dined with him, where he told me of a good bite.(33)
Lord Rivers told me two days ago, that he was resolved to come Sunday
fortnight next to hear me preach before the Queen. I assured him the day
was not yet fixed, and I knew nothing of it. To-day the Secretary told
me that his father, Sir Harry St. John,(34) and Lord Rivers were to be
at St. James's Church, to hear me preach there; and were assured I was
to preach: so there will be another bite; for I know nothing of the
matter, but that Mr. Harley and St. John are resolved I must preach
before the Queen; and the Secretary of State has told me he will give
me three weeks' warning; but I desired to be excused, which he will not.
St. John, "You shall not be excused": however, I hope they will forget
it; for if it should happen, all the puppies hereabouts will throng to
hear me, and expect something wonderful, and be plaguily baulked; for I
shall preach plain honest stuff. I stayed with St. John till eight, and
then came home; and Patrick desired leave to go abroad, and by and by
comes up the girl to tell me, a gentleman was below in a coach, who had
a bill to pay me; so I let him come up, and who should it be but Mr.
Addison and Sam Dopping, to haul me out to supper, where I stayed till
twelve. If Patrick had been at home, I should have 'scaped this; for I
have taught him to deny me almost as well as Mr. Harley's porter.--Where
did I leave off in MD's letter? let me see. So, now I have it. You are
pleased to say, Madam Dingley, that those who go for England can never
tell when to come back. Do you mean this as a reflection upon Presto,
madam? Sauceboxes, I will come back as soon as I can, as hope saved,(35)
and I hope with some advantage, unless all Ministries be alike, as
perhaps they may. I hope Hawkshaw is in Dublin before now, and that you
have your things, and like your spectacles: if you do not, you shall
have better. I hope Dingley's tobacco did not spoil Stella's chocolate,
and that all is safe: pray let me know. Mr. Addison and I are different
as black and white, and I believe our friendship will go off, by this
damned business of party: he cannot bear seeing me fall in so with
this Ministry: but I love him still as well as ever, though we seldom
meet.--Hussy, Stella, you jest about poor Congreve's eyes;(36) you do
so, hussy; but I'll bang your bones, faith.--Yes, Steele was a little
while in prison, or at least in a spunging-house, some time before
I came, but not since.(37)--Pox on your convocations, and your
Lamberts;(38) they write with a vengeance! I suppose you think it a
piece of affectation in me to wish your Irish folks would not like my
"Shower,"; but you are mistaken. I should be glad to have the general
applause there as I have here (though I say it); but I have only that of
one or two, and therefore I would have none at all, but let you all be
in the wrong. I don't know, this is not what I would say; but I am so
tosticated with supper and stuff, that I can't express myself.--What you
say of "Sid Hamet" is well enough; that an enemy should like it, and
a friend not; and that telling the author would make both change their
opinions. Why did you not tell Griffyth(39) that you fancied there was
something in it of my manner; but first spur up his commendation to the
height, as we served my poor uncle about the sconce that I mended? Well,
I desired you to give what I intended for an answer to Mrs. Fenton,(40)
to save her postage, and myself trouble; and I hope I have done it, if
you han't.

15. Lord, what a long day's writing was yesterday's answer to your
letter, sirrahs! I dined to-day with Lewis and Ford, whom I have brought
acquainted. Lewis told me a pure thing. I had been hankering with Mr.
Harley to save Steele his other employment, and have a little mercy on
him; and I had been saying the same thing to Lewis, who is Mr. Harley's
chief favourite. Lewis tells Mr. Harley how kindly I should take it, if
he would be reconciled to Steele, etc. Mr. Harley, on my account, falls
in with it, and appoints Steele a time to let him attend him, which
Steele accepts with great submission, but never comes, nor sends any
excuse. Whether it was blundering, sullenness, insolence, or rancour of
party, I cannot tell; but I shall trouble myself no more about him. I
believe Addison hindered him out of mere spite, being grated(41) to the
soul to think he should ever want my help to save his friend; yet now
he is soliciting me to make another of his friends Queen's Secretary at
Geneva; and I'll do it if I can; it is poor Pastoral Philips.(42)

16. O, why did you leave my picture behind you at t'other lodgings?
Forgot it? Well; but pray remember it now, and don't roll it up, d'ye
hear; but hang it carefully in some part of your room, where chairs and
candles and mop-sticks won't spoil it, sirrahs. No, truly, I will not
be godfather to Goody Walls this bout, and I hope she will have no more.
There will be no quiet nor cards for this child. I hope it will die the
day after the christening. Mr. Harley gave me a paper, with an
account of the sentence you speak of against the lads that defaced the
statue,(43) and that Ingoldsby(44) reprieved that part of it of standing
before the statue. I hope it was never executed. We have got your
Broderick out;(45) Doyne(46) is to succeed him, and Cox(47) Doyne. And
so there's an end of your letter; 'tis all answered; and now I must go
on upon my own stock. Go on, did I say? Why, I have written enough; but
this is too soon to send it yet, young women; faith, I dare not use
you to it, you'll always expect it; what remains shall be only short
journals of a day, and so I'll rise for this morning.--At night. I dined
with my opposite neighbour, Darteneuf; and I was soliciting this day to
present the Bishop of Clogher Vice-Chancellor;(48) but it won't do; they
are all set against him, and the Duke of Ormond, they say, has resolved
to dispose of it somewhere else. Well; little saucy rogues, do not stay
out too late to-night, because it is Saturday night, and young women
should come home soon then.

17. I went to Court to seek a dinner: but the Queen was not at church,
she has got a touch of the gout; so the Court was thin, and I went to
the Coffee-house; and Sir Thomas Frankland and his eldest son and I went
and dined with his son William.(49) I talked a great deal to Sir Thomas
about Manley; and find he is his good friend, and so has Ned Southwell
been, and I hope he will be safe, though all the Irish folks here are
his mortal enemies. There was a devilish bite to-day. They had it, I
know not how, that I was to preach this morning at St. James's Church;
an abundance went, among the rest Lord Radnor, who never is abroad till
three in the afternoon. I walked all the way home from Hatton Garden at
six, by moonlight, a delicate night. Raymond called at nine, but I was
denied; and now I am in bed between eleven and twelve, just going to
sleep, and dream of my own dear roguish impudent pretty MD.

18. You will now have short days' works, just a few lines to tell you
where I am, and what I am doing; only I will keep room for the last day
to tell you news, if there be any worth sending. I have been sometimes
like to do it at the top of my letter, until I remark it would be old
before it reached you. I was hunting to dine with Mr. Harley to-day, but
could not find him; and so I dined with honest Dr. Cockburn, and came
home at six, and was taken out to next door by Dopping and Ford, to
drink bad claret and oranges; and we let Raymond come to us, who talks
of leaving the town to-morrow, but I believe will stay a day or two
longer. It is now late, and I will say no more, but end this line with
bidding my own dear saucy MD goodnight, etc.

19. I am come down proud stomach in one instance, for I went to-day to
see the Duke of Buckingham,(50) but came too late: then I visited Mrs.
Barton,(51) and thought to have dined with some of the Ministry; but
it rained, and Mrs. Vanhomrigh was nigh, and I took the opportunity of
paying her for a scarf she bought me, and dined there; at four I went to
congratulate with Lord Shelburne, for the death of poor Lady Shelburne
dowager;(52) he was at his country house, and returned while I was
there, and had not heard of it, and he took it very well. I am now come
home before six, and find a packet from the Bishop of Clogher, with one
enclosed to the Duke of Ormond, which is ten days earlier dated than
another I had from Parvisol; however, 'tis no matter, for the Duke
has already disposed of the Vice-Chancellorship to the Archbishop of
Tuam,(53) and I could not help it, for it is a thing wholly you know in
the Duke's power; and I find the Bishop has enemies about the Duke. I
write this while Patrick is folding up my scarf, and doing up the fire
(for I keep a fire, it costs me twelvepence a week); and so be quiet
till I am gone to bed, and then sit down by me a little, and we will
talk a few words more. Well; now MD is at my bedside; and now what shall
we say? How does Mrs. Stoyte? What had the Dean for supper? How much did
Mrs. Walls win? Poor Lady Shelburne: well, go get you to bed, sirrahs.

20. Morning. I was up this morning early, and shaved by candlelight, and
write this by the fireside. Poor Raymond just came in and took his leave
of me; he is summoned by high order from his wife, but pretends he has
had enough of London. I was a little melancholy to part with him; he
goes to Bristol, where they are to be with his merchant brother, and now
thinks of staying till May; so she must be brought to bed in England. He
was so easy and manageable, that I almost repent I suffered him to see
me so seldom. But he is gone, and will save Patrick some lies in a week:
Patrick is grown admirable at it, and will make his fortune. How now,
sirrah, must I write in a morning to your impudence?

     Stay till night,
     And then I'll write,
     In black and white,
     By candlelight,
     Of wax so bright,
     It helps the sight--
     A bite, a bite!

Marry come up, Mistress Boldface.--At night. Dr. Raymond came back, and
goes to-morrow. I did not come home till eleven, and found him here to
take leave of me. I went to the Court of Requests, thinking to find Mr.
Harley and dine with him, and refused Henley, and everybody, and at last
knew not where to go, and met Jemmy Leigh by chance, and he was just in
the same way, so I dined at his lodgings on a beef-steak, and drank
your health; then left him and went to the tavern with Ben Tooke and
Portlack, the Duke of Ormond's secretary, drinking nasty white wine till
eleven. I am sick, and ashamed of it, etc.

21. I met that beast Ferris, Lord Berkeley's(54) steward formerly; I
walked with him a turn in the Park, and that scoundrel dog is as happy
as an emperor, has married a wife with a considerable estate in land and
houses about this town, and lives at his ease at Hammersmith. See your
confounded sect!(55) Well; I had the same luck to-day with Mr. Harley;
'twas a lovely day, and went by water into the City, and dined with
Stratford at a merchant's house, and walked home with as great a dunce
as Ferris, I mean honest Colonel Caulfeild,(56) and came home by eight,
and now am in bed, and going to sleep for a wager, and will send this
letter on Saturday, and so; but first I will wish you a merry Christmas
and a happy New Year, and pray God we may never keep them asunder again.

22. Morning. I am going now to Mr. Harley's levee on purpose to vex him;
I will say I had no other way of seeing him, etc. Patrick says it is a
dark morning, and that the Duke of Argyle(57) is to be knighted to-day;
the booby means installed at Windsor. But I must rise, for this is a
shaving-day, and Patrick says there is a good fire; I wish MD were by
it, or I by MD's.--At night. I forgot to tell you, Madam Dingley, that
I paid nine shillings for your glass and spectacles, of which three were
for the Bishop's case: I am sorry I did not buy you such another case;
but if you like it, I will bring one over with me; pray tell me: the
glass to read was four shillings, the spectacles two. And have you had
your chocolate? Leigh says he sent the petticoat by one Mr. Spencer.
Pray have you no further commissions for me? I paid the glass-man but
last night, and he would have made me a present of the microscope worth
thirty shillings, and would have sent it home along with me; I thought
the deuce was in the man: he said I could do him more service than that
was worth, etc. I refused his present, but promised him all service
I could do him; and so now I am obliged in honour to recommend him to
everybody.--At night. I went to Mr. Harley's levee; he came and asked
me what I had to do there, and bid me come and dine with him on a family
dinner; which I did, and it was the first time I ever saw his lady(58)
and daughter;(59) at five my Lord Keeper(60) came in: I told Mr. Harley,
he had formerly presented me to Sir Simon Harcourt, but now must to my
Lord Keeper; so he laughed, etc.

23. Morning. This letter goes to-night without fail; I hope there is
none from you yet at the Coffee-house; I will send and see by and by,
and let you know, and so and so. Patrick goes to see for a letter: what
will you lay, is there one from MD or no? No, I say; done for sixpence.
Why has the Dean never once written to me? I won sixpence; I won
sixpence; there is not one letter to Presto. Good-morrow, dear sirrahs:
Stratford and I dine to-day with Lord Mountjoy. God Almighty preserve
and bless you; farewell, etc.

I have been dining at Lord Mountjoy's; and am come to study; our news
from Spain this post takes off some of our fears. The Parliament is
prorogued to-day, or adjourned rather till after the holidays. Bank
Stock is 105, so I may get 12 shillings for my bargain already. Patrick,
the puppy, is abroad, and how shall I send this letter? Good-night,
little dears both, and be happy; and remember your poor Presto, that
wants you sadly, as hope saved. Let me go study, naughty girls, and
don't keep me at the bottom of the paper. O, faith, if you knew what
lies on my hands constantly, you would wonder to see how I could write
such long letters; but we'll talk of that some other time. Good-night
again, and God bless dear MD with His best blessings, yes, yes, and
Dingley and Stella and me too, etc.

Ask the Bishop of Clogher about the pun I sent him of Lord Stawel's
brother;(61) it will be a pure bite. This letter has 199 lines in it,
beside all postscripts; I had a curiosity to reckon.

There is a long letter for you.

It is longer than a sermon, faith.

I had another letter from Mrs. Fenton, who says you were with her; I
hope you did not go on purpose. I will answer her letter soon; it is
about some money in Lady Giffard's hands.

They say you have had eight packets due to you; so pray, madams, do not
blame Presto, but the wind.

My humble service to Mrs. Walls and Mrs. Stoyte; I missed the former a
good while.




LETTER 12.

LONDON, Dec. 23, 1710.

I have sent my 11th to-night as usual, and begin the dozenth, and I told
you I dined with Stratford at Lord Mountjoy's, and I will tell you no
more at present, guess for why; because I am going to mind things, and
mighty affairs, not your nasty First-Fruits--I let them alone till Mr.
Harley gets the Queen's letter--but other things of greater moment, that
you shall know one day, when the ducks have eaten up all the dirt. So
sit still a while just by me, while I am studying, and don't say a word,
I charge you, and when I am going to bed, I will take you along, and
talk with you a little while, so there, sit there.--Come then, let us
see what we have to say to these saucy brats, that will not let us go
sleep at past eleven. Why, I am a little impatient to know how you do;
but that I take it for a standing maxim, that when you are silent, all
is pretty well, because that is the way I will deal with you; and if
there was anything you ought to know now, I would write by the first
post, although I had written but the day before. Remember this, young
women; and God Almighty preserve you both, and make us happy together;
and tell me how accompts stand between us, that you may be paid long
before it is due, not to want. I will return no more money while I stay,
so that you need not be in pain to be paid; but let me know at least a
month before you can want. Observe this, d'ye hear, little dear sirrahs,
and love Presto, as Presto loves MD, etc.

24. You will have a merrier Christmas Eve than we here. I went up to
Court before church; and in one of the rooms, there being but little
company, a fellow in a red coat without a sword came up to me, and,
after words of course, asked me how the ladies did? I asked, "What
ladies?" He said, "Mrs. Dingley and Mrs. Johnson." "Very well," said I,
"when I heard from them last: and pray when came you from thence,
sir?" He said, "I never was in Ireland"; and just at that word Lord
Winchelsea(1) comes up to me, and the man went off: as I went out I saw
him again, and recollected him, it was Vedeau(2) with a pox: I then went
and made my apologies, that my head was full of something I had to say
to Lord Winchelsea, etc., and I asked after his wife, and so all was
well; and he inquired after my lodging, because he had some favour to
desire of me in Ireland, to recommend somebody to somebody, I know not
what it is. When I came from church, I went up to Court again, where Sir
Edmond Bacon(3) told me the bad news from Spain,(4) which you will hear
before this reaches you; as we have it now, we are undone there, and
it was odd to see the whole countenances of the Court changed so in two
hours. Lady Mountjoy(5) carried me home to dinner, where I stayed not
long after, and came home early, and now am got into bed, for you must
always write to your MD's in bed, that is a maxim.

     Mr. White and Mr. Red,
     Write to MD when abed;
     Mr. Black and Mr. Brown,
     Write to MD when you're down;
     Mr. Oak and Mr. Willow,
     Write to MD on your pillow.--

What is this? faith, I smell fire; what can it be? this house has a
thousand stinks in it. I think to leave it on Thursday, and lodge over
the way. Faith, I must rise, and look at my chimney, for the smell grows
stronger, stay--I have been up, and in my room, and found all safe, only
a mouse within the fender to warm himself, which I could not catch.
I smelt nothing there, but now in my bed-chamber I smell it again; I
believe I have singed the woollen curtain, and that is all, though I
cannot smoke it. Presto is plaguy silly to-night, an't he? Yes, and so
he be. Ay, but if I should wake and see fire. Well; I will venture; so
good-night, etc.

25. Pray, young women, if I write so much as this every day, how will
this paper hold a fortnight's work, and answer one of yours into the
bargain? You never think of this, but let me go on like a simpleton.
I wish you a merry Christmas, and many, many a one with poor Presto at
some pretty place. I was at church to-day by eight, and received the
Sacrament, and came home by ten; then went to Court at two: it was a
Collar-day, that is, when the Knights of the Garter wear their collars;
but the Queen stayed so late at Sacrament, that I came back, and dined
with my neighbour Ford, because all people dine at home on this day.
This is likewise a Collar-day all over England in every house, at least
where there is BRAWN: that's very well.--I tell you a good pun; a fellow
hard by pretends to cure agues, and has set out a sign, and spells it
EGOES; a gentleman and I observing it, he said, "How does that fellow
pretend to cure AGUES?" I said I did not know; but I was sure it was not
by a SPELL. That is admirable. And so you asked the Bishop about that
pun of Lord Stawel's brother. Bite! Have I caught you, young women? Must
you pretend to ask after roguish puns, and Latin ones too? Oh but you
smoked me, and did not ask the Bishop. Oh but you are a fool, and you
did. I met Vedeau again at Court to-day, and I observed he had a sword
on; I fancy he was broke, and has got a commission, but I never asked
him. Vedeau I think his name is, yet Parvisol's man is Vedel, that is
true. Bank Stock will fall like stock-fish by this bad news, and two
days ago I could have got twelve pounds by my bargain; but I do not
intend to sell, and in time it will rise. It is odd that my Lord
Peterborow foretold this loss two months ago, one night at Mr. Harley's,
when I was there; he bid us count upon it, that Stanhope would lose
Spain before Christmas; that he would venture his head upon it, and gave
us reasons; and though Mr. Harley argued the contrary, he still held to
his opinion. I was telling my Lord Angelsea this at Court this morning;
and a gentleman by said he had heard my Lord Peterborow affirm the same
thing. I have heard wise folks say, "An ill tongue may do much." And
'tis an odd saying,

     "Once I guessed right,
      And I got credit by't;
      Thrice I guessed wrong,
      And I kept my credit on."

No, it is you are sorry, not I.

26. By the Lord Harry, I shall be undone here with Christmas boxes.
The rogues of the Coffee-house have raised their tax, everyone giving
a crown; and I gave mine for shame, besides a great many half-crowns
to great men's porters, etc. I went to-day by water into the city, and
dined with no less a man than the City Printer.(6) There is an intimacy
between us, built upon reasons that you shall know when I see you; but
the rain caught me within twelvepenny length of home. I called at Mr.
Harley's, who was not within, dropped my half-crown with his porter,
drove to the Coffee-house, where the rain kept me till nine. I had
letters to-day from the Archbishop of Dublin and Mr. Bernage;(7) the
latter sends me a melancholy account of Lady Shelburne's(8) death, and
his own disappointments, and would gladly be a captain; if I can help
him, I will.

27. Morning. I bespoke a lodging over the way for tomorrow, and the dog
let it yesterday to another; I gave him no earnest, so it seems he could
do it; Patrick would have had me give him earnest to bind him; but I
would not. So I must go saunter to-day for a lodging somewhere else.
Did you ever see so open a winter in England? We have not had two frosty
days; but it pays it off in rain: we have not had three fair days
these six weeks. O, faith, I dreamt mightily of MD last night; but so
confused, I cannot tell a word. I have made Ford acquainted with Lewis;
and to-day we dined together: in the evening I called at one or two
neighbours, hoping to spend a Christmas evening; but none were at home,
they were all gone to be merry with others. I have often observed this,
that in merry times everybody is abroad; where the deuce are they? So
I went to the Coffee-house, and talked with Mr. Addison an hour, who at
last remembered to give me two letters, which I cannot answer to-night,
nor to-morrow neither, I can assure you, young women, count upon that. I
have other things to do than to answer naughty girls, an old saying and
true,

     Letters from MD's
     Must not be answered in ten days:

it is but bad rhyme, etc.

28. To-day I had a message from Sir Thomas Hanmer, to dine with him; the
famous Dr. Smalridge(9) was of the company, and we sat till six; and I
came home to my new lodgings in St. Albans Street,(10) where I pay the
same rent (eight shillings a week) for an apartment two pair of stairs;
but I have the use of the parlour to receive persons of quality, and I
am got into my new bed, etc.

29. Sir Andrew Fountaine has been very ill this week; and sent to me
early this morning to have prayers, which you know is the last thing. I
found the doctors and all in despair about him. I read prayers to him,
found he had settled all things; and, when I came out, the nurse asked
me whether I thought it possible he could live; for the doctors thought
not. I said, I believed he would live; for I found the seeds of life
in him, which I observe seldom fail (and I found them in poor, dearest
Stella, when she was ill many years ago); and to-night I was with him
again, and he was mightily recovered, and I hope he will do well, and
the doctor approved my reasons; but, if he should die, I should come off
scurvily. The Secretary of State (Mr. St. John) sent to me to dine with
him; Mr. Harley and Lord Peterborow dined there too; and at night came
Lord Rivers. Lord Peterborow goes to Vienna in a day or two: he has
promised to make me write to him. Mr. Harley went away at six; but we
stayed till seven. I took the Secretary aside, and complained to him
of Mr. Harley, that he had got the Queen to grant the First-Fruits,
promised to bring me to her, and get her letter to the bishops of
Ireland; but the last part he had not done in six weeks, and I was in
danger to lose reputation, etc. He took the matter right, desired me to
be with him on Sunday morning, and promises me to finish the affair in
four days; so I shall know in a little time what I have to trust
to.--It is nine o'clock, and I must go study, you little rogues; and so
good-night, etc.

30. Morning. The weather grows cold, you sauceboxes. Sir Andrew
Fountaine, they bring me word, is better. I will go rise, for my hands
are starving while I write in bed. Night. Now Sir Andrew Fountaine is
recovering, he desires to be at ease; for I called in the morning to
read prayers, but he had given orders not to be disturbed. I have lost
a legacy by his living; for he told me he had left me a picture and some
books, etc. I called to see my quondam neighbour Ford (do you know what
quondam is, though?), and he engaged me to dine with him; for he always
dines at home on Opera-days. I came home at six, writ to the Archbishop,
then studied till past eleven, and stole to bed, to write to MD these
few lines, to let you know I am in good health at the present writing
hereof, and hope in God MD is so too. I wonder I never write politics to
you: I could make you the profoundest politician in all the lane.--Well,
but when shall we answer this letter, No. 8 of MD's? Not till next year,
faith. O Lord--bo--but that will be a Monday next. Cod's-so, is it?
and so it is: never saw the like.--I made a pun t'other day to Ben
Portlack(11) about a pair of drawers. Poh, said he, that's mine a--- all
over. Pray, pray, Dingley, let me go sleep; pray, pray, Stella, let me
go slumber; and put out my wax-candle.

31. Morning. It is now seven, and I have got a fire, but am writing abed
in my bed-chamber. 'Tis not shaving-day, so I shall be ready early to
go before church to Mr. St. John; and to-morrow I will answer our MD's
letter.

     Would you answer MD's letter,
     On New Year's Day you'll do it better;
     For, when the year with MD 'gins,
     It without MD never lins.

(These proverbs have always old words in them; lins is leave off.)

     But, if on New Year you write nones,
     MD then will bang your bones.

But Patrick says I must rise.--Night. I was early this morning with
Secretary St. John, and gave him a memorial to get the Queen's letter
for the First-Fruits, who has promised to do it in a very few days. He
told me he had been with the Duke of Marlborough, who was lamenting his
former wrong steps in joining with the Whigs, and said he was worn out
with age, fatigues, and misfortunes. I swear it pitied me; and I really
think they will not do well in too much mortifying that man, although
indeed it is his own fault. He is covetous as hell, and ambitious as the
Prince of it: he would fain have been General for life, and has broken
all endeavours for peace, to keep his greatness and get money. He told
the Queen he was neither covetous nor ambitious. She said if she could
have conveniently turned about, she would have laughed, and could hardly
forbear it in his face. He fell in with all the abominable measures of
the late Ministry, because they gratified him for their own designs.
Yet he has been a successful General, and I hope he will continue his
command. O Lord, smoke the politics to MD! Well; but, if you like them,
I will scatter a little now and then, and mine are all fresh from the
chief hands. Well, I dined with Mr. Harley, and came away at six: there
was much company, and I was not merry at all. Mr. Harley made me read a
paper of verses of Prior's. I read them plain, without any fine manner;
and Prior swore, I should never read any of his again; but he would be
revenged, and read some of mine as bad. I excused myself, and said I
was famous for reading verses the worst in the world; and that everybody
snatched them from me when I offered to begin. So we laughed.--Sir
Andrew Fountaine still continues ill. He is plagued with some sort of
bile.

Jan. 1. Morning. I wish my dearest, pretty Dingley and Stella a happy
New Year, and health, and mirth, and good stomachs, and Fr's company.
Faith, I did not know how to write Fr. I wondered what was the matter;
but now I remember I always write Pdfr. Patrick wishes me a happy New
Year, and desires I would rise, for it is a good fire, and faith 'tis
cold. I was so politic last night with MD, never saw the like. Get the
Examiners, and read them; the last nine or ten are full of the reasons
for the late change, and of the abuses of the last Ministry; and
the great men assure me they are all true. They are written by
their encouragement and direction. I must rise and go see Sir
Andrew Fountaine; but perhaps to-night I may answer MD's letter: so
good-morrow, my mistresses all, good-morrow.

     I wish you both a merry New Year,
     Roast beef, minced pies, and good strong beer,
     And me a share of your good cheer,
     That I was there, or you were here;
     And you're a little saucy dear.

Good-morrow again, dear sirrahs; one cannot rise for your play.--At
night. I went this morning to visit Lady Kerry and Lord Shelburne; and
they made me dine with them. Sir Andrew Fountaine is better. And now
let us come and see what this saucy, dear letter of MD says. Come out,
letter, come out from between the sheets; here it is underneath, and
it will not come out. Come out again, I say: so there. Here it is. What
says Presto to me, pray? says it. Come, and let me answer for you to
your ladies. Hold up your head then, like a good letter. There. Pray,
how have you got up with Presto, Madam Stella? You write your eighth
when you receive mine: now I write my twelfth when I receive your
eighth. Do not you allow for what are upon the road, simpleton? What say
you to that? And so you kept Presto's little birthday, I warrant: would
to God I had been at the health rather than here, where I have no manner
of pleasure, nothing but eternal business upon my hands. I shall grow
wise in time; but no more of that: only I say Amen with my heart and
vitals, that we may never be asunder again ten days together while poor
Presto lives.

*****

I can't be merry so near any splenetic talk; so I made that long line,
and now all's well again. Yes, you are a pretending slut, indeed, with
your fourth and fifth in the margin, and your journal, and everything.
Wind--we saw no wind here, nothing at all extraordinary at any time. We
had it once when you had it not. But an old saying and a true:

     "I hate all wind,
      Before and behind,
      From cheeks with eyes,
      Or from blind.----"

Your chimney fall down! God preserve you. I suppose you only mean a
brick or two: but that's a d--ned lie of your chimney being carried
to the next house with the wind. Don't put such things upon us; those
matters will not pass here: keep a little to possibilities. My Lord
Hertford(12) would have been ashamed of such a stretch. You should take
care of what company you converse with: when one gets that faculty, 'tis
hard to break one's self of it. Jemmy Leigh talks of going over; but
