table. Before she touched her soup, Amy glanced down the line of
faces opposite, and finding none that answered the slight description
elicited from the waiter, she leaned a little forward to examine those
on her own side of the table. Some way down sat several gentlemen, and
as she bent to observe them, one did the same, and she received an
admiring glance from a pair of fine black eyes. Somewhat abashed, she
busied herself with her soup: but the fancy had taken possession of
her, and presently she whispered to Helen,--

"Do you see any signs of the baron?"

"On my left; look at the hands."

Amy looked and saw a white, shapely hand with an antique ring on the
third finger. Its owner's face was averted, but as he conversed with
animation, the hand was in full play, now emphasizing an opinion, now
lifting a glass, or more frequently pulling at a blond beard which
adorned the face of the unknown. Amy shook her head decidedly.

"I hate light men, and don't think that is the baron, for the gloves
are a size too small for those hands. Lean back and look some four or
five seats lower down on the right. See what sort of person the dark
man with the fine eyes is."

Helen obeyed, but almost instantly bent to her plate again, smiling in
spite of herself.

"That is an Englishman; he stares rudely, says 'By Jove!' and wears no
jewelry or beard."

"Now, I'm disappointed. Well, keep on the watch, and tell me if you
make any discoveries, for I _will_ find the baron."

Being hungry, Amy devoted herself to her dinner, till dessert was on
the table. She was languidly eating grapes, while Helen talked with
the major, when the word "baron" caught her ear. The speakers sat at a
table behind her, so that she could not see them without turning quite
round, which was impossible; but she listened eagerly to the following
scrap of chat:--

"Is the baron going on to-morrow?" asked a gay voice in French.

"Yes, he is bound for Baden-Baden. The season is at its height, and he
must make his game while the ball is rolling, or it is all up with the
open-handed Sigismund," answered a rough voice.

"Won't his father pardon the last escapade?" asked a third, with a
laugh.

"No, and he is right. The duel was a bad affair, for the man almost
died, and the baron barely managed to get out of the scrape through
court influence. When is the wedding to be?"

"Never, Palsdorf says. There is everything but love in the bargain,
and he swears he'll not agree to it. I like that."

"There is much nobleness in him, spite of his vagaries. He will sow
his wild oats and make a grand man in time. By the by, if we are going
to the fortress, we must be off. Give Sigismund the word; he is dining
at the other table with Power," said the gay voice.

"Take a look at the pretty English girl as you go by; it will do your
eyes good, after the fat Frauleins we have seen of late," added the
rough one.

Three gentlemen rose, and as they passed Amy stole a glance at them;
but seeing several pairs of eyes fixed on herself, she turned away
blushing, with the not unpleasant consciousness that "the pretty
English girl" was herself. Longing to see which Sigismund was, she
ventured to look after the young men, who paused behind the man with
the blond beard, and also touched the dark-eyed gentleman on the
shoulder. All five went down the hall and stood talking near the door.

"Uncle, I wish to go," said Amy, whose will was law to the amiable
major. Up he rose, and Amy added, as she took his arm, "I'm seized
with a longing to go to Baden-Baden and see a little gambling. You are
not a wild young man, so you can be trusted there."

"I hope so. Now you are a sensible little woman, and we'll do our best
to have a gay time. Wait an instant till I get my hat."

While the major searched for the missing article the girls went on,
and coming to the door, Amy tried to open it. The unwieldy foreign
lock resisted her efforts, and she was just giving it an impatient
little shake, when a voice said behind her,--

"Permit me, mademoiselle;" at the same moment a handsome hand turned
the latch, the flash of a diamond shone before her, and the door
opened.

"_Merci, monsieur_," she murmured, turning as she went out; but Helen
was close behind her, and no one else to be seen except the massive
major in the rear.

"Did you see the baron?" she whispered eagerly, as they went
up-stairs.

"No; where was he?"

"He opened the door for me. I knew him by his hand and ring. He was
close to you."

"I did not observe him, being busy gathering up my dress. I thought
the person was a waiter, and never looked at him," said Helen, with
provoking indifference.

"How unfortunate! Uncle, you are going to see the fortress; we don't
care for it; but I want you to take these gloves and inquire for Baron
Sigismund Palsdorf. He will be there with a party of gentlemen. You
can easily manage it, men are so free and easy. Mind what he is like,
and come home in time to tell me all about it."

Away went the major, and the cousins sat on the balcony enjoying the
lovely night, admiring the picturesque scene, and indulging in
the flights of fancy all girls love, for Helen, in spite of her
three-and-twenty years, was as romantic as Amy at eighteen. It was
past eleven when the major came, and the only greeting he received was
the breathless question,--

"Did you find him?"

"I found something much better than any baron, a courier. I've wanted
one ever since we started; for two young ladies and their baggage are
more than one man can do his duty by, Karl Hoffman had such excellent
testimonials from persons I know, that I did not hesitate to engage
him, and he comes to-morrow; so henceforth I've nothing to do but
devote myself to you."

"How very provoking! Did you bring the gloves back?" asked Amy, still
absorbed in the baron.

The major tossed them to her, and indulged in a hearty laugh at her
girlish regrets; then bade them good-night, and went away to give
orders for an early start next morning.

Tired of talking, the girls lay down in the two little white beds
always found in German hotels, and Amy was soon continuing in sleep
the romance she had begun awake. She dreamed that the baron proved to
be the owner of the fine eyes; that he wooed and won her, and they
were floating down the river to the chime of wedding-bells.

At this rapturous climax she woke to find the air full of music, and
to see Helen standing tall and white in the moonlight that streamed in
at the open window.

"Hush, hide behind the curtains and listen; it's a serenade,"
whispered Helen, as Amy stole to her side.

Shrouded in the drapery, they leaned and listened till the song ended,
then Amy peeped; a dark group stood below; all were bareheaded, and
now seemed whispering together. Presently a single voice rose, singing
an exquisite little French canzonet, the refrain of which was a
passionate repetition of the word "_Amie_." She thought she recognized
the voice, and the sound of her own name uttered in such ardent tones
made her heart beat and her color rise, for it seemed to signify that
the serenade was for them. As the last melodious murmur ceased, there
came a stifled laugh from below, and something fell into the balcony.
Neither dared stir till the sound of departing feet reassured them;
then creeping forward Amy drew in a lovely bouquet of myrtle, roses,
and great German forget-me-nots, tied with a white ribbon and
addressed in a dashing hand to _La belle Helène_.

"Upon my life, the romance has begun in earnest," laughed Helen,
as she examined the flowers. "You are serenaded by some unknown
nightingale, and I have flowers tossed up to me in the charming old
style. Of course it is the baron, Amy."

"I hope so; but whoever it is, they are regular troubadours, and I'm
delighted. I know the gloves will bring us fun of some kind. Do you
take one and I'll take the other, and see who will find the baron
first. Isn't it odd that they knew our names?"

"Amy, the writing on this card is very like that in the big book. I
may be bewitched by this mid-summer moonlight, but it really is very
like it. Come and see."

The two charming heads bent over the card, looking all the more
charming for the dishevelled curls and braids that hung about them as
the girls laughed and whispered together in the softly brilliant light
that filled the room.

"You are right; it is the same. The men who stared so at dinner are
gay students perhaps, and ready for any prank. Don't tell uncle, but
let us see what will come of it. I begin to enjoy myself heartily
now--don't you?" said Amy, laying her glove carefully away.

"I enjoyed myself before, but I think '_La belle Helène_' gives an
added relish to life, _Amie_," laughed Nell, putting her flowers in
water; and then both went back to their pillows, to dream delightfully
till morning.


II

KARL, THE COURIER


"Three days, at least, before we reach Baden. How tiresome it is that
uncle won't go faster!" said Amy, as she tied on her hat next morning,
wondering as she did so if the baron would take the same boat.

"As adventures have begun, I feel assured that they will continue to
cheer the way; so resign yourself and be ready for anything," replied
Helen, carefully arranging her bouquet in her travelling-basket.

A tap at the door, which stood half open, made both look up. A tall,
brown, gentlemanly man, in a gray suit, with a leathern bag slung over
his shoulder, stood there, hat in hand, and meeting Helen's eyes,
bowed respectfully, saying in good English, but with a strong German
accent,--

"Ladies, the major desired me to tell you the carriage waits."

"Why, who--" began Amy, staring with her blue eyes full of wonder at
the stranger.

He bowed again, and said, simply,--

"Karl Hoffman, at your service, mademoiselle."

"The courier--oh, yes! I forgot all about it. Please take these
things."

Amy began to hand him her miscellaneous collection of bags, books,
shawls and cushions.

"I'd no idea couriers were such decent creatures," whispered Amy, as
they followed him along the hall.

"Don't you remember the raptures Mrs. Mortimer used to have over their
Italian courier, and her funny description of him? 'Beautiful to
behold, with a night of hair, eyes full of an infinite tenderness, and
a sumptuous cheek.'"

Both girls laughed, and Amy averred that Karl's eyes danced with
merriment as he glanced over his shoulder, as the silvery peal sounded
behind him.

"Hush! he understands English; we must be careful," said Helen, and
neither spoke again till they reached the carriage.

Everything was ready, and as they drove away, the major, leaning
luxuriously back, exclaimed,--

"Now I begin to enjoy travelling, for I'm no longer worried by
the thought of luggage, time-tables, trains, and the everlasting
perplexity of thalers, kreutzers, and pfenniges. This man is a
treasure; everything is done in the best manner, and his knowledge of
matters is really amazing."

"He's a very gentlemanly-looking person," said Amy, eying a decidedly
aristocratic foot through the front window of the carriage, for Karl
sat up beside the driver.

"He _is_ a gentleman, my dear. Many of these couriers are well born
and educated, but, being poor, prefer this business to any other, as
it gives them variety, and often pleasant society. I've had a long
talk with Hoffman, and find him an excellent and accomplished fellow.
He has lost his fortune, it seems, through no fault of his own, so
being fond of a roving life, turned courier for a time, and we are
fortunate to have secured him."

"But one doesn't know how to treat him," said Helen. "I don't like
to address him as a servant, and yet it's not pleasant to order a
gentleman about."

"Oh, it will be easy enough as we go on together. Just call him
Hoffman, and behave as if you knew nothing about his past. He begged
me not to mention it, but I thought you'd like the romance of the
thing. Only don't either of you run away with him, as Ponsonby's
daughter did with her courier, who wasn't a gentleman, by the way."

"Not handsome enough," said Amy. "I don't like blue eyes and black
hair. His manners are nice, but he looks like a gipsy, with his brown
face and black beard: doesn't he, Nell?"

"Not at all. Gipsies haven't that style of face; they are thin, sharp,
and cunning in feature as in nature. Hoffman has large, well-moulded
features, and a mild, manly expression, which gives one confidence in
him."

"He has a keen, wicked look in his blue eyes, as you will see, Nell.
I mean mischievously, not malignantly wicked. He likes fun, I'm sure,
for he laughed about the 'sumptuous cheek' till his own were red,
though he dared not show it, and was as grave as an owl when we met
uncle," said Amy, smiling at the recollection.

"We shall go by boat to Biebrich, and then by rail to Heidelberg. We
shall get in late to-morrow night, but can rest a day, and then on to
Baden. Here we are; now make yourselves easy, as I do, and let Karl
take care of everything."

And putting his hands in his pockets, the major strolled about the
boat, while the courier made matters comfortable for the day. So
easily and well did he do his duty, that both girls enjoyed watching
him after he had established them on the shady side of the boat, with
camp-stools for their feet, cushions to lean on, books and bags laid
commodiously at hand.

As they sailed up the lovely Rhine they grew more and more
enthusiastic in their admiration and curiosity, and finding the meagre
description of the guide-books very unsatisfactory, Amy begged her
uncle to tell her all the legends of picturesque ruin, rock and river,
as they passed.

"Bless me, child, I know nothing; but here's Hoffman, a German born,
who will tell you everything, I dare say. Karl, what's that old castle
up there? The young ladies want to know about it."

Leaning on the railing, Hoffman told the story so well that he was
kept explaining and describing for an hour, and when he went away to
order lunch, Amy declared it was as pleasant as reading fairy tales to
listen to his dramatic histories and legends.

At lunch the major was charmed to find his favorite wines and dishes
without any need of consulting dictionary or phrase-book beforehand,
or losing his temper in vain attempts to make himself understood.

On reaching Biebrich, tired and hungry, at nightfall, everything was
ready for them, and all went to bed praising Karl, the courier, though
Amy, with unusual prudence, added,--

"He is a new broom now; let us wait a little before we judge."

All went well next day till nightfall, when a most untoward accident
occurred, and Helen's adventures began in earnest. The three occupied
a _coupé_, and being weary with long sitting, Helen got out at one of
the stations where the train paused for ten minutes. A rosy sunset
tempted her to the end of the platform, and there she found, what
nearly all foreign railway stations possess, a charming little garden.

Amy was very tired, rather cross, and passionately fond of flowers, so
when an old woman offered to pull a nosegay for "the gracious lady,"
Helen gladly waited for it, hoping to please the invalid. Twice the
whistle warned her, and at last she ran back, but only in time to see
the train move away, with her uncle gesticulating wildly to the guard,
who shook his stupid German head, and refused to see the dismayed
young lady imploring him to wait for her.

Just as the train was vanishing from the station, a man leaped from
a second-class carriage at the risk of his neck, and hurried back to
find Helen looking pale and bewildered, as well she might, left alone
and moneyless at night in a strange town.

"Mademoiselle, it is I; rest easy; we can soon go on; a train passes
in two hours, and we can telegraph to Heidelberg that they may not
fear for you."

"Oh, Hoffman, how kind of you to stop for me! What should I have done
without you, for uncle takes care of all the money, and I have only my
watch."

Helen's usual self-possession rather failed her in the flurry of the
moment, and she caught Karl's arm with a feminine little gesture of
confidence very pleasant to see. Leading her to the waiting-room, he
ordered supper, and put her into the care of the woman of the place,
while he went to make inquiries and dispatch the telegram. In half an
hour he returned, finding Helen refreshed and cheerful, though a trace
of anxiety was still visible in her watchful eyes.

"All goes excellently, mademoiselle. I have sent word to several posts
along the road that we are coming by the night train, so that Monsieur
le Major will rest tranquil till we meet. It is best that I give you
some money, lest such a mishap should again occur; it is not likely so
soon; nevertheless, here is both gold and silver. With this, one can
make one's way everywhere. Now, if mademoiselle will permit me to
advise, she will rest for an hour, as we must travel till dawn. I will
keep guard without and watch for the train."

He left her, and having made herself comfortable on one of the sofas,
she lay watching the tall shadow pass and repass door and window, as
Karl marched up and down the platform, with the tireless tramp of a
sentinel on duty. A pleasant sense of security stole over her, and
with a smile at Amy's enjoyment of the adventure when it was over,
Helen fell asleep.

A far-off shriek half woke her, and starting up, she turned to meet
the courier coming in to wake her. Up thundered the train, every
carriage apparently full of sleepy passengers, and the guard in a
state of sullen wrath at some delay, the consequences of which would
fall heaviest on him.

From carriage to carriage hurried Karl and his charge, to be met with
everywhere by the cry, "All full," in many languages, and with every
aspect of inhospitality. One carriage only showed two places; the
other seats were occupied by six students, who gallantly invited the
lady to enter. But Helen shrunk back, saying,--

"Is there no other place?"

"None, mademoiselle; this, or remain till morning," said Karl.

"Where will you go if I take this place?"

"Among the luggage,--anywhere; it is nothing. But we must decide at
once."

"Come with me; I'm afraid to be locked in here alone," said Helen,
desperately.

"Mademoiselle forgets I am her courier."

"I do not forget that you are a gentleman. Pray come in; my uncle will
thank you."

"I will," and with a sudden brightening of the eyes, a grateful
glance, and an air of redoubled respect, Hoffman followed her into the
carriage.

They were off at once, and the thing was done before Helen had time
to feel anything but the relief which the protection of his presence
afforded her.

The young gentlemen stared at the veiled lady and her grim escort,
joked under their breath, and looked wistfully at the suppressed
cigars, but behaved with exemplary politeness till sleep overpowered
them, and one after the other dropped off asleep to dream of their
respective Gretchens.

Helen could not sleep, and for hours sat studying the unconscious
faces before her, the dim landscape flying past the windows, or forgot
herself in reveries.

Hoffman remained motionless and silent, except when she addressed
him, wakeful also, and assiduous in making the long night as easy as
possible.

It was past midnight, and Helen's heavy eyelids were beginning to
droop, when suddenly there came an awful crash, a pang of mortal fear,
then utter oblivion.

As her senses returned she found herself lying in a painful position
under what had been the roof of the car; something heavy weighed
down her lower limbs, and her dizzy brain rung with a wild uproar of
shrieks and groans, eager voices, the crash of wood and iron, and the
shrill whistle of the engine, as it rushed away for help.

Through the darkness she heard the pant as of some one struggling
desperately, then a cry close by her, followed by a strong voice
exclaiming, in an agony of suspense,--

"My God, will no one come!"

"Hoffman, are you there?" cried Helen, groping in the gloom, with a
thrill of joy at the sound of a familiar voice.

"Thank heaven, you are safe. Lie still. I will save you. Help is
coming. Have no fear!" panted the voice, with an undertone of fervent
gratitude in its breathless accents.

"What has happened? Where are the rest?"

"We have been thrown down an embankment. The lads are gone for help.
God only knows what harm is done."

Karl's voice died in a stifled groan, and Helen cried out in alarm,--

"Where are you? You are hurt?"

"Not much. I keep the ruins from falling in to crush us. Be quiet,
they are coming."

A shout answered the faint halloo he gave as if to guide them to the
spot, and a moment after, five of the students were swarming about the
wreck, intent on saving the three whose lives were still in danger.

A lamp torn from some demolished carriage was held through an opening,
and Helen saw a sight that made her blood chill in her veins. Across
her feet, crushed and bleeding, lay the youngest of the students, and
kneeling close beside him was Hoffman, supporting by main strength a
mass of timber, which otherwise would fall and crush them all. His
face was ghastly pale, his eyes haggard with pain and suspense, and
great drops stood upon his forehead. But as she looked, he smiled with
a cheery.--

"Bear up, dear lady, we shall soon be out of danger. Now, lads, work
with a will; my strength is going fast."

They did work like heroes, and even in her pain and peril, Helen
admired the skill, energy, and courage of the young men, who, an hour
ago, had seemed to have no ideas above pipes and beer. Soon Hoffman
was free, the poor senseless youth lifted out, and then, as tenderly
as if she were a child, they raised and set her down, faint but
unhurt, in a wide meadow, already strewn with sad tokens of the wreck.

Karl was taken possession of as well as herself, forced to rest a
moment, drink a cordial draught from some one's flask, and be praised,
embraced, and enthusiastically blessed by the impetuous youths.

"Where is the boy who was hurt? Bring him to me. I am strong now.
I want to help. I have salts in my pocket, and I can bind up his
wounds," said Helen, soon herself again.

Karl and Helen soon brought back life and sense to the boy, and never
had human face looked so lovely as did Helen's to the anxious comrades
when she looked up in the moonlight with a joyful smile, and softly
whispered,--

"He is alive."

For an hour terrible confusion reigned, then the panic subsided a
little, and such of the carriages as were whole were made ready to
carry away as many as possible; the rest must wait till a return train
could be sent for them.

A struggle of course ensued, for every one wished to go on, and fear
made many selfish. The wounded, the women and children, were taken, as
far as possible, and the laden train moved away, leaving many anxious
watchers behind.

Helen had refused to go, and had given her place to poor Conrad,
thereby overwhelming his brother and comrades with gratitude. Two went
on with the wounded lad; the rest remained, and chivalrously devoted
themselves to Helen as a body-guard.

The moon shone clearly, the wide field was miles from any hamlet,
and a desolate silence succeeded to the late uproar, as the band of
waiters roamed about, longing for help and dawn.

"Mademoiselle, you shiver; the dew falls, and it is damp here; we must
have a fire;" and Karl was away to a neighboring hedge, intent on
warming his delicate charge if he felled a forest to do it.

The students rushed after him, and soon returned in triumph to build
a glorious fire, which drew all forlorn wanderers to its hospitable
circle. A motley assemblage; but mutual danger and discomfort produced
mutual sympathy and good will, and a general atmosphere of friendship
pervaded the party.

"Where is the brave Hoffman?" asked Wilhelm, the blond student, who,
being in the Werther period of youth, was already madly in love with
Helen, and sat at her feet catching cold in the most romantic manner.

"Behold me! The little ones cry for hunger, so I ransack the ruins and
bring away my spoils. Eat, Kinder, eat and be patient."

As he spoke Karl appeared with an odd collection of baskets, bags, and
bottles, and with a fatherly air that won all the mothers, he gave
the children whatever first appeared, making them laugh in spite of
weariness and hunger by the merry speeches which accompanied his
gifts.

"You too need something. Here is your own basket with the lunch I
ordered you. In a sad state of confusion, but still eatable. See,
it is not bad," and he deftly spread on a napkin before Helen cold
chicken, sandwiches, and fruit.

His care for the little ones as well as for herself touched her and
her eyes filled, as she remembered that she owed her life to him, and
recalled the sight of his face in the overturned car.

Her voice trembled a little as she thanked him, and the moonlight
betrayed her wet eyes. He fancied she was worn out with excitement and
fatigue, and anxious to cheer her spirits, he whispered to Wilhelm and
his mates,--

"Sing, then, comrades, and while away this tedious night. It is hard
for all to wait so long, and the babies need a lullaby."

The young men laughed and sang as only German students can sing,
making the night musical with blithe drinking songs, tender love-lays,
battle-hymns, and Volkslieder sweeter than any songs across the water.

Every heart was cheered and warmed by the magic of the music, the
babies fell asleep, strangers grew friendly, fear changed to courage,
and the most forlorn felt the romance of that bivouac under the summer
sky.

Dawn was reddening the east when a welcome whistle broke up the camp.
Every one hurried to the railway, but Helen paused to gather a handful
of blue forget-me-nots, saying to Hoffman, who waited with her wraps
on his arm,--

"It has been a happy night, in spite of the danger and discomfort. I
shall not soon forget it; and take these as a souvenir."

He smiled, standing bare-headed in the chilly wind, for his hat was
lost, his coat torn, hair dishevelled, and one hand carelessly bound
up in his handkerchief. Helen saw these marks of the night's labors
and perils for the first time, and as soon as they were seated desired
to see his hand.

"It is nothing,--a scratch, a mere scratch, I give you my word,
mademoiselle," he began, but Wilhelm unceremoniously removed the
handkerchief, showing a torn and bleeding hand which must have been
exquisitely painful.

Helen turned pale, and with a reproachful glance skilfully bound it up
again, saying, as she handed a silken scarf to Wilhelm,--

"Make of that a sling, please, and put the poor hand in it. Care must
be taken, or harm will come of it."

Hoffman submitted in bashful silence, as if surprised and touched by
the young lady's interest. She saw that, and added gratefully,--

"I do not forget that you saved my life, though you seem to have done
so. My uncle will thank you better than I can."

"I already have my reward, mademoiselle," he returned, with a
respectful inclination and a look she could neither understand nor
forget.


III

AMY'S ADVENTURE


The excitement and suspense of the major and Amy can be imagined when
news of the accident reached them. Their gratitude and relief were
intense when Helen appeared next morning, with the faithful Hoffman
still at his post, though no longer able to disguise the fact that he
was suffering from his wound.

When the story had been told, Karl was put under the surgeon's care,
and all remained at Heidelberg for several days to rest and recover.

On the afternoon of the last day the major and young ladies drove off
to the castle for a farewell view. Helen began to sketch the great
stone lion's head above the grand terrace, the major smoked and
chatted with a party of English artists whom he had met, and Amy,
with a little lad for a guide, explored the old castle to her heart's
content.

The sun set, and twilight began to fall when Helen put up her pencils,
and the major set off to find Amy, who had been appearing and
disappearing in every nook and cranny of the half-ruined castle.

Nowhere could he find her, and no voice answered when he called. The
other visitors were gone, and the place seemed deserted, except by
themselves and the old man who showed the ruins.

Becoming alarmed lest the girl had fallen somewhere, or lost her way
among the vaults where the famous Tun lies, the major called out old
Hans with his lantern, and searched high and low.

Amy's hat, full of flowers and ferns, was found in the Lady's Walk, as
the little terrace is called, but no other trace appeared, and Helen
hurried to and fro in great distress, fearing all manner of dangers.

Meanwhile Amy, having explored every other part of the castle, went to
take another look at the Tun, the dwarf, and the vaults.

Now little Anderl, her guide, had a great fear of ghosts, and legions
were said to haunt the ruins after nightfall, so when Amy rambled on
deeper and deeper into the gloom the boy's courage ebbed away with
every step; yet he was ashamed to own his fear, seeing that she had
none.

Amy wanted to see a certain cell, where a nun was said to have pined
to death because she would not listen to the Margraf's love. The
legend pleased the romantic girl, and forgetful of waning daylight,
gathering damps, and Anderl's reluctant service, she ran on, up steps
and down, delighted with little arched doors, rusty chains on the
walls, glimpses of sky through shattered roofs, and all manner of
mysterious nooks and corners. Coming at last to a narrow cell, with a
stone table, and heavy bolts on the old door, she felt sure this was
poor Elfrida's prison, and called Anderl to come on with his candle,
for the boy had lighted one, for his own comfort rather than hers. Her
call was unanswered, and glancing back, she saw the candle placed on
the ground, but no Anderl.

"Little coward, he has run away," she said, laughing; and having
satisfied her curiosity, turned to retrace her steps,--no easy task to
one ignorant of the way, for vault after vault opened on both sides,
and no path was discernible. In vain she tried to recall some
landmark, the gloom had deepened and nothing was clear. On she
hurried, but found no opening, and really frightened, stopped at last,
calling the boy in a voice that woke a hundred echoes. But Anderl had
fled home, thinking the lady would find her way back, and preferring
to lose his kreutzers to seeing a ghost.

Poor Amy's bewilderment and alarm increased with every moment's delay,
and hoping to come out somewhere, she ran on till a misstep jostled
the candle from her hand and extinguished it.

Left in the dark, her courage deserted her, and she screamed
desperately, like a lost child, and was fast getting into a state of
frantic terror, when the sound of an approaching step reassured her.

Holding her breath, she heard a quick tread drawing nearer, as if
guided by her cries, and, straining her eyes, she caught the outline
of a man's figure in the gloom.

A sensation of intense joy rushed over her, and she was about to
spring forward, when she remembered that as she could speak no German
how could she explain her plight to the stranger, if he understood
neither French nor English?

Fear took possession of her at the thought of meeting some rough
peasant, or some rollicking student, to whom she could make no
intelligible appeal or explanation.

Crouching close against the wall, she stood mute till the figure was
very near. She was in the shadow of an angle, and the man paused, as
if looking for the person who called for help.

"Who is lost here?" said a clear voice, in German.

Amy shrunk closer to the wall, fearing to speak, for the voice was
that of a young man, and a low laugh followed the words, as if the
speaker found the situation amusing.

"Mortal, ghost or devil, I'll find it," exclaimed the voice, and
stepping forward, a hand groped for and found her.

"Lottchen, is it thou? Little rogue, thou shalt pay dearly for leading
me such a chase."

As he spoke he drew the girl toward him, but with a faint cry, a vain
effort to escape, Amy's terror reached its climax, and spent with
fatigue and excitement, she lost consciousness.

"Who the deuce is it, then? Lottchen never faints on a frolic. Some
poor little girl lost in earnest. I must get her out of this gloomy
place at once, and find her party afterward."

Lifting the slight figure in his arms, the young man hurried on, and
soon came out through a shattered gateway into the shrubbery which
surrounds the base of the castle.

Laying her on the grass, he gently chafed her hands, eying the pale,
pretty face meantime with the utmost solicitude.

At his first glimpse of it he had started, smiled and made a gesture
of pleasure and surprise, then gave himself entirely to the task of
recovering the poor girl whom he had frightened out of her senses.

Very soon she looked up with dizzy eyes, and clasping her hands
imploringly, cried, in English, like a bewildered child,--

"I am lost! Oh, take me to my uncle."

"I will, the moment you can walk. Upon my soul, I meant to help you
when I followed; but as you did not answer, I fancied it was Lottchen,
the keeper's little girl. Pardon the fright I've caused you, and let
me take you to your friends."

The true English accent of the words, and the hearty tone of sincerity
in the apology, reassured Amy at once, and, rising, she said, with a
faint smile and a petulant tone,--

"I was very silly, but my guide ran away, my candle went out, I lost
the path, and can speak no German; so I was afraid to answer you at
first; and then I lost my wits altogether, for it's rather startling
to be clutched in the dark, sir."

"Indeed it is. I was very thoughtless, but now let me atone for
it. Where is your uncle, Miss Erskine?" asked the stranger, with
respectful earnestness.

"You know my name?" cried Amy in her impulsive way.

"I have that happiness," was the answer, with a smile.

"But I don't know _you_, sir;" and she peered at him, trying to see
his face in the darkness, for the copse was thick, and twilight had
come on rapidly.

"Not yet; I live in hope. Shall we go? Your uncle will be uneasy."

"Where are we?" asked Amy, glad to move on, for the interview was
becoming too personal even for her, and the stranger's manner
fluttered her, though she enjoyed the romance of the adventure
immensely.

"We are in the park which surrounds the castle. You were near the
entrance to it from the vaults when you fainted."

"I wish I had kept on a little longer, and not disgraced myself by
such a panic."

"Nay, that is a cruel wish, for then I should have lost the happiness
of helping you."

They had been walking side by side, but were forced to pause on
reaching a broken flight of steps, for Amy could not see the way
before her.

"Let me lead you; it is steep and dark, but better than going a long
way round through the dew," he said, offering his hand.

"Must we return by these dreadful vaults?" faltered Amy, shrinking
back.

"It is the shortest and safest route, I assure you."

"Are you sure you know the way?"

"Quite sure. I have lived here by the week together. Do you fear to
trust me?"

"No; but it is so dark, and everything is so strange to me. Can we get
down safely? I see nothing but a black pit."

And Amy still hesitated, with an odd mixture of fear and coquetry.

"I brought you up in safety; shall I take you down again?" asked the
stranger, with a smile flickering over his face.

Amy felt rather than saw it, and assuming an air of dignified
displeasure, motioned him to proceed, which he did for three steps;
then Amy slipped, and gladly caught at the arm extended to save her.

Without a word he took her hand and led her back through the labyrinth
she had threaded in her bewilderment. A dim light filled the place,
but with unerring steps her guide went on till they emerged into the
courtyard.

Major Erskine's voice was audible, giving directions to the keeper,
and Helen's figure visible as she groped among the shadows of the
ruined chapel for her cousin.

"There are my friends. Now I am safe. Come and let them thank you,"
cried Amy, in her frank, childlike warmth of manner.

"I want no thanks--forgive me--adieu," and hastily kissing the little
hand that had lain so confidingly in his, the stranger was gone.

Amy rushed at once to Helen, and when the lost lamb had been welcomed,
chidden, and exulted over, they drove home, listening to the very
brief account which Amy gave of her adventure.

"Naughty little gad-about, how could you go and terrify me so,
wandering in vaults with mysterious strangers, like the Countess of
Rudolstadt. You are as wet and dirty as if you had been digging a
well, yet you look as if you liked it," said Helen, as she led Amy
into their room at the hotel.

"I do," was the decided answer, as the girl pulled a handkerchief off
her head, and began to examine the corners of it. Suddenly she uttered
a cry and flew to the light, exclaiming,--

"Nell, Nell, look here! The same letters, 'S.P.,' the same coat of
arms, the same perfume--it was the baron!"

"What? who? are you out of your mind?" said Helen, examining the
large, fine cambric handkerchief, with its delicately stamped initials
under the stag's head, and three stars on a heart-shaped shield.
"Where did you get it?" she added, as she inhaled the soft odor of
violets shaken from its folds.

Amy blushed and answered shyly, "I didn't tell you all that happened
before uncle, but now I will. My hat was left behind, and when I
recovered my wits after my fright, I found this tied over my head. Oh,
Nell, it was very charming there in that romantic old park, and going
through the vaults with him, and having my hand kissed at parting. No
one ever did that before, and I like it."

Amy glanced at her hand as she spoke, and stood staring as if struck
dumb, for there on her forefinger shone a ring she had never seen
before.

"Look! look! mine is gone, and this in its place! Oh, Nell, what shall
I do?" she said, looking half frightened, half pleased.

Helen examined the ring and shook her head, for it was far more
valuable than the little pearl one which it replaced. Two tiny
hands of finest gold were linked together about a diamond of great
brilliancy; and on the inside appeared again the initials, "S.P."

"How did it happen?" she asked, rather sternly.

"Upon my word, I don't know, unless he put it on while I was stupidly
fainting. Rude man, to take advantage of me so. But, Nell, it is
splendid, and what _shall_ I do about it?"

"Tell uncle, find out the man and send back his things. It really is
absurd, the manner in which German boys behave;" and Helen frowned,
though she was strongly tempted to laugh at the whole thing.

"He was neither a German nor a boy, but an English gentleman, I'm
sure," began Amy, rather offended.

"But 'S.P.' is a baron, you know, unless there are two Richmonds in
the field," broke in Helen.

"I forgot that; never mind, it deepens the mystery; and after this
performance, I'm prepared for any enormity. It's my fate; I submit."
said Amy, tragically, as she waved her hand to and fro, pleased with
the flash of the ring.

"Amy, I think on the whole I won't speak to uncle. He is quick to take
offence, especially where we are concerned. He doesn't understand
foreign ways, and may get into trouble. We will manage it quietly
ourselves."

"How, Nell?"

"Karl is discreet; we will merely say we found these things and wish
to discover the owner. He may know this 'S.P.' and, having learned his
address, we can send them back. The man will understand; and as we
leave to-morrow, we shall be out of the way before he can play any new
prank."

"Have in Karl at once, for if I wear this lovely thing long I shall
not be able to let it go at all. How dared the creature take such a
liberty!" and Amy pulled off the ring with an expression of great
scorn.

"Come into the _salon_ and see what Karl says to the matter. Let me
speak, or you will say too much. One must be prudent before--"

She was going to say "servants," but checked herself, and substituted
"strangers," remembering gratefully how much she owed this man.

Hoffman came, looking pale, and with his hand in a sling, but was as
gravely devoted as ever, and listened to Helen's brief story with
serious attention.

"I will inquire, mademoiselle, and let you know at once. It is easy to
find persons if one has a clue. May I see the handkerchief?"

Helen showed it. He glanced at the initials, and laid it down with a
slight smile.

"The coat-of-arms is English, mademoiselle."

"Are you sure?"

"Quite so; I understand heraldry."

"But the initials stand for Sigismund Palsdorf, and we know he is a
German baron," broke in Amy, forgetting prudence in eagerness.

"If mademoiselle knows the name and title of this gentleman it will
not be hard to find him."

"We only fancy it is the same because of the initials. I dare say it
is a mistake, and the man is English. Inquire quietly, Hoffman, if
you please, as this ring is of value, and I wish to restore it to its
owner," said Helen, rather sharply.

"I shall do so, mademoiselle," and with his gentlemanly bow, the
courier left the room.

"Bless me, what's that?" cried Amy, a moment afterward, as a ringing
laugh echoed through the corridor,--a laugh so full of hearty and
infectious merriment that both girls smiled involuntarily, and Amy
peeped out to see who the blithe personage might be.

An old gentleman was entering his room near by, and Karl was just
about to descend the stairs. Both looked back at the girlish face
peeping at them, but both were quite grave, and the peal of laughter
remained a mystery, like all the rest of it.

Late in the evening Hoffman returned to report that a party of young
Englishmen had visited the castle that afternoon, and had left by
the evening train. One of them had been named Samuel Peters, and he,
doubtless, was the owner of the ring.

A humorous expression lurked in the couriers eye as he made his
report, and heard Amy exclaim, in a tone of disgust and comical
despair,--

"Samuel Peters! That spoils all the romance and dims the beauty of the
diamond. To think that a Peters should be the hero to whom I owe my
safety, and a Samuel should leave me this token of regard!"

"Hush, Amy," whispered Helen. "Thanks, Hoffman; we must wait now for
chance to help us."


IV

A POLISH EXILE


"Room for one here, sir," said the guard, as the train stopped at
Carlsruhe next day, on its way from Heidelberg to Baden.

The major put down his guide-book, Amy opened her eyes, and Helen
removed her shawl from the opposite seat, as a young man, wrapped in
a cloak, with a green shade over his eyes, and a general air of
feebleness, got in and sank back with a sigh of weariness or pain.
Evidently an invalid, for his face was thin and pale, his dark hair
cropped short, and the ungloved hand attenuated and delicate as a
woman's. A sidelong glance from under the deep shade seemed to satisfy
him regarding his neighbors, and drawing his cloak about him with a
slight shiver, he leaned into the corner and seemed to forget that he
was not alone.

Helen and Amy exchanged glances of compassionate interest, for women
always pity invalids, especially if young, comely and of the opposite
sex. The major took one look, shrugged his shoulders, and returned
to his book. Presently a hollow cough gave Helen a pretext for
discovering the nationality of the newcomer.

"Do the open windows inconvenience you, sir?" she asked, in English.

No answer; the question evidently unintelligible.

She repeated it in French, lightly touching his cloak to arrest his
attention.

Instantly a smile broke over the handsome mouth, and in the purest
French he assured her that the fresh air was most agreeable, and
begged pardon for annoying them with his troublesome cough.

"Not an invalid, I hope, sir?" said the major, in his bluff yet kindly
voice.

"They tell me I can have no other fate; that my malady is fatal; but I
still hope and fight for my life; it is all I have to give my country
now."

A stifled sigh and a sad emphasis on the last word roused the sympathy
of the girls, the interest of the major.

He took another survey, and said, with a tone of satisfaction, as
he marked the martial carriage of the young man, and caught a fiery
glance of the half-hidden eyes,--

"You are a soldier, sir?"

"I was; I am nothing now but an exile, for Poland is in chains."

The words "Poland" and "exile" brought up all the pathetic stories of
that unhappy country which the three listeners had ever heard, and won
their interest at once.

"You were in the late revolution, perhaps?" asked the major, giving
the unhappy outbreak the most respectful name he could use.

"From beginning to end."

"Oh, tell us about it; we felt much sympathy for you, and longed to
have you win," cried Amy, with such genuine interest and pity in her
tone, it was impossible to resist.

Pressing both hands upon his breast, the young man bent low, with a
flush of feeling on his pale cheek, and answered eagerly,--

"Ah, you are kind; it is balm to my sore heart to hear words like
these. I thank you, and tell you what you will. It is but little that
I do, yet I give my life, and die a long death, instead of a quick,
brave one with my comrades."

"You are young to have borne a part in a revolution, sir," said the
major, who pricked up his ears like an old war-horse at the sound of
battle.

"My friends and myself left the University at Varsovie, as volunteers;
we did our part, and now all lie in their graves but three."

"You were wounded, it seems?"

"Many times. Exposure, privation, and sorrow will finish what the
Russian bullets began. But it is well. I have no wish to see my
country enslaved, and I can no longer help her."

"Let us hope that a happier future waits for you both. Poland loves
liberty too well, and has suffered too much for it, to be kept long in
captivity."

Helen spoke warmly, and the young man listened with a brightening
face.

"It is a kind prophecy; I accept it, and take courage. God knows I
need it," he added, low to himself.

"Are you bound for Italy?" said the major, in a most un-English fit of
curiosity.

"For Geneva first, Italy later, unless Montreaux is mild enough for me
to winter in. I go to satisfy my friends, but doubt if it avails."

"Where is Montreaux?" asked Amy.

"Near Clarens, where Rousseau wrote his Heloise, and Vevay, where
so many English go to enjoy Chillon. The climate is divine for
unfortunates like myself, and life more cheap there than in Italy."

Here the train stopped again, and Hoffman came to ask if the ladies
desired anything.

At the sound of his voice the young Pole started, looked up, and
exclaimed, with the vivacity of a foreigner, in German,--

"By my life, it is Karl! Behold me, old friend, and satisfy me that it
is thyself by a handshake."

"Casimer! What wind blows thee hither, my boy, in such sad plight?"
replied Hoffman, grasping the slender hand outstretched to him.

"I fly from an enemy for the first time in my life, and, like all
cowards, shall be conquered in the end. I wrote thee I was better, but
the wound in the breast reopened, and nothing but a miracle will save
me. I go to Switzerland; and thou?"

"Where my master commands. I serve this gentleman, now."

"Hard changes for both, but with health thou art king of
circumstances, while I?--Ah well, the good God knows best. Karl, go
thou and buy me two of those pretty baskets of grapes; I will please
myself by giving them to these pitying angels. Speak they German?"

"One, the elder; but they understand not this rattle of ours."

Karl disappeared, and Helen, who _had_ understood the rapid dialogue,
tried to seem as unconscious as Amy.

"Say a friendly word to me at times; I am so homesick and
faint-hearted, my Hoffman. Thanks; they are almost worthy the lips
that shall taste them."

Taking the two little osier baskets, laden with yellow and purple
clusters, Casimer offered them, with a charming mixture of timidity
and grace, to the girls, saying, like a grateful boy,--

"You give me kind words and good hopes; permit that I thank you in
this poor way."

"I drink success to Poland." cried Helen, lifting a great, juicy grape
to her lips, like a little purple goblet, hoping to hide her confusion
under a playful air.

The grapes went round, and healths were drunk with much merriment,
for in travelling on the Continent it is impossible for the gruffest,
primmest person to long resist the frank courtesy and vivacious chat
of foreigners.

The major was unusually social and inquisitive, and while the soldiers
fought their battles over again the girls listened and took notes,
with feminine wits on the alert to catch any personal revelations
which might fall from the interesting stranger. The wrongs and
sufferings of Poland were discussed so eloquently that both young
ladies were moved to declare the most undying hatred of Russia,
Prussia, and Austria, the most intense sympathy for "poor Pologne."
All day they travelled together, and as Baden-Baden approached, they
naturally fell to talking of the gay place.

"Uncle, I must try my fortune once. I've set my heart upon it, and
so has Nell. We want to know how gamblers feel, and to taste the
fascination of the game which draws people here from all parts of
Europe," said Amy, in her half-pleading, half-imperious way.

"You may risk one napoleon each, as I foolishly promised you should,
when I little thought you would ever have an opportunity to remind me
of my promise. It's not an amusement for respectable Englishwomen, or
men either. You will agree with me there, monsieur?" and the major
glanced at the Pole, who replied, with his peculiar smile:--

"Surely, yes. It is great folly and waste of time and money; yet I
have known one man who found some good in it, or, rather, brought good
out of it. I have a friend who has a mania for giving. His own fortune
was spent in helping needy students at the University, and poor
professors. This displeased his father, and he refused supplies,
except enough for his simple personal wants. Sigismund chafed at this,
and being skilful at all games, as a gentleman may be in the way of
amusement, he resolved to play with those whose money was wasted on
frivolities, and give his winnings to his band of paupers."

"How did it succeed, this odd fancy?" asked Helen, with an interested
face, while Amy pinched her arm at the word "Sigismund."

"Excellently. My friend won often, and as his purpose became known it
caused no unkind feeling, this unusual success, for fortune seemed to
favor his kind object."

"Wrong, nevertheless, to do evil that good may come of it," said the
major, morally.

"It may be so: but it is not for me to censure my benefactor. He has
done much for my countrymen and myself, and is so truly noble I can
see no fault in him."

"What an odd name! Sigismund is German, is it not?" asked Amy, in the
most artless tone of interest.

"Yes, mademoiselle, and Palsdorf is a true German; much courage,
strength and intellect, with the gayety and simplicity of a boy. He
hates slavery of all kinds, and will be free at all costs. He is a
good son, but his father is tyrannical, and asks too much. Sigismund
will not submit to sell himself, and so is in disgrace for a time."

"Palsdorf!--was not that the name of the count or baron we heard them
talking of at Coblentz?" said Helen to Amy, with a well-feigned air of
uncertainty.

"Yes; I heard something of a duel and a broken betrothal, I think. The
people seemed to consider the baron a wild young man, so it could not
have been your friend, sir," was Amy's demure reply, glancing at Helen
with mirthful eyes, as if to say, "How our baron haunts us!"

"It is the same, doubtless. Many consider him wild, because he is
original, and dares act for himself. As it is well known, I may tell
you the truth of the duel and the betrothal, if you care to hear a
little romance."

Casimer looked eager to defend his friend, and as the girls were
longing to hear the romance, permission was given.

"In Germany, you know, the young people are often betrothed in
childhood by the parents, and sometimes never meet till they are
grown. Usually all goes well; but not always, for love cannot come at
command. Sigismund was plighted, when a boy of fifteen, to his
young cousin, and then sent away to the University till of age. On
returning, he was to travel a year or two, and then marry. He gladly
went away, and with increasing disquiet saw the time draw near when he
must keep his troth-plight."

"Hum! loved some one else. Very unfortunate to be sure," said the
major with a sigh.

"Not so; he only loved his liberty, and pretty Minna was less dear
than a life of perfect freedom. He went back at the appointed
time, saw his cousin, tried to do his duty and love her; found it
impossible, and, discovering that Minna loved another, vowed he would
never make her unhappiness as well as his own. The old baron stormed,
but the young one was firm, and would not listen to a marriage without
love; but pleaded for Minna, wished his rival success, and set out
again on his travels."

"And the duel?" asked the major, who took less interest in love than
war.

"That was as characteristic as the other act. A son of one high in
office at Berlin circulated false reports of the cause of Palsdorf's
refusal of the alliance--reports injurious to Minna. Sigismund settled
the matter in the most effectual manner, by challenging and wounding
the man. But for court influence it would have gone hardly with my
friend. The storm, however, has blown over; Minna will be happy with
her lover, and Sigismund with his liberty, till he tires of it."

"Is he handsome, this hero of yours?" said Amy, feeling the ring under
her glove, for in spite of Helen's advice, she insisted on wearing it,
that it might be at hand to return at any moment, should chance again
bring the baron in their way.

"A true German of the old type; blond and blue-eyed, tall and strong.
My hero in good truth--brave and loyal, tender and true," was the
enthusiastic answer.

"I hate fair men," pouted Amy, under her breath, as the major asked
some question about hotels.

"Take a new hero, then; nothing can be more romantic than that,"
whispered Helen, glancing at the pale, dark-haired figure wrapped in
the military cloak opposite.

"I will, and leave the baron to you;" said Amy, with a stifled laugh.

"Hush! Here are Baden and Karl," replied Helen, thankful for the
interruption.

All was bustle in a moment, and taking leave of them with an air
of reluctance, the Pole walked away, leaving Amy looking after him
wistfully, quite unconscious that she stood in everybody's way, and
that her uncle was beckoning impatiently from the carriage door.

"Poor boy! I wish he had some one to take care of him." she sighed,
half aloud.

"Mademoiselle, the major waits;" and Karl came up, hat in hand, just
in time to hear her and glance after Casimer, with an odd expression.


V

LUDMILLA


"I wonder what that young man's name was. Did he mention it, Helen?"
said the major, pausing in his march up and down the room, as if the
question was suggested by the sight of the little baskets, which the
girls had kept.

"No, uncle; but you can easily ask Hoffman," replied Helen.

"By the way, Karl, who was the Polish gentleman who came on with
us?" asked the major a moment afterward, as the courier came in with
newspapers.

"Casimer Teblinski, sir."

"A baron?" asked Amy, who was decidedly a young lady of one idea just
then.

"No, mademoiselle, but of a noble family, as the 'ski' denotes, for
that is to Polish and Russian names what 'von' is to German and 'de'
to French."

"I was rather interested in him. Where did you pick him up, Hoffman?"
said the major.

"In Paris, where he was with fellow-exiles."

"He is what he seems, is he?--no impostor, or anything of that sort?
One is often deceived, you know."

"On my honor, sir, he is a gentleman, and as brave as he is
accomplished and excellent."

"Will he die?" asked Amy, pathetically.

"With care he would recover, I think; but there is no one to nurse
him, so the poor lad must take his chance and trust in heaven for
help."

"How sad! I wish we were going his way, so that we might do something
for him--at least give him the society of his friend."

Helen glanced at Hoffman, feeling that if he were not already engaged
by them, he would devote himself to the invalid without any thought of
payment.

"Perhaps we are. You want to see the Lake of Geneva, Chillon, and that
neighborhood. Why not go now, instead of later?"

"Will you, uncle? That's capital! We need say nothing, but go on and
help the poor boy, if we can."

Helen spoke like a matron of forty, and looked as full of maternal
kindness as if the Pole were not out of his teens.

The courier bowed, the major laughed behind his paper, and Amy gave a
sentimental sigh to the memory of the baron, in whom her interest was
failing.

They only caught a glimpse of the Pole that evening at the Kursaal,
but next morning they met, and he was invited to join their party for
a little expedition.

The major was in fine spirits, and Helen assumed her maternal air
toward both invalids, for the sound of that hollow cough always
brought a shadow over her face, recalling the brother she had lost.

Amy was particularly merry and charming, and kept the whole party
laughing at her comical efforts to learn Polish and teach English as
they drove up the mountainside to the old Schloss.

"I'm not equal to mounting all those steps for a view I've seen a
dozen times; but pray take care of the child, Nell, or she'll get lost
again, as at Heidelberg," said the major, when they had roamed about
the lower part of the place; for a cool seat in the courtyard and a
glass of beer were more tempting than turrets and prospects to the
stout gentleman.

"She shall not be lost; I am her body-guard. It is steep--permit that
I lead you, mademoiselle;" Casimer offered his hand to Amy, and they
began their winding way. As she took the hand, the girl blushed and
half smiled, remembering the vaults and the baron.

"I like this better," she said to herself, as they climbed step by
step, often pausing to rest in the embrasures of the loopholes,
where the sun glanced in, the balmy wind blew, and vines peeped from
without, making a pretty picture of the girl, as she sat with rosy
color on her usually pale cheeks, brown curls fluttering about her
forehead, laughing lips, and bright eyes full of pleasant changes.
Leaning opposite in the narrow stairway, Casimer had time to study the
little tableau in many lights, and in spite of the dark glasses,
to convey warm glances of admiration, of which, however, the young
coquette seemed utterly unconscious.

Helen came leisurely after, and Hoffman followed with a telescope,
wishing, as he went, that his countrywomen possessed such dainty feet
as those going on before him, for which masculine iniquity he will be
pardoned by all who have seen the foot of a German Fraulein.

It was worth the long ascent, that wide-spread landscape basking in
the August glow.

Sitting on a fallen block of stone, while Casimer held a sun-umbrella
over her, Amy had raptures at her ease; while Helen sketched and asked
questions of Hoffman, who stood beside her, watching her progress with
interest. Once when, after repeated efforts to catch a curious effect
of light and shade, she uttered an impatient little exclamation, Karl
made a gesture as if to take the pencil and show her, but seemed to
recollect himself and drew back with a hasty "Pardon, mademoiselle."
Helen glanced up and saw the expression of his face, which plainly
betrayed that for a moment the gentleman had forgotten he was a
courier. She was glad of it, for it was a daily trial to her to order
this man about; and following the womanly impulse, she smiled and
offered the pencil, saying simply,--

"I felt sure you understood it; please show me."

He did so, and a few masterly strokes gave the sketch what it needed.
As he bent near her to do this Helen stole a glance at the grave, dark
face, and suddenly a disturbed look dawned in the eyes fixed on the
glossy black locks pushed off the courier's forehead, for he had
removed his hat when she spoke to him. He seemed to feel that
something was amiss, shot a quick glance at her, returned the pencil
and rose erect, with an almost defiant air, yet something of shame in
his eye, as his lips moved as if to speak impetuously. But not a word
did he utter, for Helen touched her forehead significantly, and said
in a low tone,--

"I am an artist; let me recommend Vandyke brown, which is _not_
affected by heat."

Hoffman looked over his shoulder at the other pair, but Amy was
making an ivy wreath for her hat, and the Pole pulling sprays for the
absorbing work. Speaking rapidly, Karl said, with a peculiar blending
of merriment, humility, and anxiety in his tone,--

"Mademoiselle, you are quick to discover my disguise; will you also be
kind in concealing? I have enemies as well as friends, whom I desire
to escape: I would earn my bread unknown; Monsieur le Major keeps my
foolish secret; may I hope for equal goodness from yourself?"

"You may, I do not forget that I owe my life to you, nor that you are
a gentleman. Trust me, I never will betray you."

"Thanks, thanks! there will come a time when I may confess the truth
and be myself, but not yet," and his regretful tone was emphasized by
an impatient gesture, as if concealment was irksome.

"Nell, come down to lunch; uncle is signalling as if he'd gone mad.
No, monsieur, it is quite impossible; you cannot reach the harebells
without risking too much; come away and forget that I wanted them."

Amy led the way, and all went down more quietly than they came up,
especially Helen and Hoffman. An excellent lunch waited on one of the
tables in front of the old gateway, and having done justice to it, the
major made himself comfortable with a cigar, bidding the girls keep
near, for they must be off in half an hour. Hoffman went to see to the
horses, Casimer strolled away with him, and the young ladies went to
gather wild flowers at the foot of the tower.

"Not a harebell here; isn't it provoking, when they grow in tufts up
there, where one can't reach them. Mercy, what's that? Run, Nell, the
old wall is coming down!"

Both had been grubbing in a damp nook, where ferns and mosses grew
luxuriantly; the fall of a bit of stone and a rending sound above made
them fly back to the path and look up.

Amy covered her eyes, and Helen grew pale, for part way down the
crumbling tower, clinging like a bird to the thick ivy stems, hung
Casimer, coolly gathering harebells from the clefts of the wall.

"Hush; don't cry out or speak; it may startle him. Crazy boy! Let us
see what he will do," whispered Helen.

"He can't go back, the vines are so torn and weak; and how will he get
down the lower wall? for you see the ivy grows up from that ledge, and
there is nothing below. How could he do it? I was only joking when I
lamented that there were no knights now, ready to leap into a lion's
den for a lady's glove," returned Amy, half angry.

In breathless silence they watched the climber till his cap was full
of flowers, and taking it between his teeth, he rapidly swung down to
the wide ledge, from which there appeared to be no way of escape but a
reckless leap of many feet on to the turf below.

The girls stood in the shadow of an old gateway, unperceived, and
waited anxiously what should follow.

Lightly folding and fastening the cap together, he dropped it down,
and, leaning forward, tried to catch the top of a young birch rustling
close by the wall. Twice he missed it; the first time he frowned, but
the second he uttered an emphatic, "Deuce take it!"

Helen and Amy looked at each other with a mutual smile and
exclamation,--

"He knows some English, then!"

There was time for no more--a violent rustle, a boyish laugh, and down
swung the slender tree, with the young man clinging to the top.

As he landed safely, Helen cried, "Bravo!" and Amy rushed out,
exclaiming reproachfully, yet admiringly,--

"How could you do it and frighten us so? I shall never express a wish
before you again, for if I wanted the moon you'd rashly try to get it,
I know."

"_Certainement_, mademoiselle," was the smiling reply. Casimer
presented the flowers, as if the exploit was a mere trifle.

"Now I shall go and press them at once in uncle's guide-book. Come and
help me, else you will be in mischief again." And Amy led the way to
the major with her flowers and their giver.

Helen roamed into one of the ruined courts for a last look at a
fountain which pleased her eye. A sort of cloister ran round the
court, open on both sides, and standing in one of these arched nooks,
she saw Hoffman and a young girl talking animatedly. The girl was
pretty, well dressed, and seemed refusing something for which
the other pleaded eagerly. His arm was about her, and she leaned
affectionately upon him, with a white hand now and then caressing his
face, which was full of sparkle and vivacity now. They seemed about to
part as Helen looked, for the maiden standing on tiptoe, laughingly
offered her blooming cheek, and as Karl kissed it warmly, he said in
German, so audibly Helen heard every word,--

"Farewell, my Ludmilla. Keep silent and I shall soon be with you.
Embrace the little one, and do not let him forget me."

Both left the place as they spoke, each going a different way, and
Helen slowly returned to her party, saying to herself in a troubled
tone,--

"'Ludmilla' and 'the little one' are his wife and child, doubtless. I
wonder if uncle knows that."

When Hoffman next appeared she could not resist looking at him; but
the accustomed gravity was resumed, and nothing remained of the glow
and brightness he had worn when with Ludmilla in the cloister.


VI

CHATEAU DE LA TOUR


Helen looked serious and Amy indignant when their uncle joined them,
ready to set out by the afternoon train, all having dined and rested
after the morning's excursion.

"Well, little girls, what's the matter now?" he asked, paternally, for
the excellent man adored his nieces.

"Helen says it's not best to go on with the Pole, and is perfectly
nonsensical, uncle," began Amy, petulantly, and not very coherently.

"Better be silly now than sorry by and by. I only suggested that,
being interesting, and Amy romantic, she might find this young man too
charming, if we see too much of him," said Helen.

"Bless my soul, what an idea!" cried the major. "Why, Nell, he's an
invalid, a Catholic, and a foreigner, any one of which objections are
enough to settle that matter. Little Amy isn't so foolish as to be in
danger of losing her heart to a person so entirely out of the question
as this poor lad, is she?"

"Of course not. _You_ do me justice, uncle. Nell thinks she may pity
and pet any one she likes because she is five years older than I,
and entirely forgets that she is a great deal more attractive than a
feeble thing like me. I should as soon think of losing my heart to
Hoffman as to the Pole, even if he wasn't what he is. One may surely
be kind to a dying man, without being accused of coquetry;" and Amy
sobbed in the most heart-rending manner.

Helen comforted her by withdrawing all objections, and promising
to leave the matter in the major's hands. But she shook her head
privately when she saw the ill-disguised eagerness with which her
cousin glanced up and down the platform after they were in the train,
and she whispered to her uncle, unobserved,--

"Leave future meetings to chance, and don't ask the Pole in, if you
can help it."

"Nonsense, my dear. You are as particular as your aunt. The lad amuses
me, and you can't deny you like to nurse sick heroes," was all the
answer she got, as the major, with true masculine perversity, put his
head out of the window and hailed Casimer as he was passing with a
bow.

"Here, Teblinski, my good fellow, don't desert us. We've always a
spare seat for you, if you haven't pleasanter quarters."

With a flush of pleasure the young man came up, but hesitated to
accept the invitation till Helen seconded it with a smile of welcome.

Amy was in an injured mood, and, shrouded in a great blue veil,
pensively reclined in her corner as if indifferent to everything about
her. But soon the cloud passed, and she emerged in a radiant state of
good humor, which lasted unbroken until the journey ended.

For two days they went on together, a very happy party, for the major
called in Hoffman to see his friend and describe the places through
which they passed. An arrangement very agreeable to all, as Karl was a
favorite, and every one missed him when away.

At Lausanne they waited while he crossed the lake to secure rooms at
Vevay. On his return he reported that all the hotels and _pensions_
were full, but that at La Tour he had secured rooms for a few weeks in
a quaint old chateau on the banks of the lake.

"Count Severin is absent in Egypt, and the housekeeper has permission
to let the apartments to transient visitors. The suite of rooms I
speak of were engaged to a party who are detained by sickness--they
are cheap, pleasant, and comfortable. A _salon_ and four bed-rooms. I
engaged them all, thinking that Teblinski might like a room there till
he finds lodgings at Montreaux. We can enter at once, and I am sure
the ladies will approve of the picturesque place."

"Well done, Hoffman; off we go without delay, for I really long to
rest my old bones in something like a home, after this long trip,"
said the major, who always kept his little troop in light marching
order.

The sail across that loveliest of lakes prepared the new-comers to be
charmed with all they saw; and when, entering by the old stone gate,
they were led into a large saloon, quaintly furnished and opening into
a terrace-garden overhanging the water, with Chillon and the Alps in
sight, Amy declared nothing could be more perfect, and Helen's face
proved her satisfaction.

An English widow and two quiet old German professors on a vacation
were the only inmates besides themselves and the buxom Swiss
housekeeper and her maids.

It was late when our party arrived, and there was only time for a
hasty survey of their rooms and a stroll in the garden before dinner.

The great chamber, with its shadowy bed, dark mirrors, ghostly
wainscot-doors and narrow windows, had not been brightened for a long
time by such a charming little apparition as Amy when she shook out
her airy muslins, smoothed her curls, and assumed all manner of
distracting devices for the captivation of mankind. Even Helen, though
not much given to personal vanity, found herself putting flowers in
her hair, and studying the effect of bracelets on her handsome arms,
as if there was some especial need of looking her best on this
occasion.

Both were certainly great ornaments to the drawing-room that evening,
as the old professors agreed while they sat blinking at them, like a
pair of benign owls. Casimer surprised them by his skill in music,
for, though forbidden to sing on account of his weak lungs, he
played as if inspired. Amy hovered about him like a moth; the major
cultivated the acquaintance of the plump widow; and Helen stood at the
window, enjoying the lovely night and music, till something happened
which destroyed her pleasure in both.

The window was open, and, leaning from it, she was watching the lake,
when the sound of a heavy sigh caught her ear. There was no moon, but
through the starlight she saw a man's figure among the shrubs below,
sitting with bent head and hidden face in the forlorn attitude of one
shut out from the music, light, and gayety that reigned within.

"It is Karl," she thought, and was about to speak, when, as if
startled by some sound she did not hear, he rose and vanished in the
gloom of the garden.

"Poor man! he thought of his wife and child, perhaps, sitting here
alone while all the rest make merry, with no care for him. Uncle must
see to this;" and Helen fell into a reverie till Amy came to propose
retiring.

"I meant to have seen where all these doors led, but was so busy
dressing I had no time, so must leave it for my amusement to-morrow.
Uncle says it's a very Radcliffian place. How like an angel that man
did play!" chattered Amy, and lulled herself to sleep by humming the
last air Casimer had given them.

Helen could not sleep, for the lonely figure in the garden haunted
her, and she wearied herself with conjectures about Hoffman and his
mystery. Hour after hour rung from the cuckoo-clock in the hall, but
still she lay awake, watching the curious shadows in the room, and
exciting herself with recalling the tales of German goblins with which
the courier had amused them the day before.

"It is close and musty here, with all this old tapestry and stuff
about; I'll open the other window," she thought; and, noiselessly
slipping from Amy's side, she threw on wrapper and slippers, lighted
her candle and tried to unbolt the tall, diamond-paned lattice. It was
rusty and would not yield, and, giving it up, she glanced about to see
whence air could be admitted. There were four doors in the room, all
low and arched, with clumsy locks and heavy handles. One opened into
a closet, one into the passage; the third was locked, but the fourth
opened easily, and, lifting her light, she peeped into a small octagon
room, full of all manner of curiosities. What they were she had no
time to see, for her startled eyes were riveted on an object that
turned her faint and cold with terror.

A heavy table stood in the middle of the room, and seated at it,
with some kind of weapon before him, was a man who looked over his
shoulder, with a ghastly face half hidden by hair and beard, and
fierce black eyes as full of malignant menace as was the clinched hand
holding the pistol. One instant Helen looked, the next flung to the
door, bolted it and dropped into a chair, trembling in every limb. The
noise did not wake Amy, and a moment's thought showed Helen the wisdom
of keeping her in ignorance of this affair. She knew the major was
close by, and possessing much courage, she resolved to wait a little
before rousing the house.

Hardly had she collected herself, when steps were heard moving softly
in the octagon room. Her light had gone out as she closed the door,
and sitting close by in the dark, she heard the sound of some one
breathing as he listened at the key-hole. Then a careful hand tried
the door, so noiselessly that no sleeper would have been awakened; and
as if to guard against a second surprise, the unknown person drew two
bolts across the door and stole away.

"Safe for a time; but I'll not pass another night under this roof,
unless this is satisfactorily cleared up," thought Helen, now feeling
more angry than frightened.

The last hour that struck was three, and soon the summer dawn reddened
the sky. Dressing herself, Helen sat by Amy, a sleepless guard, till
she woke, smiling and rosy as a child. Saying nothing of her last
night's alarm, Helen went down to breakfast a little paler than usual,
but otherwise unchanged. The major never liked to be disturbed till
he had broken his fast, and the moment they rose from the table he
exclaimed,--

"Now, girls, come and see the mysteries of Udolpho."

"I'll say nothing, yet," thought Helen, feeling braver by daylight,
yet troubled by her secret, for Hoffman might be a traitor, and this
charming chateau a den of thieves. Such things had been, and she was
in a mood to believe anything.

The upper story was a perfect museum of antique relics, very
entertaining to examine. Having finished these, Hoffman, who acted as
guide, led them into a little gloomy room containing a straw pallet,
a stone table with a loaf and pitcher on it, and, kneeling before a
crucifix, where the light from a single slit in the wall fell on him,
was the figure of a monk. The waxen mask was life-like, the attitude
effective, and the cell excellently arranged. Amy cried out when she
first saw it, but a second glance reassured her, and she patted the
bald head approvingly, as Karl explained.--

"Count Severin is an antiquarian, and amuses himself with things of
this sort. In old times there really was a hermit here, and this is
his effigy. Come down these narrow stairs, if you please, and see the
rest of the mummery."

Down they went, and the instant Helen looked about her, she burst into
a hysterical laugh, for there sat her ruffian, exactly as she saw him,
glaring over his shoulder with threatening eyes, and one hand on the
pistol. They all looked at her, for she was pale, and her merriment
unnatural; so, feeling she had excited curiosity, she gratified it by
narrating her night's adventure. Hoffman looked much concerned.

"Pardon, mademoiselle, the door should have been bolted on this
side. It usually is, but that room being unused, it was forgotten. I
remembered it, and having risen early, crept up to make sure that you
did not come upon this ugly thing unexpectedly. But I was too late, it
seems; you have suffered, to my sorrow."

"Dear Nell, and that was why I found you so pale and cold and quiet,
sitting by me when I woke, guarding me faithfully as you promised you
would. How brave and kind you were!"

"Villain! I should much like to fire your own pistols at you for this
prank of yours."

And Casimer laughingly filliped the image on its absurdly aquiline
nose.

"What in the name of common sense is this goblin here for?" demanded
the major, testily.

"There is a legend that once the owner of the chateau amused himself
by decoying travellers here, putting them to sleep in that room, and
by various devices alluring them thither. Here, one step beyond the
threshold of the door, was a trap, down which the unfortunates were
precipitated to the dungeon at the bottom of the tower, there to die
and be cast into the lake through a water-gate, still to be seen.
Severin keeps this flattering likeness of the rascal, as he does
the monk above, to amuse visitors by daylight, not at night,
mademoiselle."

And Hoffman looked wrathfully at the image, as if he would much enjoy
sending it down the trap.

"How ridiculous! I shall not go about this place alone, for fear of
lighting upon some horror of this sort. I've had enough; come away
into the garden; it's full of roses, and we may have as many as we
like."

As she spoke Amy involuntarily put out her hand for Casimer to lead
her down the steep stone steps, and he pressed the little hand with a
tender look which caused it to be hastily withdrawn.

"Here are your roses. Pretty flower; I know its meaning in English,
for it is the same with us. To give a bud to a lady is to confess
the beginning of love, a half open one tells of its growth, and a
full-blown one is to declare one's passion. Do you have that custom in
your land, mademoiselle?"

He had gathered the three as he spoke, and held the bud separately
while looking at his companion wistfully.

"No, we are not poetical, like your people, but it is a pretty fancy,"
and Amy settled her bouquet with an absorbed expression, though
inwardly wondering what he would do with his flowers.

He stood silent a moment, with a sudden flush sweeping across his
face, then flung all three into the lake with a gesture that made the
girl start, and muttered between his teeth:

"No, no; for me it is too late."

She affected not to hear, but making up a second bouquet, she gave
it to him, with no touch of coquetry in compassionate eyes or gentle
voice.

"Make your room bright with these. When one is ill nothing is so
cheering as the sight of flowers."

Meantime the others had descended and gone their separate ways.

As Karl crossed the courtyard a little child ran to meet him with
outstretched arms and a shout of satisfaction. He caught it up and
carried it away on his shoulder, like one used to caress and be
caressed by children.

Helen, waiting at the door of the tower while the major dusted his
coat, saw this, and said, suddenly, directing his attention to man and
child,--

"He seems fond of little people. I wonder if he has any of his own."

"Hoffman? No, my dear; he's not married; I asked him that when I
engaged him."

"And he said he was not?"

"Yes; he's not more than five or six-and-twenty, and fond of a
wandering life, so what should he want of a wife and a flock of
bantlings?"

"He seems sad and sober sometimes, and I fancied he might have some
domestic trouble to harass him. Don't you think there is something
peculiar about him?" asked Helen, remembering Hoffman's hint that her
uncle knew his wish to travel incognito, and wondering if he would
throw any light upon the matter. But the major's face was impenetrable
and his answer unsatisfactory.

"Well, I don't know. Every one has some worry or other, and as for
being peculiar, all foreigners seem more or less so to us, they are so
unreserved and demonstrative. I like Hoffman more and more every day,
and shall be sorry when I part with him."

"Ludmilla is his sister, then, or he didn't tell uncle the truth. It
is no concern of mine; but I wish I knew," thought Helen anxiously,
and then wondered why she should care.

A feeling of distrust had taken possession of her and she determined
to be on the watch, for the unsuspicious major would be easily duped,
and Helen trusted more to her own quick and keen eye than to his
experience. She tried to show nothing of the change in her manner: but
Hoffman perceived it, and bore it with a proud patience which often
touched her heart, but never altered her purpose.


VII

AT FAULT


Four weeks went by so rapidly that every one refused to believe it
when the major stated the fact at the breakfast-table, for all had
enjoyed themselves so heartily that they had been unconscious of the
lapse of time.

"You are not going away, uncle?" cried Amy, with a panic-stricken
look.

"Next week, my dear; we must be off, for we've much to do yet, and I
promised mamma to bring you back by the end of October."

"Never mind Paris and the rest of it; this is pleasanter. I'd rather
stay here--"

There Amy checked herself and tried to hide her face behind her
coffee-cup, for Casimer looked up in a way that made her heart flutter
and her cheeks burn.

"Sorry for it, Amy; but go we must, so enjoy your last week with all
your might, and come again next year."

"It will never be again what it is now," sighed Amy; and Casimer
echoed the words "next year," as if sadly wondering if the present
year would not be his last.

Helen rose silently and went into the garden, for of late she had
fallen into the way of reading and working in the little pavilion
which stood in an angle of the wall, overlooking lake and mountains.

A seat at the opposite end of the walk was Amy's haunt, for she liked
the sun, and within a week or two something like constraint had
existed between the cousins. Each seemed happier apart, and each was
intent on her own affairs. Helen watched over Amy's health, but no
longer offered advice or asked confidence. She often looked anxious,
and once or twice urged the major to go, as if conscious of some
danger.

But the worthy man seemed to have been bewitched as well as the young
folks, and was quite happy sitting by the plump, placid widow, or
leisurely walking with her to the chapel on the hillside.

All seemed waiting for something to break up the party, and no one had
the courage to do it. The major's decision took every one by surprise,
and Amy and Casimer looked as if they had fallen from the clouds.

The persistency with which the English lessons had gone on was
amazing, for Amy usually tired of everything in a day or two. Now,
however, she was a devoted teacher, and her pupil did her great credit
by the rapidity with which he caught the language. It looked like
pleasant play, sitting among the roses day after day, Amy affecting to
embroider while she taught, Casimer marching to and fro on the wide,
low wall, below which lay the lake, while he learned his lesson; then
standing before her to recite, or lounging on the turf in frequent
fits of idleness, both talking and laughing a great deal, and
generally forgetting everything but the pleasure of being together.
They wrote little notes as exercises--Amy in French, Casimer in
English, and each corrected the other's.

All very well for a time; but as the notes increased the corrections
decreased, and at last nothing was said of ungrammatical French or
comical English and the little notes were exchanged in silence.

As Amy took her place that day she looked forlorn, and when her pupil
came her only welcome was a reproachful--

"You are very late, sir."

"It is fifteen of minutes yet to ten clocks," was Casimer's reply, in
his best English.

"Ten o'clock, and leave out 'of' before minutes. How many times must I
tell you that?" said Amy, severely, to cover her first mistake.

"Ah, not many times; soon all goes to finish, and I have none person
to make this charming English go in my so stupide head."

"What will you do then?"

"I _jeter_ myself into the lake."

"Don't be foolish; I'm dull to-day, and want to be cheered up; suicide
isn't a pleasant subject."

"Good! See here, then--a little _plaisanterie_--what you call joke.
Can you will to see it?" and he laid a little pink cocked-hat note on
her lap, looking like a mischievous boy as he did so.

"'Mon Casimer Teblinski;' I see no joke;" and Amy was about to tear it
up, when he caught it from destruction, and holding it out of reach,
said, laughing wickedly,--

"The 'mon' is one abbreviation of 'monsieur,' but you put no
little--how do you say?--period at the end of him; it goes now in
English--_My_ Casimer Teblinski,' and that is of the most charming
address."

Amy colored, but had her return shot ready.

"Don't exult; that was only an oversight, not a deliberate deception
like that you put upon me. It was very wrong and rude, and I shall not
forgive it."

"_Mon Dieu_! where have I gone in sinning! I am a _polisson_, as I say
each day, but not a villain, I swear to you. Say to me that which I
have made of wrong, and I will do penance."

"You told me '_Ma drogha_' was the Polish for 'My pupil,' and let me
call you so a long time; I am wiser now," replied Amy, with great
dignity.

"Who has said stupidities to you, that you doubt me?" and Casimer
assumed an injured look, though his eyes danced with merriment.

"I heard Hoffman singing a Polish song to little Roserl, the burden of
which was, '_Ma drogha, Ma drogha_,' and when I asked him to translate
it, those two words meant, 'My darling.' How dare you, ungrateful
creature that you are!"

As Amy spoke, half-confusedly, half-angrily, Casimer went down upon
his knees, with folded hands and penitent face, exclaiming, in good
English,--

"Be merciful to me a sinner. I was tempted, and I could not resist."

"Get up this instant, and stop laughing. Say your lesson, for this
will be your last," was the stern reply, though Amy's face dimpled all
over with suppressed merriment.

He rose meekly, but made such sad work with the verb "To love," that
his teacher was glad to put an end to it, by proposing to read her
French to him. It was "Thaddeus of Warsaw," a musty little translation
which she had found in the house, and begun for her own amusement.
Casimer read a little, seemed interested, and suggested that they read
it together, so that he might correct her accent. Amy agreed, and
they were in the heart of the sentimental romance, finding it more
interesting than most modern readers, for the girl had an improved
Thaddeus before her, and the Pole a fairer, kinder Mary Beaufort.

Dangerous times for both, but therein lay the charm; for, though Amy
said to herself each night, "Sick, Catholic, and a foreigner,--it can
never be," yet each morning she felt, with increasing force, how blank
her day would be without him. And Casimer, honorably restraining every
word of love, yet looked volumes, and in spite of the glasses, the
girl felt the eloquence of the fine eyes they could not entirely
conceal.

To-day, as she read, he listened with his head leaning on his hand,
and though she never had read worse, he made no correction, but sat so
motionless, she fancied at last that he had actually fallen asleep.
Thinking to rouse him, she said, in French,--

"Poor Thaddeus! don't you pity him?--alone, poor, sick, and afraid to
own his love."

"No, I hate him, the absurd imbecile, with his fine boots and plumes,
and tragedy airs. He was not to be pitied, for he recovered health, he
found a fortune, he won his Marie. His sufferings were nothing; there
was no fatal blight on him, and he had time and power to conquer his
misfortunes, while I--"

Casimer spoke with sudden passion, and pausing abruptly, turned his
face away, as if to hide some emotion he was too proud to show.

Amy's heart ached, and her eyes filled, but her voice was sweet and
steady, as she said, putting by the book, like one weary of it,--

"Are you suffering to-day? Can we do anything for you? Please let us,
if we may."

"You give me all I can receive; no one can help my pain yet; but a
time will come when something may be done for me; then I will speak."
And, to her great surprise, he rose and left her, without another
word.

She saw him no more till evening; then he looked excited, played
stormily, and would sing in defiance of danger. The trouble in Amy's
face seemed reflected in Helen's, though not a word had passed between
them. She kept her eye on Casimer, with an intentness that worried
Amy, and even when he was at the instrument Helen stood near him, as
if fascinated, watching the slender hands chase one another up and
down the keys with untiring strength and skill.

Suddenly she left the room and did not return. Amy was so nervous by
that time, she could restrain herself no longer, and slipping out,
found her cousin in their chamber, poring over a glove.

"Oh, Nell, what is it? You are so odd to-night I can't understand you.
The music excites me, and I'm miserable, and I want to know what has
happened," she said, tearfully.

"I've found him!" whispered Helen, eagerly, holding up the glove with
a gesture of triumph.

"Who?" asked Amy, blinded by her tears.

"The baron."

"Where?--when?" cried the girl, amazed.

"Here, and now."

"Don't take my breath away; tell me quick, or I shall get hysterical."

"Casimer is Sigismund Palsdorf, and no more a Pole than I am," was
Helen's answer.

Amy dropped in a heap on the floor, not fainting, but so amazed she
had neither strength nor breath left. Sitting by her, Helen rapidly
went on,--

"I had a feeling as if something was wrong, and began to watch. The
feeling grew, but I discovered nothing till to-day. It will make you
laugh, it was so unromantic. As I looked over uncle's things when the
laundress brought them this afternoon, I found a collar that was not
his. It was marked 'S.P.,' and I at once felt a great desire to know
who owned it. The woman was waiting for her money, and I asked her.
'Monsieur Pologne,' she said, for his name is too much for her. She
took it into his room, and that was the end of it."

"But it may be another name; the initials only a coincidence,"
faltered Amy, looking frightened.

"No, dear, it isn't; there is more to come. Little Roserl came crying
through the hall an hour ago, and I asked what the trouble was. She
showed me a prettily-bound prayer-book which she had taken from the
Pole's room to play with, and had been ordered by her mother to carry
back. I looked into it; no name, but the same coat-of-arms as the
glove and the handkerchief. To-night as he played I examined his
hands; they are peculiar, and some of the peculiarities have left
traces on the glove. I am sure it is he, for on looking back many
things confirm the idea. He says he is a _polisson_, a rogue, fond
of jokes, and clever at playing them. The Germans are famous for
masquerading and practical jokes; this is one, I am sure, and uncle
will be terribly angry if he discovers it."

"But why all this concealment?" cried Amy. "Why play jokes on us? You
look so worried I know you have not told me all you know or fear."

"I confess I do fear that these men are political plotters as well as
exiles. There are many such, and they make tools of rich and ignorant
foreigners to further their ends. Uncle is rich, generous, and
unsuspicious; and I fear that while apparently serving and enjoying us
they are using him."

"Heavens, it may be! and that would account for the change we see in
him. I thought he was in love with the widow, but that may be only a
cloak to hide darker designs. Karl brought us here, and I dare say it
is a den of conspirators!" cried Amy, feeling as if she were getting
more of an adventure than she had bargained for.

"Don't be alarmed! I am on the watch, and mean to demand an
explanation from uncle, or take you away on my own responsibility, if
I can."

Here a maid tapped to say that tea was served.

"We must go down, or some one will suspect trouble. Plead headache to
excuse your paleness, and I'll keep people away. We will manage the
affair and be off as soon as possible," said Helen, as Amy followed
her, too bewildered to answer.

Casimer was not in the room, the major and Mrs. Cumberland were
sipping tea side by side, and the professors roaming vaguely about. To
leave Amy in peace, Helen engaged them both in a lively chat, and her
cousin sat by the window trying to collect her thoughts. Some one was
pacing up and down the garden, hatless, in the dew.

Amy forgot everything but the danger of such exposure to her reckless
friend. His cloak and hat lay on a chair; she caught them up and
glided unperceived from the long window.

"You are so imprudent I fear for you, and bring your things," said a
timid voice, as the little white figure approached the tall black one,
striding down the path tempestuously.

"You to think of me, forgetful of yourself! Little angel of kindness,
why do you take such care of me?" cried Casimer, eagerly taking not
only the cloak, but the hands that held it.

"I pitied you because you were ill and lonely. You do not deserve
my pity, but I forgive that, and would not see you suffer," was the
reproachful answer, as Amy turned away.

But he held her fast, saying earnestly,--

"What have I done? You are angry. Tell me my fault and I will amend."

"You have deceived me."

"How?"

"Will you own the truth?" and in her eagerness to set her fears at
rest, Amy forgot Helen.

"I will."

She could not see his face, but his voice was steady and his manner
earnest.

"Tell me, then, is not your true name Sigismund Palsdorf?"

He started, but answered instantly,--

"It is not."

"You are not the baron?" cried Amy.

"No; I will swear it if you wish."

"Who, then, are you?"

"Shall I confess?"

"Yes, I entreat you."

"Remember, you command me to speak."

"I do. Who are you?"

"Your lover."

The words were breathed into her ear as softly as ardently, but they
startled her so much she could find no reply, and, throwing himself
down before her, Casimer poured out his passion with an impetuosity
that held her breathless.

"Yes, I love you, and I tell it, vain and dishonorable as it is in one
like me. I try to hide it. I say 'it cannot be.' I plan to go away.
But you keep me; you are angel-good to me; you take my heart, you care
for me, teach me, pity me, and I can only love and die. I know it is
folly; I ask nothing; I pray to God to bless you always, and I say,
Go, go, before it is too late for you, as now for me!"

"Yes, I must go--it is all wrong. Forgive me. I have been very
selfish. Oh, forget me and be happy," faltered Amy, feeling that her
only safety was in flight.

"Go! go!" he cried, in a heart-broken tone, yet still kissed and clung
to her hands till she tore them away and fled into the house.

Helen missed her soon after she went, but could not follow for several
minutes; then went to their chamber and there found Amy drowned in
tears, and terribly agitated.

Soon the story was told with sobs and moans, and despairing
lamentations fit to touch a heart of stone.

"I do love him--oh, I do; but I didn't know it till he was so unhappy,
and now I've done this dreadful harm. He'll die, and I can't help him,
see him, or be anything to him. Oh, I've been a wicked, wicked girl,
and never can be happy any more."

Angry, perplexed, and conscience-stricken, for what now seemed blind
and unwise submission to the major, Helen devoted herself to calming
Amy, and when at last the poor, broken-hearted little soul fell asleep
in her arms, she pondered half the night upon the still unsolved
enigma of the Baron Sigismund.


VIII

MORE MYSTERY


"Uncle, can I speak to you a moment?" said Helen, very gravely, as
they left the breakfast-room next morning.

"Not now, my dear, I'm busy," was the hasty reply, as the major
shawled Mrs. Cumberland for an early promenade.

Helen knit her brows irefully, for this answer had been given her half
a dozen times lately when she asked for an interview. It was evident
he wished to avoid all lectures, remonstrances, and explanations; and
it was also evident that he was in love with the widow.

"Lovers are worse than lunatics to manage, so it is vain to try to get
any help from him," sighed Helen, adding, as her uncle was gallantly
leading his stout divinity away into the garden: "Amy has a bad
headache, and I shall stay to take care of her, so we can't join
your party to Chillon, sir. We have been there once, so you needn't
postpone it for us."

"Very well, my dear," and the major walked away, looking much
relieved.

As Helen was about to leave the _salon_ Casimer appeared. A single
glance at her face assured him that she knew all, and instantly
assuming a confiding, persuasive air that was irresistible, he said,
meekly,--

"Mademoiselle, I do not deserve a word from you, but it desolates me
to know that I have grieved the little angel who is too dear to me.
For her sake, pardon that I spoke my heart in spite of prudence, and
permit me to send her this."

Helen glanced from the flowers he held to his beseeching face, and her
own softened. He looked so penitent and anxious, she had not the heart
to reproach him.

"I will forgive you and carry your gift to Amy on one condition," she
said, gravely.

"Ah, you are kind! Name, then, the condition. I implore you, and I
will agree."

"Tell me, then, on your honor as a gentleman, are you not Baron
Palsdorf?"

"On my honor as a gentleman, I swear to you I am not."

"Are you, in truth, what you profess to be?"

"I am, in truth, Amy's lover, your devoted servant, and a most unhappy
man, with but a little while to live. Believe this and pity me,
dearest Mademoiselle Helène."

She did pity him, her eyes betrayed that, and her voice was very kind,
as she said,--

"Pardon my doubts. I trust you now, and wish with all my heart that
it was possible to make you happy. You know it is not, therefore I am
sure you will be wise and generous, and spare Amy further grief by
avoiding her for the little time we stay. Promise me this, Casimer."

"I may see her if I am dumb? Do not deny me this. I will not speak,
but I must look at my little and dear angel when she is near."

He pleaded so ardently with lips and hands, and eager eyes, that Helen
could not deny him, and when he had poured out his thanks she left
him, feeling very tender toward the unhappy young lover, whose passion
was so hopeless, yet so warm.

Amy was at breakfast in her room, sobbing and sipping, moaning and
munching, for, though her grief was great, her appetite was good, and
she was in no mood to see anything comical in cracking eggshells
while she bewailed her broken heart, or in eating honey in the act of
lamenting the bitterness of her fate.

Casimer would have become desperate had he seen her in the little blue
wrapper, with her bright hair loose on her shoulders, and her
pretty face wet with tears, as she dropped her spoon to seize his
flowers,--three dewy roses, one a bud, one half and the other fully
blown, making a fragrant record and avowal of the love which she must
renounce.

"Oh, my dear boy! how can I give him up, when he is so fond, and I am
all he has? Helen, uncle must let me write or go to mamma. She shall
decide; I can't; and no one else has a right to part us," sobbed Amy,
over her roses.

"Casimer will not marry, dear; he is too generous to ask such a
sacrifice," began Helen, but Amy cried indignantly,--

"It is no sacrifice; I'm rich. What do I care for his poverty?"

"His religion!" hinted Helen, anxiously.

"It need not part us; we can believe what we will. He is good; why
mind whether he is Catholic or Protestant?"

"But a Pole, Amy, so different in tastes, habits, character, and
beliefs. It is a great risk to marry a foreigner; races are so
unlike."

"I don't care if he is a Tartar, a Calmuck, or any of the other wild
tribes; I love him, he loves me, and no one need object if I don't."

"But, dear, the great and sad objection still remains--his health. He
just said he had but a little while to live."

Amy's angry eyes grew dim, but she answered, with soft earnestness,--

"So much the more need of me to make that little while happy. Think
how much he has suffered and done for others; surely I may do
something for him. Oh, Nell, can I let him die alone and in exile,
when I have both heart and home to give him?"

Helen could say no more; she kissed and comforted the faithful little
soul, feeling all the while such sympathy and tenderness that she
wondered at herself, for with this interest in the love of another
came a sad sense of loneliness, as if she was denied the sweet
experience that every woman longs to know.

Amy never could remain long under a cloud, and seeing Helen's tears,
began to cheer both her cousin and herself.

"Hoffman said he might live with care, don't you remember? and Hoffman
knows the case better than we. Let us ask him if Casimer is worse. You
do it; I can't without betraying myself."

"I will," and Helen felt grateful for any pretext to address a
friendly word to Karl, who had looked sad of late, and had been less
with them since the major became absorbed in Mrs. Cumberland.

Leaving Amy to compose herself, Helen went away to find Hoffman. It
was never difficult, for he seemed to divine her wishes and appear
uncalled the moment he was wanted. Hardly had she reached her favorite
nook in the garden when he approached with letters, and asked with
respectful anxiety, as she glanced at and threw them by with an
impatient sigh,--

"Has mademoiselle any orders? Will the ladies drive, sail, or make a
little expedition? It is fine, and mademoiselle looks as if the air
would refresh her. Pardon that I make the suggestion."

"No, Hoffman, I don't like the air of this place, and intend to leave
as soon as possible." And Helen knit her delicate dark brows with
an expression of great determination. "Switzerland is the refuge of
political exiles, and I hate plots and disguises; I feel oppressed by
some mystery, and mean to solve or break away from it at once."

She stopped abruptly, longing to ask his help, yet withheld by a
sudden sense of shyness in approaching the subject, though she had
decided to speak to Karl of the Pole.

"Can I serve you, mademoiselle? If so, pray command me," he said,
eagerly, coming a step nearer.

"You can, and I intend to ask your advice, for there can be nothing
amiss in doing so, since you are a friend of Casimer's."

"I am both friend and confidant, mademoiselle," he answered, as
if anxious to let her understand that he knew all, without the
embarrassment of words. She looked up quickly, relieved, yet troubled.

"He has told you, then?"

"Everything, mademoiselle. Pardon me if this afflicts you; I am his
only friend here, and the poor lad sorely needed comfort."

"He did. I am not annoyed; I am glad, for I know you will sustain him.
Now I may speak freely, and be equally frank. Please tell me if he is
indeed fatally ill?"

"It was thought so some months ago; now I hope. Happiness cures many
ills, and since he has loved, he has improved. I always thought care
would save him; he is worth it."

Hoffman paused, as if fearful of venturing too far; but Helen seemed
to confide freely in him, and said, softly,--

"Ah, if it were only wise to let him be happy. It is so bitter to deny
love."

"God knows it is!"

The exclamation broke from Hoffman as if an irrepressible impulse
wrung it from him.

Helen started, and for a moment neither spoke. She collected herself
soonest, and without turning, said, quietly,--

"I have been troubled by a strong impression that Casimer is not what
he seems. Till he denied it on his honor I believed him to be Baron
Palsdorf. Did he speak the truth when he said he was not?"

"Yes, mademoiselle."

"Then, Casimer Teblinski is his real name?"

No answer.

She turned sharply, and added,--

"For my cousin's sake, I must know the truth. Several curious
coincidences make me strongly suspect that he is passing under an
assumed name."

Not a word said Hoffman, but looked on the ground, as motionless and
expressionless as a statue.

Helen lost patience, and in order to show how much she had discovered,
rapidly told the story of the gloves, ring, handkerchief, prayer-book
and collar, omitting all hint of the girlish romance they had woven
about these things.

As she ended, Hoffman looked up with a curious expression, in which
confusion, amusement, admiration and annoyance seemed to contend.

"Mademoiselle," he said, gravely, "I am about to prove to you that
I feel honored by the confidence you place in me. I cannot break my
word, but I will confess to you that Casimer does _not_ bear his own
name."

"I knew it!" said Helen, with a flash of triumph in her eyes. "He _is_
the baron, and no Pole. You Germans love masquerades and jokes. This
is one, but I must spoil it before it is played out."

"Pardon; mademoiselle is keen, but in this she is mistaken. Casimer is
_not_ the baron; he did fight for Poland, and his name is known and
honored there. Of this I solemnly assure you."

She stood up and looked him straight in the face. He met her eye to
eye, and never wavered till her own fell.

She mused a few minutes, entirely forgetful of herself in her
eagerness to solve the mystery.

Hoffman stood so near that her dress touched him, and the wind blew
her scarf against his hand; and as she thought he watched her while
his eyes kindled, his color rose, and once he opened his lips to
speak, but she moved at the instant, and exclaimed,--

"I have it!"

"Now for it," he muttered, as if preparing for some new surprise or
attack.

"When uncle used to talk about the Polish revolution, there was, I
remember a gallant young Pole who did something brave. The name
just flashed on me, and it clears up my doubts. Stanislas
Prakora--'S.P.'--and Casimer is the man."

Helen spoke with an eager, bright face, as if sure of the truth now;
but, to her surprise, Hoffman laughed, a short, irrepressible laugh,
full of hearty but brief merriment. He sobered in a breath, and with
an entire change of countenance said, in an embarrassed tone,--

"Pardon my rudeness; mademoiselle's acuteness threw me off my guard.
I can say nothing till released from my promise; but mademoiselle may
rest assured that Casimer Teblinski is as good and brave a man as
Stanislas Prakora."

Helen's eyes sparkled, for in this reluctant reply she read
confirmation of her suspicion, and thought that Amy would rejoice to
learn that her lover was a hero.

"You _are_ exiles, but still hope and plot, and never relinquish your
hearts' desire?"

"Never, mademoiselle!"

"You are in danger?"

"In daily peril of losing all we most love and long for," answered
Karl, with such passion that Helen found patriotism a lovely and
inspiring thing.

"You have enemies?" she asked, unable to control her interest, and
feeling the charm of these confidences.

"Alas! yes," was the mournful reply, as Karl dropped his eyes to hide
the curious expression of mirth which he could not banish from them.

"Can you not conquer them, or escape the danger they place you in?"

"We hope to conquer, we cannot escape."

"This accounts for your disguise and Casimer's false name?"

"Yes. We beg that mademoiselle will pardon us the anxiety and
perplexity we have caused her, and hope that a time will soon arrive
when we may be ourselves. I fear the romantic interest with which
the ladies have honored us will be much lessened, but we shall still
remain their most humble and devoted servants."

Something in his tone nettled Helen, and she said sharply,--

"All this may be amusing to you, but it spoils my confidence in others
to know they wear masks. Is your name also false?"

"I am Karl Hoffman, as surely as the sun shines, mademoiselle. Do not
wound me by a doubt," he said, eagerly.

"And nothing more?"

She smiled as she spoke, and glanced at his darkened skin with a shake
of the head.

"I dare not answer that."

"No matter; I hate titles, and value people for their own worth, not
for their rank."

Helen spoke impulsively, and, as if carried away by her words and
manner, Hoffman caught her hand and pressed his lips to it ardently,
dropped it, and was gone, as if fearing to trust himself a moment
longer.

Helen stood where he left her, thinking, with a shy glance from her
hand to the spot where he had stood,--

"It _is_ pleasant to have one's hand kissed, as Amy said. Poor Karl,
his fate is almost as hard as Casimer's."

Some subtile power seemed to make the four young people shun one
another carefully, though all longed to be together. The major
appeared to share the secret disquiet that made the rest roam
listlessly about, till little Roserl came to invite them to a _fête_
in honor of the vintage. All were glad to go, hoping in the novelty
and excitement to recover their composure.

The vineyard sloped up from the chateau, and on the hillside was a
small plateau of level sward, shadowed by a venerable oak now hung
with garlands, while underneath danced the chateau servants with their
families, to the music of a pipe played by little Friedel. As the
gentlefolk approached, the revel stopped, but the major, who was in an
antic mood and disposed to be gracious, bade Friedel play on, and as
Mrs. Cumberland refused his hand with a glance at her weeds, the major
turned to the Count's buxom housekeeper, and besought her to waltz
with him. She assented, and away they went as nimbly as the best. Amy
laughed, but stopped to blush, as Casimer came up with an imploring
glance, and whispered,--

"Is it possible that I may enjoy one divine waltz with you before I
go?"

Amy gave him her hand with a glad assent, and Helen was left alone.
Every one was dancing but herself and Hoffman, who stood near by,
apparently unconscious of the fact. He glanced covertly at her, and
saw that she was beating time with foot and hand, that her eyes shone,
her lips smiled. He seemed to take courage at this, for, walking
straight up to her, he said, as coolly as if a crown-prince,--

"Mademoiselle, may I have the honor?"

A flash of surprise passed over her face, but there was no anger,
pride, or hesitation in her manner, as she leaned toward him with a
quiet "Thanks, monsieur."

A look of triumph was in his eyes as he swept her away to dance, as
she had never danced before, for a German waltz is full of life and
spirit, wonderfully captivating to English girls, and German gentlemen
make it a memorable experience when they please. As they circled round
the rustic ball-room, Hoffman never took his eyes off Helen's, and,
as if fascinated, she looked up at him, half conscious that he was
reading her heart as she read his. He said not a word, but his
face grew very tender, very beautiful in her sight, as she forgot
everything except that he had saved her life and she loved him. When
they paused, she was breathless and pale; he also; and seating her he
went away to bring her a glass of wine. As her dizzy eyes grew clear,
she saw a little case at her feet, and taking it up, opened it. A worn
paper, containing some faded forget-me-nots and these words, fell
out,--

"Gathered where Helen sat on the night of August 10th."

There was just time to restore its contents to the case, when Hoffman
returned, saw it, and looked intensely annoyed as he asked, quickly,--

"Did you read the name on it?"

"I saw only the flowers;" and Helen colored beautifully as she spoke.

"And read _them_?" he asked, with a look she could not meet.

She was spared an answer, for just then a lad came up, saying, as he
offered a note,--

"Monsieur Hoffman, madame, at the hotel, sends you this, and begs you
to come at once."

As he impatiently opened it, the wind blew the paper into Helen's lap.
She restored it, and in the act, her quick eye caught the signature,
"Thine ever, Ludmilla."

A slight shadow passed over her face, leaving it very cold and quiet.
Hoffman saw the change, and smiled, as if well pleased, but assuming
suddenly his usual manner, said deferentially,--

"Will mademoiselle permit me to visit my friend for an hour?--she is
expecting me."

"Go, then, we do not need you," was the brief reply, in a careless
tone, as if his absence was a thing of no interest to any one.

"Thanks; I shall not be long away;" and giving her a glance that made
her turn scarlet with anger at its undisguised admiration, he walked
away, humming gayly to himself Goethe's lines,--

  "Maiden's heart and city's wall
  Were made to yield, were made to fall;
  When we've held them each their day,
  Soldier-like we march away."


IX

"S.P." AND THE BARON


Dinner was over, and the _salon_ deserted by all but the two young
ladies, who sat apart, apparently absorbed in novels, while each
was privately longing for somebody to come, and with the charming
inconsistency of the fair sex, planning to fly if certain somebodies
_did_ appear.

Steps approached; both buried themselves in their books; both held
their breath and felt their hearts flutter as they never had done
before at the step of mortal man. The door opened; neither looked up,
yet each was conscious of mingled disappointment and relief when the
major said, in a grave tone, "Girls, I've something to tell you."

"We know what it is, sir," returned Helen, coolly.

"I beg your pardon, but you don't, my dear, as I will prove in five
minutes, if you will give me your attention."

The major looked as if braced up to some momentous undertaking; and
planting himself before the two young ladies, dashed bravely into the
subject.

"Girls, I've played a bold game, but I've won it, and will take the
consequences."

"They will fall heaviest on you, uncle," said Helen, thinking he was
about to declare his love for the widow.

The major laughed, shrugged his shoulders, and answered, stoutly,--

"I'll bear them; but you are quite wrong, my dear, in your surmises,
as you will soon see. Helen is my ward, and accountable to me alone.
Amy's mother gave her into my charge, and won't reproach me for
anything that has passed when I explain matters. As to the lads they
must take care of themselves."

Suddenly both girls colored, fluttered, and became intensely
interested. The major's eyes twinkled as he assumed a perfectly
impassive expression, and rapidly delivered himself of the following
thunderbolt,--

"Girls, you have been deceived, and the young men you love are
impostors."

"I thought so," muttered Helen, grimly.

"Oh, uncle, don't, don't say that!" cried Amy, despairingly.

"It's true, my dears; and the worst of it is, I knew the truth all the
time. Now, don't have hysterics, but listen and enjoy the joke as I
do. At Coblentz, when you sat in the balcony, two young men overheard
Amy sigh for adventures, and Helen advise making a romance out of the
gloves one of the lads had dropped. They had seen you by day; both
admired you, and being idle, gay young fellows, they resolved
to devote their vacation to gratifying your wishes and enjoying
themselves. We met at the Fortress; I knew one of them, and liked the
other immensely; so when they confided their scheme to me I agreed
to help them carry it out, as I had perfect confidence in both, and
thought a little adventure or two would do you good."

"Uncle, you were mad," said Helen; and Amy added, tragically,--

"You don't know what trouble has come of it."

"Perhaps I was; that remains to be proved. I do know everything, and
fail to see any trouble, so don't cry, little girl," briskly replied
the inexplicable major. "Well, we had a merry time planning our prank.
One of the lads insisted on playing courier, though I objected. He'd
done it before, liked the part, and would have his way. The other
couldn't decide, being younger and more in love; so we left him to
come into the comedy when he was ready. Karl did capitally, as you
will allow; and I am much attached to him, for in all respects he has
been true to his word. He began at Coblentz; the other, after doing
the mysterious at Heidelberg, appeared as an exile, and made quick
work with the prejudices of my well-beloved nieces--hey, Amy?"

"Go on; who are they?" cried both girls, breathlessly.

"Wait a bit; I'm not bound to expose the poor fellows to your scorn
and anger. No; if you are going to be high and haughty, to forget
their love, refuse to forgive their frolic, and rend their hearts with
reproaches, better let them remain unknown."

"No, no; we will forget and forgive, only speak!" was the command of
both.

"You promise to be lenient and mild, to let them confess their
motives, and to award a gentle penance for their sins?"

"Yes, we promise!"

"Then, come in, my lads, and plead for your lives."

As he spoke the major threw open the door, and two gentlemen entered
the room--one, slight and dark, with brilliant black eyes; the other
tall and large, with blond hair and beard. Angry, bewildered, and
shame-stricken as they were, feminine curiosity overpowered all other
feelings for the moment, and the girls sat looking at the culprits
with eager eyes, full of instant recognition; for though the disguise
was off, and neither had seen them in their true characters but once,
they felt no doubt, and involuntarily exclaimed,--

"Karl!"

"Casimer."

"No, young ladies; the courier and exile are defunct, and from their
ashes rise Baron Sigismund Palsdorf, my friend, and Sidney Power, my
nephew. I give you one hour to settle the matter; then I shall return
to bestow my blessing or to banish these scapegraces forever."

And, having fired his last shot, the major prudently retreated,
without waiting to see its effect.

It was tremendous, for it carried confusion into the fair enemy's
camp; and gave the besiegers a momentary advantage of which they were
not slow to avail themselves.

For a moment the four remained mute and motionless: then Amy, like all
timid things, took refuge in flight, and Sidney followed her into the
garden, glad to see the allies separated. Helen, with the courage of
her nature, tried to face and repulse the foe; but love was stronger
than pride, maiden shame overcame anger, and, finding it vain to meet
and bear down the steady, tender glance of the blue eyes fixed upon
her, she dropped her head into her hands and sat before him, like one
conquered but too proud to cry "Quarter." Her lover watched her till
she hid her face, then drew near, knelt down before her, and said,
with an undertone of deep feeling below the mirthful malice of his
words,--

"Mademoiselle, pardon me that I am a foolish baron, and dare to offer
you the title that you hate. I have served you faithfully for a month,
and, presumptuous as it is, I ask to be allowed to serve you all my
life. Helen, say you forgive the deceit for love's sake."

"No; you are false and forsworn. How can I believe that anything is
true?"

And Helen drew away the hand of which he had taken possession.

"Heart's dearest, you trusted me in spite of my disguise; trust
me still, and I will prove that I am neither false nor forsworn.
Catechise me, and see if I was not true in spite of all my seeming
deception."

"You said your name was Karl Hoffman," began Helen, glad to gain a
little time to calm herself before the momentous question came.

"It is; I have many, and my family choose to call me Sigismund," was
the laughing answer.

"I'll never call you so; you shall be Karl, the courier, all your life
to me," cried Helen, still unable to meet the ardent eyes before her.

"Good; I like that well; for it assures me that all my life I shall be
something to you, my heart. What next?"

"When I asked if you were the baron, you denied it."

"Pardon! I simply said my name was Hoffman. You did not ask me point
blank if I was the baron; had you done so, I think I should have
confessed all, for it was very hard to restrain myself this morning."

"No, not yet; I have more questions;" and Helen warned him away, as it
became evident that he no longer considered restraint necessary.

"Who is Ludmilla?" she said, sharply.

"My faith, that is superb!" exclaimed the baron, with a triumphant
smile at her betrayal of jealousy. "How if she is a former love?" he
asked, with a sly look at her changing face.

"It would cause me no surprise; I am prepared for anything."

"How if she is my dearest sister, for whom I sent, that she might
welcome you and bring the greetings of my parents to their new
daughter?"

"Is it, indeed, so?"

And Helen's eyes dimmed as the thought of parents, home and love
filled her heart with tenderest gratitude, for she had long been an
orphan.

"_Leibchen_, it is true; to-morrow you shall see how dear you already
are to them, for I write often and they wait eagerly to receive you."

Helen felt herself going very fast, and made an effort to harden her
heart, lest too easy victory should reward this audacious lover.

"I may not go; I also have friends, and in England we are not won in
this wild way. I will yet prove you false; it will console me for
being so duped if I can call you traitor. You said Casimer had fought
in Poland."

"Crudest of women, he did, but under his own name, Sidney Power."

"Then, he was not the brave Stanislas?--and there is no charming
Casimer?"

"Yes, there are both,--his and my friends, in Paris; true Poles, and
when we go there you shall see them."

"But his illness was a ruse?"

"No; he was wounded in the war and has been ill since. Not of a fatal
malady, I own; his cough misled you, and _he_ has no scruples in
fabling to any extent. I am not to bear the burden of his sins."

"Then, the romances he told us about your charity, your virtues,
and--your love of liberty were false?" said Helen, with a keen glance,
for these tales had done much to interest her in the unknown baron.

Sudden color rose to his forehead, and for the first time his eyes
fell before hers,--not in shame, but with a modest man's annoyance at
hearing himself praised.

"Sidney is enthusiastic in his friendship, and speaks too well for me.
The facts are true, but he doubtless glorified the simplest by his
way of telling it. Will you forgive my follies, and believe me when I
promise to play and duel no more?"

"Yes."

She yielded her hand now, and her eyes were full of happiness, yet she
added, wistfully,--

"And the betrothed, your cousin, Minna,--is she, in truth, not dear to
you?"

"Very dear, but less so than another; for I could not learn of her in
years what I learned in a day when I met you. Helen, this was begun in
jest,--it ends in solemn earnest, for I love my liberty, and I have
lost it, utterly and forever. Yet I am glad; look in my face and tell
me you believe it."

He spoke now as seriously as fervently, and with no shadow on her own,
Helen brushed back the blond hair and looked into her lover's face.
Truth, tenderness, power, and candor were written there in characters
that could not lie; and with her heart upon her lips, she answered, as
he drew her close,--

"I do believe, do love you, Sigismund!" Meanwhile another scene was
passing in the garden. Sidney, presuming upon his cousinship, took
possession of Amy, bidding her "strike but hear him." Of course she
listened with the usual accompaniment of tears and smiles, reproaches
and exclamations, varied by cruel exultations and coquettish commands
to go away and never dare approach her again.

"_Ma drogha_, listen and be appeased. Years ago you and I played
together as babies, and our fond mammas vowed we should one day mate.
When I was a youth of fourteen and you a mite of seven I went away to
India with my father, and at our parting promised to come back and
marry you. Being in a fret because you couldn't go also, you haughtily
declined the honor, and when I offered a farewell kiss, struck me with
this very little hand. Do you remember it?"

"Not I. Too young for such nonsense."

"I do, and I also remember that in my boyish way I resolved to keep my
word sooner or later, and I've done it."

"We shall see, sir," cried Amy, strongly tempted to repeat her part of
the childish scene as well as her cousin, but her hand was not free,
and he got the kiss without the blow.

"For eleven years we never met. You forgot me, and 'Cousin Sidney'
remained an empty name. I was in India till four years ago; since then
I've been flying about Germany and fighting in Poland, where I nearly
got my quietus."

"My dear boy, were you wounded?"

"Bless you, yes; and very proud of it I am. I'll show you my scars
some day; but never mind that now. A while ago I went to England,
seized with a sudden desire to find my wife."

"I admire your patience in waiting; so flattering to me, you know,"
was the sharp answer.

"It looks like neglect, I confess; but I'd heard reports of your
flirtations, and twice of your being engaged, so I kept away till my
work was done. Was it true?"

"I never flirt, Sidney, and I was only engaged a little bit once or
twice. I didn't like it, and never mean to do so any more."

"I shall see that you don't flirt; but you are very much engaged now,
so put on your ring and make no romances about any 'S.P.' but myself."

"I shall wait till you clear your character; I'm not going to care for
a deceitful impostor. What made you think of this prank?"

"You did."

"I? How?"

"When in England I saw your picture, though you were many a mile away,
and fell in love with it. Your mother told me much about you, and I
saw she would not frown upon my suit. I begged her not to tell you I
had come, but let me find you and make myself known when I liked.
You were in Switzerland, and I went after you. At Coblentz I met
Sigismund, and told him my case; he is full of romance, and when we
overheard you in the balcony we were glad of the hint. Sigismund was
with me when you came, and admired Helen immensely, so he was wild to
have a part in the frolic. I let him begin, and followed you unseen to
Heidelberg, meaning to personate an artist. Meeting you at the castle,
I made a good beginning with the vaults and the ring, and meant to
follow it up by acting the baron, you were so bent on finding him, but
Sigismund forbade it. Turning over a trunk of things left there the
year before, I came upon my old Polish uniform, and decided to be a
Thaddeus."

"How well you did it! Wasn't it hard to act all the time?" asked Amy,
wonderingly.

"Very hard with Helen, she is so keen, but not a bit so with you, for
you are such a confiding soul any one could cheat you. I've betrayed
myself a dozen times, and you never saw it. Ah, it was capital fun to
play the forlorn exile, study English, and flirt with my cousin."

"It was very base. I should think you'd be devoured with remorse.
Aren't you sorry?"

"For one thing. I cropped my head lest you should know me. I was proud
of my curls, but I sacrificed them all to you."

"Peacock! Did you think that one glimpse of your black eyes and fine
hair would make such an impression that I should recognize you again?"

"I did, and for that reason disfigured my head, put on a mustache, and
assumed hideous spectacles. Did you never suspect my disguise, Amy?"

"No. Helen used to say that she felt something was wrong, but I never
did till the other night."

"Didn't I do that well? I give you my word it was all done on the spur
of the minute. I meant to speak soon, but had not decided how, when
you came out so sweetly with that confounded old cloak, of which I'd
no more need than an African has of a blanket. Then a scene I'd read
in a novel came into my head, and I just repeated it _con amore_. Was
I very pathetic and tragical. Amy?"

"I thought so then. It strikes me as ridiculous now, and I can't help
feeling sorry that I wasted so much pity on a man who--"

"Loves you with all his heart and soul. Did you cry and grieve over
me, dear little tender thing? and do you think now that I am a
heartless fellow, bent only on amusing myself at the expense of
others? It's not so; and you shall see how true and good and steady I
can be when I have any one to love and care for me. I've been alone so
long it's new and beautiful to be petted, confided in, and looked up
to by an angel like you."

He was in earnest now; she felt it, and her anger melted away like dew
before the sun.

"Poor boy! You will go home with us now, and let us take care of you
in quiet England. You'll play no more pranks, but go soberly to work
and do something that shall make me proud to be your cousin, won't
you?"

"If you'll change 'cousin' to 'wife' I'll be and do whatever you
please. Amy, when I was a poor, dying, Catholic foreigner you loved me
and would have married me in spite of everything. Now that I'm your
well, rich, Protestant cousin, who adores you as that Pole never
could, you turn cold and cruel. Is it because the romance is gone, or
because your love was only a girl's fancy, after all?"

"You deceived me and I can't forget it; but I'll try," was the soft
answer to his reproaches.

"Are you disappointed that I'm not a baron?"

"A little bit."

"Shall I be a count? They gave me a title in Poland, a barren honor,
but all they had to offer, poor souls, in return for a little blood.
Will you be Countess Zytomar and get laughed at for your pains, or
plain Mrs. Power, with a good old English name?"

"Neither, thank you; it's only a girlish fancy, which will soon be
forgotten. Does the baron love Helen?" asked Amy, abruptly.

"Desperately, and she?"

"I think he will be happy; she is not one to make confidantes, but I
know by her tenderness with me, her sadness lately, and something in
her way of brightening when he comes, that she thinks much of him and
loves Karl Hoffman. How it will be with the baron I cannot say."

"No fear of him; he wins his way everywhere. I wish I were as
fortunate;" and the gay young gentleman heaved an artful sigh and
coughed the cough that always brought such pity to the girl's soft
eyes.

She glanced at him as he leaned pensively on the low wall, looking
down into the lake, with the level rays of sunshine on his comely face
and figure. Something softer than pity stole into her eye, as she
said, anxiously,--

"You are not really ill, Sidney?"

"I have been, and still need care, else I may have a relapse," was the
reply of this treacherous youth, whose constitution was as sound as a
bell.

Amy clasped her hands, as if in a transport of gratitude, exclaiming,
fervently,--

"What a relief it is to know that you are not doomed to--"

She paused with a shiver, as if the word were too hard to utter, and
Sidney turned to her with a beaming face, which changed to one of
mingled pain and anger, as she added, with a wicked glance,--

"Wear spectacles."

"Amy, you've got no heart!" he cried, in a tone that banished her last
doubt of his love and made her whisper tenderly, as she clung to his
arm,--

"No, dear; I've given it all to you."

Punctual to the minute, Major Erskine marched into the _salon_, with
Mrs. Cumberland on his arm, exclaiming, as he eyed the four young
people together again,--

"Now, ladies, is it to be 'Paradise Lost' or 'Regained' for the
prisoners at the bar?"

At this point the astonished gentleman found himself taken possession
of by four excited individuals, for the girls embraced and kissed him,
the young men wrung his hand and thanked him, and all seemed bent
on assuring him that they were intensely happy, grateful and
affectionate.

From this assault he emerged flushed and breathless, but beaming with
satisfaction, and saying paternally,--

"Bless you, my children, bless you. I hoped and worked for this, and
to prove how well I practise what I preach, let me present to you--my
wife."

As he drew forward the plump widow with a face full of smiles
and tears, a second rush was made, and congratulations, salutes,
exclamations and embraces were indulged in to every one's
satisfaction.

As the excitement subsided the major said, simply,--

"We were married yesterday at Montreaux. Let me hope that you will
prove as faithful as I have been, as happy as I am, as blest as I
shall be. I loved this lady in my youth, have waited many years, and
am rewarded at last, for love never comes too late."

The falter in his cheery voice, the dimness of his eyes, the smile on
his lips, and the gesture with which he returned the pressure of the
hand upon his arm, told the little romance of the good major's life
more eloquently than pages of fine writing, and touched the hearts of
those who loved him.

"I have been faithful for eleven years. Give me my reward soon, won't
you, dear?" whispered Sidney.

"Don't marry me to-morrow, and if mamma is willing I'll think about it
by and by," answered Amy.

"It is beautiful! let us go and do likewise," said Sigismund to his
betrothed.

But Helen, anxious to turn the thoughts of all from emotions too deep
for words, drew from her pocket a small pearl-colored object, which
she gave to Amy with mock solemnity, as she said, turning to lay her
hand again in her lover's,--

"Amy, our search is over. _You_ may keep the gloves; _I_ have the
baron."




MY RED CAP

"He who serves well need not fear to ask his wages."


I


It was under a blue cap that I first saw the honest face of Joe
Collins. In the third year of the late war a Maine regiment was
passing through Boston, on its way to Washington. The Common was all
alive with troops and the spectators who clustered round them to say
God-speed, as the brave fellows marched away to meet danger and death
for our sakes.

Every one was eager to do something; and, as the men stood at ease,
the people mingled freely with them, offering gifts, hearty grips of
the hand, and hopeful prophecies of victory in the end. Irresistibly
attracted, my boy Tom and I drew near, and soon, becoming excited by
the scene, ravaged the fruit-stands in our neighborhood for tokens of
our regard, mingling candy and congratulations, peanuts and prayers,
apples and applause, in one enthusiastic jumble.

While Tom was off on his third raid, my attention was attracted by
a man who stood a little apart, looking as if his thoughts were far
away. All the men were fine, stalwart fellows, as Maine men usually
are; but this one over-topped his comrades, standing straight and
tall as a Norway pine, with a face full of the mingled shrewdness,
sobriety, and self-possession of the typical New Englander. I liked
the look of him; and, seeing that he seemed solitary, even in a crowd,
I offered him my last apple with a word of interest. The keen blue
eyes met mine gratefully, and the apple began to vanish in vigorous
bites as we talked; for no one thought of ceremony at such a time.

"Where are you from?"

"Woolidge, ma'am."

"Are you glad to go?"

"Wal, there's two sides to that question. I calk'late to do my duty,
and do it hearty: but it _is_ rough on a feller leavin' his folks, for
good, maybe."

There was a sudden huskiness in the man's voice that was not
apple-skins, though he tried to make believe that it was. I knew a
word about home would comfort him, so I went on with my questions.

"It is very hard. Do you leave a family?"

"My old mother, a sick brother,--and Lucindy."

The last word was uttered in a tone of intense regret, and his brown
cheek reddened as he added hastily, to hide some embarrassment.--

"You see, Jim went last year, and got pretty well used up; so I felt
as if I'd ought to take my turn now. Mother was a regular old hero
about it and I dropped everything, and come off. Lucindy didn't think
it was my duty; and that made it awful hard, I tell you."

"Wives are less patriotic than mothers," I began; but he would not
hear Lucindy blamed, and said quickly,--

"She ain't my wife yet, but we calk'lated to be married in a month
or so; and it was wus for her than for me, women lot so on not being
disappointed. I _couldn't_ shirk, and here I be. When I git to work, I
shall be all right: the first wrench is the tryin' part."

Here he straightened his broad shoulders, and turned his face toward
the flags fluttering far in front, as if no backward look should
betray the longing of his heart for mother, home, and wife. I liked
that little glimpse of character; and when Tom returned with empty
hands, reporting that every stall was exhausted, I told him to find
out what the man would like best, then run across the street and get
it.

"I know without asking. Give us your purse, and I'll make him as happy
as a king," said the boy, laughing, as he looked up admiringly at
our tall friend, who looked down on him with an elder-brotherly air
pleasant to see. While Tom was gone, I found out Joe's name and
business, promised to write and tell his mother how finely the
regiment went off, and was just expressing a hope that we might meet
again, for I too was going to the war as nurse, when the order to
"Fall in!" came rolling down the ranks, and the talk was over. Fearing
Tom would miss our man in the confusion, I kept my eye on him till the
boy came rushing up with a packet of tobacco in one hand and a good
supply of cigars in the other. Not a romantic offering, certainly, but
a very acceptable one, as Joe's face proved, as we scrambled these
treasures into his pockets, all laughing at the flurry, while less
fortunate comrades helped us, with an eye to a share of these fragrant
luxuries by and by. There was just time for this, a hearty shake of
the big hand, and a grateful "Good-by, ma'am;" then the word was
given, and they were off. Bent on seeing the last of them, Tom and I
took a short cut, and came out on the wide street down which so many
troops marched that year; and, mounting some high steps, we watched
for our man, as we already called him.

As the inspiring music, the grand tramp, drew near, the old thrill
went through the crowd, the old cheer broke out. But it was a
different scene now than in the first enthusiastic, hopeful days.
Young men and ardent boys filled the ranks then, brave by instinct,
burning with loyal zeal, and blissfully unconscious of all that lay
before them. Now the blue coats were worn by mature men, some gray,
all grave and resolute: husbands and fathers, with the memory of wives
and children tugging at their heart-strings; homes left desolate
behind them, and before them the grim certainty of danger, hardship,
and perhaps the lifelong helplessness worse than death. Little of the
glamour of romance about the war now: they saw it as it was, a long,
hard task; and here were the men to do it well. Even the lookers-on
were different now. Once all was wild enthusiasm and glad uproar; now
men's lips were set, and women's smileless as they cheered; fewer
handkerchiefs whitened the air, for wet eyes needed them; and sudden
lulls, almost solemn in their stillness, followed the acclamations
of the crowd. All watched with quickened breath and brave souls that
living wave, blue below, and bright with a steely glitter above, as
it flowed down the street and away to distant battle-fields already
stained with precious blood.

"There he is! The outside man, and tallest of the lot. Give him a
cheer, auntie: he sees us, and remembers!" cried Tom, nearly tumbling
off his perch, as he waved his hat, and pointed out Joe Collins.

Yes, there he was, looking up, with a smile on his brave brown face,
my little nosegay in his button-hole, a suspicious bulge in the pocket
close by, and doubtless a comfortable quid in his mouth, to cheer the
weary march. How like an old friend he looked, though we had only met
fifteen minutes ago; how glad we were to be there to smile back at
him, and send him on his way feeling that, even in a strange city,
there was some one to say, "God bless you, Joe!" We watched the
tallest blue cap till it vanished, and then went home in a glow of
patriotism,--Tom to long for his turn to come, I to sew vigorously on
the gray gown the new nurse burned to wear as soon as possible, and
both of us to think and speak often of poor Joe Collins and his
Lucindy. All this happened long ago; but it is well to recall those
stirring times,--to keep fresh the memory of sacrifices made for us by
men like these; to see to it that the debt we owe them is honestly,
gladly paid; and, while we decorate the graves of those who died, to
remember also those who still live to deserve our grateful care.


II


I never expected to see Joe again; but, six months later, we did meet
in a Washington hospital one winter's night. A train of ambulances had
left their sad freight at our door, and we were hurrying to get the
poor fellows into much needed beds, after a week of hunger, cold, and
unavoidable neglect. All forms of pain were in my ward that night, and
all borne with the pathetic patience which was a daily marvel to those
who saw it.

Trying to bring order out of chaos, I was rushing up and down the
narrow aisle between the rows of rapidly filling beds, and, after
brushing several times against a pair of the largest and muddiest
boots I ever saw, I paused at last to inquire why they were impeding
the passageway. I found they belonged to a very tall man who seemed to
be already asleep or dead, so white and still and utterly worn out he
looked as he lay there, without a coat, a great patch on his forehead,
and the right arm rudely bundled up. Stooping to cover him, I saw that
he was unconscious, and, whipping out my brandy-bottle and salts, soon
brought him round, for it was only exhaustion.

"Can you eat?" I asked, as he said, "Thanky, ma'am," after a long
draught of water and a dizzy stare.

"Eat! I'm starvin'!" he answered, with such a ravenous glance at a
fat nurse who happened to be passing, that I trembled for her, and
hastened to take a bowl of soup from her tray.

As I fed him, his gaunt, weather-beaten face had a familiar look; but
so many such faces had passed before me that winter, I did not recall
this one till the ward-master came to put up the cards with the
new-comers' names above their beds. My man seemed absorbed in his
food; but I naturally glanced at the card, and there was the name
"Joseph Collins" to give me an additional interest in my new patient.

"Why, Joe! is it really you?" I exclaimed, pouring the last spoonful
of soup down his throat so hastily that I choked him.

"All that's left of me. Wal, ain't this luck, now?" gasped Joe, as
gratefully as if that hospital-cot was a bed of roses.

"What is the matter? A wound in the head and arm?" I asked, feeling
sure that no slight affliction had brought Joe there.

"Right arm gone. Shot off as slick as a whistle. I tell you, it's a
sing'lar kind of a feelin' to see a piece of your own body go flyin'
away, with no prospect of ever coming back again," said Joe, trying to
make light of one of the greatest misfortunes a man can suffer.

"That is bad, but it might have been worse. Keep up your spirits, Joe;
and we will soon have you fitted out with a new arm almost as good as
new."

"I guess it won't do much lumberin', so that trade is done for. I
s'pose there's things left-handed fellers can do, and I must learn 'em
as soon as possible, since my fightin' days are over," and Joe looked
at his one arm with a sigh that was almost a groan, helplessness is
such a trial to a manly man,--and he was eminently so.

"What can I do to comfort you most, Joe? I'll send my good Ben to help
you to bed, and will be here myself when the surgeon goes his rounds.
Is there anything else that would make you more easy?"

"If you could just drop a line to mother to let her know I'm alive, it
would be a sight of comfort to both of us. I guess I'm in for a long
spell of hospital, and I'd lay easier if I knew mother and Lucindy
warn't frettin' about me."

He must have been suffering terribly, but he thought of the women who
loved him before himself, and, busy as I was, I snatched a moment to
send a few words of hope to the old mother. Then I left him "layin'
easy," though the prospect of some months of wearing pain would have
daunted most men. If I had needed anything to increase my regard for
Joe, it would have been the courage with which he bore a very bad
quarter of an hour with the surgeons; for his arm was in a dangerous
state, the wound in the head feverish for want of care; and a heavy
cold on the lungs suggested pneumonia as an added trial to his list of
ills.

"He will have a hard time of it, but I think he will pull through,
as he is a temperate fellow, with a splendid constitution," was the
doctor's verdict, as he left us for the next man, who was past help,
with a bullet through his lungs.

"I don'no as I hanker to live, and be a burden. If Jim was able to do
for mother, I feel as if I wouldn't mind steppin' out now I'm so fur
along. As he ain't, I s'pose I must brace up, and do the best I can,"
said Joe, as I wiped the drops from his forehead, and tried to look as
if his prospect was a bright one.

"You will have Lucindy to help you, you know; and that will make
things easier for all."

"Think so? 'Pears to me I couldn't ask her to take care of three
invalids for my sake. She ain't no folks of her own, nor much means,
and ought to marry a man who can make things easy for her. Guess I'll
have to wait a spell longer before I say anything to Lucindy about
marryin' now;" and a look of resolute resignation settled on Joe's
haggard face as he gave up his dearest hope.

"I think Lucindy will have something to say, if she is like most
women, and you will find the burdens much lighter, for sharing them
between you. Don't worry about that, but get well, and go home as soon
as you can."

"All right, ma'am;" and Joe proved himself a good soldier by obeying
orders, and falling asleep like a tired child, as the first step
toward recovery.

For two months I saw Joe daily, and learned to like him very much, he
was so honest, genuine, and kind-hearted. So did his mates, for he
made friends with them all by sharing such small luxuries as came to
him, for he was a favorite; and, better still, he made sunshine in
that sad place by the brave patience with which he bore his own
troubles, the cheerful consolation he always gave to others. A droll
fellow was Joe at times, for under his sobriety lay much humor; and I
soon discovered that a visit from him was more efficacious than other
cordials in cases of despondency and discontent. Roars of laughter
sometimes greeted me as I went into his ward, and Joe's jokes were
passed round as eagerly as the water-pitcher.

Yet he had much to try him, not only in the ills that vexed his flesh,
but the cares that tried his spirit, and the future that lay before
him, full of anxieties and responsibilities which seemed so heavy now
when the strong right arm, that had cleared all obstacles away before,
was gone. The letters I wrote for him, and those he received, told
the little story very plainly; for he read them to me, and found much
comfort in talking over his affairs, as most men do when illness
makes them dependent on a woman. Jim was evidently sick and selfish.
Lucindy, to judge from the photograph cherished so tenderly under
Joe's pillow, was a pretty, weak sort of a girl, with little character
or courage to help poor Joe with his burdens. The old mother was very
like her son, and stood by him "like a hero," as he said, but was
evidently failing, and begged him to come home as soon as he was able,
that she might see him comfortably settled before she must leave him.
Her courage sustained his, and the longing to see her hastened his
departure as soon as it was safe to let him go; for Lucindy's letters
were always of a dismal sort, and made him anxious to put his shoulder
to the wheel.

"She always set consider'ble by me, mother did, bein' the oldest; and
I wouldn't miss makin' her last days happy, not if it cost me all the
arms and legs I've got," said Joe, as he awkwardly struggled into the
big boots an hour after leave to go home was given him.

It was pleasant to see his comrades gather round him with such hearty
adieus that his one hand must have tingled; to hear the good wishes
and the thanks called after him by pale creatures in their beds; and
to find tears in many eyes beside my own when he was gone, and nothing
was left of him but the empty cot, the old gray wrapper, and the name
upon the wall.

I kept that card among my other relics, and hoped to meet Joe again
somewhere in the world. He sent me one or two letters, then I went
home; the war ended soon after, time passed, and the little story of
my Maine lumberman was laid away with many other experiences which
made that part of my life a very memorable one.


III


Some years later, as I looked out of my window one dull November day,
the only cheerful thing I saw was the red cap of a messenger who was
examining the slate that hung on a wall opposite my hotel. A tall man
with gray hair and beard, one arm, and a blue army-coat. I always
salute, figuratively at least, when I see that familiar blue,
especially if one sleeve of the coat is empty; so I watched the
messenger with interest as he trudged away on some new errand, wishing
he had a better day and a thicker pair of boots. He was an unusually
large, well-made man, and reminded me of a fine building going to
ruin before its time; for the broad shoulders were bent, there was a
stiffness about the long legs suggestive of wounds or rheumatism, and
the curly hair looked as if snow had fallen on it too soon. Sitting at
work in my window, I fell into the way of watching my Red Cap, as I
called him, with more interest than I did the fat doves on the roof
opposite, or the pert sparrows hopping in the mud below. I liked the
steady way in which he plodded on through fair weather or foul, as if
intent on doing well the one small service he had found to do. I liked
his cheerful whistle as he stood waiting for a job under the porch
of the public building where his slate hung, watching the luxurious
carriages roll by, and the well-to-do gentlemen who daily passed him
to their comfortable homes, with a steady, patient sort of face, as if
wondering at the inequalities of fortune, yet neither melancholy nor
morose over the small share of prosperity which had fallen to his lot.

I often planned to give him a job, that I might see him nearer; but
I had few errands, and little Bob, the hall-boy, depended on doing
those: so the winter was nearly over before I found out that my Red
Cap was an old friend.

A parcel came for me one day, and bidding the man wait for an answer,
I sat down to write it, while the messenger stood just inside the
door like a sentinel on duty. When I looked up to give my note and
directions, I found the man staring at me with a beaming yet bashful
face, as he nodded, saying heartily,--

"I mistrusted it was you, ma'am, soon's I see the name on the bundle,
and I guess I ain't wrong. It's a number of years sence we met, and
you don't remember Joe Collins as well as he does you, I reckon?"

"Why, how you have changed! I've been seeing you every day all winter,
and never knew you," I said, shaking hands with my old patient, and
very glad to see him.

"Nigh on to twenty years makes consid'able of a change in folks,
'specially if they have a pretty hard row to hoe."

"Sit down and warm yourself while you tell me all about it; there is
no hurry for this answer, and I'll pay for your time."

Joe laughed as if that was a good joke, and sat down as if the fire
was quite as welcome as the friend.

"How are they all at home?" I asked, as he sat turning his cap round,
not quite knowing where to begin.

"I haven't got any home nor any folks neither;" and the melancholy
words banished the brightness from his rough face like a cloud.
"Mother died soon after I got back. Suddin', but she was ready, and I
was there, so she was happy. Jim lived a number of years, and was a
sight of care, poor feller; but we managed to rub along, though we had
to sell the farm: for I couldn't do much with one arm, and doctor's
bills right along stiddy take a heap of money. He was as comfortable
as he could be; and, when he was gone, it wasn't no great matter, for
there was only me, and I don't mind roughin' it."

"But Lucindy, where was she?" I asked very naturally.

"Oh! she married another man long ago. Couldn't expect her to take
me and my misfortins. She's doin' well, I hear, and that's a comfort
anyway."

There was a look on Joe's face, a tone in Joe's voice as he spoke,
that plainly showed how much he had needed comfort when left to bear
his misfortunes all alone. But he made no complaint, uttered no
reproach, and loyally excused Lucindy's desertion with a simple sort
of dignity that made it impossible to express pity or condemnation.

"How came you here, Joe?" I asked, making a sudden leap from past to
present.

"I had to scratch for a livin', and can't do much: so, after tryin' a
number of things, I found this. My old wounds pester me a good deal,
and rheumatism is bad winters; but, while my legs hold out, I can git
on. A man can't set down and starve; so I keep waggin' as long as I
can. When I can't do no more, I s'pose there's almshouse and hospital
ready for me."

"That is a dismal prospect, Joe. There ought to be a comfortable place
for such as you to spend your last days in. I am sure you have earned
it."

"Wal, it does seem ruther hard on us when we've give all we had, and
give it free and hearty, to be left to knock about in our old age. But
there's so many poor folks to be took care of, we don't get much of
a chance, for _we_ ain't the beggin' sort," said Joe, with a wistful
look at the wintry world outside, as if it would be better to lie
quiet under the snow, than to drag out his last painful years,
friendless and forgotten, in some refuge of the poor.

"Some kind people have been talking of a home for soldiers, and I hope
the plan will be carried out. It will take time; but, if it comes to
pass, you shall be one of the first men to enter that home, Joe, if I
can get you there."

"That sounds mighty cheerin' and comfortable, thanky, ma'am. Idleness
is dreadful tryin' to me, and I'd rather wear out than rust out; so I
guess I can weather it a spell longer. But it will be pleasant to look
forrard to a snug harbor bymeby. I feel a sight better just hearin'
tell about it." He certainly looked so, faint as the hope was; for the
melancholy eyes brightened as if they already saw a happier refuge in
the future than almshouse, hospital, or grave, and, when he trudged
away upon my errand, he went as briskly as if every step took him
nearer to the promised home.

After that day it was all up with Bob, for I told my neighbors Joe's
story, and we kept him trotting busily, adding little gifts, and
taking the sort of interest in him that comforted the lonely fellow,
and made him feel that he had not outlived his usefulness. I never
looked out when he was at his post that he did not smile back at me; I
never passed him in the street that the red cap was not touched with a
military flourish; and, when any of us beckoned to him, no twinge of
rheumatism was too sharp to keep him from hurrying to do our errands,
as if he had Mercury's winged feet.

Now and then he came in for a chat, and always asked how the Soldiers'
Home was prospering; expressing his opinion that "Boston was the
charitablest city under the sun, and he was sure he and his mates
would be took care of somehow."

When we parted in the spring, I told him things looked hopeful, bade
him be ready for a good long rest as soon as the hospitable doors were
open, and left him nodding cheerfully.


IV


But in the autumn I looked in vain for Joe. The slate was in its old
place, and a messenger came and went on his beat; but a strange face
was under the red cap, and this man had two arms and one eye. I asked
for Collins, but the new-comer had only a vague idea that he was dead;
and the same answer was given me at headquarters, though none of the
busy people seemed to know when or where he died. So I mourned for
Joe, and felt that it was very hard he could not have lived to enjoy
the promised refuge; for, relying upon the charity that never fails,
the Home was an actual fact now, just beginning its beneficent career.
People were waking up to this duty, money was coming in, meetings were
being held, and already a few poor fellows were in the refuge, feeling
themselves no longer paupers, but invalid soldiers honorably supported
by the State they had served. Talking it over one day with a friend,
who spent her life working for the Associated Charities, she said,--

"By the way, there is a man boarding with one of my poor women, who
ought to be got into the Home, if he will go. I don't know much about
him, except that he was in the army, has been very ill with rheumatic
fever, and is friendless. I asked Mrs. Flanagin how she managed to
keep him, and she said she had help while he was sick, and now he is
able to hobble about, he takes care of the children, so she is able to
go out to work. He won't go to his own town, because there is nothing
for him there but the almshouse, and he dreads a hospital; so
struggles along, trying to earn his bread tending babies with his one
arm. A sad case, and in your line; I wish you'd look into it."

"That sounds like my Joe, one arm and all. I'll go and see him; I've a
weakness for soldiers, sick or well."

I went, and never shall forget the pathetic little tableau I saw as I
opened Mrs. Flanagin's dingy door; for she was out, and no one heard
my tap. The room was redolent of suds, and in a grove of damp clothes
hung on lines sat a man with a crying baby laid across his lap, while
he fed three small children standing at his knee with bread and
molasses. How he managed with one arm to keep the baby from squirming
on to the floor, the plate from upsetting, and to feed the hungry
urchins who stood in a row with open mouths, like young birds, was
past my comprehension. But he did, trotting baby gently, dealing out
sweet morsels patiently, and whistling to himself, as if to beguile
his labors cheerfully.

The broad back, the long legs, the faded coat, the low whistle were
all familiar; and, dodging a wet sheet, I faced the man to find it
was indeed my Joe! A mere shadow of his former self, after months of
suffering that had crippled him for life, but brave and patient still;
trying to help himself, and not ask aid though brought so low.

For an instant I could not speak to him, and, encumbered with baby,
dish, spoon, and children, he could only stare at me with a sudden
brightening of the altered face that made it full of welcome before a
word was uttered.

"They told me you were dead, and I only heard of you by accident, not
knowing I should find my old friend alive, but not well, I'm afraid?"

"There ain't much left of me but bones and pain, ma'am. I'm powerful
glad to see you all the same. Dust off a chair, Patsey, and let the
lady set down. You go in the corner, and take turns lickin' the dish,
while I see company," said Joe, disbanding his small troop, and
shouldering the baby as if presenting arms in honor of his guest.

"Why didn't you let me know how sick you were? And how came they to
think you dead?" I asked, as he festooned the wet linen out of the
way, and prepared to enjoy himself as best he could.

"I did send once, when things was at the wust; but you hadn't got
back, and then somehow I thought I was goin' to be mustered out for
good, and so wouldn't trouble nobody. But my orders ain't come yet,
and I am doing the fust thing that come along. It ain't much, but the
good soul stood by me, and I ain't ashamed to pay my debts this way,
sence I can't do it in no other;" and Joe cradled the chubby baby in
his one arm as tenderly as if it had been his own, though little Biddy
was not an inviting infant.

"That is very beautiful and right, Joe, and I honor you for it; but
you were not meant to tend babies, so sing your last lullabies, and be
ready to go to the Home as soon as I can get you there."

"Really, ma'am? I used to lay and kind of dream about it when I
couldn't stir without yellin' out; but I never thought it would ever
come to happen. I see a piece in the paper describing it, and it
sounded dreadful nice. Shouldn't wonder if I found some of my mates
there. They were a good lot, and deservin' of all that could be done
for 'em," said Joe, trotting the baby briskly, as if the prospect
excited him, as well it might, for the change from that damp nursery
to the comfortable quarters prepared for him would be like going from
Purgatory to Paradise.

"I don't wonder you don't get well living in such a place, Joe. You
should have gone home to Woolwich, and let your friends help you," I
said, feeling provoked with him for hiding himself.

"No, ma'am!" he answered, with a look I never shall forget, it was so
full of mingled patience, pride, and pain. "I haven't a relation
in the world but a couple of poor old aunts, and they couldn't do
anything for me. As for asking help of folks I used to know, I
couldn't do it; and if you think I'd go to Lucindy, though she is wal
off, you don't know Joe Collins. I'd die fust! If she was poor and I
rich, I'd do for her like a brother; but I couldn't ask no favors of
her, not if I begged my vittles in the street, or starved. I forgive,
but I don't forgit in a hurry; and the woman that stood by me when I
was down is the woman I believe in, and can take my bread from without
shame. Hooray for Biddy Flanagin! God bless her!" and, as if to find a
vent for the emotion that filled his eyes with grateful tears, Joe
led off the cheer, which the children shrilly echoed, and I joined
heartily.

"I shall come for you in a few days; so cuddle the baby and make much
of the children before you part. It won't take you long to pack up,
will it?" I asked, as we subsided with a general laugh.

"I reckon not as I don't own any clothes but what I set in, except a
couple of old shirts and them socks. My hat's stoppin' up the winder,
and my old coat is my bed-cover. I'm awful shabby, ma'am, and that's
one reason I don't go out more. I can hobble some, but I ain't got
used to bein' a scarecrow yet," and Joe glanced from the hose without
heels that hung on the line to the ragged suit he wore, with a
resigned expression that made me long to rush out and buy up half the
contents of Oak Hall on the spot.

Curbing this wild impulse I presently departed with promises of speedy
transportation for Joe, and unlimited oranges to assuage the pangs of
parting for the young Flanagins, who escorted me to the door, while
Joe waved the baby like a triumphal banner till I got round the
corner.

There was such a beautiful absence of red tape about the new
institution that it only needed a word in the right ear to set things
going; and then, with a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all
together, Joe Collins was taken up and safely landed in the Home he so
much needed and so well deserved.

A happier man or a more grateful one it would be hard to find, and if
a visitor wants an enthusiastic guide about the place, Joe is the one
to take, for all is comfort, sunshine, and good-will to him; and
he unconsciously shows how great the need of this refuge is, as
he hobbles about on his lame feet, pointing out its beauties,
conveniences, and delights with his one arm, while his face shines,
and his voice quavers a little as he says gratefully,--

"The State don't forget us, you see, and this is a Home wuth havin'.
Long life to it!"




WHAT THE BELLS SAW AND SAID

[Written in 1867.]

"Bells ring others to church, but go not in themselves."


No one saw the spirits of the bells up there in the old steeple at
midnight on Christmas Eve. Six quaint figures, each wrapped in a
shadowy cloak and wearing a bell-shaped cap. All were gray-headed, for
they were among the oldest bell-spirits of the city, and "the light of
other days" shone in their thoughtful eyes. Silently they sat, looking
down on the snow-covered roofs glittering in the moonlight, and the
quiet streets deserted by all but the watchmen on their chilly rounds,
and such poor souls as wandered shelterless in the winter night.
Presently one of the spirits said, in a tone, which, low as it was,
filled the belfry with reverberating echoes,--

"Well, brothers, are your reports ready of the year that now lies
dying?"

All bowed their heads, and one of the oldest answered in a sonorous
voice:--

"My report isn't all I could wish. You know I look down on the
commercial part of our city and have fine opportunities for seeing
what goes on there. It's my business to watch the business men, and
upon my word I'm heartily ashamed of them sometimes. During the war
they did nobly, giving their time and money, their sons and selves to
the good cause, and I was proud of them. But now too many of them have
fallen back into the old ways, and their motto seems to be, 'Every one
for himself, and the devil take the hindmost.' Cheating, lying and
stealing are hard words, and I don't mean to apply them to _all_ who
swarm about below there like ants on an ant-hill--_they_ have other
names for these things, but I'm old-fashioned and use plain words.
There's a deal too much dishonesty in the world, and business seems to
have become a game of hazard in which luck, not labor, wins the prize.
When I was young, men were years making moderate fortunes, and were
satisfied with them. They built them on sure foundations, knew how to
enjoy them while they lived, and to leave a good name behind them when
they died.

"Now it's anything for money; health, happiness, honor, life itself,
are flung down on that great gaming-table, and they forget everything
else in the excitement of success or the desperation of defeat. Nobody
seems satisfied either, for those who win have little time or taste
to enjoy their prosperity, and those who lose have little courage or
patience to support them in adversity. They don't even fail as they
used to. In my day when a merchant found himself embarrassed he didn't
ruin others in order to save himself, but honestly confessed the
truth, gave up everything, and began again. But now-a-days after all
manner of dishonorable shifts there comes a grand crash; many suffer,
but by some hocus-pocus the merchant saves enough to retire upon and
live comfortably here or abroad. It's very evident that honor and
honesty don't mean now what they used to mean in the days of old May,
Higginson and Lawrence.

"They preach below here, and very well too sometimes, for I often
slide down the rope to peep and listen during service. But, bless you!
they don't seem to lay either sermon, psalm or prayer to heart, for
while the minister is doing his best, the congregation, tired with
the breathless hurry of the week, sleep peacefully, calculate their
chances for the morrow, or wonder which of their neighbors will lose
or win in the great game. Don't tell me! I've seen them do it, and if
I dared I'd have startled every soul of them with a rousing peal. Ah,
they don't dream whose eye is on them, they never guess what secrets
the telegraph wires tell as the messages fly by, and little know
what a report I give to the winds of heaven as I ring out above them
morning, noon, and night." And the old spirit shook his head till the
tassel on his cap jangled like a little bell.

"There are some, however, whom I love and honor," he said, in a
benignant tone, "who honestly earn their bread, who deserve all the
success that comes to them, and always keep a warm corner in their
noble hearts for those less blest than they. These are the men who
serve the city in times of peace, save it in times of war, deserve the
highest honors in its gift, and leave behind them a record that keeps
their memories green. For such an one we lately tolled a knell, my
brothers; and as our united voices pealed over the city, in all
grateful hearts, sweeter and more solemn than any chime, rung the
words that made him so beloved,--

"'Treat our dead boys tenderly, and send them home to me.'"

He ceased, and all the spirits reverently uncovered their gray heads
as a strain of music floated up from the sleeping city and died among
the stars.

"Like yours, my report is not satisfactory in all respects," began the
second spirit, who wore a very pointed cap and a finely ornamented
cloak. But, though his dress was fresh and youthful, his face was
old, and he had nodded several times during his brother's speech.
"My greatest affliction during the past year has been the terrible
extravagance which prevails. My post, as you know, is at the court end
of the city, and I see all the fashionable vices and follies. It is
a marvel to me how so many of these immortal creatures, with such
opportunities for usefulness, self-improvement and genuine happiness
can be content to go round and round in one narrow circle of
unprofitable and unsatisfactory pursuits. I do my best to warn them;
Sunday after Sunday I chime in their ears the beautiful old hymns
that sweetly chide or cheer the hearts that truly listen and believe;
Sunday after Sunday I look down on them as they pass in, hoping to see
that my words have not fallen upon deaf ears; and Sunday after Sunday
they listen to words that should teach them much, yet seem to go by
them like the wind. They are told to love their neighbor, yet too many
hate him because he possesses more of this world's goods or honors
than they: they are told that a rich man cannot enter the kingdom of
heaven, yet they go on laying up perishable wealth, and though often
warned that moth and rust will corrupt, they fail to believe it till
the worm that destroys enters and mars their own chapel of ease. Being
a spirit, I see below external splendor and find much poverty of heart
and soul under the velvet and the ermine which should cover rich and
royal natures. Our city saints walk abroad in threadbare suits, and
under quiet bonnets shine the eyes that make sunshine in the shady
places. Often as I watch the glittering procession passing to and fro
below me. I wonder if, with all our progress, there is to-day as much
real piety as in the times when our fathers, poorly clad, with weapon
in one hand and Bible in the other, came weary distances to worship in
the wilderness with fervent faith unquenched by danger, suffering and
solitude.

"Yet in spite of my fault-finding I love my children, as I call
them, for all are not butterflies. Many find wealth no temptation to
forgetfulness of duty or hardness of heart. Many give freely of their
abundance, pity the poor, comfort the afflicted, and make our city
loved and honored in other lands as in our own. They have their cares,
losses, and heartaches as well as the poor; it isn't all sunshine with
them, and they learn, poor souls, that

  "'Into each life some rain must fall,
  Some days must be dark and dreary.'

"But I've hopes of them, and lately they have had a teacher so genial,
so gifted, so well-beloved that all who listen to him must be better
for the lessons of charity, good-will and cheerfulness which he brings
home to them by the magic of tears and smiles. We know him, we love
him, we always remember him as the year comes round, and the blithest
song our brazen tongues utter is a Christmas carol to the Father of
'The Chimes!'"

As the spirit spoke his voice grew cheery, his old face shone, and in
a burst of hearty enthusiasm he flung up his cap and cheered like a
boy. So did the others, and as the fairy shout echoed through the
belfry a troop of shadowy figures, with faces lovely or grotesque,
tragical or gay, sailed by on the wings of the wintry wind and waved
their hands to the spirits of the bells.

As the excitement subsided and the spirits reseated themselves,
looking ten years younger for that burst, another spoke. A venerable
brother in a dingy mantle, with a tuneful voice, and eyes that seemed
to have grown sad with looking on much misery.

"He loves the poor, the man we've just hurrahed for, and he makes
others love and remember them, bless him!" said the spirit. "I hope
he'll touch the hearts of those who listen to him here and beguile
them to open their hands to my unhappy children over yonder. If I
could set some of the forlorn souls in my parish beside the happier
creatures who weep over imaginary woes as they are painted by his
eloquent lips, that brilliant scene would be better than any sermon.
Day and night I look down on lives as full of sin, self-sacrifice and
suffering as any in those famous books. Day and night I try to
comfort the poor by my cheery voice, and to make their wants known by
proclaiming them with all my might. But people seem to be so intent on
business, pleasure or home duties that they have no time to hear and
answer my appeal. There's a deal of charity in this good city, and
when the people do wake up they work with a will; but I can't help
thinking that if some of the money lavished on luxuries was spent on
necessaries for the poor, there would be fewer tragedies like that
which ended yesterday. It's a short story, easy to tell, though long
and hard to live; listen to it.

"Down yonder in the garret of one of the squalid houses at the foot of
my tower, a little girl has lived for a year, fighting silently and
single-handed a good fight against poverty and sin. I saw her when she
first came, a hopeful, cheerful, brave-hearted little soul, alone, yet
not afraid. She used to sit all day sewing at her window, and her lamp
burnt far into the night, for she was very poor, and all she earned
would barely give her food and shelter. I watched her feed the doves,
who seemed to be her only friends; she never forgot them, and daily
gave them the few crumbs that fell from her meagre table. But there
was no kind hand to feed and foster the little human dove, and so she
starved.

"For a while she worked bravely, but the poor three dollars a week
would not clothe and feed and warm her, though the things her busy
fingers made sold for enough to keep her comfortably if she had
received it. I saw the pretty color fade from her cheeks; her eyes
grew hollow, her voice lost its cheery ring, her step its elasticity,
and her face began to wear the haggard, anxious look that made its
youth doubly pathetic. Her poor little gowns grew shabby, her shawl so
thin she shivered when the pitiless wind smote her, and her feet were
almost bare. Rain and snow beat on the patient little figure going
to and fro, each morning with hope and courage faintly shining, each
evening with the shadow of despair gathering darker round her. It was
a hard time for all, desperately hard for her, and in her poverty, sin
and pleasure tempted her. She resisted, but as another bitter winter
came she feared that in her misery she might yield, for body and soul
were weakened now by the long struggle. She knew not where to turn
for help; there seemed to be no place for her at any safe and happy
fireside; life's hard aspect daunted her, and she turned to death,
saying confidingly, 'Take me while I'm innocent and not afraid to go.'

"I saw it all! I saw how she sold everything that would bring money
and paid her little debts to the utmost penny; how she set her poor
room in order for the last time; how she tenderly bade the doves
good-by, and lay down on her bed to die. At nine o'clock last night as
my bell rang over the city, I tried to tell what was going on in the
garret where the light was dying out so fast. I cried to them with all
my strength.--

"'Kind souls, below there! a fellow-creature is perishing for lack
of charity! Oh, help her before it is too late! Mothers, with little
daughters on your knees, stretch out your hands and take her in! Happy
women, in the safe shelter of home, think of her desolation! Rich men,
who grind the faces of the poor, remember that this soul will one day
be required of you! Dear Lord, let not this little sparrow fall to
the ground! Help, Christian men and women, in the name of Him whose
birthday blessed the world!'

"Ah me! I rang, and clashed, and cried in vain. The passers-by only
said, as they hurried home, laden with Christmas cheer: 'The old bell
is merry to-night, as it should be at this blithe season, bless it!'

"As the clocks struck ten, the poor child lay down, saying, as she
drank the last bitter draught life could give her, 'It's very cold,
but soon I shall not feel it;' and with her quiet eyes fixed on the
cross that glimmered in the moonlight above me, she lay waiting for
the sleep that needs no lullaby.

"As the clock struck eleven, pain and poverty for her were over. It
was bitter cold, but she no longer felt it. She lay serenely sleeping,
with tired heart and hands, at rest forever. As the clocks struck
twelve, the dear Lord remembered her, and with fatherly hand led her
into the home where there is room for all. To-day I rung her knell,
and though my heart was heavy, yet my soul was glad; for in spite of
all her human woe and weakness, I am sure that little girl will keep a
joyful Christmas up in heaven."

In the silence which the spirits for a moment kept, a breath of softer
air than any from the snowy world below swept through the steeple and
seemed to whisper, "Yes!"

"Avast there! fond as I am of salt water, I don't like this kind,"
cried the breezy voice of the fourth spirit, who had a tiny ship
instead of a tassel on his cap, and who wiped his wet eyes with the
sleeve of his rough blue cloak. "It won't take me long to spin my
yarn; for things are pretty taut and ship-shape aboard our craft.
Captain Taylor is an experienced sailor, and has brought many a ship
safely into port in spite of wind and tide, and the devil's own
whirlpools and hurricanes. If you want to see earnestness come aboard
some Sunday when the Captain's on the quarter-deck, and take an
observation. No danger of falling asleep there, no more than there is
up aloft, 'when the stormy winds do blow.' Consciences get raked fore
and aft, sins are blown clean out of the water, false colors are
hauled down and true ones run up to the masthead, and many an immortal
soul is warned to steer off in time from the pirates, rocks and
quicksands of temptation. He's a regular revolving light, is the
Captain,--a beacon always burning and saying plainly, 'Here are
life-boats, ready to put off in all weathers and bring the shipwrecked
into quiet waters.' He comes but seldom now, being laid up in the home
dock, tranquilly waiting till his turn comes to go out with the tide
and safely ride at anchor in the great harbor of the Lord. Our crew
varies a good deal. Some of 'em have rather rough voyages, and come
into port pretty well battered; land-sharks fall foul of a good many,
and do a deal of damage; but most of 'em carry brave and tender hearts
under the blue jackets, for their rough nurse, the sea, manages to
keep something of the child alive in the grayest old tar that makes
the world his picture-book. We try to supply 'em with life-preservers
while at sea, and make 'em feel sure of a hearty welcome when ashore,
and I believe the year '67 will sail away into eternity with a
satisfactory cargo. Brother North-End made me pipe my eye; so I'll
make him laugh to pay for it, by telling a clerical joke I heard the
other day. Bellows didn't make it, though he might have done so, as
he's a connection of ours, and knows how to use his tongue as well
as any of us. Speaking of the bells of a certain town, a reverend
gentleman affirmed that each bell uttered an appropriate remark so
plainly, that the words were audible to all. The Baptist bell cried,
briskly, 'Come up and be dipped! come up and be dipped!' The
Episcopal bell slowly said, 'Apos-tol-ic suc-cess-ion! apos-tol-ic
suc-cess-ion!' The Orthodox bell solemnly pronounced, 'Eternal
damnation! eternal damnation!' and the Methodist shouted, invitingly,
'Room for all! room for all!'"

As the spirit imitated the various calls, as only a jovial bell-sprite
could, the others gave him a chime of laughter, and vowed they would
each adopt some tuneful summons, which should reach human ears and
draw human feet more willingly to church.

"Faith, brother, you've kept your word and got the laugh out of us,"
cried a stout, sleek spirit, with a kindly face, and a row of little
saints round his cap and a rosary at his side. "It's very well we are
doing this year; the cathedral is full, the flock increasing, and the
true faith holding its own entirely. Ye may shake your heads if you
will and fear there'll be trouble, but I doubt it. We've warm hearts
of our own, and the best of us don't forget that when we were
starving, America--the saints bless the jewel!--sent us bread; when we
were dying for lack of work, America opened her arms and took us in,
and now helps us to build churches, homes and schools by giving us a
share of the riches all men work for and win. It's a generous nation
ye are, and a brave one, and we showed our gratitude by fighting for
ye in the day of trouble and giving ye our Phil, and many another
broth of a boy. The land is wide enough for us both, and while we work
and fight and grow together, each may learn something from the other.
I'm free to confess that your religion looks a bit cold and hard to
me, even here in the good city where each man may ride his own hobby
to death, and hoot at his neighbors as much as he will. You seem to
keep your piety shut up all the week in your bare, white churches, and
only let it out on Sundays, just a trifle musty with disuse. You set
your rich, warm and soft to the fore, and leave the poor shivering at
the door. You give your people bare walls to look upon, common-place
music to listen to, dull sermons to put them asleep, and then wonder
why they stay away, or take no interest when they come.

"We leave our doors open day and night; our lamps are always burning,
and we may come into our Father's house at any hour. We let rich and
poor kneel together, all being equal there. With us abroad you'll see
prince and peasant side by side, school-boy and bishop, market-woman
and noble lady, saint and sinner, praying to the Holy Mary, whose
motherly arms are open to high and low. We make our churches inviting
with immortal music, pictures by the world's great masters, and rites
that are splendid symbols of the faith we hold. Call it mummery if
ye like, but let me ask you why so many of your sheep stray into our
fold? It's because they miss the warmth, the hearty, the maternal
tenderness which all souls love and long for, and fail to find in your
stern. Puritanical belief. By Saint Peter! I've seen many a lukewarm
worshipper, who for years has nodded in your cushioned pews, wake and
glow with something akin to genuine piety while kneeling on the stone
pavement of one of our cathedrals, with Raphael's angels before his
eyes, with strains of magnificent music in his ears, and all about
him, in shapes of power or beauty, the saints and martyrs who have
saved the world, and whose presence inspires him to follow their
divine example. It's not complaining of ye I am, but just reminding ye
that men are but children after all, and need more tempting to virtue
than they do to vice, which last comes easy to 'em since the Fall. Do
your best in your own ways to get the poor souls into bliss, and good
luck to ye. But remember, there's room in the Holy Mother Church for
all, and when your own priests send ye to the divil, come straight to
us and we'll take ye in."

"A truly Catholic welcome, bull and all," said the sixth spirit, who,
in spite of his old-fashioned garments, had a youthful face, earnest,
fearless eyes, and an energetic voice that woke the echoes with its
vigorous tones. "I've a hopeful report, brothers, for the reforms of
the day are wheeling into rank and marching on. The war isn't over nor
rebeldom conquered yet, but the Old Guard has been 'up and at 'em'
through the year. There has been some hard fighting, rivers of ink
have flowed, and the Washington dawdlers have signalized themselves by
a 'masterly inactivity.' The political campaign has been an anxious
one; some of the leaders have deserted; some been mustered out; some
have fallen gallantly, and as yet have received no monuments. But at
the Grand Review the Cross of the Legion of Honor will surely shine on
many a brave breast that won no decoration but its virtue here; for
the world's fanatics make heaven's heroes, poets say.

"The flock of Nightingales that flew South during the 'winter of our
discontent' are all at home again, some here and some in Heaven. But
the music of their womanly heroism still lingers in the nation's
memory, and makes a tender minor-chord in the battle-hymn of freedom.

"The reform in literature isn't as vigorous as I could wish; but a
sharp attack of mental and moral dyspepsia will soon teach _our_
people that French confectionery and the bad pastry of Wood, Bracdon,
Yates & Co. is not the best diet for the rising generation.

"Speaking of the rising generation reminds me of the schools. They are
doing well; they always are, and we are justly proud of them.
There may be a slight tendency toward placing too much value
upon book-learning; too little upon home culture. Our girls are
acknowledged to be uncommonly pretty, witty and wise, but some of
us wish they had more health and less excitement, more domestic
accomplishments and fewer ologies and isms, and were contented with
simple pleasures and the old-fashioned virtues, and not quite so fond
of the fast, frivolous life that makes them old so soon. I am fond
of our girls and boys. I love to ring for their christenings and
marriages, to toll proudly for the brave lads in blue, and tenderly
for the innocent creatures whose seats are empty under my old roof.
I want to see them anxious to make Young America a model of virtue,
strength and beauty, and I believe they will in time.

"There have been some important revivals in religion; for the world
won't stand still, and we must keep pace or be left behind to
fossilize. A free nation must have a religion broad enough to embrace
all mankind, deep enough to fathom and fill the human soul, high
enough to reach the source of all love and wisdom, and pure enough to
satisfy the wisest and the best. Alarm bells have been rung, anathemas
pronounced, and Christians, forgetful of their creed, have abused
one another heartily. But the truth always triumphs in the end, and
whoever sincerely believes, works and waits for it, by whatever
name he calls it, will surely find his own faith blessed to him in
proportion to his charity for the faith of others.

"But look!--the first red streaks of dawn are in the East. Our vigil
is over, and we must fly home to welcome in the holidays. Before we
part, join with me, brothers, in resolving that through the coming
year we will with all our hearts and tongues,--

  "'Ring out the old, ring in the new,
  Ring out the false, ring in the true;
  Ring in the valiant man and free,
  Ring in the Christ that is to be.'"

Then hand in hand the spirits of the bells floated away, singing in
the hush of dawn the sweet song the stars sung over Bethlehem,--"Peace
on earth, good will to men."






LITTLE MEN: LIFE AT PLUMFIELD WITH JO'S BOYS

By Louisa May Alcott


     TO
     FREDDY AND JOHNNY,
     THE LITTLE MEN
     TO WHOM SHE OWES SOME OF THE BEST AND HAPPIEST
     HOURS OF HER LIFE,
     THIS BOOK IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED
     BY THEIR LOVING
     "AUNT WEEDY"



Contents

     CHAPTER I. NAT
     CHAPTER II. THE BOYS
     CHAPTER III. SUNDAY
     CHAPTER IV. STEPPING-STONES
     CHAPTER V. PATTY PANS
     CHAPTER VI. A FIRE BRAND
     CHAPTER VII. NAUGHTY NAN
     CHAPTER VIII. PRANKS AND PLAYS
     CHAPTER IX. DAISY'S BALL
     CHAPTER X. HOME AGAIN
     CHAPTER XI. UNCLE TEDDY
     CHAPTER XII. HUCKLEBERRIES
     CHAPTER XIII. GOLDILOCKS
     CHAPTER XIV. DAMON AND PYTHIAS
     CHAPTER XV. IN THE WILLOW
     CHAPTER XVI. TAMING THE COLT
     CHAPTER XVII. COMPOSITION DAY
     CHAPTER XVIII. CROPS
     CHAPTER XIX. JOHN BROOKE
     CHAPTER XX. ROUND THE FIRE
     CHAPTER XXI. THANKSGIVING




LITTLE MEN

LIFE AT PLUMFIELD WITH JO'S BOYS



CHAPTER I. NAT

"Please, sir, is this Plumfield?" asked a ragged boy of the man who
opened the great gate at which the omnibus left him.

"Yes. Who sent you?"

"Mr. Laurence. I have got a letter for the lady."

"All right; go up to the house, and give it to her; she'll see to you,
little chap."

The man spoke pleasantly, and the boy went on, feeling much cheered by
the words. Through the soft spring rain that fell on sprouting grass
and budding trees, Nat saw a large square house before him a
hospitable-looking house, with an old-fashioned porch, wide steps, and
lights shining in many windows. Neither curtains nor shutters hid the
cheerful glimmer; and, pausing a moment before he rang, Nat saw many
little shadows dancing on the walls, heard the pleasant hum of young
voices, and felt that it was hardly possible that the light and warmth
and comfort within could be for a homeless "little chap" like him.

"I hope the lady will see to me," he thought, and gave a timid rap with
the great bronze knocker, which was a jovial griffin's head.

A rosy-faced servant-maid opened the door, and smiled as she took the
letter which he silently offered. She seemed used to receiving strange
boys, for she pointed to a seat in the hall, and said, with a nod:

"Sit there and drip on the mat a bit, while I take this in to missis."

Nat found plenty to amuse him while he waited, and stared about him
curiously, enjoying the view, yet glad to do so unobserved in the dusky
recess by the door.

The house seemed swarming with boys, who were beguiling the rainy
twilight with all sorts of amusements. There were boys everywhere,
"up-stairs and down-stairs and in the lady's chamber," apparently, for
various open doors showed pleasant groups of big boys, little boys,
and middle-sized boys in all stages of evening relaxation, not to say
effervescence. Two large rooms on the right were evidently schoolrooms,
for desks, maps, blackboards, and books were scattered about. An open
fire burned on the hearth, and several indolent lads lay on their backs
before it, discussing a new cricket-ground, with such animation that
their boots waved in the air. A tall youth was practising on the flute
in one corner, quite undisturbed by the racket all about him. Two or
three others were jumping over the desks, pausing, now and then, to get
their breath and laugh at the droll sketches of a little wag who was
caricaturing the whole household on a blackboard.

In the room on the left a long supper-table was seen, set forth with
great pitchers of new milk, piles of brown and white bread, and perfect
stacks of the shiny gingerbread so dear to boyish souls. A flavor of
toast was in the air, also suggestions of baked apples, very tantalizing
to one hungry little nose and stomach.

The hall, however, presented the most inviting prospect of all, for
a brisk game of tag was going on in the upper entry. One landing
was devoted to marbles, the other to checkers, while the stairs were
occupied by a boy reading, a girl singing a lullaby to her doll, two
puppies, a kitten, and a constant succession of small boys sliding down
the banisters, to the great detriment of their clothes and danger to
their limbs.

So absorbed did Nat become in this exciting race, that he ventured
farther and farther out of his corner; and when one very lively boy
came down so swiftly that he could not stop himself, but fell off the
banisters, with a crash that would have broken any head but one rendered
nearly as hard as a cannon-ball by eleven years of constant bumping, Nat
forgot himself, and ran up to the fallen rider, expecting to find him
half-dead. The boy, however, only winked rapidly for a second, then lay
calmly looking up at the new face with a surprised, "Hullo!"

"Hullo!" returned Nat, not knowing what else to say, and thinking that
form of reply both brief and easy.

"Are you a new boy?" asked the recumbent youth, without stirring.

"Don't know yet."

"What's your name?"

"Nat Blake."

"Mine's Tommy Bangs. Come up and have a go, will you?" and Tommy got
upon his legs like one suddenly remembering the duties of hospitality.

"Guess I won't, till I see whether I'm going to stay or not," returned
Nat, feeling the desire to stay increase every moment.

"I say, Demi, here's a new one. Come and see to him;" and the lively
Thomas returned to his sport with unabated relish.

At his call, the boy reading on the stairs looked up with a pair of big
brown eyes, and after an instant's pause, as if a little shy, he put the
book under his arm, and came soberly down to greet the new-comer, who
found something very attractive in the pleasant face of this slender,
mild-eyed boy.

"Have you seen Aunt Jo?" he asked, as if that was some sort of important
ceremony.

"I haven't seen anybody yet but you boys; I'm waiting," answered Nat.

"Did Uncle Laurie send you?" proceeded Demi, politely, but gravely.

"Mr. Laurence did."

"He is Uncle Laurie; and he always sends nice boys."

Nat looked gratified at the remark, and smiled, in a way that made his
thin face very pleasant. He did not know what to say next, so the two
stood staring at one another in friendly silence, till the little girl
came up with her doll in her arms. She was very like Demi, only not so
tall, and had a rounder, rosier face, and blue eyes.

"This is my sister, Daisy," announced Demi, as if presenting a rare and
precious creature.

The children nodded to one another; and the little girl's face dimpled
with pleasure, as she said affably:

"I hope you'll stay. We have such good times here; don't we, Demi?"

"Of course, we do: that's what Aunt Jo has Plumfield for."

"It seems a very nice place indeed," observed Nat, feeling that he must
respond to these amiable young persons.

"It's the nicest place in the world, isn't it, Demi?" said Daisy, who
evidently regarded her brother as authority on all subjects.

"No, I think Greenland, where the icebergs and seals are, is more
interesting. But I'm fond of Plumfield, and it is a very nice place
to be in," returned Demi, who was interested just now in a book on
Greenland. He was about to offer to show Nat the pictures and
explain them, when the servant returned, saying with a nod toward the
parlor-door:

"All right; you are to stop."

"I'm glad; now come to Aunt Jo." And Daisy took him by the hand with a
pretty protecting air, which made Nat feel at home at once.

Demi returned to his beloved book, while his sister led the new-comer
into a back room, where a stout gentleman was frolicking with two little
boys on the sofa, and a thin lady was just finishing the letter which
she seemed to have been re-reading.

"Here he is, aunty!" cried Daisy.

"So this is my new boy? I am glad to see you, my dear, and hope you'll
be happy here," said the lady, drawing him to her, and stroking back the
hair from his forehead with a kind hand and a motherly look, which made
Nat's lonely little heart yearn toward her.

She was not at all handsome, but she had a merry sort of face that never
seemed to have forgotten certain childish ways and looks, any more than
her voice and manner had; and these things, hard to describe but very
plain to see and feel, made her a genial, comfortable kind of person,
easy to get on with, and generally "jolly," as boys would say. She saw
the little tremble of Nat's lips as she smoothed his hair, and her keen
eyes grew softer, but she only drew the shabby figure nearer and said,
laughing:

"I am Mother Bhaer, that gentleman is Father Bhaer, and these are the
two little Bhaers. Come here, boys, and see Nat."

The three wrestlers obeyed at once; and the stout man, with a chubby
child on each shoulder, came up to welcome the new boy. Rob and Teddy
merely grinned at him, but Mr. Bhaer shook hands, and pointing to a low
chair near the fire, said, in a cordial voice:

"There is a place all ready for thee, my son; sit down and dry thy wet
feet at once."

"Wet? So they are! My dear, off with your shoes this minute, and I'll
have some dry things ready for you in a jiffy," cried Mrs. Bhaer,
bustling about so energetically that Nat found himself in the cosy
little chair, with dry socks and warm slippers on his feet, before he
would have had time to say Jack Robinson, if he had wanted to try. He
said "Thank you, ma'am," instead; and said it so gratefully that Mrs.
Bhaer's eyes grew soft again, and she said something merry, because she
felt so tender, which was a way she had.

"There are Tommy Bangs' slippers; but he never will remember to put them
on in the house; so he shall not have them. They are too big; but that's
all the better; you can't run away from us so fast as if they fitted."

"I don't want to run away, ma'am." And Nat spread his grimy little hands
before the comfortable blaze, with a long sigh of satisfaction.

"That's good! Now I am going to toast you well, and try to get rid of
that ugly cough. How long have you had it, dear?" asked Mrs. Bhaer, as
she rummaged in her big basket for a strip of flannel.

"All winter. I got cold, and it wouldn't get better, somehow."

"No wonder, living in that damp cellar with hardly a rag to his poor
dear back!" said Mrs. Bhaer, in a low tone to her husband, who was
looking at the boy with a skillful pair of eyes that marked the thin
temples and feverish lips, as well as the hoarse voice and frequent fits
of coughing that shook the bent shoulders under the patched jacket.

"Robin, my man, trot up to Nursey, and tell her to give thee the
cough-bottle and the liniment," said Mr. Bhaer, after his eyes had
exchanged telegrams with his wife's.

Nat looked a little anxious at the preparations, but forgot his fears in
a hearty laugh, when Mrs. Bhaer whispered to him, with a droll look:

"Hear my rogue Teddy try to cough. The syrup I'm going to give you has
honey in it; and he wants some."

Little Ted was red in the face with his exertions by the time the bottle
came, and was allowed to suck the spoon after Nat had manfully taken a
dose and had the bit of flannel put about his throat.

These first steps toward a cure were hardly completed when a great bell
rang, and a loud tramping through the hall announced supper. Bashful Nat
quaked at the thought of meeting many strange boys, but Mrs. Bhaer held
out her hand to him, and Rob said, patronizingly, "Don't be 'fraid; I'll
take care of you."

Twelve boys, six on a side, stood behind their chairs, prancing with
impatience to begin, while the tall flute-playing youth was trying to
curb their ardor. But no one sat down till Mrs. Bhaer was in her place
behind the teapot, with Teddy on her left, and Nat on her right.

"This is our new boy, Nat Blake. After supper you can say how do you do?
Gently, boys, gently."

As she spoke every one stared at Nat, and then whisked into their seats,
trying to be orderly and failing utterly. The Bhaers did their best to
have the lads behave well at meal times, and generally succeeded pretty
well, for their rules were few and sensible, and the boys, knowing that
they tried to make things easy and happy, did their best to obey.
But there are times when hungry boys cannot be repressed without real
cruelty, and Saturday evening, after a half-holiday, was one of those
times.

"Dear little souls, do let them have one day in which they can howl and
racket and frolic to their hearts' content. A holiday isn't a holiday
without plenty of freedom and fun; and they shall have full swing once
a week," Mrs. Bhaer used to say, when prim people wondered why
banister-sliding, pillow-fights, and all manner of jovial games were
allowed under the once decorous roof of Plumfield.

It did seem at times as if the aforesaid roof was in danger of flying
off, but it never did, for a word from Father Bhaer could at any time
produce a lull, and the lads had learned that liberty must not be
abused. So, in spite of many dark predictions, the school flourished,
and manners and morals were insinuated, without the pupils exactly
knowing how it was done.

Nat found himself very well off behind the tall pitchers, with Tommy
Bangs just around the corner, and Mrs. Bhaer close by to fill up plate
and mug as fast as he could empty them.

"Who is that boy next the girl down at the other end?" whispered Nat to
his young neighbor under cover of a general laugh.

"That's Demi Brooke. Mr. Bhaer is his uncle."

"What a queer name!"

"His real name is John, but they call him Demi-John, because his
father is John too. That's a joke, don't you see?" said Tommy, kindly
explaining. Nat did not see, but politely smiled, and asked, with
interest:

"Isn't he a very nice boy?"

"I bet you he is; knows lots and reads like any thing."

"Who is the fat one next him?"

"Oh, that's Stuffy Cole. His name is George, but we call him Stuffy
'cause he eats so much. The little fellow next Father Bhaer is his boy
Rob, and then there's big Franz his nephew; he teaches some, and kind of
sees to us."

"He plays the flute, doesn't he?" asked Nat as Tommy rendered himself
speechless by putting a whole baked apple into his mouth at one blow.

Tommy nodded, and said, sooner than one would have imagined possible
under the circumstances, "Oh, don't he, though? And we dance sometimes,
and do gymnastics to music. I like a drum myself, and mean to learn as
soon as ever I can."

"I like a fiddle best; I can play one too," said Nat, getting
confidential on this attractive subject.

"Can you?" and Tommy stared over the rim of his mug with round eyes,
full of interest. "Mr. Bhaer's got an old fiddle, and he'll let you play
on it if you want to."

"Could I? Oh, I would like it ever so much. You see, I used to go round
fiddling with my father, and another man, till he died."

"Wasn't that fun?" cried Tommy, much impressed.

"No, it was horrid; so cold in winter, and hot in summer. And I got
tired; and they were cross sometimes; and I didn't get enough to eat."
Nat paused to take a generous bite of gingerbread, as if to assure
himself that the hard times were over; and then he added regretfully:
"But I did love my little fiddle, and I miss it. Nicolo took it away
when father died, and wouldn't have me any longer, 'cause I was sick."

"You'll belong to the band if you play good. See if you don't."

"Do you have a band here?" Nat's eyes sparkled.

"Guess we do; a jolly band, all boys; and they have concerts and things.
You just see what happens to-morrow night."

After this pleasantly exciting remark, Tommy returned to his supper, and
Nat sank into a blissful reverie over his full plate.

Mrs. Bhaer had heard all they said, while apparently absorbed in filling
mugs, and overseeing little Ted, who was so sleepy that he put his spoon
in his eye, nodded like a rosy poppy, and finally fell fast asleep, with
his cheek pillowed on a soft bun. Mrs. Bhaer had put Nat next to Tommy,
because that roly-poly boy had a frank and social way with him, very
attractive to shy persons. Nat felt this, and had made several small
confidences during supper, which gave Mrs. Bhaer the key to the new
boy's character, better than if she had talked to him herself.

In the letter which Mr. Laurence had sent with Nat, he had said:

"DEAR JO: Here is a case after your own heart. This poor lad is an
orphan now, sick and friendless. He has been a street-musician; and
I found him in a cellar, mourning for his dead father, and his lost
violin. I think there is something in him, and have a fancy that between
us we may give this little man a lift. You cure his overtasked body,
Fritz help his neglected mind, and when he is ready I'll see if he is
a genius or only a boy with a talent which may earn his bread for him.
Give him a trial, for the sake of your own boy,

"TEDDY."

"Of course we will!" cried Mrs. Bhaer, as she read the letter; and when
she saw Nat she felt at once that, whether he was a genius or not, here
was a lonely, sick boy who needed just what she loved to give, a home
and motherly care. Both she and Mr. Bhaer observed him quietly; and in
spite of ragged clothes, awkward manners, and a dirty face, they saw
much about Nat that pleased them. He was a thin, pale boy, of twelve,
with blue eyes, and a good forehead under the rough, neglected hair; an
anxious, scared face, at times, as if he expected hard words, or blows;
and a sensitive mouth that trembled when a kind glance fell on him;
while a gentle speech called up a look of gratitude, very sweet to see.
"Bless the poor dear, he shall fiddle all day long if he likes," said
Mrs. Bhaer to herself, as she saw the eager, happy expression on his
face when Tommy talked of the band.

So, after supper, when the lads flocked into the schoolroom for more
"high jinks," Mrs. Jo appeared with a violin in her hand, and after a
word with her husband, went to Nat, who sat in a corner watching the
scene with intense interest.

"Now, my lad, give us a little tune. We want a violin in our band, and I
think you will do it nicely."

She expected that he would hesitate; but he seized the old fiddle at
once, and handled it with such loving care, it was plain to see that
music was his passion.

"I'll do the best I can, ma'am," was all he said; and then drew the bow
across the strings, as if eager to hear the dear notes again.

There was a great clatter in the room, but as if deaf to any sounds but
those he made, Nat played softly to himself, forgetting every thing in
his delight. It was only a simple Negro melody, such as street-musicians
play, but it caught the ears of the boys at once, and silenced them,
till they stood listening with surprise and pleasure. Gradually they got
nearer and nearer, and Mr. Bhaer came up to watch the boy; for, as if he
was in his element now, Nat played away and never minded any one, while
his eyes shone, his cheeks reddened, and his thin fingers flew, as he
hugged the old fiddle and made it speak to all their hearts the language
that he loved.

A hearty round of applause rewarded him better than a shower of pennies,
when he stopped and glanced about him, as if to say:

"I've done my best; please like it."

"I say, you do that first rate," cried Tommy, who considered Nat his
protege.

"You shall be the first fiddle in my band," added Franz, with an
approving smile.

Mrs. Bhaer whispered to her husband:

"Teddy is right: there's something in the child." And Mr. Bhaer nodded
his head emphatically, as he clapped Nat on the shoulder, saying,
heartily:

"You play well, my son. Come now and play something which we can sing."

It was the proudest, happiest minute of the poor boy's life when he was
led to the place of honor by the piano, and the lads gathered round,
never heeding his poor clothes, but eying him respectfully and waiting
eagerly to hear him play again.

They chose a song he knew; and after one or two false starts they got
going, and violin, flute, and piano led a chorus of boyish voices that
made the old roof ring again. It was too much for Nat, more feeble than
he knew; and as the final shout died away, his face began to work, he
dropped the fiddle, and turning to the wall sobbed like a little child.

"My dear, what is it?" asked Mrs. Bhaer, who had been singing with all
her might, and trying to keep little Rob from beating time with his
boots.

"You are all so kind and it's so beautiful I can't help it," sobbed Nat,
coughing till he was breathless.

"Come with me, dear; you must go to bed and rest; you are worn out, and
this is too noisy a place for you," whispered Mrs. Bhaer; and took him
away to her own parlor, where she let him cry himself quiet.

Then she won him to tell her all his troubles, and listened to the
little story with tears in her own eyes, though it was not a new one to
her.

"My child, you have got a father and a mother now, and this is home.
Don't think of those sad times any more, but get well and happy; and be
sure you shall never suffer again, if we can help it. This place is made
for all sorts of boys to have a good time in, and to learn how to help
themselves and be useful men, I hope. You shall have as much music as
you want, only you must get strong first. Now come up to Nursey and have
a bath, and then go to bed, and to-morrow we will lay some nice little
plans together."

Nat held her hand fast in his, but had not a word to say, and let his
grateful eyes speak for him, as Mrs. Bhaer led him up to a big room,
where they found a stout German woman with a face so round and cheery
that it looked like a sort of sun, with the wide frill of her cap for
rays.

"This is Nursey Hummel, and she will give you a nice bath, and cut your
hair, and make you all 'comfy,' as Rob says. That's the bath-room in
there; and on Saturday nights we scrub all the little lads first, and
pack them away in bed before the big ones get through singing. Now then,
Rob, in with you."

As she talked, Mrs. Bhaer had whipped off Rob's clothes and popped him
into a long bath-tub in the little room opening into the nursery.

There were two tubs, besides foot-baths, basins, douche-pipes, and all
manner of contrivances for cleanliness. Nat was soon luxuriating in the
other bath; and while simmering there, he watched the performances of
the two women, who scrubbed, clean night-gowned, and bundled into bed
four or five small boys, who, of course, cut up all sorts of capers
during the operation, and kept every one in a gale of merriment till
they were extinguished in their beds.

By the time Nat was washed and done up in a blanket by the fire, while
Nursey cut his hair, a new detachment of boys arrived and were shut into
the bath-room, where they made as much splashing and noise as a school
of young whales at play.

"Nat had better sleep here, so that if his cough troubles him in the
night you can see that he takes a good draught of flax-seed tea," said
Mrs. Bhaer, who was flying about like a distracted hen with a large
brood of lively ducklings.

Nursey approved the plan, finished Nat off with a flannel night-gown, a
drink of something warm and sweet, and then tucked him into one of the
three little beds standing in the room, where he lay looking like a
contented mummy and feeling that nothing more in the way of luxury
could be offered him. Cleanliness in itself was a new and delightful
sensation; flannel gowns were unknown comforts in his world; sips of
"good stuff" soothed his cough as pleasantly as kind words did his
lonely heart; and the feeling that somebody cared for him made that
plain room seem a sort of heaven to the homeless child. It was like a
cosy dream; and he often shut his eyes to see if it would not vanish
when he opened them again. It was too pleasant to let him sleep, and he
could not have done so if he had tried, for in a few minutes one of the
peculiar institutions of Plumfield was revealed to his astonished but
appreciative eyes.

A momentary lull in the aquatic exercises was followed by the sudden
appearance of pillows flying in all directions, hurled by white goblins,
who came rioting out of their beds. The battle raged in several rooms,
all down the upper hall, and even surged at intervals into the nursery,
when some hard-pressed warrior took refuge there. No one seemed to
mind this explosion in the least; no one forbade it, or even looked
surprised. Nursey went on hanging up towels, and Mrs. Bhaer laid out
clean clothes, as calmly as if the most perfect order reigned. Nay,
she even chased one daring boy out of the room, and fired after him the
pillow he had slyly thrown at her.

"Won't they hurt 'em?" asked Nat, who lay laughing with all his might.

"Oh dear, no! We always allow one pillow-fight Saturday night. The cases
are changed to-morrow; and it gets up a glow after the boys' baths; so
I rather like it myself," said Mrs. Bhaer, busy again among her dozen
pairs of socks.

"What a very nice school this is!" observed Nat, in a burst of
admiration.

"It's an odd one," laughed Mrs. Bhaer, "but you see we don't believe
in making children miserable by too many rules, and too much study. I
forbade night-gown parties at first; but, bless you, it was of no use.
I could no more keep those boys in their beds than so many jacks in the
box. So I made an agreement with them: I was to allow a fifteen-minute
pillow-fight every Saturday night; and they promised to go properly to
bed every other night. I tried it, and it worked well. If they don't
keep their word, no frolic; if they do, I just turn the glasses round,
put the lamps in safe places, and let them rampage as much as they
like."

"It's a beautiful plan," said Nat, feeling that he should like to join
in the fray, but not venturing to propose it the first night. So he lay
enjoying the spectacle, which certainly was a lively one.

Tommy Bangs led the assailing party, and Demi defended his own room with
a dogged courage fine to see, collecting pillows behind him as fast as
they were thrown, till the besiegers were out of ammunition, when they
would charge upon him in a body, and recover their arms. A few slight
accidents occurred, but nobody minded, and gave and took sounding
thwacks with perfect good humor, while pillows flew like big snowflakes,
till Mrs. Bhaer looked at her watch, and called out:

"Time is up, boys. Into bed, every man jack, or pay the forfeit!"

"What is the forfeit?" asked Nat, sitting up in his eagerness to know
what happened to those wretches who disobeyed this most peculiar, but
public-spirited school-ma'am.

"Lose their fun next time," answered Mrs. Bhaer. "I give them five
minutes to settle down, then put out the lights, and expect order. They
are honorable lads, and they keep their word."

That was evident, for the battle ended as abruptly as it began a parting
shot or two, a final cheer, as Demi fired the seventh pillow at the
retiring foe, a few challenges for next time, then order prevailed. And
nothing but an occasional giggle or a suppressed whisper broke the quiet
which followed the Saturday-night frolic, as Mother Bhaer kissed her new
boy and left him to happy dreams of life at Plumfield.



CHAPTER II. THE BOYS

While Nat takes a good long sleep, I will tell my little readers
something about the boys, among whom he found himself when he woke up.

To begin with our old friends. Franz was a tall lad, of sixteen now, a
regular German, big, blond, and bookish, also very domestic, amiable,
and musical. His uncle was fitting him for college, and his aunt for a
happy home of his own hereafter, because she carefully fostered in him
gentle manners, love of children, respect for women, old and young,
and helpful ways about the house. He was her right-hand man on all
occasions, steady, kind, and patient; and he loved his merry aunt like a
mother, for such she had tried to be to him.

Emil was quite different, being quick-tempered, restless, and
enterprising, bent on going to sea, for the blood of the old vikings
stirred in his veins, and could not be tamed. His uncle promised that he
should go when he was sixteen, and set him to studying navigation, gave
him stories of good and famous admirals and heroes to read, and let him
lead the life of a frog in river, pond, and brook, when lessons were
done. His room looked like the cabin of a man-of-war, for every thing
was nautical, military, and shipshape. Captain Kyd was his delight, and
his favorite amusement was to rig up like that piratical gentleman, and
roar out sanguinary sea-songs at the top of his voice. He would dance
nothing but sailors' hornpipes, rolled in his gait, and was as
nautical in conversation to his uncle would permit. The boys called him
"Commodore," and took great pride in his fleet, which whitened the
pond and suffered disasters that would have daunted any commander but a
sea-struck boy.

Demi was one of the children who show plainly the effect of intelligent
love and care, for soul and body worked harmoniously together. The
natural refinement which nothing but home influence can teach, gave
him sweet and simple manners: his mother had cherished an innocent and
loving heart in him; his father had watched over the physical growth of
his boy, and kept the little body straight and strong on wholesome food
and exercise and sleep, while Grandpa March cultivated the little mind
with the tender wisdom of a modern Pythagoras, not tasking it with long,
hard lessons, parrot-learned, but helping it to unfold as naturally and
beautifully as sun and dew help roses bloom. He was not a perfect child,
by any means, but his faults were of the better sort; and being early
taught the secret of self-control, he was not left at the mercy of
appetites and passions, as some poor little mortals are, and then
punished for yielding to the temptations against which they have
no armor. A quiet, quaint boy was Demi, serious, yet cheery, quite
unconscious that he was unusually bright and beautiful, yet quick to see
and love intelligence or beauty in other children. Very fond of books,
and full of lively fancies, born of a strong imagination and a spiritual
nature, these traits made his parents anxious to balance them with
useful knowledge and healthful society, lest they should make him one of
those pale precocious children who amaze and delight a family sometimes,
and fade away like hot-house flowers, because the young soul blooms too
soon, and has not a hearty body to root it firmly in the wholesome soil
of this world.

So Demi was transplanted to Plumfield, and took so kindly to the life
there, that Meg and John and Grandpa felt satisfied that they had done
well. Mixing with other boys brought out the practical side of him,
roused his spirit, and brushed away the pretty cobwebs he was so fond of
spinning in that little brain of his. To be sure, he rather shocked
his mother when he came home, by banging doors, saying "by George"
emphatically, and demanding tall thick boots "that clumped like papa's."
But John rejoiced over him, laughed at his explosive remarks, got the
boots, and said contentedly,

"He is doing well; so let him clump. I want my son to be a manly boy,
and this temporary roughness won't hurt him. We can polish him up by
and by; and as for learning, he will pick that up as pigeons do peas. So
don't hurry him."

Daisy was as sunshiny and charming as ever, with all sorts of
womanlinesses budding in her, for she was like her gentle mother,
and delighted in domestic things. She had a family of dolls, whom she
brought up in the most exemplary manner; she could not get on without
her little work-basket and bits of sewing, which she did so nicely, that
Demi frequently pulled out his handkerchief display her neat stitches,
and Baby Josy had a flannel petticoat beautifully made by Sister Daisy.
She like to quiddle about the china-closet, prepare the salt-cellars,
put the spoons straight on the table; and every day went round the
parlor with her brush, dusting chairs and tables. Demi called her a
"Betty," but was very glad to have her keep his things in order, lend
him her nimble fingers in all sorts of work, and help him with his
lessons, for they kept abreast there, and had no thought of rivalry.

The love between them was as strong as ever; and no one could laugh
Demi out of his affectionate ways with Daisy. He fought her battles
valiantly, and never could understand why boys should be ashamed to
say "right out," that they loved their sisters. Daisy adored her twin,
thought "my brother" the most remarkable boy in the world, and every
morning, in her little wrapper, trotted to tap at his door with a
motherly "Get up, my dear, it's 'most breakfast time; and here's your
clean collar."

Rob was an energetic morsel of a boy, who seemed to have discovered the
secret of perpetual motion, for he never was still. Fortunately, he was
not mischievous, nor very brave; so he kept out of trouble pretty well,
and vibrated between father and mother like an affectionate little
pendulum with a lively tick, for Rob was a chatterbox.

Teddy was too young to play a very important part in the affairs of
Plumfield, yet he had his little sphere, and filled it beautifully.
Every one felt the need of a pet at times, and Baby was always ready to
accommodate, for kissing and cuddling suited him excellently. Mrs.
Jo seldom stirred without him; so he had his little finger in all the
domestic pies, and every one found them all the better for it, for they
believed in babies at Plumfield.

Dick Brown, and Adolphus or Dolly Pettingill, were two eight year-olds.
Dolly stuttered badly, but was gradually getting over it, for no one was
allowed to mock him and Mr. Bhaer tried to cure it, by making him talk
slowly. Dolly was a good little lad, quite uninteresting and ordinary,
but he flourished here, and went through his daily duties and pleasures
with placid content and propriety.

Dick Brown's affliction was a crooked back, yet he bore his burden so
cheerfully, that Demi once asked in his queer way, "Do humps make people
good-natured? I'd like one if they do." Dick was always merry, and did
his best to be like other boys, for a plucky spirit lived in the
feeble little body. When he first came, he was very sensitive about his
misfortune, but soon learned to forget it, for no one dared remind him
of it, after Mr. Bhaer had punished one boy for laughing at him.

"God don't care; for my soul is straight if my back isn't," sobbed Dick
to his tormentor on that occasion; and, by cherishing this idea, the
Bhaers soon led him to believe that people also loved his soul, and did
not mind his body, except to pity and help him to bear it.

Playing menagerie once with the others, some one said,

"What animal will you be, Dick?"

"Oh, I'm the dromedary; don't you see the hump on my back?" was the
laughing answer.

"So you are, my nice little one that don't carry loads, but marches by
the elephant first in the procession," said Demi, who was arranging the
spectacle.

"I hope others will be as kind to the poor dear as my boys have learned
to be," said Mrs. Jo, quite satisfied with the success of her teaching,
as Dick ambled past her, looking like a very happy, but a very feeble
little dromedary, beside stout Stuffy, who did the elephant with
ponderous propriety.

Jack Ford was a sharp, rather a sly lad, who was sent to this school,
because it was cheap. Many men would have thought him a smart boy, but
Mr. Bhaer did not like his way of illustrating that Yankee word, and
thought his unboyish keenness and money-loving as much of an affliction
as Dolly's stutter, or Dick's hump.

Ned Barker was like a thousand other boys of fourteen, all legs,
blunder, and bluster. Indeed the family called him the "Blunderbuss,"
and always expected to see him tumble over the chairs, bump against the
tables, and knock down any small articles near him. He bragged a good
deal about what he could do, but seldom did any thing to prove it, was
not brave, and a little given to tale-telling. He was apt to bully the
small boys, and flatter the big ones, and without being at all bad, was
just the sort of fellow who could very easily be led astray.

George Cole had been spoilt by an over-indulgent mother, who stuffed him
with sweetmeats till he was sick, and then thought him too delicate
to study, so that at twelve years old, he was a pale, puffy boy, dull,
fretful, and lazy. A friend persuaded her to send him to Plumfield, and
there he soon got waked up, for sweet things were seldom allowed, much
exercise required, and study made so pleasant, that Stuffy was gently
lured along, till he quite amazed his anxious mamma by his improvement,
and convinced her that there was really something remarkable in
Plumfield air.

Billy Ward was what the Scotch tenderly call an "innocent," for though
thirteen years old, he was like a child of six. He had been an unusually
intelligent boy, and his father had hurried him on too fast, giving him
all sorts of hard lessons, keeping at his books six hours a day, and
expecting him to absorb knowledge as a Strasburg goose does the food
crammed down its throat. He thought he was doing his duty, but he nearly
killed the boy, for a fever gave the poor child a sad holiday, and when
he recovered, the overtasked brain gave out, and Billy's mind was like a
slate over which a sponge has passed, leaving it blank.

It was a terrible lesson to his ambitious father; he could not bear the
sight of his promising child, changed to a feeble idiot, and he sent
him away to Plumfield, scarcely hoping that he could be helped, but sure
that he would be kindly treated. Quite docile and harmless was Billy,
and it was pitiful to see how hard he tried to learn, as if groping
dimly after the lost knowledge which had cost him so much.

Day after day, he pored over the alphabet, proudly said A and B, and
thought that he knew them, but on the morrow they were gone, and all
the work was to be done over again. Mr. Bhaer had infinite patience with
him, and kept on in spite of the apparent hopelessness of the task, not
caring for book lessons, but trying gently to clear away the mists from
the darkened mind, and give it back intelligence enough to make the boy
less a burden and an affliction.

Mrs. Bhaer strengthened his health by every aid she could invent, and
the boys all pitied and were kind to him. He did not like their active
plays, but would sit for hours watching the doves, would dig holes for
Teddy till even that ardent grubber was satisfied, or follow Silas, the
man, from place to place seeing him work, for honest Si was very good to
him, and though he forgot his letters Billy remembered friendly faces.

Tommy Bangs was the scapegrace of the school, and the most trying
scapegrace that ever lived. As full of mischief as a monkey, yet
so good-hearted that one could not help forgiving his tricks; so
scatter-brained that words went by him like the wind, yet so penitent
for every misdeed, that it was impossible to keep sober when he
vowed tremendous vows of reformation, or proposed all sorts of queer
punishments to be inflicted upon himself. Mr. and Mrs. Bhaer lived in
a state of preparation for any mishap, from the breaking of Tommy's own
neck, to the blowing up of the entire family with gunpowder; and Nursey
had a particular drawer in which she kept bandages, plasters, and salves
for his especial use, for Tommy was always being brought in half dead;
but nothing ever killed him, and he arose from every downfall with
redoubled vigor.

The first day he came, he chopped the top off one finger in the
hay-cutter, and during the week, fell from the shed roof, was chased by
an angry hen who tried to pick his out because he examined her chickens,
got run away with, and had his ears boxed violent by Asia, who caught
him luxuriously skimming a pan of cream with half a stolen pie.
Undaunted, however, by any failures or rebuffs, this indomitable youth
went on amusing himself with all sorts of tricks till no one felt safe.
If he did not know his lessons, he always had some droll excuse to
offer, and as he was usually clever at his books, and as bright as a
button in composing answers when he did not know them, he go on pretty
well at school. But out of school, Ye gods and little fishes! how Tommy
did carouse!

He wound fat Asia up in her own clothes line against the post, and left
here there to fume and scold for half an hour one busy Monday morning.
He dropped a hot cent down Mary Ann's back as that pretty maid was
waiting at table one day when there were gentlemen to dinner, whereat
the poor girl upset the soup and rushed out of the room in dismay,
leaving the family to think that she had gone mad. He fixed a pail of
water up in a tree, with a bit of ribbon fastened to the handle, and
when Daisy, attracted by the gay streamer, tried to pull it down, she
got a douche bath that spoiled her clean frock and hurt her little
feelings very much. He put rough white pebbles in the sugar-bowl when
his grandmother came to tea, and the poor old lady wondered why they
didn't melt in her cup, but was too polite to say anything. He passed
around snuff in church so that five of the boys sneezed with such
violence they had to go out. He dug paths in winter time, and then
privately watered them so that people should tumble down. He drove poor
Silas nearly wild by hanging his big boots in conspicuous places,
for his feet were enormous, and he was very much ashamed of them. He
persuaded confiding little Dolly to tie a thread to one of his loose
teeth, and leave the string hanging from his mouth when he went to
sleep, so that Tommy could pull it out without his feeling the dreaded
operation. But the tooth wouldn't come at the first tweak, and poor
Dolly woke up in great anguish of spirit, and lost all faith in Tommy
from that day forth.

The last prank had been to give the hens bread soaked in rum, which made
them tipsy and scandalized all the other fowls, for the respectable old
biddies went staggering about, pecking and clucking in the most maudlin
manner, while the family were convulsed with laughter at their antics,
till Daisy took pity on them and shut them up in the hen-house to sleep
off their intoxication.

These were the boys and they lived together as happy as twelve lads
could, studying and playing, working and squabbling, fighting faults and
cultivating virtues in the good old-fashioned way. Boys at other schools
probably learned more from books, but less of that better wisdom which
makes good men. Latin, Greek, and mathematics were all very well, but in
Professor Bhaer's opinion, self knowledge, self-help, and self-control
were more important, and he tried to teach them carefully. People shook
their heads sometimes at his ideas, even while they owned that the boys
improved wonderfully in manners and morals. But then, as Mrs. Jo said to
Nat, "it was an odd school."



CHAPTER III. SUNDAY

The moment the bell rang next morning Nat flew out of bed, and dressed
himself with great satisfaction in the suit of clothes he found on
the chair. They were not new, being half-worn garments of one of the
well-to-do boys; but Mrs. Bhaer kept all such cast-off feathers for the
picked robins who strayed into her nest. They were hardly on when Tommy
appeared in a high state of clean collar, and escorted Nat down to
breakfast.

The sun was shining into the dining-room on the well-spread table, and
the flock of hungry, hearty lads who gathered round it. Nat observed
that they were much more orderly than they had been the night before,
and every one stood silently behind his chair while little Rob, standing
beside his father at the head of the table, folded his hands, reverently
bent his curly head, and softly repeated a short grace in the devout
German fashion, which Mr. Bhaer loved and taught his little son to
honor. Then they all sat down to enjoy the Sunday-morning breakfast of
coffee, steak, and baked potatoes, instead of the bread and milk fare
with which they usually satisfied their young appetites. There was much
pleasant talk while the knives and forks rattled briskly, for certain
Sunday lessons were to be learned, the Sunday walk settled, and plans
for the week discussed. As he listened, Nat thought it seemed as if this
day must be a very pleasant one, for he loved quiet, and there was
a cheerful sort of hush over every thing that pleased him very much;
because, in spite of his rough life, the boy possessed the sensitive
nerves which belong to a music-loving nature.

"Now, my lads, get your morning jobs done, and let me find you ready
for church when the 'bus comes round," said Father Bhaer, and set the
example by going into the school-room to get books ready for the morrow.

Every one scattered to his or her task, for each had some little daily
duty, and was expected to perform it faithfully. Some brought wood and
water, brushed the steps, or ran errands for Mrs. Bhaer. Others fed the
pet animals, and did chores about the barn with Franz. Daisy washed the
cups, and Demi wiped them, for the twins liked to work together, and
Demi had been taught to make himself useful in the little house at home.
Even Baby Teddy had his small job to do, and trotted to and fro, putting
napkins away, and pushing chairs into their places. For half and hour
the lads buzzed about like a hive of bees, then the 'bus drove round,
Father Bhaer and Franz with the eight older boys piled in, and away they
went for a three-mile drive to church in town.

Because of the troublesome cough Nat prefered to stay at home with
the four small boys, and spent a happy morning in Mrs. Bhaer's room,
listening to the stories she read them, learning the hymns she taught
them, and then quietly employing himself pasting pictures into an old
ledger.

"This is my Sunday closet," she said, showing him shelves filled with
picture-books, paint-boxes, architectural blocks, little diaries, and
materials for letter-writing. "I want my boys to love Sunday, to find it
a peaceful, pleasant day, when they can rest from common study and
play, yet enjoy quiet pleasures, and learn, in simple ways, lessons more
important than any taught in school. Do you understand me?" she asked,
watching Nat's attentive face.

"You mean to be good?" he said, after hesitating a minute.

"Yes; to be good, and to love to be good. It is hard work sometimes, I
know very well; but we all help one another, and so we get on. This is
one of the ways in which I try to help my boys," and she took down a
thick book, which seemed half-full of writing, and opened at a page on
which there was one word at the top.

"Why, that's my name!" cried Nat, looking both surprised and interested.

"Yes; I have a page for each boy. I keep a little account of how he gets
on through the week, and Sunday night I show him the record. If it is
bad I am sorry and disappointed, if it is good I am glad and proud; but,
whichever it is, the boys know I want to help them, and they try to do
their best for love of me and Father Bhaer."

"I should think they would," said Nat, catching a glimpse of Tommy's
name opposite his own, and wondering what was written under it.

Mrs. Bhaer saw his eye on the words, and shook her head, saying, as she
turned a leaf,

"No, I don't show my records to any but the one to whom each belongs. I
call this my conscience book; and only you and I will ever know what is
to be written on the page below your name. Whether you will be pleased
or ashamed to read it next Sunday depends on yourself. I think it will
be a good report; at any rate, I shall try to make things easy for you
in this new place, and shall be quite contented if you keep our few
rules, live happily with the boys, and learn something."

"I'll try ma'am;" and Nat's thin face flushed up with the earnestness
of his desire to make Mrs. Bhaer "glad and proud," not "sorry and
disappointed." "It must be a great deal of trouble to write about so
many," he added, as she shut her book with an encouraging pat on the
shoulder.

"Not to me, for I really don't know which I like best, writing or boys,"
she said, laughing to see Nat stare with astonishment at the last item.
"Yes, I know many people think boys are a nuisance, but that is because
they don't understand them. I do; and I never saw the boy yet whom I
could not get on capitally with after I had once found the soft spot in
his heart. Bless me, I couldn't get on at all without my flock of dear,
noisy, naughty, harum-scarum little lads, could I, my Teddy?" and Mrs.
Bhaer hugged the young rogue, just in time to save the big inkstand from
going into his pocket.

Nat, who had never heard anything like this before, really did not know
whether Mother Bhaer was a trifle crazy, or the most delightful woman he
had ever met. He rather inclined to the latter opinion, in spite of her
peculiar tastes, for she had a way of filling up a fellow's plate before
he asked, of laughing at his jokes, gently tweaking him by the ear, or
clapping him on the shoulder, that Nat found very engaging.

"Now, I think you would like to go into the school-room and practise
some of the hymns we are to sing to-night," she said, rightly guessing
the thing of all others that he wanted to do.

Alone with the beloved violin and the music-book propped up before him
in the sunny window, while Spring beauty filled the world outside, and
Sabbath silence reigned within, Nat enjoyed an hour or two of genuine
happiness, learning the sweet old tunes, and forgetting the hard past in
the cheerful present.

When the church-goers came back and dinner was over, every one read,
wrote letters home, said their Sunday lessons, or talked quietly to one
another, sitting here and there about the house. At three o'clock the
entire family turned out to walk, for all the active young bodies must
have exercise; and in these walks the active young minds were taught
to see and love the providence of God in the beautiful miracles which
Nature was working before their eyes. Mr. Bhaer always went with them,
and in his simple, fatherly way, found for his flock, "Sermons in
stones, books in the running brooks, and good in everything."

Mrs. Bhaer with Daisy and her own two boys drove into town, to pay the
weekly visit to Grandma, which was busy Mother Bhaer's one holiday and
greatest pleasure. Nat was not strong enough for the long walk, and
asked to stay at home with Tommy, who kindly offered to do the honors
of Plumfield. "You've seen the house, so come out and have a look at
the garden, and the barn, and the menagerie," said Tommy, when they were
left alone with Asia, to see that they didn't get into mischief;
for, though Tommy was one of the best-meaning boys who ever adorned
knickerbockers, accidents of the most direful nature were always
happening to him, no one could exactly tell how.

"What is your menagerie?" asked Nat, as they trotted along the drive
that encircled the house.

"We all have pets, you see, and we keep 'em in the corn-barn, and call
it the menagerie. Here you are. Isn't my guinea-pig a beauty?" and Tommy
proudly presented one of the ugliest specimens of that pleasing animal
that Nat ever saw.

"I know a boy with a dozen of 'em, and he said he'd give me one, only I
hadn't any place to keep it, so I couldn't have it. It was white, with
black spots, a regular rouser, and maybe I could get it for you if you'd
like it," said Nat, feeling it would be a delicate return for Tommy's
attentions.

"I'd like it ever so much, and I'll give you this one, and they can live
together if they don't fight. Those white mice are Rob's, Franz gave
'em to him. The rabbits are Ned's, and the bantams outside are Stuffy's.
That box thing is Demi's turtle-tank, only he hasn't begun to get 'em
yet. Last year he had sixty-two, whackers some of 'em. He stamped one of
'em with his name and the year, and let it go; and he says maybe he will
find it ever so long after and know it. He read about a turtle being
found that had a mark on it that showed it must be hundreds of years
old. Demi's such a funny chap."

"What is in this box?" asked Nat, stopping before a large deep one,
half-full of earth.

"Oh, that's Jack Ford's worm-shop. He digs heaps of 'em and keeps 'em
here, and when we want any to go afishing with, we buy some of him. It
saves lots of trouble, only he charged too much for 'em. Why, last time
we traded I had to pay two cents a dozen, and then got little ones.
Jack's mean sometimes, and I told him I'd dig for myself if he didn't
lower his prices. Now, I own two hens, those gray ones with top knots,
first-rate ones they are too, and I sell Mrs. Bhaer the eggs, but I
never ask her more than twenty-five cents a dozen, never! I'd be ashamed
to do it," cried Tommy, with a glance of scorn at the worm-shop.

"Who owns the dogs?" asked Nat, much interested in these commercial
transactions, and feeling that T. Bangs was a man whom it would be a
privilege and a pleasure to patronize.

"The big dog is Emil's. His name is Christopher Columbus. Mrs. Bhaer
named him because she likes to say Christopher Columbus, and no one
minds it if she means the dog," answered Tommy, in the tone of a
show-man displaying his menagerie. "The white pup is Rob's, and the
yellow one is Teddy's. A man was going to drown them in our pond, and
Pa Bhaer wouldn't let him. They do well enough for the little chaps, I
don't think much of 'em myself. Their names are Castor and Pollux."

"I'd like Toby the donkey best, if I could have anything, it's so nice
to ride, and he's so little and good," said Nat, remembering the weary
tramps he had taken on his own tired feet.

"Mr. Laurie sent him out to Mrs. Bhaer, so she shouldn't carry Teddy
on her back when we go to walk. We're all fond of Toby, and he's a
first-rate donkey, sir. Those pigeons belong to the whole lot of us, we
each have our pet one, and go shares in all the little ones as they come
along. Squabs are great fun; there ain't any now, but you can go up and
take a look at the old fellows, while I see if Cockletop and Granny have
laid any eggs."

Nat climbed up a ladder, put his head through a trap door and took a
long look at the pretty doves billing and cooing in their spacious loft.
Some on their nests, some bustling in and out, and some sitting at
their doors, while many went flying from the sunny housetop to the
straw-strewn farmyard, where six sleek cows were placidly ruminating.

"Everybody has got something but me. I wish I had a dove, or a hen, or
even a turtle, all my own," thought Nat, feeling very poor as he saw the
interesting treasures of the other boys. "How do you get these things?"
he asked, when he joined Tommy in the barn.

"We find 'em or buy 'em, or folks give 'em to us. My father sends me
mine; but as soon as I get egg money enough, I'm going to buy a pair of
ducks. There's a nice little pond for 'em behind the barn, and people
pay well for duck-eggs, and the little duckies are pretty, and it's fun
to see 'em swim," said Tommy, with the air of a millionaire.

Nat sighed, for he had neither father nor money, nothing in the wide
world but an old empty pocketbook, and the skill that lay in his ten
finger tips. Tommy seemed to understand the question and the sigh which
followed his answer, for after a moment of deep thought, he suddenly
broke out,

"Look here, I'll tell you what I'll do. If you will hunt eggs for me, I
hate it, I'll give you one egg out of every dozen. You keep account, and
when you've had twelve, Mother Bhaer will give you twenty-five cents for
'em, and then you can buy what you like, don't you see?"

"I'll do it! What a kind feller you are, Tommy!" cried Nat, quite
dazzled by this brilliant offer.

"Pooh! that is not anything. You begin now and rummage the barn, and
I'll wait here for you. Granny is cackling, so you're sure to find one
somewhere," and Tommy threw himself down on the hay with a luxurious
sense of having made a good bargain, and done a friendly thing.

Nat joyfully began his search, and went rustling from loft to loft till
he found two fine eggs, one hidden under a beam, and the other in an old
peck measure, which Mrs. Cockletop had appropriated.

"You may have one and I'll have the other, that will just make up my
last dozen, and to-morrow we'll start fresh. Here, you chalk your
accounts up near mine, and then we'll be all straight," said Tommy,
showing a row of mysterious figures on the side of an old winnowing
machine.

With a delightful sense of importance, the proud possessor of one egg
opened his account with his friend, who laughingly wrote above the
figures these imposing words,

"T. Bangs & Co."

Poor Nat found them so fascinating that he was with difficulty persuaded
to go and deposit his first piece of portable property in Asia's
store-room. Then they went on again, and having made the acquaintance
of the two horses, six cows, three pigs, and one Alderney "Bossy,"
as calves are called in New England, Tommy took Nat to a certain old
willow-tree that overhung a noisy little brook. From the fence it was
an easy scramble into a wide niche between the three big branches, which
had been cut off to send out from year to year a crowd of slender twigs,
till a green canopy rustled overhead. Here little seats had been fixed,
and a hollow place a closet made big enough to hold a book or two, a
dismantled boat, and several half-finished whistles.

"This is Demi's and my private place; we made it, and nobody can come up
unless we let 'em, except Daisy, we don't mind her," said Tommy, as Nat
looked with delight from the babbling brown water below to the green
arch above, where bees were making a musical murmur as they feasted on
the long yellow blossoms that filled the air with sweetness.

"Oh, it's just beautiful!" cried Nat. "I do hope you'll let me up
sometimes. I never saw such a nice place in all my life. I'd like to be
a bird, and live here always."

"It is pretty nice. You can come if Demi don't mind, and I guess he
won't, because he said last night that he liked you."

"Did he?" and Nat smiled with pleasure, for Demi's regard seemed to be
valued by all the boys, partly because he was Father Bhaer's nephew, and
partly because he was such a sober, conscientious little fellow.

"Yes; Demi likes quiet chaps, and I guess he and you will get on if you
care about reading as he does."

Poor Nat's flush of pleasure deepened to a painful scarlet at those last
words, and he stammered out,

"I can't read very well; I never had any time; I was always fiddling
round, you know."

"I don't love it myself, but I can do it well enough when I want to,"
said Tommy, after a surprised look, which said as plainly as words, "A
boy twelve years old and can't read!"

"I can read music, anyway," added Nat, rather ruffled at having to
confess his ignorance.

"I can't;" and Tommy spoke in a respectful tone, which emboldened Nat to
say firmly,

"I mean to study real hard and learn every thing I can, for I never had
a chance before. Does Mr. Bhaer give hard lessons?"

"No; he isn't a bit cross; he sort of explains and gives you a boost
over the hard places. Some folks don't; my other master didn't. If we
missed a word, didn't we get raps on the head!" and Tommy rubbed his own
pate as if it tingled yet with the liberal supply of raps, the memory
of which was the only thing he brought away after a year with his "other
master."

"I think I could read this," said Nat, who had been examining the books.

"Read a bit, then; I'll help you," resumed Tommy, with a patronizing
air.

So Nat did his best, and floundered through a page with may friendly
"boosts" from Tommy, who told him he would soon "go it" as well as
anybody. Then they sat and talked boy-fashion about all sorts of things,
among others, gardening; for Nat, looking down from his perch, asked
what was planted in the many little patches lying below them on the
other side of the brook.

"These are our farms," said Tommy. "We each have our own patch, and
raise what we like in it, only have to choose different things, and
can't change till the crop is in, and we must keep it in order all
summer."

"What are you going to raise this year?"

"Wal, I cattleated to hev beans, as they are about the easiest crop
a-goin'."

Nat could not help laughing, for Tommy had pushed back his hat, put his
hands in his pockets, and drawled out his words in unconscious imitation
of Silas, the man who managed the place for Mr. Bhaer.

"Come, you needn't laugh; beans are ever so much easier than corn or
potatoes. I tried melons last year, but the bugs were a bother, and the
old things wouldn't get ripe before the frost, so I didn't have but one
good water and two little 'mush mellions,'" said Tommy, relapsing into a
"Silasism" with the last word.

"Corn looks pretty growing," said Nat, politely, to atone for his laugh.

"Yes, but you have to hoe it over and over again. Now, six weeks' beans
only have to be done once or so, and they get ripe soon. I'm going to
try 'em, for I spoke first. Stuffy wanted 'em, but he's got to take
peas; they only have to be picked, and he ought to do it, he eats such a
lot."

"I wonder if I shall have a garden?" said Nat, thinking that even
corn-hoeing must be pleasant work.

"Of course you will," said a voice from below, and there was Mr. Bhaer
returned from his walk, and come to find them, for he managed to have
a little talk with every one of the lads some time during the day, and
found that these chats gave them a good start for the coming week.

Sympathy is a sweet thing, and it worked wonders here, for each boy knew
that Father Bhaer was interested in him, and some were readier to open
their hearts to him than to a woman, especially the older ones, who
liked to talk over their hopes and plans, man to man. When sick or in
trouble they instinctively turned to Mrs. Jo, while the little ones made
her their mother-confessor on all occasions.

In descending from their nest, Tommy fell into the brook; being used to
it, he calmly picked himself out and retired to the house to be dried.
This left Nat to Mr. Bhaer, which was just what he wished, and, during
the stroll they took among the garden plots, he won the lad's heart by
giving him a little "farm," and discussing crops with him as gravely as
if the food for the family depended on the harvest. From this pleasant
topic they went to others, and Nat had many new and helpful thoughts put
into a mind that received them as gratefully as the thirsty earth had
received the warm spring rain. All supper time he brooded over them,
often fixing his eyes on Mr. Bhaer with an inquiring look, that seemed
to say, "I like that, do it again, sir." I don't know whether the man
understood the child's mute language or not, but when the boys were all
gathered together in Mrs. Bhaer's parlor for the Sunday evening talk,
he chose a subject which might have been suggested by the walk in the
garden.

As he looked about him Nat thought it seemed more like a great family
than a school, for the lads were sitting in a wide half-circle round the
fire, some on chairs, some on the rug, Daisy and Demi on the knees of
Uncle Fritz, and Rob snugly stowed away in the back of his mother's
easy-chair, where he could nod unseen if the talk got beyond his depth.

Every one looked quite comfortable, and listened attentively, for the
long walk made rest agreeable, and as every boy there knew that he would
be called upon for his views, he kept his wits awake to be ready with an
answer.

"Once upon a time," began Mr. Bhaer, in the dear old-fashioned way,
"there was a great and wise gardener who had the largest garden ever
seen. A wonderful and lovely place it was, and he watched over it with
the greatest skill and care, and raised all manner of excellent and
useful things. But weeds would grow even in this fine garden; often the
ground was bad and the good seeds sown in it would not spring up. He
had many under gardeners to help him. Some did their duty and earned the
rich wages he gave them; but others neglected their parts and let them
run to waste, which displeased him very much. But he was very patient,
and for thousands and thousands of years he worked and waited for his
great harvest."

"He must have been pretty old," said Demi, who was looking straight into
Uncle Fritz's face, as if to catch every word.

"Hush, Demi, it's a fairy story," whispered Daisy.

"No, I think it's an arrygory," said Demi.

"What is a arrygory?" called out Tommy, who was of an inquiring turn.

"Tell him, Demi, if you can, and don't use words unless you are quite
sure you know what they mean," said Mr. Bhaer.

"I do know, Grandpa told me! A fable is a arrygory; it's a story that
means something. My 'Story without an end' is one, because the child in
it means a soul; don't it, Aunty?" cried Demi, eager to prove himself
right.

"That's it, dear; and Uncle's story is an allegory, I am quite sure; so
listen and see what it means," returned Mrs. Jo, who always took part in
whatever was going on, and enjoyed it as much as any boy among them.

Demi composed himself, and Mr. Bhaer went on in his best English, for he
had improved much in the last five years, and said the boys did it.

"This great gardener gave a dozen or so of little plots to one of his
servants, and told him to do his best and see what he could raise. Now
this servant was not rich, nor wise, nor very good, but he wanted to
help because the gardener had been very kind to him in many ways. So he
gladly took the little plots and fell to work. They were all sorts of
shapes and sizes, and some were very good soil, some rather stony, and
all of them needed much care, for in the rich soil the weeds grew fast,
and in the poor soil there were many stones."

"What was growing in them besides the weeds, and stones?" asked Nat; so
interested, he forgot his shyness and spoke before them all.

"Flowers," said Mr. Bhaer, with a kind look. "Even the roughest, most
neglected little bed had a bit of heart's-ease or a sprig of mignonette
in it. One had roses, sweet peas, and daisies in it," here he pinched
the plump cheek of the little girl leaning on his arm. "Another had all
sorts of curious plants in it, bright pebbles, a vine that went climbing
up like Jack's beanstalk, and many good seeds just beginning to sprout;
for, you see, this bed had been taken fine care of by a wise old man,
who had worked in gardens of this sort all his life."

At this part of the "arrygory," Demi put his head on one side like an
inquisitive bird, and fixed his bright eye on his uncle's face, as if he
suspected something and was on the watch. But Mr. Bhaer looked perfectly
innocent, and went on glancing from one young face to another, with a
grave, wistful look, that said much to his wife, who knew how earnestly
he desired to do his duty in these little garden plots.

"As I tell you, some of these beds were easy to cultivate, that means
to take care of Daisy, and others were very hard. There was one
particularly sunshiny little bed that might have been full of fruits and
vegetables as well as flowers, only it wouldn't take any pains, and when
the man sowed, well, we'll say melons in this bed, they came to nothing,
because the little bed neglected them. The man was sorry, and kept on
trying, though every time the crop failed, all the bed said, was, 'I
forgot.'"

Here a general laugh broke out, and every one looked at Tommy, who had
pricked up his ears at the word "melons," and hung down his head at the
sound of his favorite excuse.

"I knew he meant us!" cried Demi, clapping his hands. "You are the man,
and we are the little gardens; aren't we, Uncle Fritz?"

"You have guessed it. Now each of you tell me what crop I shall try to
sow in you this spring, so that next autumn I may get a good harvest out
of my twelve, no, thirteen, plots," said Mr. Bhaer, nodding at Nat as he
corrected himself.

"You can't sow corn and beans and peas in us. Unless you mean we are to
eat a great many and get fat," said Stuffy, with a sudden brightening of
his round, dull face as the pleasing idea occurred to him.

"He don't mean that kind of seeds. He means things to make us good; and
the weeds are faults," cried Demi, who usually took the lead in these
talks, because he was used to this sort of thing, and liked it very
much.

"Yes, each of you think what you need most, and tell me, and I will help
you to grow it; only you must do your best, or you will turn out like
Tommy's melons, all leaves and no fruit. I will begin with the oldest,
and ask the mother what she will have in her plot, for we are all parts
of the beautiful garden, and may have rich harvests for our Master if we
love Him enough," said Father Bhaer.

"I shall devote the whole of my plot to the largest crop of patience I
can get, for that is what I need most," said Mrs. Jo, so soberly that
the lads fell to thinking in good earnest what they should say when
their turns came, and some among them felt a twinge of remorse, that
they had helped to use up Mother Bhaer's stock of patience so fast.

Franz wanted perseverance, Tommy steadiness, Ned went in for good
temper, Daisy for industry, Demi for "as much wiseness as Grandpa," and
Nat timidly said he wanted so many things he would let Mr. Bhaer choose
for him. The others chose much the same things, and patience, good
temper, and generosity seemed the favorite crops. One boy wished to like
to get up early, but did not know what name to give that sort of seed;
and poor Stuffy sighed out,

"I wish I loved my lessons as much as I do my dinner, but I can't."

"We will plant self-denial, and hoe it and water it, and make it grow so
well that next Christmas no one will get ill by eating too much dinner.
If you exercise your mind, George, it will get hungry just as your body
does, and you will love books almost as much as my philosopher here,"
said Mr. Bhaer; adding, as he stroked the hair off Demi's fine forehead,
"You are greedy also, my son, and you like to stuff your little mind
full of fairy tales and fancies, as well as George likes to fill his
little stomach with cake and candy. Both are bad, and I want you to
try something better. Arithmetic is not half so pleasant as 'Arabian
Nights,' I know, but it is a very useful thing, and now is the time to
learn it, else you will be ashamed and sorry by and by."

"But, 'Harry and Lucy,' and 'Frank,' are not fairy books, and they
are all full of barometers, and bricks, and shoeing horses, and useful
things, and I'm fond of them; ain't I, Daisy?" said Demi, anxious to
defend himself.

"So they are; but I find you reading 'Roland and Maybird,' a great deal
oftener than 'Harry and Lucy,' and I think you are not half so fond of
'Frank' as you are of 'Sinbad.' Come, I shall make a little bargain with
you both, George shall eat but three times a day, and you shall read but
one story-book a week, and I will give you the new cricket-ground; only,
you must promise to play in it," said Uncle Fritz, in his persuasive
way, for Stuffy hated to run about, and Demi was always reading in play
hours.

"But we don't like cricket," said Demi.

"Perhaps not now, but you will when you know it. Besides, you do like to
be generous, and the other boys want to play, and you can give them the
new ground if you choose."

This was taken them both on the right side, and they agreed to the
bargain, to the great satisfaction of the rest.

There was a little more talk about the gardens, and then they all sang
together. The band delighted Nat, for Mrs. Bhaer played the piano, Franz
the flute, Mr. Bhaer a bass viol, and he himself the violin. A very
simple little concert, but all seemed to enjoy it, and old Asia, sitting
in the corner, joined at times with the sweetest voice of any, for in
this family, master and servant, old and young, black and white, shared
in the Sunday song, which went up to the Father of them all. After this
they each shook hands with Father Bhaer; Mother Bhaer kissed them every
one from sixteen-year-old Franz to little Rob, how kept the tip of her
nose for his own particular kisses, and then they trooped up to bed.

The light of the shaded lamp that burned in the nursery shone softly on
a picture hanging at the foot of Nat's bed. There were several others
on the walls, but the boy thought there must be something peculiar about
this one, for it had a graceful frame of moss and cones about it, and
on a little bracket underneath stood a vase of wild flowers freshly
gathered from the spring woods. It was the most beautiful picture of
them all, and Nat lay looking at it, dimly feeling what it meant, and
wishing he knew all about it.

"That's my picture," said a little voice in the room. Nat popped up his
head, and there was Demi in his night-gown pausing on his way back from
Aunt Jo's chamber, whither he had gone to get a cot for a cut finger.

"What is he doing to the children?" asked Nat.

"That is Christ, the Good Man, and He is blessing the children. Don't
you know about Him?" said Demi, wondering.

"Not much, but I'd like to, He looks so kind," answered Nat, whose chief
knowledge of the Good Man consisted in hearing His name taken in vain.

"I know all about it, and I like it very much, because it is true," said
Demi.

"Who told you?"

"My Grandpa, he knows every thing, and tells the best stories in
the world. I used to play with his big books, and make bridges, and
railroads, and houses, when I was a little boy," began Demi.

"How old are you now?" asked Nat, respectfully.

"'Most ten."

"You know a lot of things, don't you?"

"Yes; you see my head is pretty big, and Grandpa says it will take a
good deal to fill it, so I keep putting pieces of wisdom into it as fast
as I can," returned Demi, in his quaint way.

Nat laughed, and then said soberly,

"Tell on, please."

And Demi gladly told on without pause or punctuation. "I found a very
pretty book one day and wanted to play with it, but Grandpa said I
mustn't, and showed me the pictures, and told me about them, and I liked
the stories very much, all about Joseph and his bad brothers, and the
frogs that came up out of the sea, and dear little Moses in the water,
and ever so many more lovely ones, but I liked about the Good Man best
of all, and Grandpa told it to me so many times that I learned it by
heart, and he gave me this picture so I shouldn't forget, and it was
put up here once when I was sick, and I left it for other sick boys to
see."'

"What makes Him bless the children?" asked Nat, who found something very
attractive in the chief figure of the group.

"Because He loved them."

"Were they poor children?" asked Nat, wistfully.

"Yes, I think so; you see some haven't got hardly any clothes on, and
the mothers don't look like rich ladies. He liked poor people, and was
very good to them. He made them well, and helped them, and told rich
people they must not be cross to them, and they loved Him dearly,
dearly," cried Demi, with enthusiasm.

"Was He rich?"

"Oh no! He was born in a barn, and was so poor He hadn't any house to
live in when He grew up, and nothing to eat sometimes, but what people
gave Him, and He went round preaching to everybody, and trying to make
them good, till the bad men killed Him."

"What for?" and Nat sat up in his bed to look and listen, so interested
was he in this man who cared for the poor so much.

"I'll tell you all about it; Aunt Jo won't mind;" and Demi settled
himself on the opposite bed, glad to tell his favorite story to so good
a listener.

Nursey peeped in to see if Nat was asleep, but when she saw what was
going on, she slipped away again, and went to Mrs. Bhaer, saying with
her kind face full of motherly emotion,

"Will the dear lady come and see a pretty sight? It's Nat listening
with all his heart to Demi telling the story of the Christ-child, like a
little white angel as he is."

Mrs. Bhaer had meant to go and talk with Nat a moment before he slept,
for she had found that a serious word spoken at this time often did
much good. But when she stole to the nursery door, and saw Nat eagerly
drinking in the words of his little friends, while Demi told the sweet
and solemn story as it had been taught him, speaking softly as he sat
with his beautiful eyes fixed on the tender face above them, her own
filled with tears, and she went silently away, thinking to herself,

"Demi is unconsciously helping the poor boy better than I can; I will
not spoil it by a single word."

The murmur of the childish voice went on for a long time, as one
innocent heart preached that great sermon to another, and no one hushed
it. When it ceased at last, and Mrs. Bhaer went to take away the lamp,
Demi was gone and Nat fast asleep, lying with his face toward the
picture, as if he had already learned to love the Good Man who loved
little children, and was a faithful friend to the poor. The boy's face
was very placid, and as she looked at it she felt that if a single day
of care and kindness had done so much, a year of patient cultivation
would surely bring a grateful harvest from this neglected garden, which
was already sown with the best of all seed by the little missionary in
the night-gown.



CHAPTER IV. STEPPING-STONES

When Nat went into school on Monday morning, he quaked inwardly, for now
he thought he should have to display his ignorance before them all. But
Mr. Bhaer gave him a seat in the deep window, where he could turn his
back on the others, and Franz heard him say his lessons there, so no one
could hear his blunders or see how he blotted his copybook. He was truly
grateful for this, and toiled away so diligently that Mr. Bhaer said,
smiling, when he saw his hot face and inky fingers:

"Don't work so hard, my boy; you will tire yourself out, and there is
time enough."

"But I must work hard, or I can't catch up with the others. They know
heaps, and I don't know anything," said Nat, who had been reduced to a
state of despair by hearing the boys recite their grammar, history, and
geography with what he thought amazing ease and accuracy.

"You know a good many things which they don't," said Mr. Bhaer, sitting
down beside him, while Franz led a class of small students through the
intricacies of the multiplication table.

"Do I?" and Nat looked utterly incredulous.

"Yes; for one thing, you can keep your temper, and Jack, who is quick
at numbers, cannot; that is an excellent lesson, and I think you have
learned it well. Then, you can play the violin, and not one of the lads
can, though they want to do it very much. But, best of all, Nat, you
really care to learn something, and that is half the battle. It seems
hard at first, and you will feel discouraged, but plod away, and things
will get easier and easier as you go on."

Nat's face had brightened more and more as he listened, for, small as
the list of his learning was, it cheered him immensely to feel that
he had anything to fall back upon. "Yes, I can keep my temper father's
beating taught me that; and I can fiddle, though I don't know where the
Bay of Biscay is," he thought, with a sense of comfort impossible to
express. Then he said aloud, and so earnestly that Demi heard him:

"I do want to learn, and I will try. I never went to school, but I
couldn't help it; and if the fellows don't laugh at me, I guess I'll get
on first rate you and the lady are so good to me."

"They shan't laugh at you; if they do, I'll I'll tell them not to,"
cried Demi, quite forgetting where he was.

The class stopped in the middle of 7 times 9, and everyone looked up to
see what was going on.

Thinking that a lesson in learning to help one another was better than
arithmetic just then, Mr. Bhaer told them about Nat, making such an
interesting and touching little story out of it that the good-hearted
lads all promised to lend him a hand, and felt quite honored to be
called upon to impart their stores of wisdom to the chap who fiddled so
capitally. This appeal established the right feeling among them, and Nat
had few hindrances to struggle against, for every one was glad to give
him a "boost" up the ladder of learning.

Till he was stronger, much study was not good for him, however, and Mrs.
Jo found various amusements in the house for him while others were at
their books. But his garden was his best medicine, and he worked away
like a beaver, preparing his little farm, sowing his beans, watching
eagerly to see them grow, and rejoicing over each green leaf and slender
stock that shot up and flourished in the warm spring weather. Never
was a garden more faithfully hoed; Mr. Bhaer really feared that nothing
would find time to grow, Nat kept up such a stirring of the soil; so he
gave him easy jobs in the flower garden or among the strawberries, where
he worked and hummed as busily as the bees booming all about him.

"This is the crop I like best," Mrs. Bhaer used to say, as she pinched
the once thin cheeks, now getting plump and ruddy, or stroked the bent
shoulders that were slowly straightening up with healthful work, good
food, and the absence of that heavy burden, poverty.

Demi was his little friend, Tommy his patron, and Daisy the comforter of
all his woes; for, though the children were younger than he, his timid
spirit found a pleasure in their innocent society, and rather shrunk
from the rough sports of the elder lads. Mr. Laurence did not forget
him, but sent clothes and books, music and kind messages, and now and
then came out to see how his boy was getting on, or took him into town
to a concert; on which occasions Nat felt himself translated into the
seventh heaven of bliss, for he went to Mr. Laurence's great house, saw
his pretty wife and little fairy of a daughter, had a good dinner, and
was made so comfortable, that he talked and dreamed of it for days and
nights afterward.

It takes so little to make a child happy that it is a pity, in a world
so full of sunshine and pleasant things, that there should be any
wistful faces, empty hands, or lonely little hearts. Feeling this, the
Bhaers gathered up all the crumbs they could find to feed their flock of
hungry sparrows, for they were not rich, except in charity. Many of
Mrs. Jo's friends who had nurseries sent her they toys of which their
children so soon tired, and in mending these Nat found an employment
that just suited him. He was very neat and skillful with those slender
fingers of his, and passed many a rainy afternoon with his gum-bottle,
paint-box, and knife, repairing furniture, animals, and games, while
Daisy was dressmaker to the dilapidated dolls. As fast as the toys were
mended, they were put carefully away in a certain drawer which was
to furnish forth a Christmas-tree for all the poor children of the
neighborhood, that being the way the Plumfield boys celebrated the
birthday of Him who loved the poor and blessed the little ones.

Demi was never tired of reading and explaining his favorite books, and
many a pleasant hour did they spend in the old willow, revelling over
"Robinson Crusoe," "Arabian Nights," "Edgeworth's Tales," and the other
dear immortal stories that will delight children for centuries to come.
This opened a new world to Nat, and his eagerness to see what came next
in the story helped him on till he could read as well as anybody, and
felt so rich and proud with his new accomplishment, that there was
danger of his being as much of a bookworm as Demi.

Another helpful thing happened in a most unexpected and agreeable
manner. Several of the boys were "in business," as they called it, for
most of them were poor, and knowing that they would have their own way
to make by and by, the Bhaers encouraged any efforts at independence.
Tommy sold his eggs; Jack speculated in live stock; Franz helped in
the teaching, and was paid for it; Ned had a taste for carpentry, and a
turning-lathe was set up for him in which he turned all sorts of useful
or pretty things, and sold them; while Demi constructed water-mills,
whirligigs, and unknown machines of an intricate and useless nature, and
disposed of them to the boys.

"Let him be a mechanic if he likes," said Mr. Bhaer. "Give a boy a
trade, and he is independent. Work is wholesome, and whatever talent
these lads possess, be it for poetry or ploughing, it shall be
cultivated and made useful to them if possible."

So, when Nat came running to him one day to ask with an excited face:

"Can I go and fiddle for some people who are to have a picnic in our
woods? They will pay me, and I'd like to earn some money as the other
boys do, and fiddling is the only way I know how to do it."

Mr. Bhaer answered readily:

"Go, and welcome. It is an easy and a pleasant way to work, and I am
glad it is offered you."

Nat went, and did so well that when he came home he had two dollars in
his pocket, which he displayed with intense satisfaction, as he told how
much he had enjoyed the afternoon, how kind the young people were, and
how they had praised his dance music, and promised to have him again.

"It is so much nicer than fiddling in the street, for then I got none
of the money, and now I have it all, and a good time besides. I'm in
business now as well as Tommy and Jack, and I like it ever so much,"
said Nat, proudly patting the old pocketbook, and feeling like a
millionaire already.

He was in business truly, for picnics were plenty as summer opened,
and Nat's skill was in great demand. He was always at liberty to go if
lessons were not neglected, and if the picnickers were respectable young
people. For Mr. Bhaer explained to him that a good plain education is
necessary for everyone, and that no amount of money should hire him to
go where he might be tempted to do wrong. Nat quite agreed to this, and
it was a pleasant sight to see the innocent-hearted lad go driving away
in the gay wagons that stopped at the gate for him, or to hear him come
fiddling home tired but happy, with his well-earned money in one pocket,
and some "goodies" from the feast for Daisy or little Ted, whom he never
forgot.

"I'm going to save up till I get enough to buy a violin for myself, and
then I can earn my own living, can't I?" he used to say, as he brought
his dollars to Mr. Bhaer to keep.

"I hope so, Nat; but we must get you strong and hearty first, and put a
little more knowledge into this musical head of yours. Then Mr. Laurie
will find you a place somewhere, and in a few years we will all come to
hear you play in public."

With much congenial work, encouragement, and hope, Nat found life
getting easier and happier every day, and made such progress in his
music lessons that his teacher forgave his slowness in some other
things, knowing very well that where the heart is the mind works best.
The only punishment the boy ever needed for neglect of more important
lessons was to hang up the fiddle and the bow for a day. The fear of
losing his bosom friend entirely made him go at his books with a will;
and having proved that he could master the lessons, what was the use of
saying "I can't?"

Daisy had a great love of music, and a great reverence for any one who
could make it, and she was often found sitting on the stairs outside
Nat's door while he was practising. This pleased him very much, and he
played his best for that one quiet little listener; for she never would
come in, but preferred to sit sewing her gay patchwork, or tending one
of her many dolls, with an expression of dreamy pleasure on her face
that made Aunt Jo say, with tears in her eyes: "So like my Beth," and
go softly by, lest even her familiar presence mar the child's sweet
satisfaction.

Nat was very fond of Mrs. Bhaer, but found something even more
attractive in the good professor, who took fatherly care of the shy
feeble boy, who had barely escaped with his life from the rough sea on
which his little boat had been tossing rudderless for twelve years. Some
good angel must have been watching over him, for, though his body had
suffered, his soul seemed to have taken little harm, and came ashore as
innocent as a shipwrecked baby. Perhaps his love of music kept it sweet
in spite of the discord all about him; Mr. Laurie said so, and he ought
to know. However that might be, Father Bhaer took pleasure in fostering
poor Nat's virtues, and in curing his faults, finding his new pupil as
docile and affectionate as a girl. He often called Nat his "daughter"
when speaking of him to Mrs. Jo, and she used to laugh at his fancy, for
Madame liked manly boys, and thought Nat amiable but weak, though you
never would have guessed it, for she petted him as she did Daisy, and he
thought her a very delightful woman.

One fault of Nat's gave the Bhaers much anxiety, although they saw how
it had been strengthened by fear and ignorance. I regret to say that
Nat sometimes told lies. Not very black ones, seldom getting deeper than
gray, and often the mildest of white fibs; but that did not matter, a
lie is a lie, and though we all tell many polite untruths in this queer
world of ours, it is not right, and everybody knows it.

"You cannot be too careful; watch your tongue, and eyes, and hands, for
it is easy to tell, and look, and act untruth," said Mr. Bhaer, in one
of the talks he had with Nat about his chief temptation.

"I know it, and I don't mean to, but it's so much easier to get along
if you ain't very fussy about being exactly true. I used to tell 'em
because I was afraid of father and Nicolo, and now I do sometimes
because the boys laugh at me. I know it's bad, but I forget," and Nat
looked much depressed by his sins.

"When I was a little lad I used to tell lies! Ach! what fibs they were,
and my old grandmother cured me of it how, do you think? My parents had
talked, and cried, and punished, but still did I forget as you. Then
said the dear old grandmother, 'I shall help you to remember, and put a
check on this unruly part,' with that she drew out my tongue and snipped
the end with her scissors till the blood ran. That was terrible, you
may believe, but it did me much good, because it was sore for days, and
every word I said came so slowly that I had time to think. After that I
was more careful, and got on better, for I feared the big scissors. Yet
the dear grandmother was most kind to me in all things, and when she lay
dying far away in Nuremberg, she prayed that little Fritz might love God
and tell the truth."

"I never had any grandmothers, but if you think it will cure me, I'll
let you snip my tongue," said Nat, heroically, for he dreaded pain, yet
did wish to stop fibbing.

Mr. Bhaer smiled, but shook his head.

"I have a better way than that, I tried it once before and it worked
well. See now, when you tell a lie I will not punish you, but you shall
punish me."

"How?" asked Nat, startled at the idea.

"You shall ferule me in the good old-fashioned way; I seldom do it
myself, but it may make you remember better to give me pain than to feel
it yourself."

"Strike you? Oh, I couldn't!" cried Nat.

"Then mind that tripping tongue of thine. I have no wish to be hurt, but
I would gladly bear much pain to cure this fault."

This suggestion made such an impression on Nat, that for a long time he
set a watch upon his lips, and was desperately accurate, for Mr. Bhaer
judged rightly, that love of him would be more powerful with Nat that
fear for himself. But alas! one sad day Nat was off his guard, and when
peppery Emil threatened to thrash him, if it was he who had run over his
garden and broken down his best hills of corn, Nat declared he didn't,
and then was ashamed to own up that he did do it, when Jack was chasing
him the night before.

He thought no one would find it out, but Tommy happened to see him, and
when Emil spoke of it a day or two later, Tommy gave his evidence, and
Mr. Bhaer heard it. School was over, and they were all standing about in
the hall, and Mr. Bhaer had just set down on the straw settee to enjoy
his frolic with Teddy; but when he heard Tommy and saw Nat turn scarlet,
and look at him with a frightened face, he put the little boy down,
saying, "Go to thy mother, bubchen, I will come soon," and taking Nat by
the hand led him into the school and shut the door.

The boys looked at one another in silence for a minute, then Tommy
slipped out and peeping in at the half-closed blinds, beheld a sight
that quite bewildered him. Mr. Bhaer had just taken down the long rule
that hung over his desk, so seldom used that it was covered with dust.

"My eye! He's going to come down heavy on Nat this time. Wish I hadn't
told," thought good-natured Tommy, for to be feruled was the deepest
disgrace at this school.

"You remember what I told you last time?" said Mr. Bhaer, sorrowfully,
not angrily.

"Yes; but please don't make me, I can't bear it," cried Nat, backing
up against the door with both hands behind him, and a face full of
distress.

"Why don't he up and take it like a man? I would," thought Tommy, though
his heart beat fast at the sight.

"I shall keep my word, and you must remember to tell the truth. Obey me,
Nat, take this and give me six good strokes."

Tommy was so staggered by this last speech that he nearly tumbled down
the bank, but saved himself, and hung onto the window ledge, staring in
with eyes as round as the stuffed owl's on the chimney-piece.

Nat took the rule, for when Mr. Bhaer spoke in that tone everyone obeyed
him, and, looking as scared and guilty as if about to stab his master,
he gave two feeble blows on the broad hand held out to him. Then
he stopped and looked up half-blind with tears, but Mr. Bhaer said
steadily:

"Go on, and strike harder."

As if seeing that it must be done, and eager to have the hard task soon
over, Nat drew his sleeve across his eyes and gave two more quick hard
strokes that reddened the hand, yet hurt the giver more.

"Isn't that enough?" he asked in a breathless sort of tone.

"Two more," was all the answer, and he gave them, hardly seeing where
they fell, then threw the rule all across the room, and hugging the kind
hand in both his own, laid his face down on it sobbing out in a passion
of love, and shame, and penitence:

"I will remember! Oh! I will!"

Then Mr. Bhaer put an arm about him, and said in a tone as compassionate
as it had just now been firm:

"I think you will. Ask the dear God to help you, and try to spare us
both another scene like this."

Tommy saw no more, for he crept back to the hall, looking so excited and
sober that the boys crowded round him to ask what was being done to Nat.

In a most impressive whisper Tommy told them, and they looked as if the
sky was about to fall, for this reversing the order of things almost
took their breath away.

"He made me do the same thing once," said Emil, as if confessing a crime
of the deepest dye.

"And you hit him? dear old Father Bhaer? By thunder, I'd just like
to see you do it now!" said Ned, collaring Emil in a fit of righteous
wrath.

"It was ever so long ago. I'd rather have my head cut off than do it
now," and Emil mildly laid Ned on his back instead of cuffing him, as he
would have felt it his duty to do on any less solemn occasion.

"How could you?" said Demi, appalled at the idea.

"I was hopping mad at the time, and thought I shouldn't mind a
bit, rather like it perhaps. But when I'd hit uncle one good crack,
everything he had ever done for me came into my head all at once
somehow, and I couldn't go on. No sir! If he'd laid me down and walked
on me, I wouldn't have minded, I felt so mean," and Emil gave himself a
good thump in the chest to express his sense of remorse for the past.

"Nat's crying like anything, and feels no end sorry, so don't let's say
a word about it; will we?" said tender-hearted Tommy.

"Of course we won't, but it's awful to tell lies," and Demi looked as if
he found the awfulness much increased when the punishment fell not upon
the sinner, but his best Uncle Fritz.

"Suppose we all clear out, so Nat can cut upstairs if he wants to,"
proposed Franz, and led the way to the barn, their refuge in troublous
times.

Nat did not come to dinner, but Mrs. Jo took some up to him, and said a
tender word, which did him good, though he could not look at her. By and
by the lads playing outside heard the violin, and said among themselves:
"He's all right now." He was all right, but felt shy about going down,
till opening his door to slip away into the woods, he found Daisy
sitting on the stairs with neither work nor doll, only her little
handkerchief in her hand, as if she had been mourning for her captive
friend.

"I'm going to walk; want to come?" asked Nat, trying to look as if
nothing was the matter, yet feeling very grateful for her silent
sympathy, because he fancied everyone must look upon him as a wretch.

"Oh yes!" and Daisy ran for her hat, proud to be chosen as a companion
by one of the big boys.

The others saw them go, but no one followed, for boys have a great deal
more delicacy than they get credit for, and the lads instinctively felt
that, when in disgrace, gentle little Daisy was their most congenial
friend.

The walk did Nat good, and he came home quieter than usual, but looking
cheerful again, and hung all over with daisy-chains made by his little
playmate while he lay on the grass and told her stories.

No one said a word about the scene of the morning, but its effect was
all the more lasting for that reason, perhaps. Nat tried his very best,
and found much help, not only from the earnest little prayers he prayed
to his Friend in heaven, but also in the patient care of the earthly
friend whose kind hand he never touched without remembering that it had
willingly borne pain for his sake.



CHAPTER V. PATTYPANS

"What's the matter, Daisy?"

"The boys won't let me play with them."

"Why not?"

"They say girls can't play football."

"They can, for I've done it!" and Mrs. Bhaer laughed at the remembrance
of certain youthful frolics.

"I know I can play; Demi and I used to, and have nice times, but he
won't let me now because the other boys laugh at him," and Daisy looked
deeply grieved at her brother's hardness of heart.

"On the whole, I think he is right, deary. It's all very well when you
two are alone, but it is too rough a game for you with a dozen boys; so
I'd find some nice little play for myself."

"I'm tired of playing alone!" and Daisy's tone was very mournful.

"I'll play with you by and by, but just now I must fly about and get
things ready for a trip into town. You shall go with me and see mamma,
and if you like you can stay with her."

"I should like to go and see her and Baby Josy, but I'd rather come
back, please. Demi would miss me, and I love to be here, Aunty."

"You can't get on without your Demi, can you?" and Aunt Jo looked as if
she quite understood the love of the little girl for her only brother.

"'Course I can't; we're twins, and so we love each other more than other
people," answered Daisy, with a brightening face, for she considered
being a twin one of the highest honors she could ever receive.

"Now, what will you do with your little self while I fly around?" asked
Mrs. Bhaer, who was whisking piles of linen into a wardrobe with great
rapidity.

"I don't know, I'm tired of dolls and things; I wish you'd make up a new
play for me, Aunty Jo," said Daisy, swinging listlessly on the door.

"I shall have to think of a brand new one, and it will take me some
time; so suppose you go down and see what Asia has got for your lunch,"
suggested Mrs. Bhaer, thinking that would be a good way in which to
dispose of the little hindrance for a time.

"Yes, I think I'd like that, if she isn't cross," and Daisy slowly
departed to the kitchen, where Asia, the black cook, reigned
undisturbed.

In five minutes, Daisy was back again, with a wide-awake face, a bit of
dough in her hand and a dab of flour on her little nose.

"Oh aunty! Please could I go and make gingersnaps and things? Asia isn't
cross, and she says I may, and it would be such fun, please do," cried
Daisy, all in one breath.

"Just the thing, go and welcome, make what you like, and stay as long as
you please," answered Mrs. Bhaer, much relieved, for sometimes the one
little girl was harder to amuse than the dozen boys.

Daisy ran off, and while she worked, Aunt Jo racked her brain for a
new play. All of a sudden she seemed to have an idea, for she smiled
to herself, slammed the doors of the wardrobe, and walked briskly away,
saying, "I'll do it, if it's a possible thing!"

What it was no one found out that day, but Aunt Jo's eyes twinkled so
when she told Daisy she had thought of a new play, and was going to buy
it, that Daisy was much excited and asked questions all the way into
town, without getting answers that told her anything. She was left at
home to play with the new baby, and delight her mother's eyes, while
Aunt Jo went off shopping. When she came back with all sorts of queer
parcels in corners of the carry-all, Daisy was so full of curiosity that
she wanted to go back to Plumfield at once. But her aunt would not be
hurried, and made a long call in mamma's room, sitting on the floor with
baby in her lap, making Mrs. Brooke laugh at the pranks of the boys, and
all sorts of droll nonsense.

How her aunt told the secret Daisy could not imagine, but her mother
evidently knew it, for she said, as she tied on the little bonnet and
kissed the rosy little face inside, "Be a good child, my Daisy, and
learn the nice new play aunty has got for you. It's a most useful and
interesting one, and it is very kind of her to play it with you, because
she does not like it very well herself."

This last speech made the two ladies laugh heartily, and increased
Daisy's bewilderment. As they drove away something rattled in the back
of the carriage.

"What's that?" asked Daisy, pricking up her ears.

"The new play," answered Mrs. Jo, solemnly.

"What is it made of?" cried Daisy.

"Iron, tin, wood, brass, sugar, salt, coal, and a hundred other things."

"How strange! What color is it?"

"All sorts of colors."

"Is it large?"

"Part of it is, and a part isn't."

"Did I ever see one?"

"Ever so many, but never one so nice as this."

"Oh! what can it be? I can't wait. When shall I see it?" and Daisy
bounced up and down with impatience.

"To-morrow morning, after lessons."

"Is it for the boys, too?"

"No, all for you and Bess. The boys will like to see it, and want to
play one part of it. But you can do as you like about letting them."

"I'll let Demi, if he wants to."

"No fear that they won't all want to, especially Stuffy," and Mrs.
Bhaer's eyes twinkled more than ever as she patted a queer knobby bundle
in her lap.

"Let me feel just once," prayed Daisy.

"Not a feel; you'd guess in a minute and spoil the fun."

Daisy groaned and then smiled all over her face, for through a little
hole in the paper she caught a glimpse of something bright.

"How can I wait so long? Couldn't I see it today?"

"Oh dear, no! It has got to be arranged, and ever so many parts fixed in
their places. I promised Uncle Teddy that you shouldn't see it till it
was all in apple-pie order."

"If uncle knows about it then it must be splendid!" cried Daisy,
clapping her hands; for this kind, rich, jolly uncle of hers was as
good as a fairy godmother to the children, and was always planning merry
surprises, pretty gifts, and droll amusements for them.

"Yes; Teddy went and bought it with me, and we had such fun in the shop
choosing the different parts. He would have everything fine and large,
and my little plan got regularly splendid when he took hold. You must
give him your very best kiss when he comes, for he is the kindest uncle
that ever went and bought a charming little coo Bless me! I nearly told
you what it was!" and Mrs. Bhaer cut that most interesting word short
off in the middle, and began to look over her bills, as if afraid she
would let the cat out of the bag if she talked any more. Daisy folded
her hands with an air of resignation, and sat quite still trying to
think what play had a "coo" in it.

When they got home she eyed every bundle that was taken out, and one
large heavy one, which Franz took straight upstairs and hid in the
nursery, filled her with amazement and curiosity. Something very
mysterious went on up there that afternoon, for Franz was hammering,
and Asia trotting up and down, and Aunt Jo flying around like a
will-o'-the-wisp, with all sort of things under her apron, while little
Ted, who was the only child admitted, because he couldn't talk plain,
babbled and laughed, and tried to tell what the "sumpin pitty" was.

All this made Daisy half-wild, and her excitement spread among the boys,
who quite overwhelmed Mother Bhaer with offers of assistance, which she
declined by quoting their own words to Daisy:

"Girls can't play with boys. This is for Daisy, and Bess, and me, so
we don't want you." Whereupon the young gentlemen meekly retired, and
invited Daisy to a game of marbles, horse, football, anything she liked,
with a sudden warmth and politeness which astonished her innocent little
soul.

Thanks to these attentions, she got through the afternoon, went early
to bed, and next morning did her lessons with an energy which made Uncle
Fritz wish that a new game could be invented every day. Quite a thrill
pervaded the school-room when Daisy was dismissed at eleven o'clock,
for everyone knew that now she was going to have the new and mysterious
play.

Many eyes followed her as she ran away, and Demi's mind was so
distracted by this event that when Franz asked him where the desert
of Sahara was, he mournfully replied, "In the nursery," and the whole
school laughed at him.

"Aunt Jo, I've done all my lessons, and I can't wait one single minute
more!" cried Daisy, flying into Mrs. Bhaer's room.

"It's all ready, come on;" and tucking Ted under one arm, and her
workbasket under the other, Aunt Jo promptly led the way upstairs.

"I don't see anything," said Daisy, staring about her as she got inside
the nursery door.

"Do you hear anything?" asked Aunt Jo, catching Ted back by his little
frock as he was making straight for one side of the room.

Daisy did hear an odd crackling, and then a purry little sound as of a
kettle singing. These noises came from behind a curtain drawn before a
deep bay window. Daisy snatched it back, gave one joyful, "Oh!" and then
stood gazing with delight at what do you think?

A wide seat ran round the three sides of the window; on one side hung
and stood all sorts of little pots and pans, gridirons and skillets;
on the other side a small dinner and tea set; and on the middle part a
cooking-stove. Not a tin one, that was of no use, but a real iron stove,
big enough to cook for a large family of very hungry dolls. But the best
of it was that a real fire burned in it, real steam came out of the
nose of the little tea-kettle, and the lid of the little boiler actually
danced a jig, the water inside bubbled so hard. A pane of glass had
been taken out and replaced by a sheet of tin, with a hole for the small
funnel, and real smoke went sailing away outside so naturally, that it
did one's heart good to see it. The box of wood with a hod of charcoal
stood near by; just above hung dust-pan, brush and broom; a little
market basket was on the low table at which Daisy used to play, and over
the back of her little chair hung a white apron with a bib, and a droll
mob cap. The sun shone in as if he enjoyed the fun, the little stove
roared beautifully, the kettle steamed, the new tins sparkled on the
walls, the pretty china stood in tempting rows, and it was altogether as
cheery and complete a kitchen as any child could desire.

Daisy stood quite still after the first glad "Oh!" but her eyes went
quickly from one charming object to another, brightening as they looked,
till they came to Aunt Jo's merry face; there they stopped as the happy
little girl hugged her, saying gratefully:

"Oh aunty, it's a splendid new play! Can I really cook at the dear
stove, and have parties and mess, and sweep, and make fires that truly
burn? I like it so much! What made you think of it?"

"Your liking to make gingersnaps with Asia made me think of it," said
Mrs. Bhaer, holding Daisy, who frisked as if she would fly. "I knew Asia
wouldn't let you mess in her kitchen very often, and it wouldn't be
safe at this fire up here, so I thought I'd see if I could find a little
stove for you, and teach you to cook; that would be fun, and useful too.
So I travelled round among the toy shops, but everything large cost too
much and I was thinking I should have to give it up, when I met Uncle
Teddy. As soon as he knew what I was about, he said he wanted to help,
and insisted on buying the biggest toy stove we could find. I scolded,
but he only laughed, and teased me about my cooking when we were young,
and said I must teach Bess as well as you, and went on buying all sorts
of nice little things for my 'cooking class' as he called it."

"I'm so glad you met him!" said Daisy, as Mrs. Jo stopped to laugh at
the memory of the funny time she had with Uncle Teddy.

"You must study hard and learn to make all kinds of things, for he says
he shall come out to tea very often, and expects something uncommonly
nice."

"It's the sweetest, dearest kitchen in the world, and I'd rather
study with it than do anything else. Can't I learn pies, and cake, and
macaroni, and everything?" cried Daisy, dancing round the room with a
new saucepan in one hand and the tiny poker in the other.

"All in good time. This is to be a useful play, I am to help you, and
you are to be my cook, so I shall tell you what to do, and show you how.
Then we shall have things fit to eat, and you will be really learning
how to cook on a small scale. I'll call you Sally, and say you are a new
girl just come," added Mrs. Jo, settling down to work, while Teddy sat
on the floor sucking his thumb, and staring at the stove as if it was a
live thing, whose appearance deeply interested him.

"That will be so lovely! What shall I do first?" asked Sally, with such
a happy face and willing air that Aunt Jo wished all new cooks were half
as pretty and pleasant.

"First of all, put on this clean cap and apron. I am rather
old-fashioned, and I like my cook to be very tidy."

Sally tucked her curly hair into the round cap, and put on the apron
without a murmur, though usually she rebelled against bibs.

"Now, you can put things in order, and wash up the new china. The old
set needs washing also, for my last girl was apt to leave it in a sad
state after a party."

Aunt Jo spoke quite soberly, but Sally laughed, for she knew who the
untidy girl was who had left the cups sticky. Then she turned up her
cuffs, and with a sigh of satisfaction began to stir about her kitchen,
having little raptures now and then over the "sweet rolling pin," the
"darling dish-tub," or the "cunning pepper-pot."

"Now, Sally, take your basket and go to market; here is the list of
things I want for dinner," said Mrs. Jo, giving her a bit of paper when
the dishes were all in order.

"Where is the market?" asked Daisy, thinking that the new play got more
and more interesting every minute.

"Asia is the market."

Away went Sally, causing another stir in the schoolroom as she passed
the door in her new costume, and whispered to Demi, with a face full of
delight, "It's a perfectly splendid play!"

Old Asia enjoyed the joke as much as Daisy, and laughed jollily as the
little girl came flying into the room with her cap all on one side, the
lids of her basket rattling like castanets and looking like a very crazy
little cook.

"Mrs. Aunt Jo wants these things, and I must have them right away," said
Daisy, importantly.

"Let's see, honey; here's two pounds of steak, potatoes, squash, apples,
bread, and butter. The meat ain't come yet; when it does I'll send it
up. The other things are all handy."

Then Asia packed one potato, one apple, a bit of squash, a little pat
of butter, and a roll, into the basket, telling Sally to be on the watch
for the butcher's boy, because he sometimes played tricks.

"Who is he?" and Daisy hoped it would be Demi.

"You'll see," was all Asia would say; and Sally went off in great
spirits, singing a verse from dear Mary Howitt's sweet story in rhyme:

     "Away went little Mabel,
     With the wheaten cake so fine,
     The new-made pot of butter,
     And the little flask of wine."

"Put everything but the apple into the store-closet for the present,"
said Mrs. Jo, when the cook got home.

There was a cupboard under the middle shelf, and on opening the door
fresh delights appeared. One half was evidently the cellar, for wood,
coal, and kindlings were piled there. The other half was full of little
jars, boxes, and all sorts of droll contrivances for holding small
quantities of flour, meal, sugar, salt, and other household stores. A
pot of jam was there, a little tin box of gingerbread, a cologne bottle
full of currant wine, and a tiny canister of tea. But the crowning charm
was two doll's pans of new milk, with cream actually rising on it, and
a wee skimmer all ready to skim it with. Daisy clasped her hands at
this delicious spectacle, and wanted to skim it immediately. But Aunt Jo
said:

"Not yet; you will want the cream to eat on your apple pie at dinner,
and must not disturb it till then."

"Am I going to have pie?" cried Daisy, hardly believing that such bliss
could be in store for her.

"Yes; if your oven does well we will have two pies, one apple and one
strawberry," said Mrs. Jo, who was nearly as much interested in the new
play as Daisy herself.

"Oh, what next?" asked Sally, all impatience to begin.

"Shut the lower draught of the stove, so that the oven may heat.
Then wash your hands and get out the flour, sugar, salt, butter, and
cinnamon. See if the pie-board is clean, and pare your apple ready to
put in."

Daisy got things together with as little noise and spilling as could be
expected, from so young a cook.

"I really don't know how to measure for such tiny pies; I must guess
at it, and if these don't succeed, we must try again," said Mrs. Jo,
looking rather perplexed, and very much amused with the small concern
before her. "Take that little pan full of flour, put in a pinch of salt,
and then rub in as much butter as will go on that plate. Always remember
to put your dry things together first, and then the wet. It mixes better
so."

"I know how; I saw Asia do it. Don't I butter the pie plates too? She
did, the first thing," said Daisy, whisking the flour about at a great
rate.

"Quite right! I do believe you have a gift for cooking, you take to it
so cleverly," said Aunt Jo, approvingly. "Now a dash of cold water,
just enough to wet it; then scatter some flour on the board, work in
a little, and roll the paste out; yes, that's the way. Now put dabs of
butter all over it, and roll it out again. We won't have our pastry very
rich, or the dolls will get dyspeptic."

Daisy laughed at the idea, and scattered the dabs with a liberal hand.
Then she rolled and rolled with her delightful little pin, and having
got her paste ready proceeded to cover the plates with it. Next the
apple was sliced in, sugar and cinnamon lavishly sprinkled over it, and
then the top crust put on with breathless care.

"I always wanted to cut them round, and Asia never would let me. How
nice it is to do it all my ownty donty self!" said Daisy, as the little
knife went clipping round the doll's plate poised on her hand.

All cooks, even the best, meet with mishaps sometimes, and Sally's first
one occurred then, for the knife went so fast that the plate slipped,
turned a somersault in the air, and landed the dear little pie upside
down on the floor. Sally screamed, Mrs. Jo laughed, Teddy scrambled to
get it, and for a moment confusion reigned in the new kitchen.

"It didn't spill or break, because I pinched the edges together so hard;
it isn't hurt a bit, so I'll prick holes in it, and then it will be
ready," said Sally, picking up the capsized treasure and putting it into
shape with a child-like disregard of the dust it had gathered in its
fall.

"My new cook has a good temper, I see, and that is such a comfort," said
Mrs. Jo. "Now open the jar of strawberry jam, fill the uncovered pie,
and put some strips of paste over the top as Asia does."

"I'll make a D in the middle, and have zigzags all round, that will be
so interesting when I come to eat it," said Sally, loading the pie with
quirls and flourishes that would have driven a real pastry cook wild.
"Now I put them in!" she exclaimed; when the last grimy knob had been
carefully planted in the red field of jam, and with an air of triumph
she shut them into the little oven.

"Clear up your things; a good cook never lets her utensils collect. Then
pare your squash and potatoes."

"There is only one potato," giggled Sally.

"Cut it in four pieces, so it will go into the little kettle, and put
the bits into cold water till it is time to cook them."

"Do I soak the squash too?"

"No, indeed! Just pare it and cut it up, and put in into the steamer
over the pot. It is drier so, though it takes longer to cook."

Here a scratching at the door caused Sally to run and open it, when Kit
appeared with a covered basket in his mouth.

"Here's the butcher boy!" cried Daisy, much tickled at the idea, as she
relieved him of his load, whereat he licked his lips and began to beg,
evidently thinking that it was his own dinner, for he often carried it
to his master in that way. Being undeceived, he departed in great wrath
and barked all the way downstairs, to ease his wounded feelings.

In the basket were two bits of steak (doll's pounds), a baked pear, a
small cake, and paper with them on which Asia had scrawled, "For Missy's
lunch, if her cookin' don't turn out well."

"I don't want any of her old pears and things; my cooking will turn out
well, and I'll have a splendid dinner; see if I don't!" cried Daisy,
indignantly.

"We may like them if company should come. It is always well to have
something in the storeroom," said Aunt Jo, who had been taught this
valuable fact by a series of domestic panics.

"Me is hundry," announced Teddy, who began to think what with so much
cooking going on it was about time for somebody to eat something. His
mother gave him her workbasket to rummage, hoping to keep him quiet till
dinner was ready, and returned to her housekeeping.

"Put on your vegetables, set the table, and then have some coals
kindling ready for the steak."

What a thing it was to see the potatoes bobbing about in the little pot;
to peep at the squash getting soft so fast in the tiny steamer; to whisk
open the oven door every five minutes to see how the pies got on, and
at last when the coals were red and glowing, to put two real steaks on
a finger-long gridiron and proudly turn them with a fork. The potatoes
were done first, and no wonder, for they had boiled frantically all the
while. The were pounded up with a little pestle, had much butter and no
salt put in (cook forgot it in the excitement of the moment), then it
was made into a mound in a gay red dish, smoothed over with a knife
dipped in milk, and put in the oven to brown.

So absorbed in these last performances had Sally been, that she forgot
her pastry till she opened the door to put in the potato, then a wail
arose, for alas! alas! the little pies were burnt black!

"Oh, my pies! My darling pies! They are all spoilt!" cried poor Sally,
wringing her dirty little hands as she surveyed the ruin of her work.
The tart was especially pathetic, for the quirls and zigzags stuck up in
all directions from the blackened jelly, like the walls and chimney of a
house after a fire.

"Dear, dear, I forgot to remind you to take them out; it's just my
luck," said Aunt Jo, remorsefully. "Don't cry, darling, it was my fault;
we'll try again after dinner," she added, as a great tear dropped from
Sally's eyes and sizzled on the hot ruins of the tart.

More would have followed, if the steak had not blazed up just then,
and so occupied the attention of cook, that she quickly forgot the lost
pastry.

"Put the meat-dish and your own plates down to warm, while you mash the
squash with butter, salt, and a little pepper on the top," said Mrs. Jo,
devoutly hoping that the dinner would meet with no further disasters.

The "cunning pepper-pot" soothed Sally's feelings, and she dished up her
squash in fine style. The dinner was safely put upon the table; the six
dolls were seated three on a side; Teddy took the bottom, and Sally the
top. When all were settled, it was a most imposing spectacle, for one
doll was in full ball costume, another in her night-gown; Jerry, the
worsted boy, wore his red winter suit, while Annabella, the noseless
darling, was airily attired in nothing but her own kid skin. Teddy, as
father of the family, behaved with great propriety, for he smilingly
devoured everything offered him, and did not find a single fault. Daisy
beamed upon her company like the weary, warm, but hospitable hostess so
often to be seen at larger tables than this, and did the honors with an
air of innocent satisfaction, which we do not often see elsewhere.

The steak was so tough that the little carving-knife would not cut it;
the potato did not go round, and the squash was very lumpy; but the
guests appeared politely unconscious of these trifles; and the master
and mistress of the house cleared the table with appetites that anyone
might envy them. The joy of skimming a jug-full of cream mitigated the
anguish felt for the loss of the pies, and Asia's despised cake proved a
treasure in the way of dessert.

"That is the nicest lunch I ever had; can't I do it every day?" asked
Daisy as she scraped up and ate the leavings all round.

"You can cook things every day after lessons, but I prefer that you
should eat your dishes at your regular meals, and only have a bit of
gingerbread for lunch. To-day, being the first time, I don't mind, but
we must keep our rules. This afternoon you can make something for tea
if you like," said Mrs. Jo, who had enjoyed the dinner-party very much,
though no one had invited her to partake.

"Do let me make flapjacks for Demi, he loves them so, and it's such fun
to turn them and put sugar in between," cried Daisy, tenderly wiping a
yellow stain off Annabella's broken nose, for Bella had refused to eat
squash when it was pressed upon her as good for "lumatism," a complaint
which it is no wonder she suffered from, considering the lightness of
her attire.

"But if you give Demi goodies, all the others will expect some also, and
then you will have your hands full."

"Couldn't I have Demi come up to tea alone just this one time? And after
that I could cook things for the others if they were good," proposed
Daisy, with a sudden inspiration.

"That is a capital idea, Posy! We will make your little messes rewards
for the good boys, and I don't know one among them who would not like
something nice to eat more than almost anything else. If little men are
like big ones, good cooking will touch their hearts and soothe their
tempers delightfully," added Aunt Jo, with a merry nod toward the
door, where stood Papa Bhaer, surveying the scene with a face full of
amusement.

"That last hit was for me, sharp woman. I accept it, for it is true; but
if I had married thee for thy cooking, heart's dearest, I should have
fared badly all these years," answered the professor, laughing as he
tossed Teddy, who became quite apoplectic in his endeavors to describe
the feast he had just enjoyed.

Daisy proudly showed her kitchen, and rashly promised Uncle Fritz as
many flapjacks as he could eat. She was just telling about the new
rewards when the boys, headed by Demi, burst into the room snuffing the
air like a pack of hungry hounds, for school was out, dinner was not
ready, and the fragrance of Daisy's steak led them straight to the spot.

A prouder little damsel was never seen than Sally as she displayed her
treasures and told the lads what was in store for them. Several rather
scoffed at the idea of her cooking anything fit to eat, but Stuffy's
heart was won at once. Nat and Demi had firm faith in her skill, and the
others said they would wait and see. All admired the kitchen, however,
and examined the stove with deep interest. Demi offered to buy
the boiler on the spot, to be used in a steam-engine which he was
constructing; and Ned declared that the best and biggest saucepan was
just the thing to melt his lead in when he ran bullets, hatchets, and
such trifles.

Daisy looked so alarmed at these proposals, that Mrs. Jo then and
there made and proclaimed a law that no boy should touch, use, or
even approach the sacred stove without a special permit from the
owner thereof. This increased its value immensely in the eyes of the
gentlemen, especially as any infringement of the law would be punished
by forfeiture of all right to partake of the delicacies promised to the
virtuous.

At this point the bell rang, and the entire population went down to
dinner, which meal was enlivened by each of the boys giving Daisy a
list of things he would like to have cooked for him as fast as he
earned them. Daisy, whose faith in her stove was unlimited, promised
everything, if Aunt Jo would tell her how to make them. This suggestion
rather alarmed Mrs. Jo, for some of the dishes were quite beyond her
skill wedding-cake, for instance, bull's-eye candy; and cabbage soup
with herrings and cherries in it, which Mr. Bhaer proposed as his
favorite, and immediately reduced his wife to despair, for German
cookery was beyond her.

Daisy wanted to begin again the minute dinner was done, but she was only
allowed to clear up, fill the kettle ready for tea, and wash out her
apron, which looked as if she had a Christmas feast. She was then sent
out to play till five o'clock, for Uncle Fritz said that too much study,
even at cooking stoves, was bad for little minds and bodies, and Aunt Jo
knew by long experience how soon new toys lose their charm if they are
not prudently used.

Everyone was very kind to Daisy that afternoon. Tommy promised her the
first fruits of his garden, though the only visible crop just then was
pigweed; Nat offered to supply her with wood, free of charge; Stuffy
quite worshipped her; Ned immediately fell to work on a little
refrigerator for her kitchen; and Demi, with a punctuality beautiful
to see in one so young, escorted her to the nursery just as the clock
struck five. It was not time for the party to begin, but he begged so
hard to come in and help that he was allowed privileges few visitors
enjoy, for he kindled the fire, ran errands, and watched the progress
of his supper with intense interest. Mrs. Jo directed the affair as she
came and went, being very busy putting up clean curtains all over the
house.

"Ask Asia for a cup of sour cream, then your cakes will be light without
much soda, which I don't like," was the first order.

Demi tore downstairs, and returned with the cream, also a puckered-up
face, for he had tasted it on his way, and found it so sour that he
predicted the cakes would be uneatable. Mrs. Jo took this occasion to
deliver a short lecture from the step-ladder on the chemical properties
of soda, to which Daisy did not listen, but Demi did, and understood it,
as he proved by the brief but comprehensive reply:

"Yes, I see, soda turns sour things sweet, and the fizzling up makes
them light. Let's see you do it, Daisy."

"Fill that bowl nearly full of flour and add a little salt to it,"
continued Mrs. Jo.

"Oh dear, everything has to have salt in it, seems to me," said Sally,
who was tired of opening the pill-box in which it was kept.

"Salt is like good-humor, and nearly every thing is better for a pinch
of it, Posy," and Uncle Fritz stopped as he passed, hammer in hand, to
drive up two or three nails for Sally's little pans to hang on.

"You are not invited to tea, but I'll give you some cakes, and I won't
be cross," said Daisy, putting up her floury little face to thank him
with a kiss.

"Fritz, you must not interrupt my cooking class, or I'll come in and
moralize when you are teaching Latin. How would you like that?" said
Mrs. Jo, throwing a great chintz curtain down on his head.

"Very much, try it and see," and the amiable Father Bhaer went singing
and tapping about the house like a mammoth woodpecker.

"Put the soda into the cream, and when it 'fizzles,' as Demi says, stir
it into the flour, and beat it up as hard as ever you can. Have your
griddle hot, butter it well, and then fry away till I come back," and
Aunt Jo vanished also.

Such a clatter as the little spoon made, and such a beating as the
batter got, it quite foamed, I assure you; and when Daisy poured some
on to the griddle, it rose like magic into a puffy flapjack that made
Demi's mouth water. To be sure, the first one stuck and scorched,
because she forgot the butter, but after that first failure all went
well, and six capital little cakes were safely landed in a dish.

"I think I like maple-syrup better than sugar," said Demi, from his
arm-chair where he had settled himself after setting the table in a new
and peculiar manner.

"Then go and ask Asia for some," answered Daisy, going into the
bath-room to wash her hands.

While the nursery was empty something dreadful happened. You see, Kit
had been feeling hurt all day because he had carried meat safely and yet
got none to pay him. He was not a bad dog, but he had his little faults
like the rest of us, and could not always resist temptation. Happening
to stroll into the nursery at that moment, he smelt the cakes, saw them
unguarded on the low table, and never stopping to think of consequences,
swallowed all six at one mouthful. I am glad to say that they were very
hot, and burned him so badly that he could not repress a surprised yelp.
Daisy heard it, ran in, saw the empty dish, also the end of a yellow
tail disappearing under the bed. Without a word she seized that tail,
pulled out the thief, and shook him till his ears flapped wildly, then
bundled him down-stairs to the shed, where he spent a lonely evening in
the coal-bin.

Cheered by the sympathy which Demi gave her, Daisy made another bowlful
of batter, and fried a dozen cakes, which were even better than the
others. Indeed, Uncle Fritz after eating two sent up word that he had
never tasted any so nice, and every boy at the table below envied Demi
at the flapjack party above.

It was a truly delightful supper, for the little teapot lid only fell
off three times and the milk jug upset but once; the cakes floated in
syrup, and the toast had a delicious beef-steak flavor, owing to cook's
using the gridiron to make it on. Demi forgot philosophy, and stuffed
like any carnal boy, while Daisy planned sumptuous banquets, and the
dolls looked on smiling affably.

"Well, dearies, have you had a good time?" asked Mrs. Jo, coming up with
Teddy on her shoulder.

"A very good time. I shall come again soon," answered Demi, with
emphasis.

"I'm afraid you have eaten too much, by the look of that table."

"No, I haven't; I only ate fifteen cakes, and they were very little
ones," protested Demi, who had kept his sister busy supplying his plate.

"They won't hurt him, they are so nice," said Daisy, with such a funny
mixture of maternal fondness and housewifely pride that Aunt Jo could
only smile and say:

"Well, on the whole, the new game is a success then?"

"I like it," said Demi, as if his approval was all that was necessary.

"It is the dearest play ever made!" cried Daisy, hugging her little
dish-tub as she proposed to wash up the cups. "I just wish everybody
had a sweet cooking stove like mine," she added, regarding it with
affection.

"This play out to have a name," said Demi, gravely removing the syrup
from his countenance with his tongue.

"It has."

"Oh, what?" asked both children eagerly.

"Well, I think we will call it Pattypans," and Aunt Jo retired,
satisfied with the success of her last trap to catch a sunbeam.



CHAPTER VI. A FIRE BRAND

"Please, ma'am, could I speak to you? It is something very important,"
said Nat, popping his head in at the door of Mrs. Bhaer's room.

It was the fifth head which had popped in during the last half-hour; but
Mrs. Jo was used to it, so she looked up, and said, briskly,

"What is it, my lad?"

Nat came in, shut the door carefully behind him, and said in an eager,
anxious tone,

"Dan has come."

"Who is Dan?"

"He's a boy I used to know when I fiddled round the streets. He sold
papers, and he was kind to me, and I saw him the other day in town, and
told him how nice it was here, and he's come."

"But, my dear boy, that is rather a sudden way to pay a visit."

"Oh, it isn't a visit; he wants to stay if you will let him!" said Nat
innocently.

"Well, I don't know about that," began Mrs. Bhaer, rather startled by
the coolness of the proposition.

"Why, I thought you liked to have poor boys come and live with you,
and be kind to 'em as you were to me," said Nat, looking surprised and
alarmed.

"So I do, but I like to know something about them first. I have to
choose them, because there are so many. I have not room for all. I wish
I had."

"I told him to come because I thought you'd like it, but if there isn't
room he can go away again," said Nat, sorrowfully.

The boy's confidence in her hospitality touched Mrs. Bhaer, and she
could not find the heart to disappoint his hope, and spoil his kind
little plan, so she said,

"Tell me about this Dan."

"I don't know any thing, only he hasn't got any folks, and he's poor,
and he was good to me, so I'd like to be good to him if I could."

"Excellent reasons every one; but really, Nat, the house is full, and
I don't know where I could put him," said Mrs. Bhaer, more and more
inclined to prove herself the haven of refuge he seemed to think her.

"He could have my bed, and I could sleep in the barn. It isn't cold
now, and I don't mind, I used to sleep anywhere with father," said Nat,
eagerly.

Something in his speech and face made Mrs. Jo put her hand on his
shoulder, and say in her kindest tone:

"Bring in your friend, Nat; I think we must find room for him without
giving him your place."

Nat joyfully ran off, and soon returned followed by a most
unprepossessing boy, who slouched in and stood looking about him, with a
half bold, half sullen look, which made Mrs. Bhaer say to herself, after
one glance,

"A bad specimen, I am afraid."

"This is Dan," said Nat, presenting him as if sure of his welcome.

"Nat tells me you would like to come and stay with us," began Mrs. Jo,
in a friendly tone.

"Yes," was the gruff reply.

"Have you no friends to take care of you?"

"No."

"Say, 'No, ma'am,'" whispered Nat.

"Shan't neither," muttered Dan.

"How old are you?"

"About fourteen."

"You look older. What can you do?"

"'Most anything."

"If you stay here we shall want you to do as the others do, work and
study as well as play. Are you willing to agree to that?"

"Don't mind trying."

"Well, you can stay a few days, and we will see how we get on together.
Take him out, Nat, and amuse him till Mr. Bhaer comes home, when we will
settle about the matter," said Mrs. Jo, finding it rather difficult to
get on with this cool young person, who fixed his big black eyes on her
with a hard, suspicious expression, sorrowfully unboyish.

"Come on, Nat," he said, and slouched out again.

"Thank you, ma'am," added Nat, as he followed him, feeling without quite
understanding the difference in the welcome given to him and to his
ungracious friend.

"The fellows are having a circus out in the barn; don't you want to come
and see it?" he asked, as they came down the wide steps on to the lawn.

"Are they big fellows?" said Dan.

"No; the big ones are gone fishing."

"Fire away, then," said Dan.

Nat led him to the great barn and introduced him to his set, who were
disporting themselves among the half-empty lofts. A large circle was
marked out with hay on the wide floor, and in the middle stood Demi with
a long whip, while Tommy, mounted on the much-enduring Toby, pranced
about the circle playing being a monkey.

"You must pay a pin apiece, or you can't see the show," said Stuffy,
who stood by the wheelbarrow in which sat the band, consisting of a
pocket-comb blown upon by Ned, and a toy drum beaten spasmodically by
Rob.

"He's company, so I'll pay for both," said Nat, handsomely, as he stuck
two crooked pins in the dried mushroom which served as money-box.

With a nod to the company they seated themselves on a couple of boards,
and the performance went on. After the monkey act, Ned gave them a fine
specimen of his agility by jumping over an old chair, and running up
and down ladders, sailor fashion. Then Demi danced a jig with a gravity
beautiful to behold. Nat was called upon to wrestle with Stuffy, and
speedily laid that stout youth upon the ground. After this, Tommy
proudly advanced to turn a somersault, an accomplishment which he had
acquired by painful perseverance, practising in private till every joint
of his little frame was black and blue. His feats were received with
great applause, and he was about to retire, flushed with pride and a
rush of blood to the head, when a scornful voice in the audience was
heard to say,

"Ho! that ain't any thing!"

"Say that again, will you?" and Tommy bristled up like an angry
turkey-cock.

"Do you want to fight?" said Dan, promptly descending from the barrel
and doubling up his fists in a business-like manner.

"No, I don't;" and the candid Thomas retired a step, rather taken aback
by the proposition.

"Fighting isn't allowed!" cried the others, much excited.

"You're a nice lot," sneered Dan.

"Come, if you don't behave, you shan't stay," said Nat, firing up at
that insult to his friends.

"I'd like to see him do better than I did, that's all," observed Tommy,
with a swagger.

"Clear the way, then," and without the slightest preparation Dan turned
three somersaults one after the other and came up on his feet.

"You can't beat that, Tom; you always hit your head and tumble flat,"
said Nat, pleased at his friend's success.

Before he could say any more the audience were electrified by three more
somersaults backwards, and a short promenade on the hands, head down,
feet up. This brought down the house, and Tommy joined in the admiring
cries which greeted the accomplished gymnast as he righted himself, and
looked at them with an air of calm superiority.

"Do you think I could learn to do it without its hurting me very much?"
Tom meekly asked, as he rubbed the elbows which still smarted after the
last attempt.

"What will you give me if I'll teach you?" said Dan.

"My new jack-knife; it's got five blades, and only one is broken."

"Give it here, then."

Tommy handed it over with an affectionate look at its smooth handle.
Dan examined it carefully, then putting it into his pocket, walked off,
saying with a wink,

"Keep it up till you learn, that's all."

A howl of wrath from Tommy was followed by a general uproar, which did
not subside till Dan, finding himself in a minority, proposed that they
should play stick-knife, and whichever won should have the treasure.
Tommy agreed, and the game was played in a circle of excited faces,
which all wore an expression of satisfaction, when Tommy won and secured
the knife in the depth of his safest pocket.

"You come off with me, and I'll show you round," said Nat, feeling that
he must have a little serious conversation with his friend in private.

What passed between them no one knew, but when they appeared again, Dan
was more respectful to every one, though still gruff in his speech, and
rough in his manner; and what else could be expected of the poor lad
who had been knocking about the world all his short life with no one to
teach him any better?

The boys had decided that they did not like him, and so they left him
to Nat, who soon felt rather oppressed by the responsibility, but too
kind-hearted to desert him.

Tommy, however, felt that in spite of the jack-knife transaction,
there was a bond of sympathy between them, and longed to return to the
interesting subject of somersaults. He soon found an opportunity, for
Dan, seeing how much he admired him, grew more amiable, and by the end
of the first week was quite intimate with the lively Tom.

Mr. Bhaer, when he heard the story and saw Dan, shook his head, but only
said quietly,

"The experiment may cost us something, but we will try it."

If Dan felt any gratitude for his protection, he did not show it, and
took without thanks all that was give him. He was ignorant, but very
quick to learn when he chose; had sharp eyes to watch what went on about
him; a saucy tongue, rough manners, and a temper that was fierce and
sullen by turns. He played with all his might, and played well at almost
all the games. He was silent and gruff before grown people, and only
now and then was thoroughly sociable among the lads. Few of them really
liked him, but few could help admiring his courage and strength, for
nothing daunted him, and he knocked tall Franz flat on one occasion with
an ease that caused all the others to keep at a respectful distance from
his fists. Mr. Bhaer watched him silently, and did his best to tame the
"Wild Boy," as they called him, but in private the worthy man shook his
head, and said soberly, "I hope the experiment will turn out well, but I
am a little afraid it may cost too much."

Mrs. Bhaer lost her patience with him half a dozen times a day, yet
never gave him up, and always insisted that there was something good
in the lad, after all; for he was kinder to animals than to people, he
liked to rove about in the woods, and, best of all, little Ted was fond
of him. What the secret was no one could discover, but Baby took to him
at once gabbled and crowed whenever he saw him preferred his strong back
to ride on to any of the others and called him "My Danny" out of his
own little head. Teddy was the only creature to whom Dan showed an
affection, and this was only manifested when he thought no one
else would see it; but mothers' eyes are quick, and motherly hearts
instinctively divine who love their babies. So Mrs. Jo soon saw and felt
that there was a soft spot in rough Dan, and bided her time to touch and
win him.

But an unexpected and decidedly alarming event upset all their plans,
and banished Dan from Plumfield.

Tommy, Nat, and Demi began by patronizing Dan, because the other
lads rather slighted him; but soon they each felt there was a certain
fascination about the bad boy, and from looking down upon him they came
to looking up, each for a different reason. Tommy admired his skill and
courage; Nat was grateful for past kindness; and Demi regarded him as
a sort of animated story book, for when he chose Dan could tell his
adventures in a most interesting way. It pleased Dan to have the three
favorites like him, and he exerted himself to be agreeable, which was
the secret of his success.

The Bhaers were surprised, but hoped the lads would have a good
influence over Dan, and waited with some anxiety, trusting that no harm
would come of it.

Dan felt they did not quite trust him, and never showed them his best
side, but took a wilful pleasure in trying their patience and thwarting
their hopes as far as he dared.

Mr. Bhaer did not approve of fighting, and did not think it a proof of
either manliness or courage for two lads to pommel one another for
the amusement of the rest. All sorts of hardy games and exercises were
encouraged, and the boys were expected to take hard knocks and tumbles
without whining; but black eyes and bloody noses given for the fun of it
were forbidden as a foolish and a brutal play.

Dan laughed at this rule, and told such exciting tales of his own valor,
and the many frays that he had been in, that some of the lads were fired
with a desire to have a regular good "mill."

"Don't tell, and I'll show you how," said Dan; and, getting half a dozen
of the lads together behind the barn, he gave them a lesson in boxing,
which quite satisfied the ardor of most of them. Emil, however, could
not submit to be beaten by a fellow younger than himself, for Emil was
past fourteen and a plucky fellow, so he challenged Dan to a fight. Dan
accepted at once, and the others looked on with intense interest.

What little bird carried the news to head-quarters no one ever knew,
but, in the very hottest of the fray, when Dan and Emil were fighting
like a pair of young bulldogs, and the others with fierce, excited
faces were cheering them on, Mr. Bhaer walked into the ring, plucked the
combatants apart with a strong hand, and said, in the voice they seldom
heard,

"I can't allow this, boys! Stop it at once; and never let me see it
again. I keep a school for boys, not for wild beasts. Look at each other
and be ashamed of yourselves."

"You let me go, and I'll knock him down again," shouted Dan, sparring
away in spite of the grip on his collar.

"Come on, come on, I ain't thrashed yet!" cried Emil, who had been down
five times, but did not know when he was beaten.

"They are playing be gladdy what-you-call-'ems, like the Romans, Uncle
Fritz," called out Demi, whose eyes were bigger than ever with the
excitement of this new pastime.

"They were a fine set of brutes; but we have learned something since
then, I hope, and I cannot have you make my barn a Colosseum. Who
proposed this?" asked Mr. Bhaer.

"Dan," answered several voices.

"Don't you know that it is forbidden?"

"Yes," growled Dan, sullenly.

"Then why break the rule?"

"They'll all be molly-coddles, if they don't know how to fight."

"Have you found Emil a molly-coddle? He doesn't look much like one,"
and Mr. Bhaer brought the two face to face. Dan had a black eye, and his
jacket was torn to rags, but Emil's face was covered with blood from a
cut lip and a bruised nose, while a bump on his forehead was already as
purple as a plum. In spite of his wounds however, he still glared upon
his foe, and evidently panted to renew the fight.

"He'd make a first-rater if he was taught," said Dan, unable to withhold
the praise from the boy who made it necessary for him to do his best.

"He'll be taught to fence and box by and by, and till then I think
he will do very well without any lessons in mauling. Go and wash your
faces; and remember, Dan, if you break any more of the rules again, you
will be sent away. That was the bargain; do your part and we will do
ours."

The lads went off, and after a few more words to the spectators, Mr.
Bhaer followed to bind up the wounds of the young gladiators. Emil went
to bed sick, and Dan was an unpleasant spectacle for a week.

But the lawless lad had no thought of obeying, and soon transgressed
again.

One Saturday afternoon as a party of the boys went out to play, Tommy
said,

"Let's go down to the river, and cut a lot of new fish-poles."

"Take Toby to drag them back, and one of us can ride him down," proposed
Stuffy, who hated to walk.

"That means you, I suppose; well, hurry up, lazy-bones," said Dan.

Away they went, and having got the poles were about to go home, when
Demi unluckily said to Tommy, who was on Toby with a long rod in his
hand,

"You look like the picture of the man in the bull-fight, only you
haven't got a red cloth, or pretty clothes on."

"I'd like to see one; there's old Buttercup in the big meadow, ride at
her, Tom, and see her run," proposed Dan, bent on mischief.

"No, you mustn't," began Demi, who was learning to distrust Dan's
propositions.

"Why not, little fuss-button?" demanded Dan.

"I don't think Uncle Fritz would like it."

"Did he ever say we must not have a bull-fight?"

"No, I don't think he ever did," admitted Demi.

"Then hold your tongue. Drive on, Tom, and here's a red rag to flap at
the old thing. I'll help you to stir her up," and over the wall went
Dan, full of the new game, and the rest followed like a flock of sheep;
even Demi, who sat upon the bars, and watched the fun with interest.

Poor Buttercup was not in a very good mood, for she had been lately
bereft of her calf, and mourned for the little thing most dismally. Just
now she regarded all mankind as her enemies (and I do not blame her),
so when the matadore came prancing towards her with the red handkerchief
flying at the end of his long lance, she threw up her head, and gave
a most appropriate "Moo!" Tommy rode gallantly at her, and Toby
recognizing an old friend, was quite willing to approach; but when the
lance came down on her back with a loud whack, both cow and donkey were
surprised and disgusted. Toby back with a bray of remonstrance, and
Buttercup lowered her horns angrily.

"At her again, Tom; she's jolly cross, and will do it capitally!" called
Dan, coming up behind with another rod, while Jack and Ned followed his
example.

Seeing herself thus beset, and treated with such disrespect, Buttercup
trotted round the field, getting more and more bewildered and excited
every moment, for whichever way she turned, there was a dreadful boy,
yelling and brandishing a new and very disagreeable sort of whip. It was
great fun for them, but real misery for her, till she lost patience and
turned the tables in the most unexpected manner. All at once she wheeled
short round, and charged full at her old friend Toby, whose conduct cut
her to the heart. Poor slow Toby backed so precipitately that he tripped
over a stone, and down went horse, matadore, and all, in one ignominious
heap, while distracted Buttercup took a surprising leap over the wall,
and galloped wildly out of sight down the road.

"Catch her, stop her, head her off! run, boys, run!" shouted Dan,
tearing after her at his best pace, for she was Mr. Bhaer's pet
Alderney, and if anything happened to her, Dan feared it would be all
over with him. Such a running and racing and bawling and puffing as
there was before she was caught! The fish-poles were left behind; Toby
was trotted nearly off his legs in the chase; and every boy was red,
breathless, and scared. They found poor Buttercup at last in a flower
garden, where she had taken refuge, worn out with the long run.
Borrowing a rope for a halter, Dan led her home, followed by a party
of very sober young gentlemen, for the cow was in a sad state, having
strained her shoulder jumping, so that she limped, her eyes looked wild,
and her glossy coat was wet and muddy.

"You'll catch it this time, Dan," said Tommy, as he led the wheezing
donkey beside the maltreated cow.

"So will you, for you helped."

"We all did, but Demi," added Jack.

"He put it into our heads," said Ned.

"I told you not to do it," cried Demi, who was most broken-hearted at
poor Buttercup's state.

"Old Bhaer will send me off, I guess. Don't care if he does," muttered
Dan, looking worried in spite of his words.

"We'll ask him not to, all of us," said Demi, and the others assented
with the exception of Stuffy, who cherished the hope that all the
punishment might fall on one guilty head. Dan only said, "Don't bother
about me;" but he never forgot it, even though he led the lads astray
again, as soon as the temptation came.

When Mr. Bhaer saw the animal, and heard the story, he said very little,
evidently fearing that he should say too much in the first moments of
impatience. Buttercup was made comfortable in her stall, and the boys
sent to their rooms till supper-time. This brief respite gave them time
to think the matter over, to wonder what the penalty would be, and to
try to imagine where Dan would be sent. He whistled briskly in his room,
so that no one should think he cared a bit; but while he waited to know
his fate, the longing to stay grew stronger and stronger, the more he
recalled the comfort and kindness he had known here, the hardship and
neglect he had felt elsewhere. He knew they tried to help him, and at
the bottom of his heart he was grateful, but his rough life had made
him hard and careless, suspicious and wilful. He hated restraint of any
sort, and fought against it like an untamed creature, even while he knew
it was kindly meant, and dimly felt that he would be the better for it.
He made up his mind to be turned adrift again, to knock about the city
as he had done nearly all his life; a prospect that made him knit
his black brows, and look about the cosy little room with a wistful
expression that would have touched a much harder heart than Mr. Bhaer's
if he had seen it. It vanished instantly, however, when the good man
came in, and said in his accustomed grave way,

"I have heard all about it, Dan, and though you have broken the rules
again, I am going to give you one more trial, to please Mother Bhaer."

Dan flushed up to his forehead at this unexpected reprieve, but he only
said in his gruff way,

"I didn't know there was any rule about bull-fighting."

"As I never expected to have any at Plumfield, I never did make such
a rule," answered Mr. Bhaer, smiling in spite of himself at the boy's
excuse. Then he added gravely, "But one of the first and most important
of our few laws is the law of kindness to every dumb creature on the
place. I want everybody and everything to be happy here, to love
and trust, and serve us, as we try to love and trust and serve them
faithfully and willingly. I have often said that you were kinder to the
animals than any of the other boys, and Mrs. Bhaer liked that trait in
you very much, because she thought it showed a good heart. But you have
disappointed us in that, and we are sorry, for we hoped to make you
quite one of us. Shall we try again?"

Dan's eyes had been on the floor, and his hands nervously picking at
the bit of wood he had been whittling as Mr. Bhaer came in, but when he
heard the kind voice ask that question, he looked up quickly, and said
in a more respectful tone than he had ever used before,

"Yes, please."

"Very well, then, we will say no more, only you will stay at home from
the walk to-morrow, as the other boys will and all of you must wait on
poor Buttercup till she is well again."

"I will."

"Now, go down to supper, and do your best, my boy, more for your own
sake than for ours." Then Mr. Bhaer shook hands with him, and Dan went
down more tamed by kindness than he would have been by the good whipping
which Asia had strongly recommended.

Dan did try for a day or two, but not being used to it, he soon tired
and relapsed into his old wilful ways. Mr. Bhaer was called from home
on business one day, and the boys had no lessons. They liked this, and
played hard till bedtime, when most of them turned in and slept like
dormice. Dan, however, had a plan in his head, and when he and Nat were
alone, he unfolded it.

"Look here!" he said, taking from under his bed a bottle, a cigar, and a
pack of cards, "I'm going to have some fun, and do as I used to with
the fellows in town. Here's some beer, I got if of the old man at the
station, and this cigar; you can pay for 'em or Tommy will, he's got
heaps of money and I haven't a cent. I'm going to ask him in; no, you
go, they won't mind you."

"The folks won't like it," began Nat.

"They won't know. Daddy Bhaer is away, and Mrs. Bhaer's busy with Ted;
he's got croup or something, and she can't leave him. We shan't sit up
late or make any noise, so where's the harm?"

"Asia will know if we burn the lamp long, she always does."

"No, she won't, I've got a dark lantern on purpose; it don't give much
light, and we can shut it quick if we hear anyone coming," said Dan.

This idea struck Nat as a fine one, and lent an air of romance to the
thing. He started off to tell Tommy, but put his head in again to say,

"You want Demi, too, don't you?"

"No, I don't; the Deacon will rollup eyes and preach if you tell him. He
will be asleep, so just tip the wink to Tom and cut back again."

Nat obeyed, and returned in a minute with Tommy half dressed, rather
tousled about the head and very sleepy, but quite ready for fun as
usual.

"Now, keep quiet, and I'll show you how to play a first-rate game called
'Poker,'" said Dan, as the three revellers gathered round the table, on
which were set forth the bottle, the cigar, and the cards. "First we'll
all have a drink, then we'll take a go at the 'weed,' and then we'll
play. That's the way men do, and it's jolly fun."

The beer circulated in a mug, and all three smacked their lips over it,
though Nat and Tommy did not like the bitter stuff. The cigar was worse
still, but they dared not say so, and each puffed away till he was dizzy
or choked, when he passed the "weed" on to his neighbor. Dan liked
it, for it seemed like old times when he now and then had a chance
to imitate the low men who surrounded him. He drank, and smoked, and
swaggered as much like them as he could, and, getting into the spirit
of the part he assumed, he soon began to swear under his breath for
fear some one should hear him. "You mustn't; it's wicked to say 'Damn!'"
cried Tommy, who had followed his leader so far.

"Oh, hang! don't you preach, but play away; it's part of the fun to
swear."

"I'd rather say 'thunder turtles,'" said Tommy, who had composed this
interesting exclamation and was very proud of it.

"And I'll say 'The Devil;' that sounds well," added Nat, much impressed
by Dan's manly ways.

Dan scoffed at their "nonsense," and swore stoutly as he tried to teach
them the new game.

But Tommy was very sleepy, and Nat's head began to ache with the beer
and the smoke, so neither of them was very quick to learn, and the game
dragged. The room was nearly dark, for the lantern burned badly; they
could not laugh loud nor move about much, for Silas slept next door in
the shed-chamber, and altogether the party was dull. In the middle of a
deal Dan stopped suddenly, and called out, "Who's that?" in a startled
tone, and at the same moment drew the slide over the light. A voice in
the darkness said tremulously, "I can't find Tommy," and then there was
the quick patter of bare feet running away down the entry that led from
the wing to the main house.

"It's Demi! he's gone to call some one; cut into bed, Tom, and don't
tell!" cried Dan, whisking all signs of the revel out of sight, and
beginning to tear off his clothes, while Nat did the same.

Tommy flew to his room and dived into bed, where he lay, laughing
till something burned his hand, when he discovered that he was still
clutching the stump of the festive cigar, which he happened to be
smoking when the revel broke up.

It was nearly out, and he was about to extinguish it carefully when
Nursey's voice was heard, and fearing it would betray him if he hid it
in the bed, he threw it underneath, after a final pinch which he thought
finished it.

Nursey came in with Demi, who looked much amazed to see the red face of
Tommy reposing peacefully upon his pillow.

"He wasn't there just now, because I woke up and could not find him
anywhere," said Demi, pouncing on him.

"What mischief are you at now, bad child?" asked Nursey, with a
good-natured shake, which made the sleeper open his eyes to say meekly,

"I only ran into Nat's room to see him about something. Go away, and let
me alone; I'm awful sleepy."

Nursey tucked Demi in, and went off to reconnoitre, but only found two
boys slumbering peacefully in Dan's room. "Some little frolic," she
thought, and as there was no harm done she said nothing to Mrs. Bhaer,
who was busy and worried over little Teddy.

Tommy was sleepy, and telling Demi to mind his own business and not ask
questions, he was snoring in ten minutes, little dreaming what was going
on under his bed. The cigar did not go out, but smouldered away on the
straw carpet till it was nicely on fire, and a hungry little flame went
creeping along till the dimity bedcover caught, then the sheets, and
then the bed itself. The beer made Tommy sleep heavily, and the smoke
stupified Demi, so they slept on till the fire began to scorch them, and
they were in danger of being burned to death.

Franz was sitting up to study, and as he left the school-room he smelt
the smoke, dashed up-stairs and saw it coming in a cloud from the left
wing of the house. Without stopping to call any one, he ran into the
room, dragged the boys from the blazing bed, and splashed all the water
he could find at hand on to the flames. It checked but did not quench
the fire, and the children wakened on being tumbled topsy-turvy into
a cold hall, began to roar at the top of their voices. Mrs. Bhaer
instantly appeared, and a minute after Silas burst out of his room
shouting, "Fire!" in a tone that raised the whole house. A flock of
white goblins with scared faces crowded into the hall, and for a minute
every one was panic-stricken.

Then Mrs. Bhaer found her wits, bade Nursey see to the burnt boys, and
sent Franz and Silas down-stairs for some tubs of wet clothes which
she flung on the bed, over the carpet, and up against the curtains, now
burning finely, and threatening to kindle the walls.

Most of the boys stood dumbly looking on, but Dan and Emil worked
bravely, running to and fro with water from the bath-room, and helping
to pull down the dangerous curtains.

The peril was soon over, and ordering the boys all back to bed, and
leaving Silas to watch lest the fire broke out again, Mrs. Bhaer and
Franz went to see how the poor boys got on. Demi had escaped with one
burn and a grand scare, but Tommy had not only most of his hair scorched
off his head, but a great burn on his arm, that made him half crazy with
the pain. Demi was soon made cosy, and Franz took him away to his own
bed, where the kind lad soothed his fright and hummed him to sleep as
cosily as a woman. Nursey watched over poor Tommy all night, trying to
ease his misery, and Mrs. Bhaer vibrated between him and little Teddy
with oil and cotton, paregoric and squills, saying to herself from time
to time, as if she found great amusement in the thought, "I always knew
Tommy would set the house on fire, and now he has done it!"

When Mr. Bhaer got home next morning he found a nice state of things.
Tommy in bed, Teddy wheezing like a little grampus, Mrs. Jo quite used
up, and the whole flock of boys so excited that they all talked at once,
and almost dragged him by main force to view the ruins. Under his quiet
management things soon fell into order, for every one felt that he was
equal to a dozen conflagrations, and worked with a will at whatever task
he gave them.

There was no school that morning, but by afternoon the damaged room was
put to rights, the invalids were better, and there was time to hear and
judge the little culprits quietly. Nat and Tommy told their parts in the
mischief, and were honestly sorry for the danger they had brought to the
dear old house and all in it. But Dan put on his devil-may-care look,
and would not own that there was much harm done.

Now, of all things, Mr. Bhaer hated drinking, gambling, and swearing;
smoking he had given up that the lads might not be tempted to try it,
and it grieved and angered him deeply to find that the boy, with whom he
had tried to be most forbearing, should take advantage of his absence to
introduce these forbidden vices, and teach his innocent little lads
to think it manly and pleasant to indulge in them. He talked long and
earnestly to the assembled boys, and ended by saying, with an air of
mingled firmness and regret,

"I think Tommy is punished enough, and that scar on his arm will remind
him for a long time to let these things alone. Nat's fright will do for
him, for he is really sorry, and does try to obey me. But you, Dan, have
been many times forgiven, and yet it does no good. I cannot have my boys
hurt by your bad example, nor my time wasted in talking to deaf ears, so
you can say good-bye to them all, and tell Nursey to put up your things
in my little black bag."

"Oh! sir, where is he going?" cried Nat.

"To a pleasant place up in the country, where I sometimes send boys when
they don't do well here. Mr. Page is a kind man, and Dan will be happy
there if he chooses to do his best."

"Will he ever come back?" asked Demi.

"That will depend on himself; I hope so."

As he spoke, Mr. Bhaer left the room to write his letter to Mr. Page,
and the boys crowded round Dan very much as people do about a man who is
going on a long and perilous journey to unknown regions.

"I wonder if you'll like it," began Jack.

"Shan't stay if I don't," said Dan coolly.

"Where will you go?" asked Nat.

"I may go to sea, or out west, or take a look at California," answered
Dan, with a reckless air that quite took away the breath of the little
boys.

"Oh, don't! stay with Mr. Page awhile and then come back here; do, Dan,"
pleaded Nat, much affected at the whole affair.

"I don't care where I go, or how long I stay, and I'll be hanged if I
ever come back here," with which wrathful speech Dan went away to put up
his things, every one of which Mr. Bhaer had given him.

That was the only good-bye he gave the boys, for they were all talking
the matter over in the barn when he came down, and he told Nat not to
call them. The wagon stood at the door, and Mrs. Bhaer came out to speak
to Dan, looking so sad that his heart smote him, and he said in a low
tone,

"May I say good-bye to Teddy?"

"Yes, dear; go in and kiss him, he will miss his Danny very much."

No one saw the look in Dan's eyes as he stooped over the crib, and saw
the little face light up at first sight of him, but he heard Mrs. Bhaer
say pleadingly,

"Can't we give the poor lad one more trial, Fritz?" and Mr. Bhaer answer
in his steady way,

"My dear, it is not best, so let him go where he can do no harm to
others, while they do good to him, and by and by he shall come back, I
promise you."

"He's the only boy we ever failed with, and I am so grieved, for I
thought there was the making of a fine man in him, spite of his faults."

Dan heard Mrs. Bhaer sigh, and he wanted to ask for one more trial
himself, but his pride would not let him, and he came out with the hard
look on his face, shook hands without a word, and drove away with Mr.
Bhaer, leaving Nat and Mrs. Jo to look after him with tears in their
eyes.

A few days afterwards they received a letter from Mr. Page, saying that
Dan was doing well, whereat they all rejoiced. But three weeks later
came another letter, saying that Dan had run away, and nothing had been
heard of him, whereat they all looked sober, and Mr. Bhaer said,

"Perhaps I ought to have given him another chance."

Mrs. Bhaer, however, nodded wisely and answered, "Don't be troubled,
Fritz; the boy will come back to us, I'm sure of it."

But time went on and no Dan came.



CHAPTER VII. NAUGHTY NAN

"Fritz, I've got a new idea," cried Mrs. Bhaer, as she met her husband
one day after school.

"Well, my dear, what is it?" and he waited willingly to hear the new
plan, for some of Mrs. Jo's ideas were so droll, it was impossible to
help laughing at them, though usually they were quite sensible, and he
was glad to carry them out.

"Daisy needs a companion, and the boys would be all the better for
another girl among them; you know we believe in bringing up little men
and women together, and it is high time we acted up to our belief. They
pet and tyrannize over Daisy by turns, and she is getting spoilt. Then
they must learn gentle ways, and improve their manners, and having girls
about will do it better than any thing else."

"You are right, as usual. Now, who shall we have?" asked Mr. Bhaer,
seeing by the look in her eye that Mrs. Jo had some one all ready to
propose.

"Little Annie Harding."

"What! Naughty Nan, as the lads call her?" cried Mr. Bhaer, looking very
much amused.

"Yes, she is running wild at home since her mother died, and is too
bright a child to be spoilt by servants. I have had my eye on her for
some time, and when I met her father in town the other day I asked him
why he did not send her to school. He said he would gladly if he could
find as good a school for girls as ours was for boys. I know he would
rejoice to have her come; so suppose we drive over this afternoon and
see about it."

"Have not you cares enough now, my Jo, without this little gypsy to
torment you?" asked Mr. Bhaer, patting the hand that lay on his arm.

"Oh dear, no," said Mother Bhaer, briskly. "I like it, and never was
happier than since I had my wilderness of boys. You see, Fritz, I feel a
great sympathy for Nan, because I was such a naughty child myself that
I know all about it. She is full of spirits, and only needs to be taught
what to do with them to be as nice a little girl as Daisy. Those quick
wits of hers would enjoy lessons if they were rightly directed, and what
is now a tricksy midget would soon become a busy, happy child. I know
how to manage her, for I remember how my blessed mother managed me,
and--"

"And if you succeed half as well as she did, you will have done a
magnificent work," interrupted Mr. Bhaer, who labored under the delusion
that Mrs. B. was the best and most charming woman alive.

"Now, if you make fun of my plan I'll give you bad coffee for a week,
and then where are you, sir?" cried Mrs. Jo, tweaking him by the ear
just as if he was one of the boys.

"Won't Daisy's hair stand erect with horror at Nan's wild ways?" asked
Mr. Bhaer, presently, when Teddy had swarmed up his waistcoat, and Rob
up his back, for they always flew at their father the minute school was
done.

"At first, perhaps, but it will do Posy good. She is getting prim and
Bettyish, and needs stirring up a bit. She always has a good time when
Nan comes over to play, and the two will help each other without knowing
it. Dear me, half the science of teaching is knowing how much children
do for one another, and when to mix them."

"I only hope she won't turn out another firebrand."

"My poor Dan! I never can quite forgive myself for letting him go,"
sighed Mrs. Bhaer.

At the sound of the name, little Teddy, who had never forgotten his
friend, struggled down from his father's arms, and trotted to the door,
looked out over the sunny lawn with a wistful face, and then trotted
back again, saying, as he always did when disappointed of the longed-for
sight,

"My Danny's tummin' soon."

"I really think we ought to have kept him, if only for Teddy's sake, he
was so fond of him, and perhaps baby's love would have done for him what
we failed to do."

"I've sometimes felt that myself; but after keeping the boys in a
ferment, and nearly burning up the whole family, I thought it safer to
remove the firebrand, for a time at least," said Mr. Bhaer.

"Dinner's ready, let me ring the bell," and Rob began a solo upon that
instrument which made it impossible to hear one's self speak.

"Then I may have Nan, may I?" asked Mrs. Jo.

"A dozen Nans if you want them, my dear," answered Mr. Bhaer, who had
room in his fatherly heart for all the naughty neglected children in the
world.

When Mrs. Bhaer returned from her drive that afternoon, before she could
unpack the load of little boys, without whom she seldom moved, a small
girl of ten skipped out at the back of the carry-all and ran into the
house, shouting,

"Hi, Daisy! where are you?"

Daisy came, and looked pleased to see her guest, but also a trifle
alarmed, when Nan said, still prancing, as if it was impossible to keep
still,

"I'm going to stay here always, papa says I may, and my box is coming
tomorrow, all my things had to be washed and mended, and your aunt came
and carried me off. Isn't it great fun?"

"Why, yes. Did you bring your big doll?" asked Daisy, hoping she had,
for on the last visit Nan had ravaged the baby house, and insisted on
washing Blanche Matilda's plaster face, which spoilt the poor dear's
complexion for ever.

"Yes, she's somewhere round," returned Nan, with most unmaternal
carelessness. "I made you a ring coming along, and pulled the hairs out
of Dobbin's tail. Don't you want it?" and Nan presented a horse-hair
ring in token of friendship, as they had both vowed they would never
speak to one another again when they last parted.

Won by the beauty of the offering, Daisy grew more cordial, and proposed
retiring to the nursery, but Nan said, "No, I want to see the boys, and
the barn," and ran off, swinging her hat by one string till it broke,
when she left it to its fate on the grass.

"Hullo! Nan!" cried the boys as she bounced in among them with the
announcement,

"I'm going to stay."

"Hooray!" bawled Tommy from the wall on which he was perched, for Nan
was a kindred spirit, and he foresaw "larks" in the future.

"I can bat; let me play," said Nan, who could turn her hand to any
thing, and did not mind hard knocks.

"We ain't playing now, and our side beat without you."

"I can beat you in running, any way," returned Nan, falling back on her
strong point.

"Can she?" asked Nat of Jack.

"She runs very well for a girl," answered Jack, who looked down upon Nan
with condescending approval.

"Will you try?" said Nan, longing to display her powers.

"It's too hot," and Tommy languished against the wall as if quite
exhausted.

"What's the matter with Stuffy?" asked Nan, whose quick eyes were roving
from face to face.

"Ball hurt his hand; he howls at every thing," answered Jack scornfully.

"I don't, I never cry, no matter how I'm hurt; it's babyish," said Nan,
loftily.

"Pooh! I could make you cry in two minutes," returned Stuffy, rousing
up.

"See if you can."

"Go and pick that bunch of nettles, then," and Stuffy pointed to a
sturdy specimen of that prickly plant growing by the wall.

Nan instantly "grasped the nettle," pulled it up, and held it with a
defiant gesture, in spite of the almost unbearable sting.

"Good for you," cried the boys, quick to acknowledge courage even in one
of the weaker sex.

More nettled than she was, Stuffy determined to get a cry out of her
somehow, and he said tauntingly, "You are used to poking your hands into
every thing, so that isn't fair. Now go and bump your head real hard
against the barn, and see if you don't howl then."

"Don't do it," said Nat, who hated cruelty.

But Nan was off, and running straight at the barn, she gave her head a
blow that knocked her flat, and sounded like a battering-ram. Dizzy, but
undaunted, she staggered up, saying stoutly, though her face was drawn
with pain,

"That hurt, but I don't cry."

"Do it again," said Stuffy angrily; and Nan would have done it, but Nat
held her; and Tommy, forgetting the heat, flew at Stuffy like a little
game-cock, roaring out,

"Stop it, or I'll throw you over the barn!" and so shook and hustled
poor Stuffy that for a minute he did not know whether he was on his head
or his heels.

"She told me to," was all he could say, when Tommy let him alone.

"Never mind if she did; it is awfully mean to hurt a little girl," said
Demi, reproachfully.

"Ho! I don't mind; I ain't a little girl, I'm older than you and Daisy;
so now," cried Nan, ungratefully.

"Don't preach, Deacon, you bully Posy every day of your life," called
out the Commodore, who just then hove in sight.

"I don't hurt her; do I, Daisy?" and Demi turned to his sister, who was
"pooring" Nan's tingling hands, and recommending water for the purple
lump rapidly developing itself on her forehead.

"You are the best boy in the world," promptly answered Daisy; adding,
as truth compelled her to do, "You hurt me sometimes, but you don't mean
to."

"Put away the bats and things, and mind what you are about, my hearties.
No fighting allowed aboard this ship," said Emil, who rather lorded it
over the others.

"How do you do, Madge Wildfire?" said Mr. Bhaer, as Nan came in with
the rest to supper. "Give the right hand, little daughter, and mind thy
manners," he added, as Nan offered him her left.

"The other hurts me."

"The poor little hand! what has it been doing to get those blisters?" he
asked, drawing it from behind her back, where she had put it with a look
which made him think she had been in mischief.

Before Nan could think of any excuse, Daisy burst out with the whole
story, during which Stuffy tried to hide his face in a bowl of bread and
milk. When the tale was finished, Mr. Bhaer looked down the long table
towards his wife, and said with a laugh in his eyes,

"This rather belongs to your side of the house, so I won't meddle with
it, my dear."

Mrs. Jo knew what he meant, but she liked her little black sheep all the
better for her pluck, though she only said in her soberest way,

"Do you know why I asked Nan to come here?"

"To plague me," muttered Stuffy, with his mouth full.

"To help make little gentlemen of you, and I think you have shown that
some of you need it."

Here Stuffy retired into his bowl again, and did not emerge till Demi
made them all laugh by saying, in his slow wondering way,

"How can she, when she's such a tomboy?"

"That's just it, she needs help as much as you, and I expect you set her
an example of good manners."

"Is she going to be a little gentleman too?" asked Rob.

"She'd like it; wouldn't you, Nan?" added Tommy.

"No, I shouldn't; I hate boys!" said Nan fiercely, for her hand still
smarted, and she began to think that she might have shown her courage in
some wiser way.

"I am sorry you hate my boys, because they can be well-mannered, and
most agreeable when they choose. Kindness in looks and words and ways is
true politeness, and any one can have it if they only try to treat other
people as they like to be treated themselves."

Mrs. Bhaer had addressed herself to Nan, but the boys nudged one
another, and appeared to take the hint, for that time at least, and
passed the butter; said "please," and "thank you," "yes, sir," and "no,
ma'am," with unusual elegance and respect. Nan said nothing, but kept
herself quiet and refrained from tickling Demi, though strongly tempted
to do so, because of the dignified airs he put on. She also appeared
to have forgotten her hatred of boys, and played "I spy" with them till
dark. Stuffy was observed to offer her frequent sucks on his candy-ball
during the game, which evidently sweetened her temper, for the last
thing she said on going to bed was,

"When my battledore and shuttle-cock comes, I'll let you all play with
'em."

Her first remark in the morning was "Has my box come?" and when told
that it would arrive sometime during the day, she fretted and fumed, and
whipped her doll, till Daisy was shocked. She managed to exist, however,
till five o'clock, when she disappeared, and was not missed till
supper-time, because those at home thought she had gone to the hill with
Tommy and Demi.

"I saw her going down the avenue alone as hard as she could pelt,"
said Mary Ann, coming in with the hasty-pudding, and finding every one
asking, "Where is Nan?"

"She has run home, little gypsy!" cried Mrs. Bhaer, looking anxious.

"Perhaps she has gone to the station to look after her luggage,"
suggested Franz.

"That is impossible, she does not know the way, and if she found it, she
could never carry the box a mile," said Mrs. Bhaer, beginning to think
that her new idea might be rather a hard one to carry out.

"It would be like her," and Mr. Bhaer caught up his hat to go and find
the child, when a shout from Jack, who was at the window, made everyone
hurry to the door.

There was Miss Nan, to be sure, tugging along a very large band-box tied
up in linen bag. Very hot and dusty and tired did she look, but marched
stoutly along, and came puffing up to the steps, where she dropped
her load with a sigh of relief, and sat down upon it, observed as she
crossed her tired arms,

"I couldn't wait any longer, so I went and got it."

"But you did not know the way," said Tommy, while the rest stood round
enjoying the joke.

"Oh, I found it, I never get lost."

"It's a mile, how could you go so far?"

"Well, it was pretty far, but I rested a good deal."

"Wasn't that thing very heavy?"

"It's so round, I couldn't get hold of it good, and I thought my arms
would break right off."

"I don't see how the station-master let you have it," said Tommy.

"I didn't say anything to him. He was in the little ticket place, and
didn't see me, so I just took it off the platform."

"Run down and tell him it is all right, Franz, or old Dodd will think
it is stolen," said Mr. Bhaer, joining in the shout of laughter at Nan's
coolness.

"I told you we would send for it if it did not come. Another time you
must wait, for you will get into trouble if you run away. Promise me
this, or I shall not dare to trust you out of my sight," said Mrs.
Bhaer, wiping the dust off Nan's little hot face.

"Well, I won't, only papa tells me not to put off doing things, so I
don't."

"That is rather a poser; I think you had better give her some supper
now, and a private lecture by and by," said Mr. Bhaer, too much amused
to be angry at the young lady's exploit.

The boys thought it "great fun," and Nan entertained them all
supper-time with an account of her adventures; for a big dog had barked
at her, a man had laughed at her, a woman had given her a doughnut, and
her hat had fallen into the brook when she stopped to drink, exhausted
with her exertion.

"I fancy you will have your hands full now, my dear; Tommy and Nan are
quite enough for one woman," said Mr. Bhaer, half an hour later.

"I know it will take some time to tame the child, but she is such a
generous, warm-hearted little thing, I should love her even if she were
twice as naughty," answered Mrs. Jo, pointing to the merry group, in
the middle of which stood Nan, giving away her things right and left, as
lavishly as if the big band-box had no bottom.

It was those good traits that soon made little "Giddygaddy," as they
called her, a favorite with every one. Daisy never complained of being
dull again, for Nan invented the most delightful plays, and her pranks
rivalled Tommy's, to the amusement of the whole school. She buried her
big doll and forgot it for a week, and found it well mildewed when she
dragged it up. Daisy was in despair, but Nan took it to the painter who
as at work about the house, got him to paint it brick red, with staring
black eyes, then she dressed it up with feathers, and scarlet flannel,
and one of Ned's leaden hatchets; and in the character of an Indian
chief, the late Poppydilla tomahawked all the other dolls, and caused
the nursery to run red with imaginary gore. She gave away her new shoes
to a beggar child, hoping to be allowed to go barefoot, but found it
impossible to combine charity and comfort, and was ordered to ask leave
before disposing of her clothes. She delighted the boys by making a
fire-ship out of a shingle with two large sails wet with turpentine,
which she lighted, and then sent the little vessel floating down the
brook at dusk. She harnessed the old turkey-cock to a straw wagon, and
made him trot round the house at a tremendous pace. She gave her coral
necklace for four unhappy kittens, which had been tormented by some
heartless lads, and tended them for days as gently as a mother, dressing
their wounds with cold cream, feeding them with a doll's spoon, and
mourning over them when they died, till she was consoled by one of
Demi's best turtles. She made Silas tattoo an anchor on her arm like
his, and begged hard to have a blue star on each cheek, but he dared not
do it, though she coaxed and scolded till the soft-hearted fellow longed
to give in. She rode every animal on the place, from the big horse Andy
to the cross pig, from whom she was rescued with difficulty. Whatever
the boys dared her to do she instantly attempted, no matter how
dangerous it might be, and they were never tired of testing her courage.

Mr. Bhaer suggested that they should see who would study best, and Nan
found as much pleasure in using her quick wits and fine memory as her
active feet and merry tongue, while the lads had to do their best to
keep their places, for Nan showed them that girls could do most things
as well as boys, and some things better. There were no rewards in
school, but Mr. Bhaer's "Well done!" and Mrs. Bhaer's good report on the
conscience book, taught them to love duty for its own sake, and try to
do it faithfully, sure sooner or later the recompense would come. Little
Nan was quick to feel the new atmosphere, to enjoy it, to show that it
was what she needed; for this little garden was full of sweet flowers,
half hidden by the weeds; and when kind hands gently began to
cultivate it, all sorts of green shoots sprung up, promising to blossom
beautifully in the warmth of love and care, the best climate for young
hearts and souls all the world over.



CHAPTER VIII. PRANKS AND PLAYS

As there is no particular plan to this story, except to describe a few
scenes in the life at Plumfield for the amusement of certain little
persons, we will gently ramble along in this chapter and tell some of
the pastimes of Mrs. Jo's boys. I beg leave to assure my honored readers
that most of the incidents are taken from real life, and that the oddest
are the truest; for no person, no matter how vivid an imagination he may
have, can invent anything half so droll as the freaks and fancies that
originate in the lively brains of little people.

Daisy and Demi were full of these whims, and lived in a world of their
own, peopled with lovely or grotesque creatures, to whom they gave the
queerest names, and with whom they played the queerest games. One of
these nursery inventions was an invisible sprite called "The Naughty
Kitty-mouse," whom the children had believed in, feared, and served for
a long time. They seldom spoke of it to any one else, kept their rites
as private as possible; and, as they never tried to describe it even to
themselves, this being had a vague mysterious charm very agreeable
to Demi, who delighted in elves and goblins. A most whimsical and
tyrannical imp was the Naughty Kitty-mouse, and Daisy found a fearful
pleasure in its service, blindly obeying its most absurd demands, which
were usually proclaimed from the lips of Demi, whose powers of invention
were great. Rob and Teddy sometimes joined in these ceremonies, and
considered them excellent fun, although they did not understand half
that went on.

One day after school Demi whispered to his sister, with an ominous wag
of the head,

"The Kitty-mouse wants us this afternoon."

"What for?" asked Daisy, anxiously.

"A sackerryfice," answered Demi, solemnly. "There must be a fire behind
the big rock at two o'clock, and we must all bring the things we like
best, and burn them!" he added, with an awful emphasis on the last
words.

"Oh, dear! I love the new paper dollies Aunt Amy painted for me best
of any thing; must I burn them up?" cried Daisy, who never thought of
denying the unseen tyrant any thing it demanded.

"Every one. I shall burn my boat, my best scrapbook, and all my
soldiers," said Demi firmly.

"Well, I will; but it's too bad of Kitty-mouse to want our very nicest
things," sighed Daisy.

"A sackerryfice means to give up what you are fond of, so we must,"
explained Demi, to whom the new idea had been suggested by hearing
Uncle Fritz describe the customs of the Greeks to the big boys who were
reading about them in school.

"Is Rob coming too," asked Daisy.

"Yes, and he is going to bring his toy village; it is all made of wood,
you know, and will burn nicely. We'll have a grand bonfire, and see them
blaze up, won't we?"

This brilliant prospect consoled Daisy, and she ate her dinner with a
row of paper dolls before her, as a sort of farewell banquet.

At the appointed hour the sacrificial train set forth, each child
bearing the treasures demanded by the insatiable Kitty-mouse. Teddy
insisted on going also, and seeing that all the others had toys, he
tucked a squeaking lamb under one arm, and old Annabella under the
other, little dreaming what anguish the latter idol was to give him.

"Where are you going, my chickens?" asked Mrs. Jo, as the flock passed
her door.

"To play by the big rock; can't we?"

"Yes, only don't do near the pond, and take good care of baby."

"I always do," said Daisy, leading forth her charge with a capable air.

"Now, you must all sit round, and not move till I tell you. This flat
stone is an altar, and I am going to make a fire on it."

Demi then proceeded to kindle up a small blaze, as he had seen the boys
do at picnics. When the flame burned well, he ordered the company to
march round it three times and then stand in a circle.

"I shall begin, and as fast as my things are burnt, you must bring
yours."

With that he solemnly laid on a little paper book full of pictures,
pasted in by himself; this was followed by a dilapidated boat, and
then one by one the unhappy leaden soldiers marched to death. Not one
faltered or hung back, from the splendid red and yellow captain to the
small drummer who had lost his legs; all vanished in the flames and
mingled in one common pool of melted lead.

"Now, Daisy!" called the high priest of Kitty-mouse, when his rich
offerings had been consumed, to the great satisfaction of the children.

"My dear dollies, how can I let them go?" moaned Daisy, hugging the
entire dozen with a face full of maternal woe.

"You must," commanded Demi; and with a farewell kiss to each, Daisy laid
her blooming dolls upon the coals.

"Let me keep one, the dear blue thing, she is so sweet," besought the
poor little mamma, clutching her last in despair.

"More! more!" growled an awful voice, and Demi cried, "that's the
Kitty-mouse! she must have every one, quick, or she will scratch us."

In went the precious blue belle, flounces, rosy hat, and all, and
nothing but a few black flakes remained of that bright band.

"Stand the houses and trees round, and let them catch themselves; it
will be like a real fire then," said Demi, who liked variety even in his
"sackerryfices."

Charmed by this suggestion, the children arranged the doomed village,
laid a line of coals along the main street, and then sat down to watch
the conflagration. It was somewhat slow to kindle owing to the paint,
but at last one ambitious little cottage blazed up, fired a tree of the
palm species, which fell on to the roof of a large family mansion,
and in a few minutes the whole town was burning merrily. The wooden
population stood and stared at the destruction like blockheads, as they
were, till they also caught and blazed away without a cry. It took
some time to reduce the town to ashes, and the lookers-on enjoyed the
spectacle immensely, cheering as each house fell, dancing like wild
Indians when the steeple flamed aloft, and actually casting one wretched
little churn-shaped lady, who had escaped to the suburbs, into the very
heart of the fire.

The superb success of this last offering excited Teddy to such a degree,
that he first threw his lamb into the conflagration, and before it had
time even to roast, he planted poor Annabella on the funeral pyre. Of
course she did not like it, and expressed her anguish and resentment in
a way that terrified her infant destroyer. Being covered with kid,
she did not blaze, but did what was worse, she squirmed. First one leg
curled up, then the other, in a very awful and lifelike manner; next
she flung her arms over her head as if in great agony; her head itself
turned on her shoulders, her glass eyes fell out, and with one final
writhe of her whole body, she sank down a blackened mass on the ruins
of the town. This unexpected demonstration startled every one and
frightened Teddy half out of his little wits. He looked, then screamed
and fled toward the house, roaring "Marmar" at the top of his voice.

Mrs. Bhaer heard the outcry and ran to the rescue, but Teddy could only
cling to her and pour out in his broken way something about "poor Bella
hurted," "a dreat fire," and "all the dollies dorn." Fearing some dire
mishap, his mother caught him up and hurried to the scene of action,
where she found the blind worshippers of Kitty-mouse mourning over the
charred remains of the lost darling.

"What have you been at? Tell me all about it," said Mrs. Jo, composing
herself to listen patiently, for the culprits looked so penitent, she
forgave them beforehand.

With some reluctance Demi explained their play, and Aunt Jo laughed till
the tears ran down her cheeks, the children were so solemn, and the play
was so absurd.

"I thought you were too sensible to play such a silly game as this. If
I had any Kitty-mouse I'd have a good one who liked you to play in safe
pleasant ways, and not destroy and frighten. Just see what a ruin you
have made; all Daisy's pretty dolls, Demi's soldiers, and Rob's new
village beside poor Teddy's pet lamb, and dear old Annabella. I shall
have to write up in the nursery the verse that used to come in the boxes
of toys,

     "The children of Holland take pleasure in making,
     What the children of Boston take pleasure in breaking."

"Only I shall put Plumfield instead of Boston."

"We never will again, truly, truly!" cried the repentant little sinners,
much abashed at this reproof.

"Demi told us to," said Rob.

"Well, I heard Uncle tell about the Greece people, who had altars
and things, and so I wanted to be like them, only I hadn't any live
creatures to sackerryfice, so we burnt up our toys."

"Dear me, that is something like the bean story," said Aunt Jo, laughing
again.

"Tell about it," suggested Daisy, to change the subject.

"Once there was a poor woman who had three or four little children, and
she used to lock them up in her room when she went out to work, to keep
them safe. On day when she was going away she said, 'Now, my dears,
don't let baby fall out of window, don't play with the matches, and
don't put beans up your noses.' Now the children had never dreamed of
doing that last thing, but she put it into their heads, and the minute
she was gone, they ran and stuffed their naughty little noses full of
beans, just to see how it felt, and she found them all crying when she
came home."

"Did it hurt?" asked Rob, with such intense interest that his mother
hastily added a warning sequel, lest a new edition of the bean story
should appear in her own family.

"Very much, as I know, for when my mother told me this story, I was so
silly that I went and tried it myself. I had no beans, so I took some
little pebbles, and poked several into my nose. I did not like it at
all, and wanted to take them out again very soon, but one would not
come, and I was so ashamed to tell what a goose I been that I went for
hours with the stone hurting me very much. At last the pain got so bad
I had to tell, and when my mother could not get it out the doctor came.
Then I was put in a chair and held tight, Rob, while he used his ugly
little pincers till the stone hopped out. Dear me! how my wretched
little nose did ache, and how people laughed at me!" and Mrs. Jo shook
her head in a dismal way, as if the memory of her sufferings was too
much for her.

Rob looked deeply impressed and I am glad to say took the warning to
heart. Demi proposed that they should bury poor Annabella, and in the
interest of the funeral Teddy forgot his fright. Daisy was soon consoled
by another batch of dolls from Aunt Amy, and the Naughty Kitty-mouse
seemed to be appeased by the last offerings, for she tormented them no
more.

"Brops" was the name of a new and absorbing play, invented by Bangs.
As this interesting animal is not to be found in any Zoological Garden,
unless Du Chaillu has recently brought one from the wilds of Africa, I
will mention a few of its peculiar habits and traits, for the benefit of
inquiring minds. The Brop is a winged quadruped, with a human face of
a youthful and merry aspect. When it walks the earth it grunts, when it
soars it gives a shrill hoot, occasionally it goes erect, and talks good
English. Its body is usually covered with a substance much resembling a
shawl, sometimes red, sometimes blue, often plaid, and, strange to say,
they frequently change skins with one another. On their heads they have
a horn very like a stiff brown paper lamp-lighter. Wings of the same
substance flap upon their shoulders when they fly; this is never very
far from the ground, as they usually fall with violence if they attempt
any lofty flights. They browse over the earth, but can sit up and eat
like the squirrel. Their favorite nourishment is the seed-cake; apples
also are freely taken, and sometimes raw carrots are nibbled when food
is scarce. They live in dens, where they have a sort of nest, much like
a clothes-basket, in which the little Brops play till their wings are
grown. These singular animals quarrel at times, and it is on these
occasions that they burst into human speech, call each other names, cry,
scold, and sometimes tear off horns and skin, declaring fiercely that
they "won't play." The few privileged persons who have studied them are
inclined to think them a remarkable mixture of the monkey, the sphinx,
the roc, and the queer creatures seen by the famous Peter Wilkins.

This game was a great favorite, and the younger children beguiled many
a rainy afternoon flapping or creeping about the nursery, acting like
little bedlamites and being as merry as little grigs. To be sure, it was
rather hard upon clothes, particularly trouser-knees, and jacket-elbows;
but Mrs. Bhaer only said, as she patched and darned,

"We do things just as foolish, and not half so harmless. If I could
get as much happiness out of it as the little dears do, I'd be a Brop
myself."

Nat's favorite amusements were working in his garden, and sitting in the
willow-tree with his violin, for that green nest was a fairy world to
him, and there he loved to perch, making music like a happy bird. The
lads called him "Old Chirper," because he was always humming, whistling,
or fiddling, and they often stopped a minute in their work or play to
listen to the soft tones of the violin, which seemed to lead a little
orchestra of summer sounds. The birds appeared to regard him as one of
themselves, and fearlessly sat on the fence or lit among the boughs to
watch him with their quick bright eyes. The robins in the apple-tree
near by evidently considered him a friend, for the father bird hunted
insects close beside him, and the little mother brooded as confidingly
over her blue eggs as if the boy was only a new sort of blackbird who
cheered her patient watch with his song. The brown brook babbled and
sparkled below him, the bees haunted the clover fields on either side,
friendly faces peeped at him as they passed, the old house stretched its
wide wings hospitably toward him, and with a blessed sense of rest and
love and happiness, Nat dreamed for hours in this nook, unconscious what
healthful miracles were being wrought upon him.

One listener he had who never tired, and to whom he was more than a
mere schoolmate. Poor Billy's chief delight was to lie beside the brook,
watching leaves and bits of foam dance by, listening dreamily to the
music in the willow-tree. He seemed to think Nat a sort of angel who sat
aloft and sang, for a few baby memories still lingered in his mind and
seemed to grow brighter at these times. Seeing the interest he took in
Nat, Mr. Bhaer begged him to help them lift the cloud from the feeble
brain by this gentle spell. Glad to do any thing to show his gratitude,
Nat always smiled on Billy when he followed him about, and let him
listen undisturbed to the music which seemed to speak a language he
could understand. "Help one another," was a favorite Plumfield motto,
and Nat learned how much sweetness is added to life by trying to live up
to it.

Jack Ford's peculiar pastime was buying and selling; and he bid fair
to follow in the footsteps of his uncle, a country merchant, who sold
a little of every thing and made money fast. Jack had seen the sugar
sanded, the molasses watered, the butter mixed with lard, and things of
that kind, and labored under the delusion that it was all a proper part
of the business. His stock in trade was of a different sort, but he made
as much as he could out of every worm he sold, and always got the
best of the bargain when he traded with the boys for string, knives,
fish-hooks, or whatever the article might be. The boys who all had
nicknames, called him "Skinflint," but Jack did not care as long as the
old tobacco-pouch in which he kept his money grew heavier and heavier.

He established a sort of auction-room, and now and then sold off all the
odds and ends he had collected, or helped the lads exchange things with
one another. He got bats, balls, hockey-sticks, etc., cheap, from one
set of mates, furbished them up, and let them for a few cents a time to
another set, often extending his business beyond the gates of Plumfield
in spite of the rules. Mr. Bhaer put a stop to some of his speculations,
and tried to give him a better idea of business talent than mere
sharpness in overreaching his neighbors. Now and then Jack made a bad
bargain, and felt worse about it than about any failure in lessons or
conduct, and took his revenge on the next innocent customer who came
along. His account-book was a curiosity; and his quickness at figures
quite remarkable. Mr. Bhaer praised him for this, and tried to make his
sense of honesty and honor as quick; and, by and by, when Jack found
that he could not get on without these virtues, he owned that his
teacher was right.

Cricket and football the boys had of course; but, after the stirring
accounts of these games in the immortal "Tom Brown at Rugby," no feeble
female pen may venture to do more than respectfully allude to them.

Emil spent his holidays on the river or the pond, and drilled the elder
lads for a race with certain town boys, who now and then invaded
their territory. The race duly came off, but as it ended in a general
shipwreck, it was not mentioned in public; and the Commodore had serious
thoughts of retiring to a desert island, so disgusted was he with his
kind for a time. No desert island being convenient, he was forced
to remain among his friends, and found consolation in building a
boat-house.

The little girls indulged in the usual plays of their age, improving
upon them somewhat as their lively fancies suggested. The chief and
most absorbing play was called "Mrs. Shakespeare Smith;" the name
was provided by Aunt Jo, but the trials of the poor lady were quite
original. Daisy was Mrs. S. S., and Nan by turns her daughter or a
neighbor, Mrs. Giddygaddy.

No pen can describe the adventures of these ladies, for in one short
afternoon their family was the scene of births, marriages, deaths,
floods, earthquakes, tea-parties, and balloon ascensions. Millions of
miles did these energetic women travel, dressed in hats and habits never
seen before by mortal eye, perched on the bed, driving the posts like
mettlesome steeds, and bouncing up and down till their heads spun. Fits
and fires were the pet afflictions, with a general massacre now and then
by way of change. Nan was never tired of inventing fresh combinations,
and Daisy followed her leader with blind admiration. Poor Teddy was a
frequent victim, and was often rescued from real danger, for the excited
ladies were apt to forget that he was not of the same stuff their
longsuffering dolls. Once he was shut into the closet for a dungeon, and
forgotten by the girls, who ran off to some out-of-door game. Another
time he was half drowned in the bath-tub, playing be a "cunning little
whale." And, worst of all, he was cut down just in time after being hung
up for a robber.

But the institution most patronized by all was the Club. It had no other
name, and it needed none, being the only one in the neighborhood. The
elder lads got it up, and the younger were occasionally admitted if
they behaved well. Tommy and Demi were honorary members, but were always
obliged to retire unpleasantly early, owing to circumstances over
which they had no control. The proceedings of this club were somewhat
peculiar, for it met at all sorts of places and hours, had all manner
of queer ceremonies and amusements, and now and then was broken up
tempestuously, only to be re-established, however, on a firmer basis.

Rainy evenings the members met in the schoolroom, and passed the time in
games: chess, morris, backgammon, fencing matches, recitations, debates,
or dramatic performances of a darkly tragical nature. In summer the barn
was the rendezvous, and what went on there no uninitiated mortal
knows. On sultry evenings the Club adjourned to the brook for aquatic
exercises, and the members sat about in airy attire, frog-like and cool.
On such occasions the speeches were unusually eloquent, quite flowing,
as one might say; and if any orator's remarks displeased the audience,
cold water was thrown upon him till his ardor was effectually quenched.
Franz was president, and maintained order admirably, considering the
unruly nature of the members. Mr. Bhaer never interfered with their
affairs, and was rewarded for this wise forbearance by being invited now
and then to behold the mysteries unveiled, which he appeared to enjoy
much.

When Nan came she wished to join the Club, and caused great excitement
and division among the gentlemen by presenting endless petitions, both
written and spoken, disturbing their solemnities by insulting them
through the key-hole, performing vigorous solos on the door, and
writing up derisive remarks on walls and fences, for she belonged to
the "Irrepressibles." Finding these appeals in vain, the girls, by the
advice of Mrs. Jo, got up an institution of their own, which they called
the Cosy Club. To this they magnanimously invited the gentlemen whose
youth excluded them from the other one, and entertained these favored
beings so well with little suppers, new games devised by Nan, and other
pleasing festivities, that, one by one, the elder boys confessed a
desire to partake of these more elegant enjoyments, and, after much
consultation, finally decided to propose an interchange of civilities.

The members of the Cosy Club were invited to adorn the rival
establishment on certain evenings, and to the surprise of the gentlemen
their presence was not found to be a restraint upon the conversation
or amusement of the regular frequenters; which could not be said of all
Clubs, I fancy. The ladies responded handsomely and hospitably to these
overtures of peace, and both institutions flourished long and happily.



CHAPTER IX. DAISY'S BALL

"Mrs. Shakespeare Smith would like to have Mr. John Brooke, Mr. Thomas
Bangs, and Mr. Nathaniel Blake to come to her ball at three o'clock
today.

"P.S. Nat must bring his fiddle, so we can dance, and all the boys must
be good, or they cannot have any of the nice things we have cooked."

This elegant invitation would, I fear, have been declined, but for the
hint given in the last line of the postscript.

"They have been cooking lots of goodies, I smelt 'em. Let's go," said
Tommy.

"We needn't stay after the feast, you know," added Demi.

"I never went to a ball. What do you have to do?" asked Nat.

"Oh, we just play be men, and sit round stiff and stupid like grown-up
folks, and dance to please the girls. Then we eat up everything, and
come away as soon as we can."

"I think I could do that," said Nat, after considering Tommy's
description for a minute.

"I'll write and say we'll come;" and Demi despatched the following
gentlemanly reply,

"We will all come. Please have lots to eat. J. B. Esquire."

Great was the anxiety of the ladies about their first ball, because if
every thing went well they intended to give a dinner-party to the chosen
few.

"Aunt Jo likes to have the boys play with us, if they are not rough;
so we must make them like our balls, then they will do them good," said
Daisy, with her maternal air, as she set the table and surveyed the
store of refreshments with an anxious eye.

"Demi and Nat will be good, but Tommy will do something bad, I know he
will," replied Nan, shaking her head over the little cake-basket which
she was arranging.

"Then I shall send him right home," said Daisy, with decision.

"People don't do so at parties, it isn't proper."

"I shall never ask him any more."

"That would do. He'd be sorry not to come to the dinner-ball, wouldn't
he?"

"I guess he would! we'll have the splendidest things ever seen, won't
we? Real soup with a ladle and a tureem [she meant tureen] and a little
bird for turkey, and gravy, and all kinds of nice vegytubbles." Daisy
never could say vegetables properly, and had given up trying.

"It is 'most three, and we ought to dress," said Nan, who had arranged a
fine costume for the occasion, and was anxious to wear it.

"I am the mother, so I shan't dress up much," said Daisy, putting on a
night-cap ornamented with a red bow, one of her aunt's long skirts, and
a shawl; a pair of spectacles and large pocket handkerchief completed
her toilette, making a plump, rosy little matron of her.

Nan had a wreath of artificial flowers, a pair of old pink slippers, a
yellow scarf, a green muslin skirt, and a fan made of feathers from the
duster; also, as a last touch of elegance, a smelling-bottle without any
smell in it.

"I am the daughter, so I rig up a good deal, and I must sing and dance,
and talk more than you do. The mothers only get the tea and be proper,
you know."

A sudden very loud knock caused Miss Smith to fly into a chair, and fan
herself violently, while her mamma sat bolt upright on the sofa, and
tried to look quite calm and "proper." Little Bess, who was on a visit,
acted the part of maid, and opened the door, saying with a smile, "Wart
in, gemplemun; it's all weady."

In honor of the occasion, the boys wore high paper collars, tall
black hats, and gloves of every color and material, for they were an
afterthought, and not a boy among them had a perfect pair.

"Good day, mum," said Demi, in a deep voice, which was so hard to keep
up that his remarks had to be extremely brief.

Every one shook hands and then sat down, looking so funny, yet so sober,
that the gentlemen forgot their manners, and rolled in their chairs with
laughter.

"Oh, don't!" cried Mrs. Smith, much distressed.

"You can't ever come again if you act so," added Miss Smith, rapping Mr.
Bangs with her bottle because he laughed loudest.

"I can't help it, you look so like fury," gasped Mr. Bangs, with most
uncourteous candor.

"So do you, but I shouldn't be so rude as to say so. He shan't come to
the dinner-ball, shall he, Daisy?" cried Nan, indignantly.

"I think we had better dance now. Did you bring your fiddle, sir?" asked
Mrs. Smith, trying to preserve her polite composure.

"It is outside the door," and Nat went to get it.

"Better have tea first," proposed the unabashed Tommy, winking openly
at Demi to remind him that the sooner the refreshments were secured, the
sooner they could escape.

"No, we never have supper first; and if you don't dance well you won't
have any supper at all, not one bit, sir," said Mrs. Smith, so sternly
that her wild guests saw she was not to be trifled with, and grew
overwhelmingly civil all at once.

"I will take Mr. Bangs and teach him the polka, for he does not know it
fit to be seen," added the hostess, with a reproachful look that sobered
Tommy at once.

Nat struck up, and the ball opened with two couples, who went
conscientiously through a somewhat varied dance. The ladies did well,
because they liked it, but the gentlemen exerted themselves from more
selfish motives, for each felt that he must earn his supper, and labored
manfully toward that end. When every one was out of breath they were
allowed to rest; and, indeed, poor Mrs. Smith needed it, for her long
dress had tripped her up many times. The little maid passed round
molasses and water in such small cups that one guest actually emptied
nine. I refrain from mentioning his name, because this mild beverage
affected him so much that he put cup and all into his mouth at the ninth
round, and choked himself publicly.

"You must ask Nan to play and sing now," said Daisy to her brother, who
sat looking very much like an owl, as he gravely regarded the festive
scene between his high collars.

"Give us a song, mum," said the obedient guest, secretly wondering where
the piano was.

Miss Smith sailed up to an old secretary which stood in the room,
threw back the lid of the writing-desk, and sitting down before it,
accompanied herself with a vigor which made the old desk rattle as she
sang that new and lovely song, beginning

     "Gaily the troubadour
     Touched his guitar,
     As he was hastening
     Home from the war."

The gentlemen applauded so enthusiastically that she gave them "Bounding
Billows," "Little Bo-Peep," and other gems of song, till they were
obliged to hint that they had had enough. Grateful for the praises
bestowed upon her daughter, Mrs. Smith graciously announced,

"Now we will have tea. Sit down carefully, and don't grab."

It was beautiful to see the air of pride with which the good lady did
the honors of her table, and the calmness with which she bore the little
mishaps that occurred. The best pie flew wildly on the floor when she
tried to cut it with a very dull knife; the bread and butter vanished
with a rapidity calculated to dismay a housekeeper's soul; and, worst of
all, the custards were so soft that they had to be drunk up, instead of
being eaten elegantly with the new tin spoons.

I grieve to state that Miss Smith squabbled with the maid for the best
jumble, which caused Bess to toss the whole dish into the air, and burst
out crying amid a rain of falling cakes. She was comforted by a seat at
the table, and the sugar-bowl to empty; but during this flurry a large
plate of patties was mysteriously lost, and could not be found. They
were the chief ornament of the feast, and Mrs. Smith was indignant at
the loss, for she had made them herself, and they were beautiful to
behold. I put it to any lady if it was not hard to have one dozen
delicious patties (made of flour, salt, and water, with a large raisin
in the middle of each, and much sugar over the whole) swept away at one
fell swoop?

"You hid them, Tommy; I know you did!" cried the outraged hostess,
threatening her suspected guest with the milk-pot.

"I didn't!"

"You did!"

"It isn't proper to contradict," said Nan, who was hastily eating up the
jelly during the fray.

"Give them back, Demi," said Tommy.

"That's a fib, you've got them in your own pocket," bawled Demi, roused
by the false accusation.

"Let's take 'em away from him. It's too bad to make Daisy cry,"
suggested Nat, who found his first ball more exciting than he expected.

Daisy was already weeping, Bess like a devoted servant mingled her tears
with those of her mistress, and Nan denounced the entire race of boys as
"plaguey things." Meanwhile the battle raged among the gentlemen, for,
when the two defenders of innocence fell upon the foe, that hardened
youth intrenched himself behind a table and pelted them with the stolen
tarts, which were very effective missiles, being nearly as hard as
bullets. While his ammunition held out the besieged prospered, but the
moment the last patty flew over the parapet, the villain was seized,
dragged howling from the room, and cast upon the hall floor in an
ignominious heap. The conquerors then returned flushed with victory, and
while Demi consoled poor Mrs. Smith, Nat and Nan collected the scattered
tarts, replaced each raisin in its proper bed, and rearranged the dish
so that it really looked almost as well as ever. But their glory had
departed, for the sugar was gone, and no one cared to eat them after the
insult offered to them.

"I guess we had better go," said Demi, suddenly, as Aunt Jo's voice was
heard on the stairs.

"P'r'aps we had," and Nat hastily dropped a stray jumble that he had
just picked up.

But Mrs. Jo was among them before the retreat was accomplished, and into
her sympathetic ear the young ladies poured the story of their woes.

"No more balls for these boys till they have atoned for this bad
behavior by doing something kind to you," said Mrs. Jo, shaking her head
at the three culprits.

"We were only in fun," began Demi.

"I don't like fun that makes other people unhappy. I am disappointed in
you, Demi, for I hoped you would never learn to tease Daisy. Such a kind
little sister as she is to you."

"Boys always tease their sisters; Tom says so," muttered Demi.

"I don't intend that my boys shall, and I must send Daisy home if you
cannot play happily together," said Aunt Jo, soberly.

At this awful threat, Demi sidled up to his sister, and Daisy hastily
dried her tears, for to be separated was the worst misfortune that could
happen to the twins.

"Nat was bad, too, and Tommy was baddest of all," observed Nan, fearing
that two of the sinners would not get their fair share of punishment.

"I am sorry," said Nat, much ashamed.

"I ain't!" bawled Tommy through the keyhole, where he was listening with
all his might.

Mrs. Jo wanted very much to laugh, but kept her countenance, and said
impressively, as she pointed to the door,

"You can go, boys, but remember, you are not to speak to or play with
the little girls till I give you leave. You don't deserve the pleasure,
so I forbid it."

The ill-mannered young gentlemen hastily retired, to be received
outside with derision and scorn by the unrepentant Bangs, who would
not associate with them for at least fifteen minutes. Daisy was soon
consoled for the failure of her ball, but lamented the edict that parted
her from her brother, and mourned over his short-comings in her tender
little heart. Nan rather enjoyed the trouble, and went about turning up
her pug nose at the three, especially Tommy, who pretended not to care,
and loudly proclaimed his satisfaction at being rid of those "stupid
girls." But in his secret soul he soon repented of the rash act that
caused this banishment from the society he loved, and every hour of
separation taught him the value of the "stupid girls."

The others gave in very soon, and longed to be friends, for now there
was no Daisy to pet and cook for them; no Nan to amuse and doctor them;
and, worst of all, no Mrs. Jo to make home life pleasant and life easy
for them. To their great affliction, Mrs. Jo seemed to consider herself
one of the offended girls, for she hardly spoke to the outcasts, looked
as if she did not see them when she passed, and was always too busy now
to attend to their requests. This sudden and entire exile from favor
cast a gloom over their souls, for when Mother Bhaer deserted them,
their sun had set at noon-day, as it were, and they had no refuge left.

This unnatural state of things actually lasted for three days, then
they could bear it no longer, and fearing that the eclipse might become
total, went to Mr. Bhaer for help and counsel.

It is my private opinion that he had received instructions how to behave
if the case should be laid before him. But no one suspected it, and he
gave the afflicted boys some advice, which they gratefully accepted and
carried out in the following manner:

Secluding themselves in the garret, they devoted several play-hours to
the manufacture of some mysterious machine, which took so much paste
that Asia grumbled, and the little girls wondered mightily. Nan nearly
got her inquisitive nose pinched in the door, trying to see what was
going on, and Daisy sat about, openly lamenting that they could not
all play nicely together, and not have any dreadful secrets. Wednesday
afternoon was fine, and after a good deal of consultation about wind and
weather, Nat and Tommy went off, bearing an immense flat parcel hidden
under many newspapers. Nan nearly died with suppressed curiosity, Daisy
nearly cried with vexation, and both quite trembled with interest when
Demi marched into Mrs. Bhaer's room, hat in hand, and said, in the
politest tone possible to a mortal boy of his years,

"Please, Aunt Jo, would you and the girls come out to a surprise party
we have made for you? Do it's a very nice one."

"Thank you, we will come with pleasure; only, I must take Teddy with
me," replied Mrs. Bhaer, with a smile that cheered Demi like sunshine
after rain.

"We'd like to have him. The little wagon is all ready for the girls; you
won't mind walking just up to Pennyroyal Hill, will you Aunty?"

"I should like it exceedingly; but are you quite sure I shall not be in
the way?"

"Oh, no, indeed! we want you very much; and the party will be spoilt if
you don't come," cried Demi, with great earnestness.

"Thank you kindly, sir;" and Aunt Jo made him a grand curtsey, for she
liked frolics as well as any of them.

"Now, young ladies, we must not keep them waiting; on with the hats, and
let us be off at once. I'm all impatience to know what the surprise is."

As Mrs. Bhaer spoke every one bustled about, and in five minutes the
three little girls and Teddy were packed into the "clothes-basket," as
they called the wicker wagon which Toby drew. Demi walked at the head of
the procession, and Mrs. Jo brought up the rear, escorted by Kit. It was
a most imposing party, I assure you, for Toby had a red feather-duster
in his head, two remarkable flags waved over the carriage, Kit had a
blue bow on his neck, which nearly drove him wild, Demi wore a nosegay
of dandelions in his buttonhole, and Mrs. Jo carried the queer Japanese
umbrella in honor of the occasion.

The girls had little flutters of excitement all the way; and Teddy was
so charmed with the drive that he kept dropping his hat overboard, and
when it was taken from him he prepared to tumble out himself, evidently
feeling that it behooved him to do something for the amusement of the
party.

When they came to the hill "nothing was to be seen but the grass
blowing in the wind," as the fairy books say, and the children looked
disappointed. But Demi said, in his most impressive manner,

"Now, you all get out and stand still, and the surprise party with come
in;" with which remark he retired behind a rock, over which heads had
been bobbing at intervals for the last half-hour.

A short pause of intense suspense, and then Nat, Demi, and Tommy marched
forth, each bearing a new kite, which they presented to the three young
ladies. Shrieks of delight arose, but were silenced by the boys, who
said, with faces brimful of merriment, "That isn't all the surprise;"
and, running behind the rock, again emerged bearing a fourth kite of
superb size, on which was printed, in bright yellow letters, "For Mother
Bhaer."

"We thought you'd like one, too, because you were angry with us, and
took the girls' part," cried all three, shaking with laughter, for this
part of the affair evidently was a surprise to Mrs. Jo.

She clapped her hands, and joined in the laugh, looking thoroughly
tickled at the joke.

"Now, boys, that is regularly splendid! Who did think of it?" she asked,
receiving the monster kite with as much pleasure as the little girls did
theirs.

"Uncle Fritz proposed it when we planned to make the others; he said
you'd like it, so we made a bouncer," answered Demi, beaming with
satisfaction at the success of the plot.

"Uncle Fritz knows what I like. Yes, these are magnificent kites, and
we were wishing we had some the other day when you were flying yours,
weren't we, girls?"

"That's why we made them for you," cried Tommy, standing on his head as
the most appropriate way of expressing his emotions.

"Let us fly them," said energetic Nan.

"I don't know how," began Daisy.

"We'll show you, we want to!" cried all the boys in a burst of devotion,
as Demi took Daisy's, Tommy Nan's, and Nat, with difficulty, persuaded
Bess to let go her little blue one.

"Aunty, if you will wait a minute, we'll pitch yours for you," said
Demi, feeling that Mrs. Bhaer's favor must not be lost again by any
neglect of theirs.

"Bless your buttons, dear, I know all about it; and here is a boy who
will toss up for me," added Mrs. Jo, as the professor peeped over the
rock with a face full of fun.

He came out at once, tossed up the big kite, and Mrs. Jo ran off with it
in fine style, while the children stood and enjoyed the spectacle. One
by one all the kites went up, and floated far overhead like gay birds,
balancing themselves on the fresh breeze that blew steadily over the
hill. Such a merry time as they had! running and shouting, sending up
the kites or pulling them down, watching their antics in the air, and
feeling them tug at the string like live creatures trying to escape.
Nan was quite wild with the fun, Daisy thought the new play nearly as
interesting as dolls, and little Bess was so fond of her "boo tite,"
that she would only let it go on very short flights, preferring to
hold it in her lap and look at the remarkable pictures painted on it by
Tommy's dashing brush. Mrs. Jo enjoyed hers immensely, and it acted as
if it knew who owned it, for it came tumbling down head first when least
expected, caught on trees, nearly pitched into the river, and finally
darted away to such a height that it looked a mere speck among the
clouds.

By and by every one got tired, and fastening the kite-strings to trees
and fences, all sat down to rest, except Mr. Bhaer, who went off to look
at the cows, with Teddy on his shoulder.

"Did you ever have such a good time as this before?" asked Nat, as they
lay about on the grass, nibbling pennyroyal like a flock of sheep.

"Not since I last flew a kite, years ago, when I was a girl," answered
Mrs. Jo.

"I'd like to have known you when you were a girl, you must have been so
jolly," said Nat.

"I was a naughty little girl, I am sorry to say."

"I like naughty little girls," observed Tommy, looking at Nan, who made
a frightful grimace at him in return for the compliment.

"Why don't I remember you then, Aunty? Was I too young?" asked Demi.

"Rather, dear."

"I suppose my memory hadn't come then. Grandpa says that different parts
of the mind unfold as we grow up, and the memory part of my mind hadn't
unfolded when you were little, so I can't remember how you looked,"
explained Demi.

"Now, little Socrates, you had better keep that question for grandpa, it
is beyond me," said Aunt Jo, putting on the extinguisher.

"Well, I will, he knows about those things, and you don't," returned
Demi, feeling that on the whole kites were better adapted to the
comprehension of the present company.

"Tell about the last time you flew a kite," said Nat, for Mrs. Jo had
laughed as she spoke of it, and he thought it might be interesting.

"Oh, it was only rather funny, for I was a great girl of fifteen, and
was ashamed to be seen at such a play. So Uncle Teddy and I privately
made our kites, and stole away to fly them. We had a capital time, and
were resting as we are now, when suddenly we heard voices, and saw a
party of young ladies and gentlemen coming back from a picnic. Teddy did
not mind, though he was rather a large boy to be playing with a kite,
but I was in a great flurry, for I knew I should be sadly laughed at,
and never hear the last of it, because my wild ways amused the neighbors
as much as Nan's do us.

"'What shall I do?' I whispered to Teddy, as the voices drew nearer and
nearer.

"'I'll show you,' he said, and whipping out his knife he cut the
strings. Away flew the kites, and when the people came up we were
picking flowers as properly as you please. They never suspected us, and
we had a grand laugh over our narrow escape."

"Were the kites lost, Aunty?" asked Daisy.

"Quite lost, but I did not care, for I made up my mind that it would be
best to wait till I was an old lady before I played with kites again;
and you see I have waited," said Mrs. Jo, beginning to pull in the big
kite, for it was getting late.

"Must we go now?"

"I must, or you won't have any supper; and that sort of surprise party
would not suit you, I think, my chickens."

"Hasn't our party been a nice one?" asked Tommy, complacently.

"Splendid!" answered every one.

"Do you know why? It is because your guests have behaved themselves,
and tried to make everything go well. You understand what I mean, don't
you?"

"Yes'm," was all the boys said, but they stole a shamefaced look at one
another, as they meekly shouldered their kites and walked home, thinking
of another party where the guests had not behaved themselves, and things
had gone badly on account of it.



CHAPTER X. HOME AGAIN

July had come, and haying begun; the little gardens were doing finely
and the long summer days were full of pleasant hours. The house stood
open from morning till night, and the lads lived out of doors, except at
school time. The lessons were short, and there were many holidays, for
the Bhaers believed in cultivating healthy bodies by much exercise,
and our short summers are best used in out-of-door work. Such a rosy,
sunburnt, hearty set as the boys became; such appetites as they had;
such sturdy arms and legs, as outgrew jackets and trousers; such
laughing and racing all over the place; such antics in house and barn;
such adventures in the tramps over hill and dale; and such satisfaction
in the hearts of the worthy Bhaers, as they saw their flock prospering
in mind and body, I cannot begin to describe. Only one thing was needed
to make them quite happy, and it came when they least expected it.

One balmy night when the little lads were in bed, the elder ones bathing
down at the brook, and Mrs. Bhaer undressing Teddy in her parlor, he
suddenly cried out, "Oh, my Danny!" and pointed to the window, where the
moon shone brightly.

"No, lovey, he is not there, it was the pretty moon," said his mother.

"No, no, Danny at a window; Teddy saw him," persisted baby, much
excited.

"It might have been," and Mrs. Bhaer hurried to the window, hoping it
would prove true. But the face was gone, and nowhere appeared any signs
of a mortal boy; she called his name, ran to the front door with Teddy
in his little shirt, and made him call too, thinking the baby voice
might have more effect than her own. No one answered, nothing appeared,
and they went back much disappointed. Teddy would not be satisfied with
the moon, and after he was in his crib kept popping up his head to ask
if Danny was not "tummin' soon."

By and by he fell asleep, the lads trooped up to bed, the house grew
still, and nothing but the chirp of the crickets broke the soft silence
of the summer night. Mrs. Bhaer sat sewing, for the big basket was
always piled with socks, full of portentous holes, and thinking of the
lost boy. She had decided that baby had been mistaken, and did not even
disturb Mr. Bhaer by telling him of the child's fancy, for the poor
man got little time to himself till the boys were abed, and he was busy
writing letters. It was past ten when she rose to shut up the house. As
she paused a minute to enjoy the lovely scene from the steps, something
white caught her eye on one of the hay-cocks scattered over the lawn.
The children had been playing there all the afternoon, and, fancying
that Nan had left her hat as usual, Mrs. Bhaer went out to get it. But
as she approached, she saw that it was neither hat nor handkerchief, but
a shirt sleeve with a brown hand sticking out of it. She hurried round
the hay-cock, and there lay Dan, fast asleep.

Ragged, dirty, thin, and worn-out he looked; one foot was bare, the
other tied up in the old gingham jacket which he had taken from his own
back to use as a clumsy bandage for some hurt. He seemed to have hidden
himself behind the hay-cock, but in his sleep had thrown out the arm
that had betrayed him. He sighed and muttered as if his dreams disturbed
him, and once when he moved, he groaned as if in pain, but still slept
on quite spent with weariness.

"He must not lie here," said Mrs. Bhaer, and stooping over him she
gently called his name. He opened his eyes and looked at her, as if she
was a part of his dream, for he smiled and said drowsily, "Mother Bhaer,
I've come home."

The look, the words, touched her very much, and she put her hand under
his head to lift him up, saying in her cordial way,

"I thought you would, and I'm so glad to see you, Dan." He seemed to
wake thoroughly then, and started up looking about him as if he suddenly
remembered where he was, and doubted even that kind welcome. His face
changed, and he said in his old rough way,

"I was going off in the morning. I only stopped to peek in, as I went
by."

"But why not come in, Dan? Didn't you hear us call you? Teddy saw, and
cried for you."

"Didn't suppose you'd let me in," he said, fumbling with a little bundle
which he had taken up as if going immediately.

"Try and see," was all Mrs. Bhaer answered, holding out her hand and
pointing to the door, where the light shone hospitably.

With a long breath, as if a load was off his mind, Dan took up a stout
stick, and began to limp towards the house, but stopped suddenly, to say
inquiringly,

"Mr. Bhaer won't like it. I ran away from Page."

"He knows it, and was sorry, but it will make no difference. Are you
lame?" asked Mrs. Jo, as he limped on again.

"Getting over a wall a stone fell on my foot and smashed it. I don't
mind," and he did his best to hide the pain each step cost him.

Mrs. Bhaer helped him into her own room, and, once there, he dropped
into a chair, and laid his head back, white and faint with weariness and
suffering.

"My poor Dan! drink this, and then eat a little; you are at home now,
and Mother Bhaer will take good care of you."

He only looked up at her with eyes full of gratitude, as he drank the
wine she held to his lips, and then began slowly to eat the food she
brought him. Each mouthful seemed to put heart into him, and presently
he began to talk as if anxious to have her know all about him.

"Where have you been, Dan?" she asked, beginning to get out some
bandages.

"I ran off more'n a month ago. Page was good enough, but too strict. I
didn't like it, so I cut away down the river with a man who was going in
his boat. That's why they couldn't tell where I'd gone. When I left the
man, I worked for a couple of weeks with a farmer, but I thrashed his
boy, and then the old man thrashed me, and I ran off again and walked
here."

"All the way?"

"Yes, the man didn't pay me, and I wouldn't ask for it. Took it out in
beating the boy," and Dan laughed, yet looked ashamed, as he glanced at
his ragged clothes and dirty hands.

"How did you live? It was a long, long tramp for a boy like you."

"Oh, I got on well enough, till I hurt my foot. Folks gave me things to
eat, and I slept in barns and tramped by day. I got lost trying to make
a short cut, or I'd have been here sooner."

"But if you did not mean to come in and stay with us, what were you
going to do?"

"I thought I'd like to see Teddy again, and you; and then I was going
back to my old work in the city, only I was so tired I went to sleep on
the hay. I'd have been gone in the morning, if you hadn't found me."

"Are you sorry I did?" and Mrs. Jo looked at him with a half merry, half
reproachful look, as she knelt down to look at his wounded foot.

The color came up into Dan's face, and he kept his eyes fixed on his
plate, as he said very low, "No, ma'am, I'm glad, I wanted to stay, but
I was afraid you--"

He did not finish, for Mrs. Bhaer interrupted him by an exclamation of
pity, as she saw his foot, for it was seriously hurt.

"When did you do it?"

"Three days ago."

"And you have walked on it in this state?"

"I had a stick, and I washed it at every brook I came to, and one woman
gave me a rag to put on it."

"Mr. Bhaer must see and dress it at once," and Mrs. Jo hastened into the
next room, leaving the door ajar behind her, so that Dan heard all that
passed.

"Fritz, the boy has come back."

"Who? Dan?"

"Yes, Teddy saw him at the window, and he called to him, but he went
away and hid behind the hay-cocks on the lawn. I found him there just
now fast asleep, and half dead with weariness and pain. He ran away
from Page a month ago, and has been making his way to us ever since. He
pretends that he did not mean to let us see him, but go on to the city,
and his old work, after a look at us. It is evident, however, that the
hope of being taken in has led him here through every thing, and there
he is waiting to know if you will forgive and take him back."

"Did he say so?"

"His eyes did, and when I waked him, he said, like a lost child, 'Mother
Bhaer, I've come home.' I hadn't the heart to scold him, and just took
him in like a poor little black sheep come back to the fold. I may keep
him, Fritz?"

"Of course you may! This proves to me that we have a hold on the boy's
heart, and I would no more send him away now than I would my own Rob."

Dan heard a soft little sound, as if Mrs. Jo thanked her husband without
words, and, in the instant's silence that followed, two great tears that
had slowly gathered in the boy's eyes brimmed over and rolled down his
dusty cheeks. No one saw them, for he brushed them hastily away; but
in that little pause I think Dan's old distrust for these good people
vanished for ever, the soft spot in his heart was touched, and he felt
an impetuous desire to prove himself worthy of the love and pity that
was so patient and forgiving. He said nothing, he only wished the wish
with all his might, resolved to try in his blind boyish way, and
sealed his resolution with the tears which neither pain, fatigue, nor
loneliness could wring from him.

"Come and see his foot. I am afraid it is badly hurt, for he has kept
on three days through heat and dust, with nothing but water and an old
jacket to bind it up with. I tell you, Fritz, that boy is a brave lad,
and will make a fine man yet."

"I hope so, for your sake, enthusiastic woman, your faith deserves
success. Now, I will go and see your little Spartan. Where is he?"

"In my room; but, dear, you'll be very kind to him, no matter how
gruff he seems. I am sure that is the way to conquer him. He won't bear
sternness nor much restraint, but a soft word and infinite patience will
lead him as it used to lead me."

"As if you ever like this little rascal!" cried Mr. Bhaer, laughing, yet
half angry at the idea.

"I was in spirit, though I showed it in a different way. I seem to know
by instinct how he feels, to understand what will win and touch him, and
to sympathize with his temptations and faults. I am glad I do, for it
will help me to help him; and if I can make a good man of this wild boy,
it will be the best work of my life."

"God bless the work, and help the worker!"

Mr. Bhaer spoke now as earnestly as she had done, and both came in
together to find Dan's head down upon his arm, as if he was quite
overcome by sleep. But he looked up quickly, and tried to rise as Mr.
Bhaer said pleasantly,

"So you like Plumfield better than Page's farm. Well, let us see if we
can get on more comfortably this time than we did before."

"Thanky, sir," said Dan, trying not to be gruff, and finding it easier
than he expected.

"Now, the foot! Ach! this is not well. We must have Dr. Firth to-morrow.
Warm water, Jo, and old linen."

Mr. Bhaer bathed and bound up the wounded foot, while Mrs. Jo prepared
the only empty bed in the house. It was in the little guest-chamber
leading from the parlor, and often used when the lads were poorly, for
it saved Mrs. Jo from running up and down, and the invalids could see
what was going on. When it was ready, Mr. Bhaer took the boy in his
arms, and carried him in, helped him undress, laid him on the little
white bed, and left him with another hand-shake, and a fatherly
"Good-night, my son."

Dan dropped asleep at once, and slept heavily for several hours; then
his foot began to throb and ache, and he awoke to toss about uneasily,
trying not to groan lest any one should hear him, for he was a brave
lad, and did bear pain like "a little Spartan," as Mr. Bhaer called him.

Mrs. Jo had a way of flitting about the house at night, to shut the
windows if the wind grew chilly, to draw mosquito curtains over Teddy,
or look after Tommy, who occasionally walked in his sleep. The least
noise waked her, and as she often heard imaginary robbers, cats, and
conflagrations, the doors stood open all about, so her quick ear caught
the sound of Dan's little moans, and she was up in a minute. He was just
giving his hot pillow a despairing thump when a light came glimmering
through the hall, and Mrs. Jo crept in, looking like a droll ghost,
with her hair in a great knob on the top of her head, and a long gray
dressing-gown trailing behind her.

"Are you in pain, Dan?"

"It's pretty bad; but I didn't mean to wake you."

"I'm a sort of owl, always flying about at night. Yes, your foot is like
fire; the bandages must be wet again," and away flapped the maternal owl
for more cooling stuff, and a great mug of ice water.

"Oh, that's so nice!" sighed Dan, the wet bandages went on again, and a
long draught of water cooled his thirsty throat.

"There, now, sleep your best, and don't be frightened if you see me
again, for I'll slip down by and by, and give you another sprinkle."

As she spoke, Mrs. Jo stooped to turn the pillow and smooth the
bed-clothes, when, to her great surprise, Dan put his arm around her
neck, drew her face down to his, and kissed her, with a broken "Thank
you, ma'am," which said more than the most eloquent speech could have
done; for the hasty kiss, the muttered words, meant, "I'm sorry, I will
try." She understood it, accepted the unspoken confession, and did not
spoil it by any token of surprise. She only remembered that he had no
mother, kissed the brown cheek half hidden on the pillow, as if ashamed
of the little touch of tenderness, and left him, saying, what he long
remembered, "You are my boy now, and if you choose you can make me proud
and glad to say so."

Once again, just at dawn, she stole down to find him so fast asleep
that he did not wake, and showed no sign of consciousness as she wet his
foot, except that the lines of pain smoothed themselves away, and left
his face quite peaceful.

The day was Sunday, and the house so still that he never waked till near
noon, and, looking round him, saw an eager little face peering in at
the door. He held out his arms, and Teddy tore across the room to cast
himself bodily upon the bed, shouting, "My Danny's tum!" as he hugged
and wriggled with delight. Mrs. Bhaer appeared next, bringing breakfast,
and never seeming to see how shamefaced Dan looked at the memory of the
little scene last night. Teddy insisted on giving him his "betfus," and
fed him like a baby, which, as he was not very hungry, Dan enjoyed very
much.

Then came the doctor, and the poor Spartan had a bad time of it, for
some of the little bones in his foot were injured, and putting them to
rights was such a painful job, that Dan's lips were white, and great
drops stood on his forehead, though he never cried out, and only held
Mrs. Jo's hand so tight that it was red long afterwards.

"You must keep this boy quiet, for a week at least, and not let him put
his foot to the ground. By that time, I shall know whether he may hop a
little with a crutch, or stick to his bed for a while longer," said Dr.
Firth, putting up the shining instruments that Dan did not like to see.

"It will get well sometime, won't it?" he asked, looking alarmed at the
word "crutches."

"I hope so;" and with that the doctor departed, leaving Dan much
depressed; for the loss of a foot is a dreadful calamity to an active
boy.

"Don't be troubled, I am a famous nurse, and we will have you tramping
about as well as ever in a month," said Mrs. Jo, taking a hopeful view
of the case.

But the fear of being lame haunted Dan, and even Teddy's caresses did
not cheer him; so Mrs. Jo proposed that one or two of the boys should
come in and pay him a little visit, and asked whom he would like to see.

"Nat and Demi; I'd like my hat too, there's something in it I guess
they'd like to see. I suppose you threw away my bundle of plunder?" said
Dan, looking rather anxious as he put the question.

"No, I kept it, for I thought they must be treasures of some kind, you
took such care of them;" and Mrs. Jo brought him his old straw hat
stuck full of butterflies and beetles, and a handkerchief containing a
collection of odd things picked up on his way: birds' eggs, carefully
done up in moss, curious shells and stones, bits of fungus, and several
little crabs, in a state of great indignation at their imprisonment.

"Could I have something to put these fellers in? Mr. Hyde and I found
'em, and they are first-rate ones, so I'd like to keep and watch 'em;
can I?" asked Dan, forgetting his foot, and laughing to see the crabs go
sidling and backing over the bed.

"Of course you can; Polly's old cage will be just the thing. Don't let
them nip Teddy's toes while I get it;" and away went Mrs. Jo, leaving
Dan overjoyed to find that his treasures were not considered rubbish,
and thrown away.

Nat, Demi, and the cage arrived together, and the crabs were settled
in their new house, to the great delight of the boys, who, in the
excitement of the performance, forgot any awkwardness they might
otherwise have felt in greeting the runaway. To these admiring listeners
Dan related his adventures much more fully than he had done to the
Bhaers. Then he displayed his "plunder," and described each article so
well, that Mrs. Jo, who had retired to the next room to leave them
free, was surprised and interested, as well as amused, at their boyish
chatter.

"How much the lad knows of these things! how absorbed he is in them! and
what a mercy it is just now, for he cares so little for books, it would
be hard to amuse him while he is laid up; but the boys can supply him
with beetles and stones to any extent, and I am glad to find out this
taste of his; it is a good one, and may perhaps prove the making of him.
If he should turn out a great naturalist, and Nat a musician, I should
have cause to be proud of this year's work;" and Mrs. Jo sat smiling
over her book as she built castles in the air, just as she used to do
when a girl, only then they were for herself, and now they were for
other people, which is the reason perhaps that some of them came to
pass in reality for charity is an excellent foundation to build anything
upon.

Nat was most interested in the adventures, but Demi enjoyed the beetles
and butterflies immensely, drinking in the history of their changeful
little lives as if it were a new and lovely sort of fairy tale for, even
in his plain way, Dan told it well, and found great satisfaction in the
thought that here at least the small philosopher could learn of him. So
interested were they in the account of catching a musk rat, whose skin
was among the treasures, that Mr. Bhaer had to come himself to tell Nat
and Demi it was time for the walk. Dan looked so wistfully after them as
they ran off that Father Bhaer proposed carrying him to the sofa in the
parlor for a little change of air and scene.

When he was established, and the house quiet, Mrs. Jo, who sat near
by showing Teddy pictures, said, in an interested tone, as she nodded
towards the treasures still in Dan's hands,

"Where did you learn so much about these things?"

"I always liked 'em, but didn't know much till Mr. Hyde told me."

"Oh, he was a man who lived round in the woods studying these things I
don't know what you call him and wrote about frogs, and fishes, and so
on. He stayed at Page's, and used to want me to go and help him, and it
was great fun, 'cause he told me ever so much, and was uncommon jolly
and wise. Hope I'll see him again sometime."

"I hope you will," said Mrs. Jo, for Dan's face had brightened up, and
he was so interested in the matter that he forgot his usual taciturnity.

"Why, he could make birds come to him, and rabbits and squirrels didn't
mind him any more than if he was a tree. Did you ever tickle a lizard
with a straw?" asked Dan, eagerly.

"No, but I should like to try it."

"Well, I've done it, and it's so funny to see 'em turn over and stretch
out, they like it so much. Mr. Hyde used to do it; and he'd make snakes
listen to him while he whistled, and he knew just when certain flowers
would blow, and bees wouldn't sting him, and he'd tell the wonderfullest
things about fish and flies, and the Indians and the rocks."

"I think you were so fond of going with Mr. Hyde, you rather neglected
Mr. Page," said Mrs. Jo, slyly.

"Yes, I did; I hated to have to weed and hoe when I might be tramping
round with Mr. Hyde. Page thought such things silly, and called Mr. Hyde
crazy because he'd lay hours watching a trout or a bird."

"Suppose you say lie instead of lay, it is better grammar," said Mrs.
Jo, very gently; and then added, "Yes, Page is a thorough farmer, and
would not understand that a naturalist's work was just as interesting,
and perhaps just as important as his own. Now, Dan, if you really love
these things, as I think you do, and I am glad to see it, you shall have
time to study them and books to help you; but I want you to do something
besides, and to do it faithfully, else you will be sorry by and by, and
find that you have got to begin again."

"Yes, ma'am," said Dan, meekly, and looked a little scared by the
serious tone of the last remarks, for he hated books, yet had evidently
made up his mind to study anything she proposed.

"Do you see that cabinet with twelve drawers in it?" was the next very
unexpected question.

Dan did see two tall old-fashioned ones standing on either side of the
piano; he knew them well, and had often seen nice bits of string, nails,
brown paper, and such useful matters come out of the various drawers. He
nodded and smiled. Mrs. Jo went on,

"Well, don't you think those drawers would be good places to put your
eggs, and stones, and shells, and lichens?"

"Oh, splendid, but you wouldn't like my things 'clutterin' round,' as
Mr. Page used to say, would you?" cried Dan, sitting up to survey the
old piece of furniture with sparkling eyes.

"I like litter of that sort; and if I didn't, I should give you the
drawers, because I have a regard for children's little treasures, and
I think they should be treated respectfully. Now, I am going to make a
bargain with you, Dan, and I hope you will keep it honorably. Here are
twelve good-sized drawers, one for each month of the year, and they
shall be yours as fast as you earn them, by doing the little duties that
belong to you. I believe in rewards of a certain kind, especially for
young folks; they help us along, and though we may begin by being good
for the sake of the reward, if it is rightly used, we shall soon learn
to love goodness for itself."

"Do you have 'em?" asked Dan, looking as if this was new talk for him.

"Yes, indeed! I haven't learnt to get on without them yet. My rewards
are not drawers, or presents, or holidays, but they are things which I
like as much as you do the others. The good behavior and success of my
boys is one of the rewards I love best, and I work for it as I want you
to work for your cabinet. Do what you dislike, and do it well, and
you get two rewards, one, the prize you see and hold; the other, the
satisfaction of a duty cheerfully performed. Do you understand that?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"We all need these little helps; so you shall try to do your lessons and
your work, play kindly with all the boys, and use your holidays well;
and if you bring me a good report, or if I see and know it without words
for I'm quick to spy out the good little efforts of my boys you shall
have a compartment in the drawer for your treasures. See, some are
already divided into four parts, and I will have the others made in
the same way, a place for each week; and when the drawer is filled
with curious and pretty things, I shall be as proud of it as you are;
prouder, I think for in the pebbles, mosses, and gay butterflies, I
shall see good resolutions carried out, conquered faults, and a promise
well kept. Shall we do this, Dan?"

The boys answered with one of the looks which said much, for it showed
that he felt and understood her wish and words, although he did not know
how to express his interest and gratitude for such care and kindness.
She understood the look, and seeing by the color that flushed up to his
forehead that he was touched, as she wished him to be, she said no more
about that side of the new plan, but pulled out the upper drawer, dusted
it, and set it on two chairs before the sofa, saying briskly,

"Now, let us begin at once by putting those nice beetles in a safe
place. These compartments will hold a good deal, you see. I'd pin the
butterflies and bugs round the sides; they will be quite safe there, and
leave room for the heavy things below. I'll give you some cotton wool,
and clean paper and pins, and you can get ready for the week's work."

"But I can't go out to find any new things," said Dan, looking piteously
at his foot.

"That's true; never mind, we'll let these treasures do for this week,
and I dare say the boys will bring you loads of things if you ask them."

"They don't know the right sort; besides, if I lay, no, lie here all the
time, I can't work and study, and earn my drawers."

"There are plenty of lessons you can learn lying there, and several
little jobs of work you can do for me."

"Can I?" and Dan looked both surprised and pleased.

"You can learn to be patient and cheerful in spite of pain and no play.
You can amuse Teddy for me, wind cotton, read to me when I sew, and do
many things without hurting your foot, which will make the days pass
quickly, and not be wasted ones."

Here Demi ran in with a great butterfly in one hand, and a very ugly
little toad in the other.

"See, Dan, I found them, and ran back to give them to you; aren't they
beautiful ones?" panted Demi, all out of breath.

Dan laughed at the toad, and said he had no place to put him, but the
butterfly was a beauty, and if Mrs. Jo would give him a big pin, he
would stick it right up in the drawer.

"I don't like to see the poor thing struggle on a pin; if it must be
killed, let us put it out of pain at once with a drop of camphor," said
Mrs. Jo, getting out the bottle.

"I know how to do it Mr. Hyde always killed 'em that way but I didn't
have any camphor, so I use a pin," and Dan gently poured a drop on the
insect's head, when the pale green wings fluttered an instant, and then
grew still.

This dainty little execution was hardly over when Teddy shouted from the
bedroom, "Oh, the little trabs are out, and the big one's eaten 'em
all up." Demi and his aunt ran to the rescue, and found Teddy dancing
excitedly in a chair, while two little crabs were scuttling about the
floor, having got through the wires of the cage. A third was clinging to
the top of the cage, evidently in terror of his life, for below appeared
a sad yet funny sight. The big crab had wedged himself into the little
recess where Polly's cup used to stand, and there he sat eating one of
his relations in the coolest way. All the claws of the poor victim were
pulled off, and he was turned upside down, his upper shell held in
one claw close under the mouth of the big crab like a dish, while he
leisurely ate out of it with the other claw, pausing now and then to
turn his queer bulging eyes from side to side, and to put out a slender
tongue and lick them in a way that made the children scream with
laughter. Mrs. Jo carried the cage in for Dan to see the sight, while
Demi caught and confined the wanderers under an inverted wash-bowl.

"I'll have to let these fellers go, for I can't keep 'em in the house,"
said Dan, with evident regret.

"I'll take care of them for you, if you will tell me how, and they can
live in my turtle-tank just as well as not," said Demi, who found them
more interesting even that his beloved slow turtles. So Dan gave him
directions about the wants and habits of the crabs, and Demi bore them
away to introduce them to their new home and neighbors. "What a good
boy he is!" said Dan, carefully settling the first butterfly, and
remembering that Demi had given up his walk to bring it to him.

"He ought to be, for a great deal has been done to make him so."

"He's had folks to tell him things, and to help him; I haven't," said
Dan, with a sigh, thinking of his neglected childhood, a thing he seldom
did, and feeling as if he had not had fair play somehow.

"I know it, dear, and for that reason I don't expect as much from you as
from Demi, though he is younger; you shall have all the help that we can
give you now, and I hope to teach you how to help yourself in the best
way. Have you forgotten what Father Bhaer told you when you were here
before, about wanting to be good, and asking God to help you?"

"No, ma'am," very low.

"Do you try that way still?"

"No, ma'am," lower still.

"Will you do it every night to please me?"

"Yes, ma'am," very soberly.

"I shall depend on it, and I think I shall know if you are faithful
to your promise, for these things always show to people who believe in
them, though not a word is said. Now here is a pleasant story about a
boy who hurt his foot worse than you did yours; read it, and see how
bravely he bore his troubles."

She put that charming little book, "The Crofton Boys," into his hands,
and left him for an hour, passing in and out from time to time that
he might not feel lonely. Dan did not love to read, but soon got so
interested that he was surprised when the boys came home. Daisy brought
him a nosegay of wild flowers, and Nan insisted on helping bring him his
supper, as he lay on the sofa with the door open into the dining-room,
so that he could see the lads at table, and they could nod socially to
him over their bread and butter.

Mr. Bhaer carried him away to his bed early, and Teddy came in his
night-gown to say good-night, for he went to his little nest with the
birds.

"I want to say my prayers to Danny; may I?" he asked; and when his
mother said, "Yes," the little fellow knelt down by Dan's bed, and
folding his chubby hands, said softly,

"Pease Dod bess everybody, and hep me to be dood."

Then he went away smiling with sleepy sweetness over his mother's
shoulder.

But after the evening talk was done, the evening song sung, and the
house grew still with beautiful Sunday silence, Dan lay in his pleasant
room wide awake, thinking new thoughts, feeling new hopes and desires
stirring in his boyish heart, for two good angels had entered in: love
and gratitude began the work which time and effort were to finish; and
with an earnest wish to keep his first promise, Dan folded his hands
together in the Darkness, and softly whispered Teddy's little prayer,

"Please God bless every one, and help me to be good."



CHAPTER XI. UNCLE TEDDY

For a week Dan only moved from bed to sofa; a long week and a hard one,
for the hurt foot was very painful at times, the quiet days were very
wearisome to the active lad, longing to be out enjoying the summer
weather, and especially difficult was it to be patient. But Dan did
his best, and every one helped him in their various ways; so the time
passed, and he was rewarded at last by hearing the doctor say, on
Saturday morning,

"This foot is doing better than I expected. Give the lad the crutch this
afternoon, and let him stump about the house a little."

"Hooray!" shouted Nat, and raced away to tell the other boys the good
news.

Everybody was very glad, and after dinner the whole flock assembled to
behold Dan crutch himself up and down the hall a few times before he
settled in the porch to hold a sort of levee. He was much pleased at the
interest and good-will shown him, and brightened up more and more every
minute; for the boys came to pay their respects, the little girls fussed
about him with stools and cushions, and Teddy watched over him as if he
was a frail creature unable to do anything for himself. They were still
sitting and standing about the steps, when a carriage stopped at the
gate, a hat was waved from it, and with a shout of "Uncle Teddy! Uncle
Teddy!" Rob scampered down the avenue as fast as his short legs would
carry him. All he boys but Dan ran after him to see who should be
first to open the gate, and in a moment the carriage drove up with boys
swarming all over it, while Uncle Teddy sat laughing in the midst, with
his little daughter on his knee.

"Stop the triumphal car and let Jupiter descend," he said, and jumping
out ran up the steps to meet Mrs. Bhaer, who stood smiling and clapping
her hands like a girl.

"How goes it, Teddy?"

"All right, Jo."

Then they shook hands, and Mr. Laurie put Bess into her aunt's arms,
saying, as the child hugged her tight, "Goldilocks wanted to see you so
much that I ran away with her, for I was quite pining for a sight of you
myself. We want to play with your boys for an hour or so, and to see how
'the old woman who lived in a shoe, and had so many children she did not
know what to do,' is getting on."

"I'm so glad! Play away, and don't get into mischief," answered Mrs.
Jo, as the lads crowded round the pretty child, admiring her long golden
hair, dainty dress, and lofty ways, for the little "Princess," as they
called her, allowed no one to kiss her, but sat smiling down upon them,
and graciously patting their heads with her little, white hands. They
all adored her, especially Rob, who considered her a sort of doll,
and dared not touch her lest she should break, but worshipped her at a
respectful distance, made happy by an occasional mark of favor from her
little highness. As she immediately demanded to see Daisy's kitchen,
she was borne off by Mrs. Jo, with a train of small boys following. The
others, all but Nat and Demi, ran away to the menagerie and gardens
to have all in order; for Mr. Laurie always took a general survey, and
looked disappointed if things were not flourishing.

Standing on the steps, he turned to Dan, saying like an old
acquaintance, though he had only seen him once or twice before,

"How is the foot?"

"Better, sir."

"Rather tired of the house, aren't you?"

"Guess I am!" and Dan's eyes roved away to the green hills and woods
where he longed to be.

"Suppose we take a little turn before the others come back? That big,
easy carriage will be quite safe and comfortable, and a breath of fresh
air will do you good. Get a cushion and a shawl, Demi, and let's carry
Dan off."

The boys thought it a capital joke, and Dan looked delighted, but asked,
with an unexpected burst of virtue,

"Will Mrs. Bhaer like it?"

"Oh, yes; we settled all that a minute ago."

"You didn't say any thing about it, so I don't see how you could," said
Demi, inquisitively.

"We have a way of sending messages to one another, without any words. It
is a great improvement on the telegraph."

"I know it's eyes; I saw you lift your eyebrows, and nod toward the
carriage, and Mrs. Bhaer laughed and nodded back again," cried Nat, who
was quite at his ease with kind Mr. Laurie by this time.

"Right. Now them, come on," and in a minute Dan found himself settled in
the carriage, his foot on a cushion on the seat opposite, nicely
covered with a shawl, which fell down from the upper regions in a most
mysterious manner, just when they wanted it. Demi climbed up to the
box beside Peter, the black coachman. Nat sat next Dan in the place of
honor, while Uncle Teddy would sit opposite, to take care of the foot,
he said, but really that he might study the faces before him both so
happy, yet so different, for Dan's was square, and brown, and strong,
while Nat's was long, and fair, and rather weak, but very amiable with
its mild eyes and good forehead.

"By the way, I've got a book somewhere here that you may like to see,"
said the oldest boy of the party, diving under the seat and producing a
book which make Dan exclaim,

"Oh! by George, isn't that a stunner?" as he turned the leaves, and saw
fine plates of butterflies, and birds, and every sort of interesting
insect, colored like life. He was so charmed that he forgot his thanks,
but Mr. Laurie did not mind, and was quite satisfied to see the boy's
eager delight, and to hear this exclamations over certain old friends as
he came to them. Nat leaned on his shoulder to look, and Demi turned his
back to the horses, and let his feet dangle inside the carriage, so that
he might join in the conversation.

When they got among the beetles, Mr. Laurie took a curious little object
out of his vest-pocket, and laying it in the palm of his hand, said,

"There's a beetle that is thousands of years old;" and then, while the
lads examined the queer stone-bug, that looked so old and gray, he told
them how it came out of the wrappings of a mummy, after lying for ages
in a famous tomb. Finding them interested, he went on to tell about the
Egyptians, and the strange and splendid ruins they have left behind them
the Nile, and how he sailed up the mighty river, with the handsome dark
men to work his boat; how he shot alligators, saw wonderful beasts and
birds; and afterwards crossed the desert on a camel, who pitched him
about like a ship in a storm.

"Uncle Teddy tells stories 'most as well as Grandpa," said Demi,
approvingly, when the tale was done, and the boys' eyes asked for more.

"Thank you," said Mr. Laurie, quite soberly, for he considered Demi's
praise worth having, for children are good critics in such cases, and to
suit them is an accomplishment that any one may be proud of.

"Here's another trifle or two that I tucked into my pocket as I was
turning over my traps to see if I had any thing that would amuse Dan,"
and Uncle Teddy produced a fine arrow-head and a string of wampum.

"Oh! tell about the Indians," cried Demi, who was fond of playing
wigwam.

"Dan knows lots about them," added Nat.

"More than I do, I dare say. Tell us something," and Mr. Laurie looked
as interested as the other two.

"Mr. Hyde told me; he's been among 'em, and can talk their talk,
and likes 'em," began Dan, flattered by their attention, but rather
embarrassed by having a grown-up listener.

"What is wampum for?" asked curious Demi, from his perch.

The others asked questions likewise, and, before he knew it, Dan was
reeling off all Mr. Hyde had told him, as they sailed down the river
a few weeks before. Mr. Laurie listened well, but found the boy more
interesting than the Indians, for Mrs. Jo had told him about Dan, and
he rather took a fancy to the wild lad, who ran away as he himself
had often longed to do, and who was slowly getting tamed by pain and
patience.

"I've been thinking that it would be a good plan for you fellows to have
a museum of your own; a place in which to collect all the curious and
interesting things that you find, and make, and have given you. Mrs. Jo
is too kind to complain, but it is rather hard for her to have the house
littered up with all sorts of rattletraps, half-a-pint of dor-bugs in
one of her best vases, for instance, a couple of dead bats nailed up in
the back entry, wasps nests tumbling down on people's heads, and stones
lying round everywhere, enough to pave the avenue. There are not many
women who would stand that sort of thing, are there, now?"

As Mr. Laurie spoke with a merry look in his eyes, the boys laughed and
nudged one another, for it was evident that some one told tales out of
school, else how could he know of the existence of these inconvenient
treasures.

"Where can we put them, then?" said Demi, crossing his legs and leaning
down to argue the question.

"In the old carriage-house."

"But it leaks, and there isn't any window, nor any place to put things,
and it's all dust and cobwebs," began Nat.

"Wait till Gibbs and I have touched it up a bit, and then see how
you like it. He is to come over on Monday to get it ready; then
next Saturday I shall come out, and we will fix it up, and make the
beginning, at least, of a fine little museum. Every one can bring
his things, and have a place for them; and Dan is to be the head man,
because he knows most about such matters, and it will be quiet, pleasant
work for him now that he can't knock about much."

"Won't that be jolly?" cried Nat, while Dan smiled all over his face and
had not a word to say, but hugged his book, and looked at Mr. Laurie
as if he thought him one of the greatest public benefactors that ever
blessed the world.

"Shall I go round again, sir?" asked Peter, as they came to the gate,
after two slow turns about the half-mile triangle.

"No, we must be prudent, else we can't come again. I must go over the
premises, take a look at the carriage-house, and have a little talk with
Mrs. Jo before I go;" and, having deposited Dan on his sofa to rest and
enjoy his book, Uncle Teddy went off to have a frolic with the lads who
were raging about the place in search of him. Leaving the little girls
to mess up-stairs, Mrs. Bhaer sat down by Dan, and listened to his eager
account of the drive till the flock returned, dusty, warm, and much
excited about the new museum, which every one considered the most
brilliant idea of the age.

"I always wanted to endow some sort of an institution, and I am going to
begin with this," said Mr. Laurie, sitting down on a stool at Mrs. Jo's
feet.

"You have endowed one already. What do you call this?" and Mrs. Jo
pointed to the happy-faced lads, who had camped upon the floor about
him.

"I call it a very promising Bhaer-garden, and I'm proud to be a member
of it. Did you know I was the head boy in this school?" he asked,
turning to Dan, and changing the subject skilfully, for he hated to be
thanked for the generous things he did.

"I thought Franz was!" answered Dan, wondering what the man meant.

"Oh, dear no! I'm the first boy Mrs. Jo ever had to take care of, and I
was such a bad one that she isn't done with me yet, though she has been
working at me for years and years."

"How old she must be!" said Nat, innocently.

"She began early, you see. Poor thing! she was only fifteen when she
took me, and I led her such a life, it's a wonder she isn't wrinkled and
gray, and quite worn out," and Mr. Laurie looked up at her laughing.

"Don't Teddy; I won't have you abuse yourself so;" and Mrs. Jo stroked
the curly black head at her knee as affectionately as ever, for, in
spite of every thing Teddy was her boy still.

"If it hadn't been for you, there never would have been a Plumfield. It
was my success with you, sir, that gave me courage to try my pet plan.
So the boys may thank you for it, and name the new institution 'The
Laurence Museum,' in honor of its founder, won't we, boys?" she added,
looking very like the lively Jo of old times.

"We will! we will!" shouted the boys, throwing up their hats, for though
they had taken them off on entering the house, according to rule, they
had been in too much of a hurry to hang them up.

"I'm as hungry as a bear, can't I have a cookie?" asked Mr. Laurie, when
the shout subsided and he had expressed his thanks by a splendid bow.

"Trot out and ask Asia for the gingerbread-box, Demi. It isn't in order
to eat between meals, but, on this joyful occasion, we won't mind, and
have a cookie all round," said Mrs. Jo; and when the box came she
dealt them out with a liberal hand, every one munching away in a social
circle.

Suddenly, in the midst of a bite, Mr. Laurie cried out, "Bless my heart,
I forgot grandma's bundle!" and running out to the carriage, returned
with an interesting white parcel, which, being opened, disclosed a
choice collection of beasts, birds, and pretty things cut out of crisp
sugary cake, and baked a lovely brown.

"There's one for each, and a letter to tell which is whose. Grandma and
Hannah made them, and I tremble to think what would have happened to me
if I had forgotten to leave them."

Then, amid much laughing and fun, the cakes were distributed. A fish for
Dan, a fiddle for Nat, a book for Demi, a money for Tommy, a flower for
Daisy, a hoop for Nan, who had driven twice round the triangle without
stopping, a star for Emil, who put on airs because he studied astronomy,
and, best of all, an omnibus for Franz, whose great delight was to drive
the family bus. Stuffy got a fat pig, and the little folks had birds,
and cats, and rabbits, with black currant eyes.

"Now I must go. Where is my Goldilocks? Mamma will come flying out to
get her if I'm not back early," said Uncle Teddy, when the last crumb
had vanished, which it speedily did, you may be sure.

The young ladies had gone into the garden, and while they waited till
Franz looked them up, Jo and Laurie stood at the door talking together.

"How does little Giddy-gaddy come on?" he asked, for Nan's pranks amused
him very much, and he was never tired of teasing Jo about her.

"Nicely; she is getting quite mannerly, and begins to see the error of
her wild ways."

"Don't the boys encourage her in them?"

"Yes; but I keep talking, and lately she has improved much. You saw how
prettily she shook hands with you, and how gentle she was with Bess.
Daisy's example has its effect upon her, and I'm quite sure that a few
months will work wonders."

Here Mrs. Jo's remarks were cut short by the appearance of Nan tearing
round the corner at a break-neck pace, driving a mettlesome team of four
boys, and followed by Daisy trundling Bess in a wheelbarrow. Hat off,
hair flying, whip cracking, and barrow bumping, up they came in a cloud
of dust, looking as wild a set of little hoydens as one would wish to
see.

"So, these are the model children, are they? It's lucky I didn't bring
Mrs. Curtis out to see your school for the cultivation of morals
and manners; she would never have recovered from the shock of this
spectacle," said Mr. Laurie, laughing at Mrs. Jo's premature rejoicing
over Nan's improvement.

"Laugh away; I'll succeed yet. As you used to say at College, quoting
some professor, 'Though the experiment has failed, the principle remains
the same,'" said Mrs. Bhaer, joining in the merriment.

"I'm afraid Nan's example is taking effect upon Daisy, instead of the
other way. Look at my little princess! she has utterly forgotten her
dignity, and is screaming like the rest. Young ladies, what does
this mean?" and Mr. Laurie rescued his small daughter from impending
destruction, for the four horses were champing their bits and curvetting
madly all about her, as she sat brandishing a great whip in both hands.

"We're having a race, and I beat," shouted Nan.

"I could have run faster, only I was afraid of spilling Bess," screamed
Daisy.

"Hi! go long!" cried the princess, giving such a flourish with her whip
that the horses ran away, and were seen no more.

"My precious child! come away from this ill-mannered crew before you are
quite spoilt. Good-by, Jo! Next time I come, I shall expect to find the
boys making patchwork."

"It wouldn't hurt them a bit. I don't give in, mind you; for my
experiments always fail a few times before they succeed. Love to Amy and
my blessed Marmee," called Mrs. Jo, as the carriage drove away; and the
last Mr. Laurie saw of her, she was consoling Daisy for her failure by a
ride in the wheelbarrow, and looking as if she liked it.

Great was the excitement all the week about the repairs in the
carriage-house, which went briskly on in spite of the incessant
questions, advice, and meddling of the boys. Old Gibbs was nearly driven
wild with it all, but managed to do his work nevertheless; and by
Friday night the place was all in order roof mended, shelves up, walls
whitewashed, a great window cut at the back, which let in a flood of
sunshine, and gave them a fine view of the brook, the meadows, and the
distant hills; and over the great door, painted in red letters, was "The
Laurence Museum."

All Saturday morning the boys were planning how it should be furnished
with their spoils, and when Mr. Laurie arrived, bringing an aquarium
which Mrs. Amy said she was tired of, their rapture was great.

The afternoon was spent in arranging things, and when the running and
lugging and hammering was over, the ladies were invited to behold the
institution.

It certainly was a pleasant place, airy, clean, and bright. A hop-vine
shook its green bells round the open window, the pretty aquarium stood
in the middle of the room, with some delicate water plants rising above
the water, and gold-fish showing their brightness as they floated to and
fro below. On either side of the window were rows of shelves ready to
receive the curiosities yet to be found. Dan's tall cabinet stood before
the great door which was fastened up, while the small door was to be
used. On the cabinet stood a queer Indian idol, very ugly, but very
interesting; old Mr. Laurence sent it, as well as a fine Chinese junk in
full sail, which had a conspicuous place on the long table in the middle
of the room. Above, swinging in a loop, and looking as if she was alive,
hung Polly, who died at an advanced age, had been carefully stuffed, and
was no presented by Mrs. Jo. The walls were decorated with all sorts of
things. A snake's skin, a big wasp's nest, a birch-bark canoe, a string
of birds' eggs, wreaths of gray moss from the South, and a bunch of
cotton-pods. The dead bats had a place, also a large turtle-shell, and
an ostrich-egg proudly presented by Demi, who volunteered to explain
these rare curiosities to guests whenever they liked. There were so many
stones that it was impossible to accept them all, so only a few of the
best were arranged among the shells on the shelves, the rest were piled
up in corners, to be examined by Dan at his leisure.

Every one was eager to give something, even Silas, who sent home for
a stuffed wild-cat killed in his youth. It was rather moth-eaten and
shabby, but on a high bracket and best side foremost the effect was
fine, for the yellow glass eyes glared, and the mouth snarled so
naturally, that Teddy shook in his little shoes at sight of it, when he
came bringing his most cherished treasure, one cocoon, to lay upon the
shrine of science.

"Isn't it beautiful? I'd no idea we had so many curious things. I gave
that; don't it look well? We might make a lot by charging something for
letting folks see it."

Jack added that last suggestion to the general chatter that went on as
the family viewed the room.

"This is a free museum and if there is any speculating on it I'll paint
out the name over the door," said Mr. Laurie, turning so quickly that
Jack wished he had held his tongue.

"Hear! hear!" cried Mr. Bhaer.

"Speech! speech!" added Mrs. Jo.

"Can't, I'm too bashful. You give them a lecture yourself you are used
to it," Mr. Laurie answered, retreating towards the window, meaning to
escape. But she held him fast, and said, laughing as she looked at the
dozen pairs of dirty hands about her,

"If I did lecture, it would on the chemical and cleansing properties of
soap. Come now, as the founder of the institution, you really ought to
give us a few moral remarks, and we will applaud tremendously."

Seeing that there was no way of escaping, Mr. Laurie looked up at Polly
hanging overhead, seemed to find inspiration in the brilliant old bird,
and sitting down upon the table, said, in his pleasant way,

"There is one thing I'd like to suggest, boys, and that is, I want you
to get some good as well as much pleasure out of this. Just putting
curious or pretty things here won't do it; so suppose you read up about
them, so that when anybody asks questions you can answer them, and
understand the matter. I used to like these things myself, and should
enjoy hearing about them now, for I've forgotten all I once knew. It
wasn't much, was it, Jo? Here's Dan now, full of stories about birds,
and bugs, and so on; let him take care of the museum, and once a week
the rest of you take turns to read a composition, or tell about some
animal, mineral, or vegetable. We should all like that, and I think it
would put considerable useful knowledge into our heads. What do you say,
Professor?"

"I like it much, and will give the lads all the help I can. But they
will need books to read up these new subjects, and we have not many,
I fear," began Mr. Bhaer, looking much pleased, planning many fine
lectures on geology, which he liked. "We should have a library for the
special purpose."

"Is that a useful sort of book, Dan?" asked Mr. Laurie, pointing to the
volume that lay open by the cabinet.

"Oh, yes! it tells all I want to know about insects. I had it here to
see how to fix the butterflies right. I covered it, so it is not hurt;"
and Dan caught it up, fearing the lender might think him careless.

"Give it here a minute;" and, pulling out his pencil, Mr. Laurie wrote
Dan's name in it, saying, as he set the book up on one of the corner
shelves, where nothing stood but a stuffed bird without a tail, "There,
that is the beginning of the museum library. I'll hunt up some more
books, and Demi shall keep them in order. Where are those jolly little
books we used to read, Jo? 'Insect Architecture' or some such name, all
about ants having battles, and bees having queens, and crickets eating
holes in our clothes and stealing milk, and larks of that sort."

"In the garret at home. I'll have them sent out, and we will plunge into
Natural History with a will," said Mrs. Jo, ready for any thing.

"Won't it be hard to write about such things?" asked Nat, who hated
compositions.

"At first, perhaps; but you will soon like it. If you think that hard,
how would you like to have this subject given to you, as it was to a
girl of thirteen: A conversation between Themistocles, Aristides, and
Pericles on the proposed appropriation of funds of the confederacy of
Delos for the ornamentation of Athens?" said Mrs. Jo.

The boys groaned at the mere sound of the long names, and the gentlemen
laughed at the absurdity of the lesson.

"Did she write it?" asked Demi, in an awe-stricken tone.

"Yes, but you can imagine what a piece of work she make of it, though
she was rather a bright child."

"I'd like to have seen it," said Mr. Bhaer.

"Perhaps I can find it for you; I went to school with her," and Mrs. Jo
looked so wicked that every one knew who the little girl was.

Hearing of this fearful subject for a composition quite reconciled
the boys to the thought of writing about familiar things. Wednesday
afternoon was appointed for the lectures, as they preferred to call
them, for some chose to talk instead of write. Mr. Bhaer promised a
portfolio in which the written productions should be kept, and Mrs.
Bhaer said she would attend the course with great pleasure.

Then the dirty-handed society went off the wash, followed by the
Professor, trying to calm the anxiety of Rob, who had been told by Tommy
that all water was full of invisible pollywogs.

"I like your plan very much, only don't be too generous, Teddy," said
Mrs. Bhaer, when they were left alone. "You know most of the boys have
got to paddle their own canoes when they leave us, and too much sitting
in the lap of luxury will unfit them for it."

"I'll be moderate, but do let me amuse myself. I get desperately tired
of business sometimes, and nothing freshens me up like a good frolic
with your boys. I like that Dan very much, Jo. He isn't demonstrative;
but he has the eye of a hawk, and when you have tamed him a little he
will do you credit."

"I'm so glad you think so. Thank you very much for your kindness to him,
especially for this museum affair; it will keep him happy while he is
lame, give me a chance to soften and smooth this poor, rough lad, and
make him love us. What did inspire you with such a beautiful, helpful
idea, Teddy?" asked Mrs. Bhaer, glancing back at the pleasant room, as
she turned to leave it.

Laurie took both her hands in his, and answered, with a look that made
her eyes fill with happy tears,

"Dear Jo! I have known what it is to be a motherless boy, and I never
can forget how much you and yours have done for me all these years."



CHAPTER XII. HUCKLEBERRIES

There was a great clashing of tin pails, much running to and fro, and
frequent demands for something to eat, one August afternoon, for the
boys were going huckleberrying, and made as much stir about it as if
they were setting out to find the North West Passage.

"Now, my lads, get off as quietly as you can, for Rob is safely out
of the way, and won't see you," said Mrs. Bhaer, as she tied Daisy's
broad-brimmed hat, and settled the great blue pinafore in which she had
enveloped Nan.

But the plan did not succeed, for Rob had heard the bustle, decided to
go, and prepared himself, without a thought of disappointment. The troop
was just getting under way when the little man came marching downstairs
with his best hat on, a bright tin pail in his hand, and a face beaming
with satisfaction.

"Oh, dear! now we shall have a scene," sighed Mrs. Bhaer, who found her
eldest son very hard to manage at times.

"I'm all ready," said Rob, and took his place in the ranks with such
perfect unconsciousness of his mistake, that it really was very hard to
undeceive him.

"It's too far for you, my love; stay and take care of me, for I shall be
all alone," began his mother.

"You've got Teddy. I'm a big boy, so I can go; you said I might when I
was bigger, and I am now," persisted Rob, with a cloud beginning to dim
the brightness of his happy face.

"We are going up to the great pasture, and it's ever so far; we don't
want you tagging on," cried Jack, who did not admire the little boys.

"I won't tag, I'll run and keep up. O Mamma! let me go! I want to fill
my new pail, and I'll bring 'em all to you. Please, please, I will
be good!" prayed Robby, looking up at his mother, so grieved and
disappointed that her heart began to fail her.

"But, my deary, you'll get so tired and hot you won't have a good time.
Wait till I go, and then we will stay all day, and pick as many berries
as you want."

"You never do go, you are so busy, and I'm tired of waiting. I'd rather
go and get the berries for you all myself. I love to pick 'em, and I
want to fill my new pail dreffly," sobbed Rob.

The pathetic sight of great tears tinkling into the dear new pail, and
threatening to fill it with salt water instead of huckleberries, touched
all the ladies present. His mother patted the weeper on his back; Daisy
offered to stay home with him; and Nan said, in her decided way,

"Let him come; I'll take care of him."

"If Franz was going I wouldn't mind, for he is very careful; but he is
haying with the father, and I'm not sure about the rest of you," began
Mrs. Bhaer.

"It's so far," put in Jack.

"I'd carry him if I was going wish I was," said Dan, with a sigh.

"Thank you, dear, but you must take care of your foot. I wish I could
go. Stop a minute, I think I can manage it after all;" and Mrs. Bhaer
ran out to the steps, waving her apron wildly.

Silas was just driving away in the hay-cart, but turned back, and agreed
at once, when Mrs. Jo proposed that he should take the whole party to
the pasture, and go for them at five o'clock.

"It will delay your work a little, but never mind; we will pay you in
huckleberry pies," said Mrs. Jo, knowing Silas's weak point.

His rough, brown face brightened up, and he said, with a cheery "Haw!
haw!" "Wal now, Mis' Bhaer, if you go to bribin' of me, I shall give in
right away."

"Now, boys, I have arranged it so that you can all go," said Mrs. Bhaer,
running back again, much relieved, for she loved to make them happy, and
always felt miserable when she had disturbed the serenity of her little
sons; for she believed that the small hopes and plans and pleasures
of children should be tenderly respected by grown-up people, and never
rudely thwarted or ridiculed.

"Can I go?" said Dan, delighted.

"I thought especially of you. Be careful, and never mind the berries,
but sit about and enjoy the lovely things which you know how to find all
about you," answered Mrs. Bhaer, who remembered his kind offer to her
boy.

"Me too! me too!" sung Rob, dancing with joy, and clapping his precious
pail and cover like castanets.

"Yes, and Daisy and Nan must take good care of you. Be at the bars at
five o'clock, and Silas will come for you all."

Robby cast himself upon his mother in a burst of gratitude, promising
to bring her every berry he picked, and not eat one. Then they were all
packed into the hay-cart, and went rattling away, the brightest face
among the dozen being that of Rob, as he sat between his two temporary
little mothers, beaming upon the whole world, and waving his best hat;
for his indulgent mamma had not the heart to bereave him of it, since
this was a gala-day to him.

Such a happy afternoon as they had, in spite of the mishaps which
usually occur on such expeditions! Of course Tommy came to grief,
tumbled upon a hornet's nest and got stung; but being used to woe, he
bore the smart manfully, till Dan suggested the application of damp
earth, which much assuaged the pain. Daisy saw a snake, and flying from
it lost half her berries; but Demi helped her to fill up again, and
discussed reptiles most learnedly the while. Ned fell out of a tree, and
split his jacket down the back, but suffered no other fracture. Emil and
Jack established rival claims to a certain thick patch, and while they
were squabbling about it, Stuffy quickly and quietly stripped the bushes
and fled to the protection of Dan, who was enjoying himself immensely.
The crutch was no longer necessary, and he was delighted to see how
strong his foot felt as he roamed about the great pasture, full of
interesting rocks and stumps, with familiar little creatures in the
grass, and well-known insects dancing in the air.

But of all the adventures that happened on this afternoon that which
befell Nan and Rob was the most exciting, and it long remained one of
the favorite histories of the household. Having explored the country
pretty generally, torn three rents in her frock, and scratched her face
in a barberry-bush, Nan began to pick the berries that shone like big,
black beads on the low, green bushes. Her nimble fingers flew, but
still her basket did not fill up as rapidly as she desired, so she kept
wandering here and there to search for better places, instead of picking
contentedly and steadily as Daisy did. Rob followed Nan, for her energy
suited him better than his cousin's patience, and he too was anxious to
have the biggest and best berries for Marmar.

"I keep putting 'em in, but it don't fill up, and I'm so tired," said
Rob, pausing a moment to rest his short legs, and beginning to think
huckleberrying was not all his fancy painted it; for the sun blazed, Nan
skipped hither and thither like a grasshopper, and the berries fell out
of his pail almost as fast as he put them in, because, in his struggles
with the bushes, it was often upside-down.

"Last time we came they were ever so much thicker over that wall great
bouncers; and there is a cave there where the boys made a fire. Let's go
and fill our things quick, and then hide in the cave and let the others
find us," proposed Nan, thirsting for adventures.

Rob consented, and away they went, scrambling over the wall and running
down the sloping fields on the other side, till they were hidden among
the rocks and underbrush. The berries were thick, and at last the pails
were actually full. It was shady and cool down there, and a little
spring gave the thirsty children a refreshing drink out of its mossy
cup.

"Now we will go and rest in the cave, and eat our lunch," said Nan, well
satisfied with her success so far.

"Do you know the way?" asked Rob.

"'Course I do; I've been once, and I always remember. Didn't I go and
get my box all right?"

That convinced Rob, and he followed blindly as Nan led him over stock
and stone, and brought him, after much meandering, to a small recess in
the rock, where the blackened stones showed that fires had been made.

"Now, isn't it nice?" asked Nan, as she took out a bit of
bread-and-butter, rather damaged by being mixed up with nails,
fishhooks, stones and other foreign substances, in the young lady's
pocket.

"Yes; do you think they will find us soon?" asked Rob, who found the
shadowy glen rather dull, and began to long for more society.

"No, I don't; because if I hear them, I shall hide, and have fun making
them find me."

"P'raps they won't come."

"Don't care; I can get home myself."

"Is it a great way?" asked Rob, looking at his little stubby boots,
scratched and wet with his long wandering.

"It's six miles, I guess." Nan's ideas of distance were vague, and her
faith in her own powers great.

"I think we better go now," suggested Rob, presently.

"I shan't till I have picked over my berries;" and Nan began what seemed
to Rob an endless task.

"Oh, dear! you said you'd take good care of me," he sighed, as the sun
seemed to drop behind the hill all of a sudden.

"Well I am taking good care of you as hard as I can. Don't be cross,
child; I'll go in a minute," said Nan, who considered five-year-old
Robby a mere infant compared to herself.

So little Rob sat looking anxiously about him, and waiting patiently,
for, spite of some misgivings, he felt great confidence in Nan.

"I guess it's going to be night pretty soon," he observed, as if to
himself, as a mosquito bit him, and the frogs in a neighboring marsh
began to pipe up for the evening concert.

"My goodness me! so it is. Come right away this minute, or they will be
gone," cried Nan, looking up from her work, and suddenly perceiving that
the sun was down.

"I heard a horn about an hour ago; may be they were blowing for us,"
said Rob, trudging after his guide as she scrambled up the steep hill.

"Where was it?" asked Nan, stopping short.

"Over that way;" he pointed with a dirty little finger in an entirely
wrong direction.

"Let's go that way and meet them;" and Nan wheeled about, and began to
trot through the bushes, feeling a trifle anxious, for there were so
many cow-paths all about she could not remember which way they came.

On they went over stock and stone again, pausing now and then to listen
for the horn, which did not blow any more, for it was only the moo of a
cow on her way home.

"I don't remember seeing that pile of stones do you?" asked Nan, as she
sat on a wall to rest a moment and take an observation.

"I don't remember any thing, but I want to go home," and Rob's voice had
a little tremble in it that made Nan put her arms round him and lift him
gently down, saying, in her most capable way,

"I'm going just as fast as I can, dear. Don't cry, and when we come to
the road, I'll carry you."

"Where is the road?" and Robby wiped his eyes to look for it.

"Over by that big tree. Don't you know that's the one Ned tumbled out
of?"

"So it is. May be they waited for us; I'd like to ride home wouldn't
you?" and Robby brightened up as he plodded along toward the end of the
great pasture.

"No, I'd rather walk," answered Nan, feeling quite sure that she would
be obliged to do so, and preparing her mind for it.

Another long trudge through the fast-deepening twilight and another
disappointment, for when they reached the tree, they found to their
dismay that it was not the one Ned climbed, and no road anywhere
appeared.

"Are we lost?" quavered Rob, clasping his pail in despair.

"Not much. I don't just see which way to go, and I guess we'd better
call."

So they both shouted till they were hoarse, yet nothing answered but the
frogs in full chorus.

"There is another tall tree over there, perhaps that's the one," said
Nan, whose heart sunk within her, though she still spoke bravely.

"I don't think I can go any more; my boots are so heavy I can't pull
'em;" and Robby sat down on a stone quite worn out.

"Then we must stay here all night. I don't care much, if snakes don't
come."

"I'm frightened of snakes. I can't stay all night. Oh, dear! I don't
like to be lost," and Rob puckered up his face to cry, when suddenly a
thought occurred to him, and he said, in a tone of perfect confidence,

"Marmar will come and find me she always does; I ain't afraid now."

"She won't know where we are."

"She didn't know I was shut up in the ice-house, but she found me.
I know she'll come," returned Robby, so trustfully, that Nan felt
relieved, and sat down by him, saying, with a remorseful sigh,

"I wish we hadn't run away."

"You made me; but I don't mind much Marmar will love me just the same,"
answered Rob, clinging to his sheet-anchor when all other hope was gone.

"I'm so hungry. Let's eat our berries," proposed Nan, after a pause,
during which Rob began to nod.

"So am I, but I can't eat mine, 'cause I told Marmar I'd keep them all
for her."

"You'll have to eat them if no one comes for us," said Nan, who felt
like contradicting every thing just then. "If we stay here a great many
days, we shall eat up all the berries in the field, and then we shall
starve," she added grimly.

"I shall eat sassafras. I know a big tree of it, and Dan told me how
squirrels dig up the roots and eat them, and I love to dig," returned
Rob, undaunted by the prospect of starvation.

"Yes; and we can catch frogs, and cook them. My father ate some once,
and he said they were nice," put in Nan, beginning to find a spice of
romance even in being lost in a huckleberry pasture.

"How could we cook frogs? we haven't got any fire."

"I don't know; next time I'll have matches in my pocket," said Nan,
rather depressed by this obstacle to the experiment in frog-cookery.

"Couldn't we light a fire with a fire-fly?" asked Rob, hopefully, as he
watched them flitting to and fro like winged sparks.

"Let's try;" and several minutes were pleasantly spent in catching the
flies, and trying to make them kindle a green twig or two. "It's a lie
to call them fire-flies when there isn't a fire in them," Nan said,
throwing one unhappy insect away with scorn, though it shone its best,
and obligingly walked up and down the twigs to please the innocent
little experimenters.

"Marmar's a good while coming," said Rob, after another pause, during
which they watched the stars overhead, smelt the sweet fern crushed
under foot, and listened to the crickets' serenade.

"I don't see why God made any night; day is so much pleasanter," said
Nan, thoughtfully.

"It's to sleep in," answered Rob, with a yawn.

"Then do go to sleep," said Nan, pettishly.

"I want my own bed. Oh, I wish I could see Teddy!" cried Rob, painfully
reminded of home by the soft chirp of birds safe in their little nests.

"I don't believe your mother will ever find us," said Nan, who was
becoming desperate, for she hated patient waiting of any sort. "It's so
dark she won't see us."

"It was all black in the ice-house, and I was so scared I didn't call
her, but she saw me; and she will see me now, no matter how dark it is,"
returned confiding Rob, standing up to peer into the gloom for the help
which never failed him.

"I see her! I see her!" he cried, and ran as fast as his tired legs
would take him toward a dark figure slowly approaching. Suddenly he
stopped, then turned about, and came stumbling back, screaming in a
great panic,

"No, it's a bear, a big black one!" and hid his face in Nan's skirts.

For a moment Nan quailed; ever her courage gave out at the thought of a
real bear, and she was about to turn and flee in great disorder, when a
mild "Moo!" changed her fear to merriment, as she said, laughing,

"It's a cow, Robby! the nice, black cow we saw this afternoon."

The cow seemed to feel that it was not just the thing to meet two
little people in her pasture after dark, and the amiable beast paused to
inquire into the case. She let them stroke her, and stood regarding them
with her soft eyes so mildly, that Nan, who feared no animal but a bear,
was fired with a desire to milk her.

"Silas taught me how; and berries and milk would be so nice," she said,
emptying the contents of her pail into her hat, and boldly beginning her
new task, while Rob stood by and repeated, at her command, the poem from
Mother Goose:

     "Cushy cow, bonny, let down your milk,
     Let down your milk to me,
     And I will give you a gown of silk,
     A gown of silk and a silver tee."

But the immortal rhyme had little effect, for the benevolent cow had
already been milked, and had only half a gill to give the thirsty
children.

"Shoo! get away! you are an old cross patch," cried Nan, ungratefully,
as she gave up the attempt in despair; and poor Molly walked on with a
gentle gurgle of surprise and reproof.

"Each can have a sip, and then we must take a walk. We shall go to sleep
if we don't; and lost people mustn't sleep. Don't you know how Hannah
Lee in the pretty story slept under the snow and died?"

"But there isn't any snow now, and it's nice and warm," said Rob, who
was not blessed with as lively a fancy as Nan.

"No matter, we will poke about a little, and call some more; and then,
if nobody comes, we will hide under the bushes, like Hop-'o-my-thumb and
his brothers."

It was a very short walk, however, for Rob was so sleepy he could not
get on, and tumbled down so often that Nan entirely lost patience, being
half distracted by the responsibility she had taken upon herself.

"If you tumble down again, I'll shake you," she said, lifting the poor
little man up very kindly as she spoke, for Nan's bark was much worse
than her bite.

"Please don't. It's my boots they keep slipping so;" and Rob manfully
checked the sob just ready to break out, adding, with a plaintive
patience that touched Nan's heart, "If the skeeters didn't bite me so, I
could go to sleep till Marmar comes."

"Put your head on my lap, and I'll cover you up with my apron; I'm not
afraid of the night," said Nan, sitting down and trying to persuade
herself that she did not mind the shadow nor the mysterious rustlings
all about her.

"Wake me up when she comes," said rob, and was fast asleep in five
minutes with his head in Nan's lap under the pinafore.

The little girl sat for some fifteen minutes, staring about her with
anxious eyes, and feeling as if each second was an hour. Then a pale
light began to glimmer over the hill-top and she said to herself,

"I guess the night is over and morning is coming. I'd like to see the
sun rise, so I'll watch, and when it comes up we can find our way right
home."

But before the moon's round face peeped above the hill to destroy her
hope, Nan had fallen asleep, leaning back in a little bower of tall
ferns, and was deep in a mid-summer night's dream of fire-flies and blue
aprons, mountains of huckleberries, and Robby wiping away the tears of a
black cow, who sobbed, "I want to go home! I want to go home!"

While the children were sleeping, peacefully lulled by the drowsy hum of
many neighborly mosquitoes, the family at home were in a great state of
agitation. The hay-cart came at five, and all but Jack, Emil, Nan, and
Rob were at the bars ready for it. Franz drove instead of Silas, and
when the boys told him that the others were going home through the wood,
he said, looking ill-pleased, "They ought to have left Rob to ride, he
will be tired out by the long walk."

"It's shorter that way, and they will carry him," said Stuffy, who was
in a hurry for his supper.

"You are sure Nan and Rob went with them?"

"Of course they did; I saw them getting over the wall, and sung out that
it was most five, and Jack called back that they were going the other
way," explained Tommy.

"Very well, pile in then," and away rattled the hay-cart with the tired
children and the full pails.

Mrs. Jo looked sober when she heard of the division of the party, and
sent Franz back with Toby to find and bring the little ones home. Supper
was over, and the family sitting about in the cool hall as usual, when
Franz came trotting back, hot, dusty, and anxious.

"Have they come?" he called out when half-way up the avenue.

"No!" and Mrs. Jo flew out of her chair looking so alarmed that every
one jumped up and gathered round Franz.

"I can't find them anywhere," he began; but the words were hardly spoken
when a loud "Hullo!" startled them all, and the next minute Jack and
Emil came round the house.

"Where are Nan and Rob?" cried Mrs. Jo, clutching Emil in a way that
caused him to think his aunt had suddenly lost her wits.

"I don't know. They came home with the others, didn't they?" he
answered, quickly.

"No; George and Tommy said they went with you."

"Well, they didn't. Haven't seen them. We took a swim in the pond, and
came by the wood," said Jack, looking alarmed, as well he might.

"Call Mr. Bhaer, get the lanterns, and tell Silas I want him."

That was all Mrs. Jo said, but they knew what she meant, and flew to
obey her orders. In ten minutes, Mr. Bhaer and Silas were off to the
wood, and Franz tearing down the road on old Andy to search the great
pasture. Mrs. Jo caught up some food from the table, a little bottle of
brandy from the medicine-closet, took a lantern, and bidding Jack and
Emil come with her, and the rest not stir, she trotted away on Toby,
never stopping for hat or shawl. She heard some one running after her,
but said not a word till, as she paused to call and listen, the light of
her lantern shone on Dan's face.

"You here! I told Jack to come," she said, half-inclined to send him
back, much as she needed help.

"I wouldn't let him; he and Emil hadn't had any supper, and I wanted
to come more than they did," he said, taking the lantern from her and
smiling up in her face with the steady look in his eyes that made her
feel as if, boy though he was, she had some one to depend on.

Off she jumped, and ordered him on to Toby, in spite of his pleading to
walk; then they went on again along the dusty, solitary road, stopping
every now and then to call and hearken breathlessly for little voices to
reply.

When they came to the great pasture, other lights were already flitting
to and fro like will-o'-the-wisps, and Mr. Bhaer's voice was heard
shouting, "Nan! Rob! Rob! Nan!" in every part of the field. Silas
whistled and roared, Dan plunged here and there on Toby, who seemed
to understand the case, and went over the roughest places with unusual
docility. Often Mrs. Jo hushed them all, saying, with a sob in her
throat, "The noise may frighten them, let me call; Robby will know my
voice;" and then she would cry out the beloved little name in every tone
of tenderness, till the very echoes whispered it softly, and the winds
seemed to waft it willingly; but still no answer came.

The sky was overcast now, and only brief glimpses of the moon were seen,
heat-lightening darted out of the dark clouds now and then, and a faint
far-off rumble as of thunder told that a summer-storm was brewing.

"O my Robby! my Robby!" mourned poor Mrs. Jo, wandering up and down like
a pale ghost, while Dan kept beside her like a faithful fire-fly. "What
shall I say to Nan's father if she comes to harm? Why did I ever trust
my darling so far away? Fritz, do you hear any thing?" and when a
mournful, "No" came back, she wrung her hands so despairingly that Dan
sprung down from Toby's back, tied the bridle to the bars, and said, in
his decided way,

"They may have gone down the spring I'm going to look."

He was over the wall and away so fast that she could hardly follow him;
but when she reached the spot, he lowered the lantern and showed her
with joy the marks of little feet in the soft ground about the spring.
She fell down on her knees to examine the tracks, and then sprung up,
saying eagerly,

"Yes; that is the mark of my Robby's little boots! Come this way, they
must have gone on."

Such a weary search! But now some inexplicable instinct seemed to lead
the anxious mother, for presently Dan uttered a cry, and caught up a
little shining object lying in the path. It was the cover of the new
tin pail, dropped in the first alarm of being lost. Mrs. Jo hugged and
kissed it as if it were a living thing; and when Dan was about to utter
a glad shout to bring the others to the spot, she stopped him, saying,
as she hurried on, "No, let me find them; I let Rob go, and I want to
give him back to his father all myself."

A little farther on Nan's hat appeared, and after passing the place
more than once, they came at last upon the babes in the wood, both sound
asleep. Dan never forgot the little picture on which the light of his
lantern shone that night. He thought Mrs. Jo would cry out, but she
only whispered, "Hush!" as she softly lifted away the apron, and saw the
little ruddy face below. The berry-stained lips were half-open as the
breath came and went, the yellow hair lay damp on the hot forehead, and
both the chubby hands held fast the little pail still full.

The sight of the childish harvest, treasured through all the troubles of
that night for her, seemed to touch Mrs. Jo to the heart, for suddenly
she gathered up her boy, and began to cry over him, so tenderly, yet
so heartily, that he woke up, and at first seemed bewildered. Then he
remembered, and hugged her close, saying with a laugh of triumph,

"I knew you'd come! O Marmar! I did want you so!" For a moment they
kissed and clung to one another, quite forgetting all the world; for no
matter how lost and soiled and worn-out wandering sons may be, mothers
can forgive and forget every thing as they fold them in their fostering
arms. Happy the son whose faith in his mother remains unchanged, and
who, through all his wanderings, has kept some filial token to repay her
brave and tender love.

Dan meantime picked Nan out of her bush, and, with a gentleness none but
Teddy ever saw in him before, he soothed her first alarm at the sudden
waking, and wiped away her tears; for Nan also began to cry for joy,
it was so good to see a kind face and feel a strong arm round her after
what seemed to her ages of loneliness and fear.

"My poor little girl, don't cry! You are all safe now, and no one
shall say a word of blame to-night," said Mrs. Jo, taking Nan into her
capacious embrace, and cuddling both children as a hen might gather her
lost chickens under her motherly wings.

"It was my fault; but I am sorry. I tried to take care of him, and I
covered him up and let him sleep, and didn't touch his berries, though I
was so hungry; and I never will do it again truly, never, never," sobbed
Nan, quite lost in a sea of penitence and thankfulness.

"Call them now, and let us get home," said Mrs. Jo; and Dan, getting
upon the wall, sent a joyful word "Found!" ringing over the field.

How the wandering lights came dancing from all sides, and gathered
round the little group among the sweet fern bushes! Such a hugging,
and kissing, and talking, and crying, as went on must have amazed the
glowworms, and evidently delighted the mosquitoes, for they hummed
frantically, while the little moths came in flocks to the party, and
the frogs croaked as if they could not express their satisfaction loudly
enough.

Then they set out for home, a queer party, for Franz rode on to tell
the news; Dan and Toby led the way; then came Nan in the strong arms of
Silas, who considered her "the smartest little baggage he ever saw," and
teased her all the way home about her pranks. Mrs. Bhaer would let no
one carry Rob but himself, and the little fellow, refreshed by sleep,
sat up, and chattered gayly, feeling himself a hero, while his mother
went beside him holding on to any pat of his precious little body that
came handy, and never tired of hearing him say, "I knew Marmar would
come," or seeing him lean down to kiss her, and put a plump berry into
her mouth, "'Cause he picked 'em all for her."

The moon shone out just as they reached the avenue, and all the boys
came shouting to meet them, so the lost lambs were borne in triumph
and safety, and landed in the dining-room, where the unromantic little
things demanded supper instead of preferring kisses and caresses. They
were set down to bread and milk, while the entire household stood round
to gaze upon them. Nan soon recovered her spirits, and recounted her
perils with a relish now that they were all over. Rob seemed absorbed in
his food, but put down his spoon all of a sudden, and set up a doleful
roar.

"My precious, why do you cry?" asked his mother, who still hung over
him.

"I'm crying 'cause I was lost," bawled Rob, trying to squeeze out a
tear, and failing entirely.

"But you are found now. Nan says you didn't cry out in the field, and I
was glad you were such a brave boy."

"I was so busy being frightened I didn't have any time then. But I want
to cry now, 'cause I don't like to be lost," explained Rob, struggling
with sleep, emotion, and a mouthful of bread and milk.

The boys set up such a laugh at this funny way of making up for lost
time, that Rob stopped to look at them, and the merriment was so
infectious, that after a surprised stare he burst out into a merry,
"Ha, ha!" and beat his spoon upon the table as if he enjoyed the joke
immensely.

"It is ten o'clock; into bed, every man of you," said Mr. Bhaer, looking
at his watch.

"And, thank Heaven! there will be no empty ones to-night," added Mrs.
Bhaer, watching, with full eyes, Robby going up in his father's
arms, and Nan escorted by Daisy and Demi, who considered her the most
interesting heroine of their collection.

"Poor Aunt Jo is so tired she ought to be carried up herself," said
gentle Franz, putting his arm round her as she paused at the stair-foot,
looking quite exhausted by her fright and long walk.

"Let's make an arm-chair," proposed Tommy.

"No, thank you, my lads; but somebody may lend me a shoulder to lean
on," answered Mrs. Jo.

"Me! me!" and half-a-dozen jostled one another, all eager to be chosen,
for there was something in the pale motherly face that touched the warm
hearts under the round jackets.

Seeing that they considered it an honor, Mrs. Jo gave it to the one who
had earned it, and nobody grumbled when she put her arm on Dan's broad
shoulder, saying, with a look that made him color up with pride and
pleasure,

"He found the children; so I think he must help me up."

Dan felt richly rewarded for his evening's work, not only that he was
chosen from all the rest to go proudly up bearing the lamp, but because
Mrs. Jo said heartily, "Good-night, my boy! God bless you!" as he left
her at her door.

"I wish I was your boy," said Dan, who felt as if danger and trouble had
somehow brought him nearer than ever to her.

"You shall be my oldest son," and she sealed her promise with a kiss
that made Dan hers entirely.

Little Rob was all right next day, but Nan had a headache, and lay on
Mother Bhaer's sofa with cold-cream upon her scratched face. Her remorse
was quite gone, and she evidently thought being lost rather a fine
amusement. Mrs. Jo was not pleased with this state of things, and had no
desire to have her children led from the paths of virtue, or her pupils
lying round loose in huckleberry fields. So she talked soberly to Nan,
and tried to impress upon her mind the difference between liberty and
license, telling several tales to enforce her lecture. She had not
decided how to punish Nan, but one of these stories suggested a way, and
as Mrs. Jo liked odd penalties, she tried it.

"All children run away," pleaded Nan, as if it was as natural and
necessary a thing as measles or hooping cough.

"Not all, and some who do run away don't get found again," answered Mrs.
Jo.

"Didn't you do it yourself?" asked Nan, whose keen little eyes saw some
traces of a kindred spirit in the serious lady who was sewing so morally
before her.

Mrs. Jo laughed, and owned that she did.

"Tell about it," demanded Nan, feeling that she was getting the upper
hand in the discussion.

Mrs. Jo saw that, and sobered down at once, saying, with a remorseful
shake of the head,

"I did it a good many times, and led my poor mother rather a hard life
with my pranks, till she cured me."

"How?" and Nan sat up with a face full of interest.

"I had a new pair of shoes once, and wanted to show them; so, though I
was told not to leave the garden, I ran away and was wandering about all
day. It was in the city, and why I wasn't killed I don't know. Such a
time as I had. I frolicked in the park with dogs, sailed boats in the
Back Bay with strange boys, dined with a little Irish beggar-girl on
salt fish and potatoes, and was found at last fast asleep on a door-step
with my arms round a great dog. It was late in the evening, and I was a
dirty as a little pig, and the new shoes were worn out I had travelled
so far."

"How nice!" cried Nan, looking all ready to go and do it herself.

"It was not nice next day;" and Mrs. Jo tried to keep her eyes from
betraying how much she enjoyed the memory of her early capers.

"Did your mother whip you?" asked Nan, curiously.

"She never whipped me but once, and then she begged my pardon, or I
don't think I ever should have forgiven her, it hurt my feelings so
much."

"Why did she beg your pardon? my father don't."

"Because, when she had done it, I turned round and said, 'Well, you are
mad yourself, and ought to be whipped as much as me.' She looked at me
a minute, then her anger all died out, and she said, as if ashamed, 'You
are right, Jo, I am angry; and why should I punish you for being in a
passion when I set you such a bad example? Forgive me, dear, and let us
try to help one another in a better way.' I never forgot it, and it did
me more good than a dozen rods."

Nan sat thoughtfully turning the little cold-cream jar for a minute, and
Mrs. Jo said nothing, but let that idea get well into the busy little
mind that was so quick to see and feel what went on about her.

"I like that," said Nan, presently, and her face looked less elfish,
with its sharp eyes, inquisitive nose, and mischievous mouth. "What did
your mother do to you when you ran away that time?"

"She tied me to the bed-post with a long string, so that I could not
go out of the room, and there I stayed all day with the little worn-out
shoes hanging up before me to remind me of my fault."

"I should think that would cure anybody," cried Nan, who loved her
liberty above all things.

"It did cure me, and I think it will you, so I am going to try it," said
Mrs. Jo, suddenly taking a ball of strong twine out of a drawer in her
work-table.

Nan looked as if she was decidedly getting the worst of the argument
now, and sat feeling much crestfallen while Mrs. Jo tied one end round
her waist and the other to the arm of the sofa, saying, as she finished,

"I don't like to tie you up like a naughty little dog, but if you don't
remember any better than a dog, I must treat you like one."

"I'd just as lief be tied up as not I like to play dog;" and Nan put on
a don't-care face, and began to growl and grovel on the floor.

Mrs. Jo took no notice, but leaving a book or two and a handkerchief to
hem, she went away, and left Miss Nan to her own devices. This was not
agreeable, and after sitting a moment she tried to untie the cord. But
it was fastened in the belt of her apron behind, so she began on the
knot at the other end. It soon came loose, and, gathering it up, Nan was
about to get out of the window, when she heard Mrs. Jo say to somebody
as she passed through the hall,

"No, I don't think she will run away now; she is an honorable little
girl, and knows that I do it to help her."

In a minute, Nan whisked back, tied herself up, and began to sew
violently. Rob came in a moment after, and was so charmed with the new
punishment, that he got a jump-rope and tethered himself to the other
arm of the sofa in the most social manner.

"I got lost too, so I ought to be tied up as much as Nan," he explained
to his mother when she saw the new captive.

"I'm not sure that you don't deserve a little punishment, for you knew
it was wrong to go far away from the rest."

"Nan took me," began Rob, willing to enjoy the novel penalty, but not
willing to take the blame.

"You needn't have gone. You have got a conscience, though you are a
little boy, and you must learn to mind it."

"Well, my conscience didn't prick me a bit when she said 'Let's get over
the wall,'" answered Rob, quoting one of Demi's expressions.

"Did you stop to see if it did?"

"No."

"Then you cannot tell."

"I guess it's such a little conscience that it don't prick hard enough
for me to feel it," added Rob, after thinking the matter over for a
minute.

"We must sharpen it up. It's bad to have a dull conscience; so you may
stay here till dinner-time, and talk about it with Nan. I trust you both
not to untie yourselves till I say the word."

"No, we won't," said both, feeling a certain sense of virtue in helping
to punish themselves.

For an hour they were very good, then they grew tired of one room,
and longed to get out. Never had the hall seemed so inviting; even the
little bedroom acquired a sudden interest, and they would gladly have
gone in and played tent with the curtains of the best bed. The open
windows drove them wild because they could not reach them; and the outer
world seemed so beautiful, they wondered how they ever found the
heart to say it was dull. Nan pined for a race round the lawn, and Rob
remembered with dismay that he had not fed his dog that morning, and
wondered what poor Pollux would do. They watched the clock, and Nan did
some nice calculations in minutes and seconds, while Rob learned to tell
all the hours between eight and one so well that he never forgot them.
It was maddening to smell the dinner, to know that there was to be
succotash and huckleberry pudding, and to feel that they would not be
on the spot to secure good helps of both. When Mary Ann began to set the
table, they nearly cut themselves in two trying to see what meat there
was to be; and Nan offered to help her make the beds, if she would only
see that she had "lots of sauce on her pudding."

When the boys came bursting out of school, they found the children
tugging at their halters like a pair of restive little colts, and
were much edified, as well as amused, by the sequel to the exciting
adventures of the night.

"Untie me now, Marmar; my conscience will prick like a pin next time, I
know it will," said Rob, as the bell rang, and Teddy came to look at him
with sorrowful surprise.

"We shall see," answered his mother, setting him free. He took a good
run down the hall, back through the dining-room, and brought up beside
Nan, quite beaming with virtuous satisfaction.

"I'll bring her dinner to her, may I?" he asked, pitying his
fellow-captive.

"That's my kind little son! Yes, pull out the table, and get a chair;"
and Mrs. Jo hurried away to quell the ardor of the others, who were
always in a raging state of hunger at noon.

Nan ate alone, and spent a long afternoon attached to the sofa. Mrs.
Bhaer lengthened her bonds so that she could look out of the window;
and there she stood watching the boys play, and all the little summer
creatures enjoying their liberty. Daisy had a picnic for the dolls on
the lawn, so that Nan might see the fun if she could not join in it.
Tommy turned his best somersaults to console her; Demi sat on the steps
reading aloud to himself, which amused Nan a good deal; and Dan brought
a little tree-toad to show her as the most delicate attention in his
power.

But nothing atoned for the loss of freedom; and a few hours of
confinement taught Nan how precious it was. A good many thoughts went
through the little head that lay on the window-sill during the last
quiet hour when all the children went to the brook to see Emil's new
ship launched. She was to have christened it, and had depended on
smashing a tiny bottle of currant-wine over the prow as it was named
Josephine in honor of Mrs. Bhaer. Now she had lost her chance, and Daisy
wouldn't do it half so well. Tears rose to her eyes as she remembered
that it was all her own fault; and she said aloud, addressing a fat
bee who was rolling about in the yellow heart of a rose just under the
window,

"If you have run away, you'd better go right home, and tell your mother
you are sorry, and never do so any more."

"I am glad to hear you give him such good advice, and I think he has
taken it," said Mrs. Jo, smiling, as the bee spread his dusty wings and
flew away.

Nan brushed off a bright drop or two that shone on the window-sill, and
nestled against her friend as she took her on her knee, adding kindly
for she had seen the little drops, and knew what they meant,

"Do you think my mother's cure for running away a good one?"

"Yes, ma'am," answered Nan, quite subdued by her quiet day.

"I hope I shall not have to try it again."

"I guess not;" and Nan looked up with such an earnest little face that
Mrs. Jo felt satisfied, and said no more, for she liked to have her
penalties do their own work, and did not spoil the effect by too much
moralizing.

Here Rob appeared, bearing with infinite care what Asia called a "sarcer
pie," meaning one baked in a saucer.

"It's made out of some of my berries, and I'm going to give you half at
supper-time," he announced with a flourish.

"What makes you, when I'm so naughty?" asked Nan, meekly.

"Because we got lost together. You ain't going to be naughty again, are
you?"

"Never," said Nan, with great decision.

"Oh, goody! now let's go and get Mary Ann to cut this for us all ready
to eat; it's 'most tea time;" and Rob beckoned with the delicious little
pie.

Nan started to follow, then stopped, and said,

"I forgot, I can't go."

"Try and see," said Mrs. Bhaer, who had quietly untied the cord sash
while she had been talking.

Nan saw that she was free, and with one tempestuous kiss to Mrs. Jo, she
was off like a humming-bird, followed by Robby, dribbling huckleberry
juice as he ran.



CHAPTER XIII. GOLDILOCKS

After the last excitement peace descended upon Plumfield and reigned
unbroken for several weeks, for the elder boys felt that the loss of Nan
and Rob lay at their door, and all became so paternal in their care
that they were rather wearying; while the little ones listened to Nan's
recital of her perils so many times, that they regarded being lost as
the greatest ill humanity was heir to, and hardly dared to put their
little noses outside the great gate lest night should suddenly descend
upon them, and ghostly black cows come looming through the dusk.

"It is too good to last," said Mrs. Jo; for years of boy-culture had
taught her that such lulls were usually followed by outbreaks of some
sort, and when less wise women would have thought that the boys had
become confirmed saints, she prepared herself for a sudden eruption of
the domestic volcano.

One cause of this welcome calm was a visit from little Bess, whose
parents lent her for a week while they were away with Grandpa Laurence,
who was poorly. The boys regarded Goldilocks as a mixture of child,
angel, and fairy, for she was a lovely little creature, and the golden
hair which she inherited from her blonde mamma enveloped her like
a shining veil, behind which she smiled upon her worshippers when
gracious, and hid herself when offended. Her father would not have it
cut and it hung below her waist, so soft and fine and bright, that Demi
insisted that it was silk spun from a cocoon. Every one praised the
little Princess, but it did not seem to do her harm, only to teach her
that her presence brought sunshine, her smiles made answering smiles
on other faces, and her baby griefs filled every heart with tenderest
sympathy.

Unconsciously, she did her young subjects more good than many a real
sovereign, for her rule was very gentle and her power was felt rather
than seen. Her natural refinement made her dainty in all things, and
had a good effect upon the careless lads about her. She would let no one
touch her roughly or with unclean hands, and more soap was used during
her visits than at any other time, because the boys considered it the
highest honor to be allowed to carry her highness, and the deepest
disgrace to be repulsed with the disdainful command, "Do away, dirty
boy!"

Lour voices displeased her and quarrelling frightened her; so gentler
tones came into the boyish voices as they addressed her, and squabbles
were promptly suppressed in her presence by lookers-on if the principles
could not restrain themselves. She liked to be waited on, and the
biggest boys did her little errands without a murmur, while the small
lads were her devoted slaves in all things. They begged to be allowed to
draw her carriage, bear her berry-basket, or pass her plate at table.
No service was too humble, and Tommy and Ned came to blows before they
could decide which should have the honor of blacking her little boots.

Nan was especially benefited by a week in the society of a well-bred
lady, though such a very small one; for Bess would look at her with
a mixture of wonder and alarm in her great blue eyes when the hoyden
screamed and romped; and she shrunk from her as if she thought her a
sort of wild animal. Warm-hearted Nan felt this very much. She said at
first, "Pooh! I don't care!" But she did care, and was so hurt when Bess
said, "I love my tuzzin best, tause she is twiet," that she shook poor
Daisy till her teeth chattered in her head, and then fled to the barn
to cry dismally. In that general refuge for perturbed spirits she found
comfort and good counsel from some source or other. Perhaps the swallows
from their mud-built nests overhead twittered her a little lecture on
the beauty of gentleness. However that might have been, she came out
quite subdued, and carefully searched the orchard for a certain kind
of early apple that Bess liked because it was sweet and small and rosy.
Armed with this peace-offering, she approached the little Princess, and
humbly presented it. To her great joy it was graciously accepted, and
when Daisy gave Nan a forgiving kiss, Bess did likewise, as if she felt
that she had been too severe, and desired to apologize. After this they
played pleasantly together, and Nan enjoyed the royal favor for days.
To be sure she felt a little like a wild bird in a pretty cage at first,
and occasionally had to slip out to stretch her wings in a long flight,
or to sing at the top of her voice, where neither would disturb the
plump turtle-dove Daisy, nor the dainty golden canary Bess. But it did
her good; for, seeing how every one loved the little Princess for her
small graces and virtues, she began to imitate her, because Nan wanted
much love, and tried hard to win it.

Not a boy in the house but felt the pretty child's influence, and was
improved by it without exactly knowing how or why, for babies can
work miracles in the hearts that love them. Poor Billy found infinite
satisfaction in staring at her, and though she did not like it she
permitted without a frown, after she had been made to understand that he
was not quite like the others, and on that account must be more kindly
treated. Dick and Dolly overwhelmed her with willow whistles, the only
thing they knew how to make, and she accepted but never used them. Rob
served her like a little lover, and Teddy followed her like a pet dog.
Jack she did not like, because he was afflicted with warts and had a
harsh voice. Stuffy displeased her because he did not eat tidily, and
George tried hard not to gobble, that he might not disgust the dainty
little lady opposite. Ned was banished from court in utter disgrace when
he was discovered tormenting some unhappy field-mice. Goldilocks could
never forget the sad spectacle, and retired behind her veil when he
approached, waving him away with an imperious little hand, and crying,
in a tone of mingled grief and anger,

"No, I tarn't love him; he tut the poor mouses' little tails off, and
they queeked!"

Daisy promptly abdicated when Bess came, and took the humble post of
chief cook, while Nan was first maid of honor; Emil was chancellor
of the exchequer, and spent the public monies lavishly in getting up
spectacles that cost whole ninepences. Franz was prime minister, and
directed her affairs of state, planned royal progresses through the
kingdom, and kept foreign powers in order. Demi was her philosopher, and
fared much better than such gentlemen usually do among crowned heads.
Dan was her standing army, and defended her territories gallantly; Tommy
was court fool, and Nat a tuneful Rizzio to this innocent little Mary.

Uncle Fritz and Aunt Jo enjoyed this peaceful episode, and looked on
at the pretty play in which the young folk unconsciously imitated their
elders, without adding the tragedy that is so apt to spoil the dramas
acted on the larger stage.

"They teach us quite as much as we teach them," said Mr. Bhaer.

"Bless the dears! they never guess how many hints they give us as to the
best way of managing them," answered Mrs. Jo.

"I think you were right about the good effect of having girls among the
boys. Nan has stirred up Daisy, and Bess is teaching the little bears
how to behave better than we can. If this reformation goes on as it
has begun, I shall soon feel like Dr. Blimber with his model young
gentlemen," said Professor, laughing, as he saw Tommy not only remove
his own hat, but knock off Ned's also, as they entered the hall where
the Princess was taking a ride on the rocking-horse, attended by Rob
and Teddy astride of chairs, and playing gallant knights to the best of
their ability.

"You will never be a Blimber, Fritz, you couldn't do it if you tried;
and our boys will never submit to the forcing process of that famous
hot-bed. No fear that they will be too elegant: American boys like
liberty too well. But good manners they cannot fail to have, if we give
them the kindly spirit that shines through the simplest demeanor, making
it courteous and cordial, like yours, my dear old boy."

"Tut! tut! we will not compliment; for if I begin you will run away, and
I have a wish to enjoy this happy half hour to the end;" yet Mr. Bhaer
looked pleased with the compliment, for it was true, and Mrs. Jo felt
that she had received the best her husband could give her, by saying
that he found his truest rest and happiness in her society.

"To return to the children: I have just had another proof of Goldilocks'
good influence," said Mrs. Jo, drawing her chair nearer the sofa,
where the Professor lay resting after a long day's work in his various
gardens. "Nan hates sewing, but for love of Bess has been toiling half
the afternoon over a remarkable bag in which to present a dozen of our
love-apples to her idol when she goes. I praised her for it, and she
said, in her quick way, 'I like to sew for other people; it is stupid
sewing for myself.' I took the hint, and shall give her some little
shirts and aprons for Mrs. Carney's children. She is so generous, she
will sew her fingers sore for them, and I shall not have to make a task
of it."

"But needlework is not a fashionable accomplishment, my dear."

"Sorry for it. My girls shall learn all I can teach them about it,
even if they give up the Latin, Algebra, and half-a-dozen ologies it
is considered necessary for girls to muddle their poor brains over
now-a-days. Amy means to make Bess an accomplished woman, but the dear's
mite of a forefinger has little pricks on it already, and her mother has
several specimens of needlework which she values more than the clay bird
without a bill, that filled Laurie with such pride when Bess made it."

"I also have proof of the Princess's power," said Mrs. Bhaer, after he
had watched Mrs. Jo sew on a button with an air of scorn for the whole
system of fashionable education. "Jack is so unwilling to be classed
with Stuffy and Ned, as distasteful to Bess, that he came to me a little
while ago, and asked me to touch his warts with caustic. I have often
proposed it, and he never would consent; but now he bore the smart
manfully, and consoles his present discomfort by hopes of future favor,
when he can show her fastidious ladyship a smooth hand."

Mrs. Bhaer laughed at the story, and just then Stuffy came in to ask if
he might give Goldilocks some of the bonbons his mother had sent him.

"She is not allowed to eat sweeties; but if you like to give her the
pretty box with the pink sugar-rose in it, she would like it very much,"
said Mrs. Jo, unwilling to spoil this unusual piece of self-denial, for
the "fat boy" seldom offered to share his sugar-plums.

"Won't she eat it? I shouldn't like to make her sick," said Stuffy,
eyeing the delicate sweetmeat lovingly, yet putting it into the box.

"Oh, no, she won't touch it, if I tell her it is to look at, not to eat.
She will keep it for weeks, and never think of tasting it. Can you do as
much?"

"I should hope so! I'm ever so much older than she is," cried Stuffy,
indignantly.

"Well, suppose we try. Here, put your bonbons in this bag, and see how
long you can keep them. Let me count two hearts, four red fishes, three
barley-sugar horses, nine almonds, and a dozen chocolate drops. Do you
agree to that?" asked sly Mrs. Jo, popping the sweeties into her little
spool-bag.

"Yes," said Stuffy, with a sigh; and pocketing the forbidden fruit,
he went away to give Bess the present, that won a smile from her, and
permission to escort her round the garden.

"Poor Stuffy's heart has really got the better of his stomach at last,
and his efforts will be much encouraged by the rewards Bess gives him,"
said Mrs. Jo.

"Happy is the man who can put temptation in his pocket and learn
self-denial from so sweet a little teacher!" added Mr. Bhaer, as
the children passed the window, Stuffy's fat face full of placid
satisfaction, and Goldilocks surveying her sugar-rose with polite
interest, though she would have preferred a real flower with a "pitty
smell."

When her father came to take her home, a universal wail arose, and the
parting gifts showered upon her increased her luggage to such an extent
that Mr. Laurie proposed having out the big wagon to take it into town.
Every one had given her something; and it was found difficult to pack
white mice, cake, a parcel of shells, apples, a rabbit kicking violently
in a bag, a large cabbage for his refreshment, a bottle of minnows, and
a mammoth bouquet. The farewell scene was moving, for the Princess sat
upon the hall-table, surrounded by her subjects. She kissed her cousins,
and held out her hand to the other boys, who shook it gently with
various soft speeches, for they were taught not to be ashamed of showing
their emotions.

"Come again soon, little dear," whispered Dan, fastening his best
green-and-gold beetle in her hat.

"Don't forget me, Princess, whatever you do," said the engaging Tommy,
taking a last stroke of the pretty hair.

"I am coming to your house next week, and then I shall see you, Bess,"
added Nat, as if he found consolation in the thought.

"Do shake hands now," cried Jack, offering a smooth paw.

"Here are two nice new ones to remember us by," said Dick and Dolly,
presenting fresh whistles, quite unconscious that seven old ones had
been privately deposited in the kitchen-stove.

"My little precious! I shall work you a book-mark right away, and you
must keep it always," said Nan, with a warm embrace.

But of all the farewells, poor Billy's was the most pathetic, for the
thought that she was really going became so unbearable that he cast
himself down before her, hugging her little blue boots and blubbering
despairingly, "Don't go away! oh, don't!" Goldilocks was so touched by
this burst of feeling, that she leaned over and lifting the poor lad's
head, said, in her soft, little voice,

"Don't cry, poor Billy! I will tiss you and tum adain soon."

This promise consoled Billy, and he fell back beaming with pride at the
unusual honor conferred upon him.

"Me too! me too!" clamored Dick and Dolly, feeling that their devotion
deserved some return. The others looked as if they would like to join
in the cry; and something in the kind, merry faces about her moved the
Princess to stretch out her arms and say, with reckless condescension,

"I will tiss evvybody!"

Like a swarm of bees about a very sweet flower, the affectionate lads
surrounded their pretty playmate, and kissed her till she looked like a
little rose, not roughly, but so enthusiastically that nothing but the
crown of her hat was visible for a moment. Then her father rescued her,
and she drove away still smiling and waving her hands, while the boys
sat on the fence screaming like a flock of guinea-fowls, "Come back!
come back!" till she was out of sight.

They all missed her, and each dimly felt that he was better for having
known a creature so lovely, delicate, and sweet; for little Bess
appealed to the chivalrous instinct in them as something to love,
admire, and protect with a tender sort of reverence. Many a man
remembers some pretty child who has made a place in his heart and kept
her memory alive by the simple magic of her innocence; these little men
were just learning to feel this power, and to love it for its gentle
influence, not ashamed to let the small hand lead them, nor to own their
loyalty to womankind, even in the bud.



CHAPTER XIV. DAMON AND PYTHIAS

Mrs. Bhaer was right; peace was only a temporary lull, a storm was
brewing, and two days after Bess left, a moral earthquake shook
Plumfield to its centre.

Tommy's hens were at the bottom of the trouble, for if they had not
persisted in laying so many eggs, he could not have sold them and made
such sums. Money is the root of all evil, and yet it is such a useful
root that we cannot get on without it any more than we can without
potatoes. Tommy certainly could not, for he spent his income so
recklessly, that Mr. Bhaer was obliged to insist on a savings-bank, and
presented him with a private one an imposing tin edifice, with the name
over the door, and a tall chimney, down which the pennies were to
go, there to rattle temptingly till leave was given to open a sort of
trap-door in the floor.

The house increased in weight so rapidly, that Tommy soon became
satisfied with his investment, and planned to buy unheard-of treasures
with his capital. He kept account of the sums deposited, and was
promised that he might break the bank as soon as he had five dollars,
on condition that he spent the money wisely. Only one dollar was needed,
and the day Mrs. Jo paid him for four dozen eggs, he was so delighted,
that he raced off to the barn to display the bright quarters to Nat, who
was also laying by money for the long-desired violin.

"I wish I had 'em to put with my three dollars, then I'd soon get enough
to buy my fiddle," he said, looking wistfully at the money.

"P'raps I'll lend you some. I haven't decided yet what I'll do with
mine," said Tommy, tossing up his quarters and catching them as they
fell.

"Hi! boys! come down to the brook and see what a jolly great snake Dan's
got!" called a voice from behind the barn.

"Come on," said Tommy; and, laying his money inside the old winnowing
machine, away he ran, followed by Nat.

The snake was very interesting, and then a long chase after a lame
crow, and its capture, so absorbed Tommy's mind and time, that he never
thought of his money till he was safely in bed that night.

"Never mind, no one but Nat knows where it is," said the easy-going lad,
and fell asleep untroubled by any anxiety about his property.

Next morning, just as the boys assembled for school, Tommy rushed into
the room breathlessly, demanding,

"I say, who has got my dollar?"

"What are you talking about?" asked Franz.

Tommy explained, and Nat corroborated his statement.

Every one else declared they knew nothing about it, and began to look
suspiciously at Nat, who got more and more alarmed and confused with
each denial.

"Somebody must have taken it," said Franz, as Tommy shook his fist at
the whole party, and wrathfully declared that,

"By thunder turtles! if I get hold of the thief, I'll give him what he
won't forget in a hurry."

"Keep cool, Tom; we shall find him out; thieves always come to grief,"
said Dan, as one who knew something of the matter.

"May be some tramp slept in the barn and took it," suggested Ned.

"No, Silas don't allow that; besides, a tramp wouldn't go looking in
that old machine for money," said Emil, with scorn.

"Wasn't it Silas himself?" said Jack.

"Well, I like that! Old Si is as honest as daylight. You wouldn't catch
him touching a penny of ours," said Tommy, handsomely defending his
chief admirer from suspicion.

"Whoever it was had better tell, and not wait to be found out," said
Demi, looking as if an awful misfortune had befallen the family.

"I know you think it's me," broke out Nat, red and excited.

"You are the only one who knew where it was," said Franz.

"I can't help it I didn't take it. I tell you I didn't I didn't!" cried
Nat, in a desperate sort of way.

"Gently, gently, my son! What is all this noise about?" and Mr. Bhaer
walked in among them.

Tommy repeated the story of his loss, and, as he listened, Mr. Bhaer's
face grew graver and graver; for, with all their faults and follies, the
lads till now had been honest.

"Take your seats," he said; and, when all were in their places, he added
slowly, as his eye went from face to face with a grieved look, that was
harder to bear than a storm of words,

"Now, boys, I shall ask each one of you a single question, and I want an
honest answer. I am not going to try to frighten, bribe, or surprise the
truth out of you, for every one of you have got a conscience, and know
what it is for. Now is the time to undo the wrong done to Tommy, and
set yourselves right before us all. I can forgive the yielding to sudden
temptation much easier than I can deceit. Don't add a lie to the theft,
but confess frankly, and we will all try to help you make us forget and
forgive."

He paused a moment, and one might have heard a pin drop, the room was
so still; then slowly and impressively he put the question to each one,
receiving the same answer in varying tones from all. Every face was
flushed and excited, so that Mr. Bhaer could not take color as a
witness, and some of the little boys were so frightened that they
stammered over the two short words as if guilty, though it was evident
that they could not be. When he came to Nat, his voice softened, for the
poor lad looked so wretched, Mr. Bhaer felt for him. He believed him to
be the culprit, and hoped to save the boy from another lie, by winning
him to tell the truth without fear.

"Now, my son, give me an honest answer. Did you take the money?"

"No, sir!" and Nat looked up at him imploringly.

As the words fell from his trembling lips, somebody hissed.

"Stop that!" cried Mr. Bhaer, with a sharp rap on his desk, as he looked
sternly toward the corner whence the sound came.

Ned, Jack, and Emil sat there, and the first two looked ashamed of
themselves, but Emil called out,

"It wasn't me, uncle! I'd be ashamed to hit a fellow when he is down."

"Good for you!" cried Tommy, who was in a sad state of affliction at the
trouble his unlucky dollar had made.

"Silence!" commanded Mr. Bhaer; and when it came, he said soberly,

"I am very sorry, Nat, but evidences are against you, and your old fault
makes us more ready to doubt you than we should be if we could trust you
as we do some of the boys, who never fib. But mind, my child, I do not
charge you with this theft; I shall not punish you for it till I am
perfectly sure, nor ask any thing more about it. I shall leave it for
you to settle with your own conscience. If you are guilty, come to me at
any hour of the day or night and confess it, and I will forgive and
help you to amend. If you are innocent, the truth will appear sooner or
later, and the instant it does, I will be the first to beg your pardon
for doubting you, and will so gladly do my best to clear your character
before us all."

"I didn't! I didn't!" sobbed Nat, with his head down upon his arms, for
he could not bear the look of distrust and dislike which he read in the
many eyes fixed on him.

"I hope not." Mr. Bhaer paused a minute, as if to give the culprit,
whoever he might be, one more chance. Nobody spoke, however, and only
sniffs of sympathy from some of the little fellows broke the silence.
Mr. Bhaer shook his head, and added, regretfully,

"There is nothing more to be done, then, and I have but one thing to
say: I shall not speak of this again, and I wish you all to follow my
example. I cannot expect you to feel as kindly toward any one whom you
suspect as before this happened, but I do expect and desire that you
will not torment the suspected person in any way, he will have a hard
enough time without that. Now go to your lessons."

"Father Bhaer let Nat off too easy," muttered Ned to Emil, as they got
out their books.

"Hold your tongue," growled Emil, who felt that this event was a blot
upon the family honor.

Many of the boys agreed with Ned, but Mr. Bhaer was right, nevertheless;
and Nat would have been wiser to confess on the spot and have the
trouble over, for even the hardest whipping he ever received from his
father was far easier to bear than the cold looks, the avoidance, and
general suspicion that met him on all sides. If ever a boy was sent to
Coventry and kept there, it was poor Nat; and he suffered a week of slow
torture, though not a hand was raised against him, and hardly a word
said.

That was the worst of it; if they would only have talked it out, or
even have thrashed him all round, he could have stood it better than
the silent distrust that made very face so terrible to meet. Even Mrs.
Bhaer's showed traces of it, though her manner was nearly as kind as
ever; but the sorrowful anxious look in Father Bhaer's eyes cut Nat
to the heart, for he loved his teacher dearly, and knew that he had
disappointed all his hopes by this double sin.

Only one person in the house entirely believed in him, and stood up for
him stoutly against all the rest. This was Daisy. She could not explain
why she trusted him against all appearances, she only felt that she
could not doubt him, and her warm sympathy made her strong to take his
part. She would not hear a word against him from any one, and actually
slapped her beloved Demi when he tried to convince her that it must have
been Nat, because no one else knew where the money was.

"Maybe the hens ate it; they are greedy old things," she said; and when
Demi laughed, she lost her temper, slapped the amazed boy, and then
burst out crying and ran away, still declaring, "He didn't! he didn't!
he didn't!"

Neither aunt nor uncle tried to shake the child's faith in her friend,
but only hoped her innocent instinct might prove sure, and loved her all
the better for it. Nat often said, after it was over, that he couldn't
have stood it, if it had not been for Daisy. When the others shunned
him, she clung to him closer than ever, and turned her back on the rest.
She did not sit on the stairs now when he solaced himself with the old
fiddle, but went in and sat beside him, listening with a face so full of
confidence and affection, that Nat forgot disgrace for a time, and
was happy. She asked him to help her with her lessons, she cooked him
marvelous messes in her kitchen, which he ate manfully, no matter what
they were, for gratitude gave a sweet flavor to the most distasteful.
She proposed impossible games of cricket and ball, when she found that
he shrank from joining the other boys. She put little nosegays from her
garden on his desk, and tried in every way to show that she was not a
fair-weather friend, but faithful through evil as well as good repute.
Nan soon followed her example, in kindness at least; curbed her sharp
tongue, and kept her scornful little nose from any demonstration of
doubt or dislike, which was good of Madame Giddy-gaddy, for she firmly
believed that Nat took the money.

Most of the boys let him severely alone, but Dan, though he said he
despised him for being a coward, watched over him with a grim sort of
protection, and promptly cuffed any lad who dared to molest his mate or
make him afraid. His idea of friendship was as high as Daisy's, and, in
his own rough way, he lived up to it as loyally.

Sitting by the brook one afternoon, absorbed in the study of the
domestic habits of water-spiders, he overheard a bit of conversation on
the other side of the wall. Ned, who was intensely inquisitive, had been
on tenterhooks to know certainly who was the culprit; for of late one
or two of the boys had begun to think that they were wrong, Nat was so
steadfast in his denials, and so meek in his endurance of their neglect.
This doubt had teased Ned past bearing, and he had several times
privately beset Nat with questions, regardless of Mr. Bhaer's express
command. Finding Nat reading alone on the shady side of the wall, Ned
could not resist stopping for a nibble at the forbidden subject. He had
worried Nat for some ten minutes before Dan arrived, and the first words
the spider-student heard were these, in Nat's patient, pleading voice,

"Don't, Ned! oh, don't! I can't tell you because I don't know, and it's
mean of you to keep nagging at me on the sly, when Father Bhaer told you
not to plague me. You wouldn't dare to if Dan was round."

"I ain't afraid of Dan; he's nothing but an old bully. Don't believe but
what he took Tom's money, and you know it, and won't tell. Come, now!"

"He didn't, but, if he did, I would stand up for him, he has always been
so good to me," said Nat, so earnestly that Dan forgot his spiders, and
rose quickly to thank him, but Ned's next words arrested him.

"I know Dan did it, and gave the money to you. Shouldn't wonder if he
got his living picking pockets before he came here, for nobody knows
any thing about him but you," said Ned, not believing his own words, but
hoping to get the truth out of Nat by making him angry.

He succeeded in a part of his ungenerous wish, for Nat cried out,
fiercely,

"If you say that again I'll go and tell Mr. Bhaer all about it. I don't
want to tell tales, but, by George! I will, if you don't let Dan alone."

"Then you'll be a sneak, as well as a liar and a thief," began Ned, with
a jeer, for Nat had borne insult to himself so meekly, the other did not
believe he would dare to face the master just to stand up for Dan.

What he might have added I cannot tell, for the words were hardly out
of his mouth when a long arm from behind took him by the collar, and,
jerking him over the wall in a most promiscuous way, landed him with a
splash in the middle of the brook.

"Say that again and I'll duck you till you can't see!" cried Dan,
looking like a modern Colossus of Rhodes as he stood, with a foot on
either side of the narrow stream, glaring down at the discomfited youth
in the water.

"I was only in fun," said Ned.

"You are a sneak yourself to badger Nat round the corner. Let me catch
you at it again, and I'll souse you in the river next time. Get up, and
clear out!" thundered Dan, in a rage.

Ned fled, dripping, and his impromptu sitz-bath evidently did him good,
for he was very respectful to both the boys after that, and seemed to
have left his curiosity in the brook. As he vanished Dan jumped over the
wall, and found Nat lying, as if quite worn out and bowed down with his
troubles.

"He won't pester you again, I guess. If he does, just tell me, and I'll
see to him," said Dan, trying to cool down.

"I don't mind what he says about me so much, I've got used to it,"
answered Nat sadly; "but I hate to have him pitch into you."

"How do you know he isn't right?" asked Dan, turning his face away.

"What, about the money?" cried Nat, looking up with a startled air.

"Yes."

"But I don't believe it! You don't care for money; all you want is your
old bugs and things," and Nat laughed, incredulously.

"I want a butterfly net as much as you want a fiddle; why shouldn't I
steal the money for it as much as you?" said Dan, still turning away,
and busily punching holes in the turf with his stick.

"I don't think you would. You like to fight and knock folks round
sometimes, but you don't lie, and I don't believe you'd steal," and Nat
shook his head decidedly.

"I've done both. I used to fib like fury; it's too much trouble now; and
I stole things to eat out of gardens when I ran away from Page, so you
see I am a bad lot," said Dan, speaking in the rough, reckless way which
he had been learning to drop lately.

"O Dan! don't say it's you! I'd rather have it any of the other boys,"
cried Nat, in such a distressed tone that Dan looked pleased, and showed
that he did, by turning round with a queer expression in his face,
though he only answered,

"I won't say any thing about it. But don't you fret, and we'll pull
through somehow, see if we don't."

Something in his face and manner gave Nat a new idea; and he said,
pressing his hands together, in the eagerness of his appeal,

"I think you know who did it. If you do, beg him to tell, Dan. It's so
hard to have 'em all hate me for nothing. I don't think I can bear it
much longer. If I had any place to go to, I'd run away, though I love
Plumfield dearly; but I'm not brave and big like you, so I must stay and
wait till some one shows them that I haven't lied."

As he spoke, Nat looked so broken and despairing, that Dan could not
bear it, and, muttered huskily,

"You won't wait long," and he walked rapidly away, and was seen no more
for hours.

"What is the matter with Dan?" asked the boys of one another several
times during the Sunday that followed a week which seemed as if it would
never end. Dan was often moody, but that day he was so sober and silent
that no one could get any thing out of him. When they walked he strayed
away from the rest, and came home late. He took no part in the evening
conversation, but sat in the shadow, so busy with his own thoughts that
he scarcely seemed to hear what was going on. When Mrs. Jo showed him an
unusually good report in the Conscience Book, he looked at it without a
smile, and said, wistfully,

"You think I am getting on, don't you?"

"Excellently, Dan! and I am so pleased, because I always thought you
only needed a little help to make you a boy to be proud of."

He looked up at her with a strange expression in his black eyes an
expression of mingled pride and love and sorrow which she could not
understand then but remembered afterward.

"I'm afraid you'll be disappointed, but I do try," he said, shutting the
book with no sign of pleasure in the page that he usually liked so much
to read over and talk about.

"Are you sick, dear?" asked Mrs. Jo, with her hand on his shoulder.

"My foot aches a little; I guess I'll go to bed. Good-night, mother,"
he added, and held the hand against his cheek a minute, then went away
looking as if he had said good-bye to something dear.

"Poor Dan! he takes Nat's disgrace to heart sadly. He is a strange boy;
I wonder if I ever shall understand him thoroughly?" said Mrs. Jo
to herself, as she thought over Dan's late improvement with real
satisfaction, yet felt that there was more in the lad than she had at
first suspected.

One of things which cut Nat most deeply was an act of Tommy's, for after
his loss Tommy had said to him, kindly, but firmly,

"I don't wish to hurt you, Nat, but you see I can't afford to lose my
money, so I guess we won't be partners any longer;" and with that Tommy
rubbed out the sign, "T. Bangs & Co."

Nat had been very proud of the "Co.," and had hunted eggs industriously,
kept his accounts all straight, and had added a good sum to his income
from the sale of his share of stock in trade.

"O Tom! must you?" he said, feeling that his good name was gone for ever
in the business world if this was done.

"I must," returned Tommy, firmly. "Emil says that when one man 'bezzles
(believe that's the word it means to take money and cut away with it)
the property of a firm, the other one sues him, or pitches into him
somehow, and won't have any thing more to do with him. Now you have
'bezzled my property; I shan't sue you, and I shan't pitch into you, but
I must dissolve the partnership, because I can't trust you, and I don't
wish to fail."

"I can't make you believe me, and you won't take my money, though I'd be
thankful to give all my dollars if you'd only say you don't think I took
your money. Do let me hunt for you, I won't ask any wages, but do it for
nothing. I know all the places, and I like it," pleaded Nat.

But Tommy shook his head, and his jolly round face looked suspicious and
hard as he said, shortly, "Can't do it; wish you didn't know the places.
Mind you don't go hunting on the sly, and speculate in my eggs."

Poor Nat was so hurt that he could not get over it. He felt that he had
lost not only his partner and patron, but that he was bankrupt in honor,
and an outlaw from the business community. No one trusted his word,
written or spoken, in spite of his efforts to redeem the past falsehood;
the sign was down, the firm broken up, and he a ruined man. The barn,
which was the boys' Wall Street, knew him no more. Cockletop and
her sisters cackled for him in vain, and really seemed to take his
misfortune to heart, for eggs were fewer, and some of the biddies
retired in disgust to new nests, which Tommy could not find.

"They trust me," said Nat, when he heard of it; and though the boys
shouted at the idea, Nat found comfort in it, for when one is down in
the world, the confidence of even a speckled hen is most consoling.

Tommy took no new partner, however, for distrust had entered in, and
poisoned the peace of his once confiding soul. Ned offered to join him,
but he declined, saying, with a sense of justice that did him honor,

"It might turn out that Nat didn't take my money, and then we could
be partners again. I don't think it will happen, but I will give him a
chance, and keep the place open a little longer."

Billy was the only person whom Bangs felt he could trust in his shop,
and Billy was trained to hunt eggs, and hand them over unbroken, being
quite satisfied with an apple or a sugar-plum for wages. The morning
after Dan's gloomy Sunday, Billy said to his employer, as he displayed
the results of a long hunt,

"Only two."

"It gets worse and worse; I never saw such provoking old hens," growled
Tommy, thinking of the days when he often had six to rejoice over.
"Well, put 'em in my hat and give me a new bit of chalk; I must mark 'em
up, any way."

Billy mounted a peck-measure, and looked into the top of the machine,
where Tommy kept his writing materials.

"There's lots of money in here," said Billy.

"No, there isn't. Catch me leaving my cash round again," returned Tommy.

"I see 'em one, four, eight, two dollars," persisted Billy, who had not
yet mastered the figures correctly.

"What a jack you are!" and Tommy hopped up to get the chalk for himself,
but nearly tumbled down again, for there actually were four bright
quarters in a row, with a bit of paper on them directed to "Tom Bangs,"
that there might be no mistake.

"Thunder turtles!" cried Tommy, and seizing them he dashed into the
house, bawling wildly, "It's all right! Got my money! Where's Nat?"

He was soon found, and his surprise and pleasure were so genuine that
few doubted his word when he now denied all knowledge of the money.

"How could I put it back when I didn't take it? Do believe me now, and
be good to me again," he said, so imploringly, that Emil slapped him on
the back, and declared he would for one.

"So will I, and I'm jolly glad it's not you. But who the dickens is it?"
said Tommy, after shaking hands heartily with Nat.

"Never mind, as long as it's found," said Dan with his eyes fixed on
Nat's happy face.

"Well, I like that! I'm not going to have my things hooked, and then
brought back like the juggling man's tricks," cried Tommy, looking at
his money as if he suspected witchcraft.

"We'll find him out somehow, though he was sly enough to print this so
his writing wouldn't be known," said Franz, examining the paper.

"Demi prints tip-top," put in Rob, who had not a very clear idea what
the fuss was all about.

"You can't make me believe it's him, not if you talk till you are blue,"
said Tommy, and the others hooted at the mere idea; for the little
deacon, as they called him, was above suspicion.

Nat felt the difference in the way they spoke of Demi and himself, and
would have given all he had or ever hoped to have to be so trusted;
for he had learned how easy it is to lose the confidence of others, how
very, very hard to win it back, and truth became to him a precious thing
since he had suffered from neglecting it.

Mr. Bhaer was very glad one step had been taken in the right direction,
and waited hopefully for yet further revelations. They came sooner than
he expected, and in a way that surprised and grieved him very much. As
they sat at supper that night, a square parcel was handed to Mrs. Bhaer
from Mrs. Bates, a neighbor. A note accompanied the parcel, and, while
Mr. Bhaer read it, Demi pulled off the wrapper, exclaiming, as he saw
its contents,

"Why, it's the book Uncle Teddy gave Dan!"

"The devil!" broke from Dan, for he had not yet quite cured himself of
swearing, though he tried very hard.

Mr. Bhaer looked up quickly at the sound. Dan tried to meet his eyes,
but could not; his own fell, and he sat biting his lips, getting redder
and redder till he was the picture of shame.

"What is it?" asked Mrs. Bhaer, anxiously.

"I should have preferred to talk about this in private, but Demi has
spoilt that plan, so I may as well have it out now," said Mr. Bhaer,
looking a little stern, as he always did when any meanness or deceit
came up for judgment.

"The note is from Mrs. Bates, and she says that her boy Jimmy told her
he bought this book of Dan last Saturday. She saw that it was worth much
more than a dollar, and thinking there was some mistake, has sent it to
me. Did you sell it, Dan?"

"Yes, sir," was the slow answer.

"Why?"

"Wanted money."

"For what?"

"To pay somebody."

"To whom did you owe it?"

"Tommy."

"Never borrowed a cent of me in his life," cried Tommy, looked scared,
for he guessed what was coming now, and felt that on the whole he would
have preferred witchcraft, for he admired Dan immensely.

"Perhaps he took it," cried Ned, who owed Dan a grudge for the ducking,
and, being a mortal boy, liked to pay it off.

"O Dan!" cried Nat, clasping his hands, regardless of the bread and
butter in them.

"It is a hard thing to do, but I must have this settled, for I cannot
have you watching each other like detectives, and the whole school
disturbed in this way, did you put that dollar in the barn this
morning?" asked Mr. Bhaer.

Dan looked him straight in the face, and answered steadily, "Yes, I
did."

A murmur went round the table, Tommy dropped his mug with a crash; Daisy
cried out, "I knew it wasn't Nat;" Nan began to cry, and Mrs. Jo left
the room, looking so disappointed, sorry, and ashamed that Dan could not
bear it. He hid his face in his hands a moment, then threw up his head,
squared his shoulders as if settling some load upon them, and said, with
the dogged look, and half-resolute, half-reckless tone he had used when
he first came,

"I did it; now you may do what you like to me, but I won't say another
word about it."

"Not even that you are sorry?" asked Mr. Bhaer, troubled by the change
in him.

"I ain't sorry."

"I'll forgive him without asking," said Tommy, feeling that it was
harder somehow to see brave Dan disgraced than timid Nat.

"Don't want to be forgiven," returned Dan, gruffly.

"Perhaps you will when you have thought about it quietly by yourself, I
won't tell you now how surprised and disappointed I am, but by and by I
will come up and talk to you in your room."

"Won't make any difference," said Dan, trying to speak defiantly, but
failing as he looked at Mr. Bhaer's sorrowful face; and, taking his
words for a dismissal, Dan left the room as if he found it impossible to
stay.

It would have done him good if he had stayed; for the boys talked the
matter over with such sincere regret, and pity, and wonder, it might
have touched and won him to ask pardon. No one was glad to find that it
was he, not even Nat; for, spite of all his faults, and they were many,
every one liked Dan now, because under his rough exterior lay some of
the manly virtues which we most admire and love. Mrs. Jo had been the
chief prop, as well as cultivator, of Dan; and she took it sadly to
heart that her last and most interesting boy had turned out so ill. The
theft was bad, but the lying about it, and allowing another to suffer
so much from an unjust suspicion was worse; and most discouraging of all
was the attempt to restore the money in an underhand way, for it showed
not only a want of courage, but a power of deceit that boded ill for the
future. Still more trying was his steady refusal to talk of the matter,
to ask pardon, or express any remorse. Days passed; and he went about
his lessons and his work, silent, grim, and unrepentant. As if taking
warning by their treatment of Nat, he asked no sympathy of any one,
rejected the advances of the boys, and spent his leisure hours roaming
about the fields and woods, trying to find playmates in the birds and
beasts, and succeeding better than most boys would have done, because he
knew and loved them so well.

"If this goes on much longer, I'm afraid he will run away again, for he
is too young to stand a life like this," said Mr. Bhaer, quite dejected
at the failure of all his efforts.

"A little while ago I should have been quite sure that nothing would
tempt him away, but now I am ready of any thing, he is so changed,"
answered poor Mrs. Jo, who mourned over her boy and could not be
comforted, because he shunned her more than any one else, and only
looked at her with the half-fierce, half-imploring eyes of a wild animal
caught in a trap, when she tried to talk to him alone.

Nat followed him about like a shadow, and Dan did not repulse him as
rudely as he did others, but said, in his blunt way, "You are all right;
don't worry about me. I can stand it better than you did."

"But I don't like to have you all alone," Nat would say, sorrowfully.

"I like it;" and Dan would tramp away, stifling a sigh sometimes, for he
was lonely.

Passing through the birch grove one day, he came up on several of the
boys, who were amusing themselves by climbing up the trees and swinging
down again, as they slender elastic stems bent till their tops touched
the ground. Dan paused a minute to watch the fun, without offering
to join in it, and as he stood there Jack took his turn. He had
unfortunately chosen too large a tree; for when he swung off, it only
bent a little way, and left him hanging at a dangerous height.

"Go back; you can't do it!" called Ned from below.

Jack tried, but the twigs slipped from his hands, and he could not get
his legs round the trunk. He kicked, and squirmed, and clutched in vain,
then gave it up, and hung breathless, saying helplessly,

"Catch me! help me! I must drop!"

"You'll be killed if you do," cried Ned, frightened out of his wits.

"Hold on!" shouted Dan; and up the tree he went, crashing his way along
till he nearly reached Jack, whose face looked up at him, full of fear
and hope.

"You'll both come down," said Ned, dancing with excitement on the slope
underneath, while Nat held out his arms, in the wild hope of breaking
the fall.

"That's what I want; stand from under," answered Dan, coolly; and, as he
spoke, his added weight bent the tree many feet nearer the earth.

Jack dropped safely; but the birch, lightened of half its load, flew up
again so suddenly, that Dan, in the act of swinging round to drop feet
foremost, lost his hold and fell heavily.

"I'm not hurt, all right in a minute," he said, sitting up, a little
pale and dizzy, as the boys gathered round him, full of admiration and
alarm.

"You're a trump, Dan, and I'm ever so much obliged to you," cried Jack,
gratefully.

"It wasn't any thing," muttered Dan, rising slowly.

"I say it was, and I'll shake hands with you, though you are," Ned
checked the unlucky word on his tongue, and held out his hand, feeling
that it was a handsome thing on his part.

"But I won't shake hands with a sneak;" and Dan turned his back with a
look of scorn, that caused Ned to remember the brook, and retire with
undignified haste.

"Come home, old chap; I'll give you a lift;" and Nat walked away with
him leaving the others to talk over the feat together, to wonder when
Dan would "come round," and to wish one and all that Tommy's "confounded
money had been in Jericho before it made such a fuss."

When Mr. Bhaer came into school next morning, he looked so happy, that
the boys wondered what had happened to him, and really thought he had
lost his mind when they saw him go straight to Dan, and, taking him by
both hands, say all in one breath, as he shook them heartily,

"I know all about it, and I beg your pardon. It was like you to do it,
and I love you for it, though it's never right to tell lies, even for a
friend."

"What is it?" cried Nat, for Dan said not a word, only lifted up his
head, as if a weight of some sort had fallen off his back.

"Dan did not take Tommy's money;" and Mr. Bhaer quite shouted it, he was
so glad.

"Who did?" cried the boys in a chorus.

Mr. Bhaer pointed to one empty seat, and every eye followed his finger,
yet no one spoke for a minute, they were so surprised.

"Jack went home early this morning, but he left this behind him;" and
in the silence Mr. Bhaer read the note which he had found tied to his
door-handle when he rose.

"I took Tommy's dollar. I was peeking in through a crack and saw him put
it there. I was afraid to tell before, though I wanted to. I didn't care
so much about Nat, but Dan is a trump, and I can't stand it any longer.
I never spent the money; it's under the carpet in my room, right behind
the washstand. I'm awful sorry. I am going home, and don't think I shall
ever come back, so Dan may have my things.

"JACK"

It was not an elegant confession, being badly written, much blotted,
and very short; but it was a precious paper to Dan; and, when Mr. Bhaer
paused, the boy went to him, saying, in a rather broken voice, but with
clear eyes, and the frank, respectful manner they had tried to teach
him,

"I'll say I'm sorry now, and ask you to forgive me, sir."

"It was a kind lie, Dan, and I can't help forgiving it; but you see it
did no good," said Mr. Bhaer, with a hand on either shoulder, and a face
full of relief and affection.

"It kept the boys from plaguing Nat. That's what I did it for. It made
him right down miserable. I didn't care so much," explained Dan, as if
glad to speak out after his hard silence.

"How could you do it? You are always so kind to me," faltered Nat,
feeling a strong desire to hug his friend and cry. Two girlish
performances, which would have scandalized Dan to the last degree.

"It's all right now, old fellow, so don't be a fool," he said,
swallowing the lump in his throat, and laughing out as he had not done
for weeks. "Does Mrs. Bhaer know?" he asked, eagerly.

"Yes; and she is so happy I don't know what she will do to you," began
Mr. Bhaer, but got no farther, for here the boys came crowding about Dan
in a tumult of pleasure and curiosity; but before he had answered more
than a dozen questions, a voice cried out,

"Three cheers for Dan!" and there was Mrs. Jo in the doorway waving her
dish-towel, and looking as if she wanted to dance a jig for joy, as she
used to do when a girl.

"Now then," cried Mr. Bhaer, and led off a rousing hurrah, which
startled Asia in the kitchen, and made old Mr. Roberts shake his head as
he drove by, saying,

"Schools are not what they were when I was young!"

Dan stood it pretty well for a minute, but the sight of Mrs. Jo's
delight upset him, and he suddenly bolted across the hall into the
parlor, whither she instantly followed, and neither were seen for half
an hour.

Mr. Bhaer found it very difficult to calm his excited flock; and, seeing
that lessons were an impossibility for a time, he caught their attention
by telling them the fine old story of the friends whose fidelity to one
another has made their names immortal. The lads listened and remembered,
for just then their hearts were touched by the loyalty of a humbler pair
of friends. The lie was wrong, but the love that prompted it and the
courage that bore in silence the disgrace which belonged to another,
made Dan a hero in their eyes. Honesty and honor had a new meaning now;
a good name was more precious than gold; for once lost money could not
buy it back; and faith in one another made life smooth and happy as
nothing else could do.

Tommy proudly restored the name of the firm; Nat was devoted to Dan; and
all the boys tried to atone to both for former suspicion and neglect.
Mrs. Jo rejoiced over her flock, and Mr. Bhaer was never tired of
telling the story of his young Damon and Pythias.



CHAPTER XV. IN THE WILLOW

The old tree saw and heard a good many little scenes and confidences
that summer, because it became the favorite retreat of all the children,
and the willow seemed to enjoy it, for a pleasant welcome always met
them, and the quiet hours spent in its arms did them all good. It had
a great deal of company one Saturday afternoon, and some little bird
reported what went on there.

First came Nan and Daisy with their small tubs and bits of soap, for
now and then they were seized with a tidy fit, and washed up all their
dolls' clothes in the brook. Asia would not have them "slopping round"
in her kitchen, and the bath-room was forbidden since Nan forgot to turn
off the water till it overflowed and came gently dripping down through
the ceiling. Daisy went systematically to work, washing first the white
and then the colored things, rinsing them nicely, and hanging them to
dry on a cord fastened from one barberry-bush to another, and pinning
them up with a set of tiny clothes-pins Ned had turned for her. But Nan
put all her little things to soak in the same tub, and then forgot them
while she collected thistledown to stuff a pillow for Semiramis, Queen
of Babylon, as one doll was named. This took some time, and when Mrs.
Giddy-gaddy came to take out her clothes, deep green stains appeared on
every thing, for she had forgotten the green silk lining of a certain
cape, and its color had soaked nicely into the pink and blue gowns, the
little chemises, and even the best ruffled petticoat.

"Oh me! what a mess!" sighed Nan.

"Lay them on the grass to bleach," said Daisy, with an air of
experience.

"So I will, and we can sit up in the nest and watch that they don't blow
away."

The Queen of Babylon's wardrobe was spread forth upon the bank, and,
turning up their tubs to dry, the little washerwomen climbed into the
nest, and fell to talking, as ladies are apt to do in the pauses of
domestic labor.

"I'm going to have a feather-bed to go with my new pillow," said Mrs.
Giddy-gaddy, as she transferred the thistledown from her pocket to her
handkerchief, losing about half in the process.

"I wouldn't; Aunt Jo says feather-beds aren't healthy. I never let my
children sleep on any thing but a mattress," returned Mrs. Shakespeare
Smith, decidedly.

"I don't care; my children are so strong they often sleep on the
floor, and don't mind it," (which was quite true). "I can't afford nine
mattresses, and I like to make beds myself."

"Won't Tommy charge for the feathers?"

"May be he will, but I shan't pay him, and he won't care," returned Mrs.
G., taking a base advantage of the well-known good nature of T. Bangs.

"I think the pink will fade out of that dress sooner than the green mark
will," observed Mrs. S., looking down from her perch, and changing the
subject, for she and her gossip differed on many points, and Mrs. Smith
was a discreet lady.

"Never mind; I'm tired of dolls, and I guess I shall put them all away
and attend to my farm; I like it rather better than playing house," said
Mrs. G., unconsciously expressing the desire of many older ladies, who
cannot dispose of their families so easily however.

"But you mustn't leave them; they will die without their mother," cried
the tender Mrs. Smith.

"Let 'em die then; I'm tired of fussing over babies, and I'm going
to play with the boys; they need me to see to 'em," returned the
strong-minded lady.

Daisy knew nothing about women's rights; she quietly took all she
wanted, and no one denied her claim, because she did not undertake what
she could not carry out, but unconsciously used the all-powerful right
of her own influence to win from others any privilege for which she
had proved her fitness. Nan attempted all sorts of things, undaunted by
direful failures, and clamored fiercely to be allowed to do every thing
that the boys did. They laughed at her, hustled her out of the way, and
protested against her meddling with their affairs. But she would not be
quenched and she would be heard, for her will was strong, and she had
the spirit of a rampant reformer. Mrs. Bhaer sympathized with her, but
tired to curb her frantic desire for entire liberty, showing her that
she must wait a little, learn self-control, and be ready to use her
freedom before she asked for it. Nan had meek moments when she agreed to
this, and the influences at work upon her were gradually taking effect.
She no longer declared that she would be engine-driver or a blacksmith,
but turned her mind to farming, and found in it a vent for the energy
bottled up in her active little body. It did not quite satisfy her,
however; for her sage and sweet marjoram were dumb things, and could not
thank her for her care. She wanted something human to love, work for,
and protect, and was never happier than when the little boys brought
their cut fingers, bumped heads, or bruised joints for her to "mend-up."
Seeing this, Mrs. Jo proposed that she should learn how to do it nicely,
and Nursey had an apt pupil in bandaging, plastering, and fomenting. The
boys began to call her "Dr. Giddy-gaddy," and she liked it so well that
Mrs. Jo one day said to the Professor,

"Fritz, I see what we can do for that child. She wants something to live
for even now, and will be one of the sharp, strong, discontented women
if she does not have it. Don't let us snub her restless little nature,
but do our best to give her the work she likes, and by and by persuade
her father to let her study medicine. She will make a capital doctor,
for she has courage, strong nerves, a tender heart, and an intense love
and pity for the weak and suffering."

Mr. Bhaer smiled at first, but agreed to try, and gave Nan an
herb-garden, teaching her the various healing properties of the plants
she tended, and letting her try their virtues on the children in
the little illnesses they had from time to time. She learned fast,
remembered well, and showed a sense and interest most encouraging to
her Professor, who did not shut his door in her face because she was a
little woman.

She was thinking of this, as she sat in the willow that day, and when
Daisy said in her gentle way,

"I love to keep house, and mean to have a nice one for Demi when we grow
up and live together."

Nan replied with decision

"Well, I haven't got any brother, and I don't want any house to fuss
over. I shall have an office, with lots of bottles and drawers and
pestle things in it, and I shall drive round in a horse and chaise and
cure sick people. That will be such fun."

"Ugh! how can you bear the bad-smelling stuff and the nasty little
powders and castor-oil and senna and hive syrup?" cried Daisy, with a
shudder.

"I shan't have to take any, so I don't care. Besides, they make people
well, and I like to cure folks. Didn't my sage-tea make Mother Bhaer's
headache go away, and my hops stop Ned's toothache in five hours? So
now!"

"Shall you put leeches on people, and cut off legs and pull out teeth?"
asked Daisy, quaking at the thought.

"Yes, I shall do every thing; I don't care if the people are all smashed
up, I shall mend them. My grandpa was a doctor, and I saw him sew a
great cut in a man's cheek, and I held the sponge, and wasn't frightened
a bit, and Grandpa said I was a brave girl."

"How could you? I'm sorry for sick people, and I like to nurse them,
but it makes my legs shake so I have to run away. I'm not a brave girl,"
sighed Daisy.

"Well, you can be my nurse, and cuddle my patients when I have given
them the physic and cut off their legs," said Nan, whose practice was
evidently to be of the heroic kind.

"Ship ahoy! Where are you, Nan?" called a voice from below.

"Here we are."

"Ay, ay!" said the voice, and Emil appeared holding one hand in the
other, with his face puckered up as if in pain.

"Oh, what's the matter?" cried Daisy, anxiously.

"A confounded splinter in my thumb. Can't get it out. Take a pick at it,
will you, Nanny?"

"It's in very deep, and I haven't any needle," said Nan, examining a
tarry thumb with interest.

"Take a pin," said Emil, in a hurry.

"No, it's too big and hasn't got a sharp point."

Here Daisy, who had dived into her pocket, presented a neat little
housewife with four needles in it.

"You are the Posy who always has what we want," said Emil; and Nan
resolved to have a needle-book in her own pocket henceforth, for just
such cases as this were always occurring in her practice.

Daisy covered her eyes, but Nan probed and picked with a steady hand,
while Emil gave directions not down in any medical work or record.

"Starboard now! Steady, boys, steady! Try another tack. Heave ho! there
she is!"

"Suck it," ordered the Doctor, surveying the splinter with an
experienced eye.

"Too dirty," responded the patient, shaking his bleeding hand.

"Wait; I'll tie it up if you have got a handkerchief."

"Haven't; take one of those rags down there."

"Gracious! no, indeed; they are doll's clothes," cried Daisy,
indignantly.

"Take one of mine; I'd like to have you," said Nan; and swinging himself
down, Emil caught up the first "rag" he saw. It happened to be the
frilled skirt; but Nan tore it up without a murmur; and when the royal
petticoat was turned into a neat little bandage, she dismissed her
patient with the command,

"Keep it wet, and let it alone; then it will heal right up, and not be
sore."

"What do you charge?" asked the Commodore, laughing.

"Nothing; I keep a 'spensary; that is a place where poor people are
doctored free gratis for nothing," explained Nan, with an air.

"Thank you, Doctor Giddy-gaddy. I'll always call you in when I come
to grief;" and Emil departed, but looked back to say for one good turn
deserves another "Your duds are blowing away, Doctor."

Forgiving the disrespectful word, "duds," the ladies hastily descended,
and, gathering up their wash, retired to the house to fire up the little
stove, and go to ironing.

A passing breath of air shook the old willow, as if it laughed softly
at the childish chatter which went on in the nest, and it had hardly
composed itself when another pair of birds alighted for a confidential
twitter.

"Now, I'll tell you the secret," began Tommy, who was "swellin' wisibly"
with the importance of his news.

"Tell away," answered Nat, wishing he had brought his fiddle, it was so
shady and quiet here.

"Well, we fellows were talking over the late interesting case of
circumstantial evidence," said Tommy, quoting at random from a speech
Franz had made at the club, "and I proposed giving Dan something to
make up for our suspecting him, to show our respect, and so on, you know
something handsome and useful, that he could keep always and be proud
of. What do you think we chose?"

"A butterfly-net; he wants one ever so much," said Nat, looking a little
disappointed, for he meant to get it himself.

"No, sir; it's to be a microscope, a real swell one, that we see
what-do-you-call-'ems in water with, and stars, and ant-eggs, and all
sorts of games, you know. Won't it be a jolly good present?" said Tommy,
rather confusing microscopes and telescopes in his remarks.

"Tip-top! I'm so glad! Won't it cost a heap, though?" cried Nat, feeling
that his friend was beginning to be appreciated.

"Of course it will; but we are all going to give something. I headed the
paper with my five dollars; for if it is done at all, it must be done
handsome."

"What! all of it? I never did see such a generous chap as you are;" and
Nat beamed upon him with sincere admiration.

"Well, you see, I've been so bothered with my property, that I'm tired
of it, and don't mean to save up any more, but give it away as I go
along, and then nobody will envy me, or want to steal it, and I shan't
be suspecting folks and worrying about my old cash," replied Tommy, on
whom the cares and anxieties of a millionaire weighed heavily.

"Will Mr. Bhaer let you do it?"

"He thought it was a first-rate plan, and said that some of the best men
he knew preferred to do good with their money instead of laying it up to
be squabbled over when they died."

"Your father is rich; does he do that way?"

"I'm not sure; he gives me all I want; I know that much. I'm going to
talk to him about it when I go home. Anyhow, I shall set him a good
example;" and Tommy was so serious, that Nat did not dare to laugh, but
said, respectfully,

"You will be able to do ever so much with your money, won't you?"

"So Mr. Bhaer said, and he promised to advise me about useful ways of
spending it. I'm going to begin with Dan; and next time I get a dollar
or so, I shall do something for Dick, he's such a good little chap, and
only has a cent a week for pocket-money. He can't earn much, you know;
so I'm going to kind of see to him;" and good-hearted Tommy quite longed
to begin.

"I think that's a beautiful plan, and I'm not going to try to buy a
fiddle any more; I'm going to get Dan his net all myself, and if there
is any money left, I'll do something to please poor Billy. He's fond
of me, and though he isn't poor, he'd like some little thing from me,
because I can make out what he wants better than the rest of you."
And Nat fell to wondering how much happiness could be got out of his
precious three dollars.

"So I would. Now come and ask Mr. Bhaer if you can't go in town with me
on Monday afternoon, so you can get the net, while I get the microscope.
Franz and Emil are going too, and we'll have a jolly time larking round
among the shops."

The lads walked away arm-in-arm, discussing the new plans with droll
importance, yet beginning already to feel the sweet satisfaction which
comes to those who try, no matter how humbly, to be earthly providences
to the poor and helpless, and gild their mite with the gold of charity
before it is laid up where thieves cannot break through and steal.

"Come up and rest while we sort the leaves; it's so cool and pleasant
here," said Demi, as he and Dan came sauntering home from a long walk in
the woods.

"All right!" answered Dan, who was a boy of few words, and up they went.

"What makes birch leaves shake so much more than the others?" asked
inquiring Demi, who was always sure of an answer from Dan.

"They are hung differently. Don't you see the stem where it joins the
leaf is sort of pinched one way, and where it joins the twig, it is
pinched another. This makes it waggle with the least bit of wind, but
the elm leaves hang straight, and keep stiller."

"How curious! will this do so?" and Demi held up a sprig of acacia,
which he had broken from a little tree on the lawn, because it was so
pretty.

"No; that belongs to the sort that shuts up when you touch it. Draw your
finger down the middle of the stem, and see if the leaves don't curl
up," said Dan, who was examining a bit of mica.

Demi tried it, and presently the little leaves did fold together, till
the spray showed a single instead of a double line of leaves.

"I like that; tell me about the others. What do these do?" asked Demi,
taking up a new branch.

"Feed silk-worms; they live on mulberry leaves, till they begin to spin
themselves up. I was in a silk-factory once, and there were rooms full
of shelves all covered with leaves, and worms eating them so fast that
it made a rustle. Sometimes they eat so much they die. Tell that to
Stuffy," and Dan laughed, as he took up another bit of rock with a
lichen on it.

"I know one thing about this mullein leaf: the fairies use them for
blankets," said Demi, who had not quite given up his faith in the
existence of the little folk in green.

"If I had a microscope, I'd show you something prettier than fairies,"
said Dan, wondering if he should ever own that coveted treasure. "I knew
an old woman who used mullein leaves for a night-cap because she had
face-ache. She sewed them together, and wore it all the time."

"How funny! was she your grandmother?"

"Never had any. She was a queer old woman, and lived alone in a little
tumble-down house with nineteen cats. Folks called her a witch, but she
wasn't, though she looked like an old rag-bag. She was real kind to me
when I lived in that place, and used to let me get warm at her fire when
the folks at the poorhouse were hard on me."

"Did you live in a poorhouse?"

"A little while. Never mind that I didn't mean to speak of it;" and Dan
stopped short in his unusual fit of communicativeness.

"Tell about the cats, please," said Demi, feeling that he had asked an
unpleasant question, and sorry for it.

"Nothing to tell; only she had a lot of 'em, and kept 'em in a barrel
nights; and I used to go and tip over the barrel sometimes, and let 'em
out all over the house, and then she'd scold, and chase 'em and put 'em
in again, spitting and yowling like fury."

"Was she good to them?" asked Demi, with a hearty child's laugh,
pleasant to hear.

"Guess she was. Poor old soul! she took in all the lost and sick cats in
the town; and when anybody wanted one they went to Marm Webber, and she
let 'em pick any kind and color they wanted, and only asked ninepence,
she was glad to have her pussies get a good home."

"I should like to see Marm Webber. Could I, if I went to that place?"

"She's dead. All my folks are," said Dan, briefly.

"I'm sorry;" and Demi sat silent a minute, wondering what subject would
be safe to try next. He felt delicate about speaking of the departed
lady, but was very curious about the cats, and could not resist asking
softly,

"Did she cure the sick ones?"

"Sometimes. One had a broken leg, and she tied it up to a stick, and it
got well; and another had fits, and she doctored it with yarbs till
it was cured. But some of 'em died, and she buried 'em; and when they
couldn't get well, she killed 'em easy."

"How?" asked Demi, feeling that there was a peculiar charm about this
old woman, and some sort of joke about the cats, because Dan was smiling
to himself.

"A kind lady, who was fond of cats, told her how, and gave her some
stuff, and sent all her own pussies to be killed that way. Marm used
to put a sponge wet with ether, in the bottom of an old boot, then poke
puss in head downwards. The ether put her to sleep in a jiffy, and she
was drowned in warm water before she woke up."

"I hope the cats didn't feel it. I shall tell Daisy about that. You have
known a great many interesting things, haven't you?" asked Demi, and
fell to meditating on the vast experience of a boy who had run away more
than once, and taken care of himself in a big city.

"Wish I hadn't sometimes."

"Why? Don't remembering them feel good?"

"No."

"It's very singular how hard it is to manage your mind," said Demi,
clasping his hands round his knees, and looking up at the sky as if for
information upon his favorite topic.

"Devilish hard no, I don't mean that;" and Dan bit his lips, for the
forbidden word slipped out in spite of him, and he wanted to be more
careful with Demi than with any of the other boys.

"I'll play I didn't hear it," said Demi; "and you won't do it again, I'm
sure."

"Not if I can help it. That's one of the things I don't want to
remember. I keep pegging away, but it don't seem to do much good;" and
Dan looked discouraged.

"Yes, it does. You don't say half so many bad words as you used to; and
Aunt Jo is pleased, because she said it was a hard habit to break up."

"Did she?" and Dan cheered up a bit.

"You must put swearing away in your fault-drawer, and lock it up; that's
the way I do with my badness."

"What do you mean?" asked Dan, looking as if he found Demi almost as
amusing as a new sort of cockchafer or beetle.

"Well, it's one of my private plays, and I'll tell you, but I think
you'll laugh at it," began Demi, glad to hold forth on this congenial
subject. "I play that my mind is a round room, and my soul is a little
sort of creature with wings that lives in it. The walls are full of
shelves and drawers, and in them I keep my thoughts, and my goodness and
badness, and all sorts of things. The goods I keep where I can see
them, and the bads I lock up tight, but they get out, and I have to
keep putting them in and squeezing them down, they are so strong. The
thoughts I play with when I am alone or in bed, and I make up and do
what I like with them. Every Sunday I put my room in order, and talk
with the little spirit that lives there, and tell him what to do. He is
very bad sometimes, and won't mind me, and I have to scold him, and take
him to Grandpa. He always makes him behave, and be sorry for his faults,
because Grandpa likes this play, and gives me nice things to put in the
drawers, and tells me how to shut up the naughties. Hadn't you better
try that way? It's a very good one;" and Demi looked so earnest and full
of faith, that Dan did not laugh at his quaint fancy, but said, soberly,

"I don't think there is a lock strong enough to keep my badness shut up.
Any way my room is in such a clutter I don't know how to clear it up."

"You keep your drawers in the cabinet all spandy nice; why can't you do
the others?"

"I ain't used to it. Will you show me how?" and Dan looked as if
inclined to try Demi's childish way of keeping a soul in order.

"I'd love to, but I don't know how, except to talk as Grandpa does. I
can't do it good like him, but I'll try."

"Don't tell any one; only now and then we'll come here and talk things
over, and I'll pay you for it by telling all I know about my sort of
things. Will that do?" and Dan held out his big, rough hand.

Demi gave his smooth, little hand readily, and the league was made;
for in the happy, peaceful world where the younger boy lived, lions
and lambs played together, and little children innocently taught their
elders.

"Hush!" said Dan, pointing toward the house, as Demi was about to
indulge in another discourse on the best way of getting badness down,
and keeping it down; and peeping from their perch, they saw Mrs. Jo
strolling slowly along, reading as she went, while Teddy trotted behind
her, dragging a little cart upside down.

"Wait till they see us," whispered Demi, and both sat still as the pair
came nearer, Mrs. Jo so absorbed in her book that she would have walked
into the brook if Teddy had not stopped her by saying,

"Marmar, I wanter fis."

Mrs. Jo put down the charming book which she had been trying to read for
a week, and looked about her for a fishing-pole, being used to making
toys out of nothing. Before she had broken one from the hedge, a
slender willow bough fell at her feet; and, looking up, she saw the boys
laughing in the nest.

"Up! up!" cried Teddy, stretching his arms and flapping his skirts as if
about to fly.

"I'll come down and you come up. I must go to Daisy now;" and Demi
departed to rehearse the tale of the nineteen cats, with the exciting
boot-and-barrel episodes.

Teddy was speedily whisked up; and then Dan said, laughing, "Come, too;
there's plenty of room. I'll lend you a hand."

Mrs. Jo glanced over her shoulder, but no one was in sight; and rather
liking the joke of the thing, she laughed back, saying, "Well, if you
won't mention it, I think I will;" and with two nimble steps was in the
willow.

"I haven't climbed a tree since I was married. I used to be very fond
of it when I was a girl," she said, looking well-pleased with her shady
perch.

"Now, you read if you want to, and I'll take care of Teddy," proposed
Dan, beginning to make a fishing-rod for impatient Baby.

"I don't think I care about it now. What were you and Demi at up here?"
asked Mrs. Jo, thinking, from the sober look on Dan's face, that he had
something on his mind.

"Oh! we were talking. I'd been telling him about leaves and things, and
he was telling me some of his queer plays. Now, then, Major, fish away;"
and Dan finished off his work by putting a big blue fly on the bent pin
which hung at the end of the cord he had tied to the willow-rod.

Teddy leaned down from the tree, and was soon wrapt up in watching
for the fish which he felt sure would come. Dan held him by his little
petticoats, lest he should take a "header" into the brook, and Mrs. Jo
soon won him to talk by doing so herself.

"I am so glad you told Demi about 'leaves and things;' it is just what
he needs; and I wish you would teach him, and take him to walk with
you."

"I'd like to, he is so bright; but--"

"But what?"

"I didn't think you'd trust me."

"Why not?"

"Well, Demi is so kind of precious, and so good, and I'm such a bad lot,
I thought you'd keep him away from me."

"But you are not a 'bad lot,' as you say; and I do trust you, Dan,
entirely, because you honestly try to improve, and do better and better
every week."

"Really?" and Dan looked up at her with the cloud of despondency lifting
from his face.

"Yes; don't you feel it?"

"I hoped so, but I didn't know."

"I have been waiting and watching quietly, for I thought I'd give you a
good trial first; and if you stood it, I would give you the best reward
I had. You have stood it well; and now I'm going to trust not only Demi,
but my own boy, to you, because you can teach them some things better
than any of us."

"Can I?" and Dan looked amazed at the idea.

"Demi has lived among older people so much that he needs just what you
have knowledge of common things, strength, and courage. He thinks you
are the bravest boy he ever saw, and admires your strong way of doing
things. Then you know a great deal about natural objects, and can tell
him more wonderful tales of birds, and bees, and leaves, and animals,
than his story-books give him; and, being true, these stories will teach
and do him good. Don't you see now how much you can help him, and why I
like to have him with you?"

"But I swear sometimes, and might tell him something wrong. I wouldn't
mean to, but it might slip out, just as 'devil' did a few minutes ago,"
said Dan, anxious to do his duty, and let her know his shortcomings.

"I know you try not to say or do any thing to harm the little fellow,
and here is where I think Demi will help you, because he is so innocent
and wise in his small way, and has what I am trying to give you, dear,
good principles. It is never too early to try and plant them in a child,
and never too late to cultivate them in the most neglected person. You
are only boys yet; you can teach one another. Demi will unconsciously
strengthen your moral sense, you will strengthen his common sense, and I
shall feel as if I had helped you both."

Words could not express how pleased and touched Dan was by this
confidence and praise. No one had ever trusted him before, no one had
cared to find out and foster the good in him, and no one had suspected
how much there was hidden away in the breast of the neglected boy, going
fast to ruin, yet quick to feel and value sympathy and help. No honor
that he might earn hereafter would ever be half so precious as the right
to teach his few virtues and small store of learning to the child
whom he most respected; and no more powerful restraint could have been
imposed upon him than the innocent companion confided to his care. He
found courage now to tell Mrs. Jo of the plan already made with Demi,
and she was glad that the first step had been so naturally taken. Every
thing seemed to be working well for Dan, and she rejoiced over him,
because it had seemed a hard task, yet, working on with a firm belief in
the possibility of reformation in far older and worse subjects than he,
there had come this quick and hopeful change to encourage her. He felt
that he had friends now and a place in the world, something to live and
work for, and, though he said little, all that was best and bravest in a
character made old by a hard experience responded to the love and faith
bestowed on him, and Dan's salvation was assured.

Their quiet talk was interrupted by a shout of delight from Teddy, who,
to the surprise of every one, did actually catch a trout where no trout
had been seen for years. He was so enchanted with his splendid success
that he insisted on showing his prize to the family before Asia cooked
it for supper; so the three descended and went happily away together,
all satisfied with the work of that half hour.

Ned was the next visitor to the tree, but he only made a short stay,
sitting there at his ease while Dick and Dolly caught a pailful of
grasshoppers and crickets for him. He wanted to play a joke on Tommy,
and intended to tuck up a few dozen of the lively creatures in his bed,
so that when Bangs got in he would speedily tumble out again, and pass
a portion of the night in chasing "hopper-grasses" round the room. The
hunt was soon over, and having paid the hunters with a few peppermints
apiece Ned retired to make Tommy's bed.

For an hour the old willow sighed and sung to itself, talked with the
brook, and watched the lengthening shadows as the sun went down. The
first rosy color was touching its graceful branches when a boy came
stealing up the avenue, across the lawn, and, spying Billy by the
brook-side, went to him, saying, in a mysterious tone,

"Go and tell Mr. Bhaer I want to see him down here, please. Don't let
any one hear."

Billy nodded and ran off, while the boy swung himself up into the tree,
and sat there looking anxious, yet evidently feeling the charm of the
place and hour. In five minutes, Mr. Bhaer appeared, and, stepping up on
the fence, leaned into the nest, saying, kindly,

"I am glad to see you, Jack; but why not come in and meet us all at
once?"

"I wanted to see you first, please, sir. Uncle made me come back. I know
I don't deserve any thing, but I hope the fellows won't be hard upon
me."

Poor Jack did not get on very well, but it was evident that he was sorry
and ashamed, and wanted to be received as easily as possible; for his
Uncle had thrashed him well and scolded him soundly for following the
example he himself set. Jack had begged not to be sent back, but the
school was cheap, and Mr. Ford insisted, so the boy returned as quietly
as possible, and took refuge behind Mr. Bhaer.

"I hope not, but I can't answer for them, though I will see that they
are not unjust. I think, as Dan and Nat have suffered so much, being
innocent, you should suffer something, being guilty. Don't you?" asked
Mr. Bhaer, pitying Jack, yet feeling he deserved punishment for a fault
which had so little excuse.

"I suppose so, but I sent Tommy's money back, and I said I was sorry,
isn't that enough?" said Jack, rather sullenly; for the boy who could do
so mean a thing was not brave enough to bear the consequences well.

"No; I think you should ask pardon of all three boys, openly and
honestly. You cannot expect them to respect and trust you for a time,
but you can live down this disgrace if you try, and I will help you.
Stealing and lying are detestable sins, and I hope this will be a lesson
to you. I am glad you are ashamed, it is a good sign; bear it patiently,
and do your best to earn a better reputation."

"I'll have an auction, and sell off all my goods dirt cheap," said Jack,
showing his repentance in the most characteristic way.

"I think it would be better to give them away, and begin on a new
foundation. Take 'Honesty is the best policy' for your motto, and live
up to it in act, and word, and thought, and though you don't make a cent
of money this summer, you will be a rich boy in the autumn," said Mr.
Bhaer, earnestly.

It was hard, but Jack consented, for he really felt that cheating didn't
pay, and wanted to win back the friendship of the boys. His heart clung
to his possessions, and he groaned inwardly at the thought of actually
giving away certain precious things. Asking pardon publicly was easy
compared to this; but then he began to discover that certain other
things, invisible, but most valuable, were better property than knives,
fish-hooks, or even money itself. So he decided to buy up a little
integrity, even at a high price, and secure the respect of his
playmates, though it was not a salable article.

"Well, I'll do it," he said, with a sudden air of resolution, which
pleased Mr. Bhaer.

"Good! and I'll stand by you. Now come and begin at once."

And Father Bhaer led the bankrupt boy back into the little world, which
received him coldly at first, but slowly warmed to him, when he showed
that he had profited by the lesson, and was sincerely anxious to go into
a better business with a new stock-in-trade.



CHAPTER XVI. TAMING THE COLT

"What in the world is that boy doing?" said Mrs. Jo to herself, as she
watched Dan running round the half-mile triangle as if for a wager.
He was all alone, and seemed possessed by some strange desire to run
himself into a fever, or break his neck; for, after several rounds, he
tried leaping walls, and turning somersaults up the avenue, and finally
dropped down on the grass before the door as if exhausted.

"Are you training for a race, Dan?" asked Mrs. Jo, from the window where
she sat.

He looked up quickly, and stopped panting to answer, with a laugh,

"No; I'm only working off my steam."

"Can't you find a cooler way of doing it? You will be ill if you tear
about so in such warm weather," said Mrs. Jo, laughing also, as she
threw him out a great palm-leaf fan.

"Can't help it. I must run somewhere," answered Dan, with such an odd
expression in his restless eyes, that Mrs. Jo was troubled, and asked,
quickly,

"Is Plumfield getting too narrow for you?"

"I wouldn't mind if it was a little bigger. I like it though; only the
fact is the devil gets into me sometimes, and then I do want to bolt."

The words seemed to come against his will, for he looked sorry the
minute they were spoken, and seemed to think he deserved a reproof for
his ingratitude. But Mrs. Jo understood the feeling, and though sorry to
see it, she could not blame the boy for confessing it. She looked at him
anxiously, seeing how tall and strong he had grown, how full of energy
his face was, with its eager eyes and resolute mouth; and remembering
the utter freedom he had known for years before, she felt how even the
gentle restraint of this home would weigh upon him at times when the old
lawless spirit stirred in him. "Yes," she said to herself, "my wild hawk
needs a larger cage; and yet, if I let him go, I am afraid he will be
lost. I must try and find some lure strong enough to keep him safe."

"I know all about it," she added, aloud. "It is not 'the devil,' as you
call it, but the very natural desire of all young people for liberty. I
used to feel just so, and once, I really did think for a minute that I
would bolt."

"Why didn't you?" said Dan, coming to lean on the low window-ledge, with
an evident desire to continue the subject.

"I knew it was foolish, and love for my mother kept me at home."

"I haven't got any mother," began Dan.

"I thought you had now," said Mrs. Jo, gently stroking the rough hair
off his hot forehead.

"You are no end good to me, and I can't ever thank you enough, but it
just isn't the same, is it?" and Dan looked up at her with a wistful,
hungry look that went to her heart.

"No, dear, it is not the same, and never can be. I think an own mother
would have been a great deal to you. But as that cannot be, you must
try to let me fill her place. I fear I have not done all I ought, or you
would not want to leave me," she added, sorrowfully.

"Yes, you have!" cried Dan, eagerly. "I don't want to go, and I won't
go, if I can help it; but every now and then I feel as if I must burst
out somehow. I want to run straight ahead somewhere, to smash something,
or pitch into somebody. Don't know why, but I do, and that's all about
it."

Dan laughed as he spoke, but he meant what he said, for he knit his
black brows, and brought down his fist on the ledge with such force,
that Mrs. Jo's thimble flew off into the grass. He brought it back, and
as she took it she held the big, brown hand a minute, saying, with a
look that showed the words cost her something,

"Well, Dan, run if you must, but don't run very far; and come back to me
soon, for I want you very much."

He was rather taken aback by this unexpected permission to play truant,
and somehow it seemed to lessen his desire to go. He did not understand
why, but Mrs. Jo did, and, knowing the natural perversity of the human
mind, counted on it to help her now. She felt instinctively that the
more the boy was restrained the more he would fret against it; but leave
him free, and the mere sense of liberty would content him, joined to the
knowledge that his presence was dear to those whom he loved best. It was
a little experiment, but it succeeded, for Dan stood silent a moment,
unconsciously picking the fan to pieces and turning the matter over
in his mind. He felt that she appealed to his heart and his honor,
and owned that he understood it by saying presently, with a mixture of
regret and resolution in his face,

"I won't go yet awhile, and I'll give you fair warning before I bolt.
That's fair, isn't it?"

"Yes, we will let it stand so. Now, I want to see if I can't find some
way for you to work off your steam better than running about the place
like a mad dog, spoiling my fans, or fighting with the boys. What can we
invent?" and while Dan tried to repair the mischief he had done, Mrs.
Jo racked her brain for some new device to keep her truant safe until he
had learned to love his lessons better.

"How would you like to be my express-man?" she said, as a sudden thought
popped into her head.

"Go into town, and do the errands?" asked Dan, looking interested at
once.

"Yes; Franz is tired of it, Silas cannot be spared just now, and Mr.
Bhaer has no time. Old Andy is a safe horse, you are a good driver, and
know your way about the city as well as a postman. Suppose you try it,
and see if it won't do most as well to drive away two or three times a
week as to run away once a month."

"I'd like it ever so much, only I must go alone and do it all myself. I
don't want any of the other fellows bothering round," said Dan, taking
to the new idea so kindly that he began to put on business airs already.

"If Mr. Bhaer does not object you shall have it all your own way. I
suppose Emil will growl, but he cannot be trusted with horses, and you
can. By the way, to-morrow is market-day, and I must make out my list.
You had better see that the wagon is in order, and tell Silas to have
the fruit and vegetables ready for mother. You will have to be up early
and get back in time for school, can you do that?"

"I'm always an early bird, so I don't mind," and Dan slung on his jacket
with despatch.

"The early bird got the worm this time, I'm sure," said Mrs. Jo,
merrily.

"And a jolly good worm it is," answered Dan, as he went laughing away to
put a new lash to the whip, wash the wagon, and order Silas about with
all the importance of a young express-man.

"Before he is tired of this I will find something else and have it ready
when the next restless fit comes on," said Mrs. Jo to herself, as she
wrote her list with a deep sense of gratitude that all her boys were not
Dans.

Mr. Bhaer did not entirely approve of the new plan, but agreed to give
it a trial, which put Dan on his mettle, and caused him to give up
certain wild plans of his own, in which the new lash and the long
hill were to have borne a part. He was up and away very early the next
morning, heroically resisting the temptation to race with the milkmen
going into town. Once there, he did his errands carefully, to Mr.
Bhaer's surprise and Mrs. Jo's great satisfaction. The Commodore did
growl at Dan's promotion, but was pacified by a superior padlock to his
new boat-house, and the thought that seamen were meant for higher honors
than driving market-wagons and doing family errands. So Dan filled
his new office well and contentedly for weeks, and said no more about
bolting. But one day Mr. Bhaer found him pummelling Jack, who was
roaring for mercy under his knee.

"Why, Dan, I thought you had given up fighting," he said, as he went to
the rescue.

"We ain't fighting, we are only wrestling," answered Dan, leaving off
reluctantly.

"It looks very much like it, and feels like it, hey, Jack?" said Mr.
Bhaer, as the defeated gentleman got upon his legs with difficulty.

"Catch me wrestling with him again. He's most knocked my head off,"
snarled Jack, holding on to that portion of his frame as if it really
was loose upon his shoulders.

"The fact is, we began in fun, but when I got him down I couldn't help
pounding him. Sorry I hurt you, old fellow," explained Dan, looking
rather ashamed of himself.

"I understand. The longing to pitch into somebody was so strong you
couldn't resist. You are a sort of Berserker, Dan, and something to
tussle with is as necessary to you as music is to Nat," said Mr. Bhaer,
who knew all about the conversation between the boy and Mrs. Jo.

"Can't help it. So if you don't want to be pounded you'd better keep out
of the way," answered Dan, with a warning look in his black eyes that
made Jack sheer off in haste.

"If you want something to wrestle with, I will give you a tougher
specimen than Jack," said Mr. Bhaer; and, leading the way to the
wood-yard, he pointed out certain roots of trees that had been grubbed
up in the spring, and had been lying there waiting to be split.

"There, when you feel inclined to maltreat the boys, just come and work
off your energies here, and I'll thank you for it."

"So I will;" and, seizing the axe that lay near Dan hauled out a tough
root, and went at it so vigorously, that the chips flew far and wide,
and Mr. Bhaer fled for his life.

To his great amusement, Dan took him at his word, and was often seen
wrestling with the ungainly knots, hat and jacket off, red face, and
wrathful eyes; for he got into royal rages over some of his adversaries,
and swore at them under his breath till he had conquered them, when he
exulted, and marched off to the shed with an armful of gnarled oak-wood
in triumph. He blistered his hands, tired his back, and dulled the axe,
but it did him good, and he got more comfort out of the ugly roots than
any one dreamed, for with each blow he worked off some of the pent-up
power that would otherwise have been expended in some less harmless way.

"When this is gone I really don't know what I shall do," said Mrs. Jo
to herself, for no inspiration came, and she was at the end of her
resources.

But Dan found a new occupation for himself, and enjoyed it some time
before any one discovered the cause of his contentment. A fine young
horse of Mr. Laurie's was kept at Plumfield that summer, running loose
in a large pasture across the brook. The boys were all interested in the
handsome, spirited creature, and for a time were fond of watching him
gallop and frisk with his plumey tail flying, and his handsome head
in the air. But they soon got tired of it, and left Prince Charlie to
himself. All but Dan, he never tired of looking at the horse, and seldom
failed to visit him each day with a lump of sugar, a bit of bread, or
an apple to make him welcome. Charlie was grateful, accepted his
friendship, and the two loved one another as if they felt some tie
between them, inexplicable but strong. In whatever part of the wide
field he might be, Charlie always came at full speed when Dan whistled
at the bars, and the boy was never happier than when the beautiful,
fleet creature put its head on his shoulder, looking up at him with fine
eyes full of intelligent affection.

"We understand one another without any palaver, don't we, old fellow?"
Dan would say, proud of the horse's confidence, and, so jealous of his
regard, that he told no one how well the friendship prospered, and never
asked anybody but Teddy to accompany him on these daily visits.

Mr. Laurie came now and then to see how Charlie got on, and spoke of
having him broken to harness in the autumn.

"He won't need much taming, he is such a gentle, fine-tempered brute. I
shall come out and try him with a saddle myself some day," he said, on
one of these visits.

"He lets me put a halter on him, but I don't believe he will bear a
saddle even if you put it on," answered Dan, who never failed to be
present when Charlie and his master met.

"I shall coax him to bear it, and not mind a few tumbles at first. He
has never been harshly treated, so, though he will be surprised at the
new performance, I think he won't be frightened, and his antics will do
no harm."

"I wonder what he would do," said Dan to himself, as Mr. Laurie went
away with the Professor, and Charlie returned to the bars, from which he
had retired when the gentlemen came up.

A daring fancy to try the experiment took possession of the boy as he
sat on the topmost rail with the glossy back temptingly near him.
Never thinking of danger, he obeyed the impulse, and while Charlie
unsuspectingly nibbled at the apple he held, Dan quickly and quietly
took his seat. He did not keep it long, however, for with an astonished
snort, Charlie reared straight up, and deposited Dan on the ground. The
fall did not hurt him, for the turf was soft, and he jumped up, saying,
with a laugh,

"I did it anyway! Come here, you rascal, and I'll try it again."

But Charlie declined to approach, and Dan left him resolving to succeed
in the end; for a struggle like this suited him exactly. Next time he
took a halter, and having got it on, he played with the horse for a
while, leading him to and fro, and putting him through various antics
till he was a little tired; then Dan sat on the wall and gave him bread,
but watched his chance, and getting a good grip of the halter, slipped
on to his back. Charlie tried the old trick, but Dan held on, having had
practice with Toby, who occasionally had an obstinate fit, and tried to
shake off his rider. Charlie was both amazed and indignant; and after
prancing for a minute, set off at a gallop, and away went Dan heels over
head. If he had not belonged to the class of boys who go through all
sorts of dangers unscathed, he would have broken his neck; as it was, he
got a heavy fall, and lay still collecting his wits, while Charlie tore
round the field tossing his head with every sign of satisfaction at
the discomfiture of his rider. Presently it seemed to occur to him that
something was wrong with Dan, and, being of a magnanimous nature, he
went to see what the matter was. Dan let him sniff about and perplex
himself for a few minutes; then he looked up at him, saying, as
decidedly as if the horse could understand,

"You think you have beaten, but you are mistaken, old boy; and I'll ride
you yet see if I don't."

He tried no more that day, but soon after attempted a new method of
introducing Charlie to a burden. He strapped a folded blanket on his
back, and then let him race, and rear, and roll, and fume as much as
he liked. After a few fits of rebellion Charlie submitted, and in a few
days permitted Dan to mount him, often stopped short to look round, as
if he said, half patiently, half reproachfully, "I don't understand it,
but I suppose you mean no harm, so I permit the liberty."

Dan patted and praised him, and took a short turn every day, getting
frequent falls, but persisting in spite of them, and longing to try a
saddle and bridle, but not daring to confess what he had done. He had
his wish, however, for there had been a witness of his pranks who said a
good word for him.

"Do you know what that chap has ben doin' lately?" asked Silas of his
master, one evening, as he received his orders for the next day.

"Which boy?" said Mr. Bhaer, with an air of resignation, expecting some
sad revelation.

"Dan, he's ben a breaking the colt, sir, and I wish I may die if he
ain't done it," answered Silas, chuckling.

"How do you know?"

"Wal, I kinder keep an eye on the little fellers, and most gen'lly know
what they're up to; so when Dan kep going off to the paster, and coming
home black and blue, I mistrusted that suthing was goin' on. I didn't
say nothin', but I crep up into the barn chamber, and from there I see
him goin' through all manner of games with Charlie. Blest if he warn't
throwed time and agin, and knocked round like a bag o' meal. But the
pluck of that boy did beat all, and he 'peared to like it, and kep on as
ef bound to beat."

"But, Silas, you should have stopped it the boy might have been killed,"
