I kept my head for use of Holy Church;
And see you, we shall have to dodge again,
And let the Pope trample our rights, and plunge
His foreign fist into our island Church
To plump the leaner pouch of Italy.
For a time, for a time.
Why? that these statutes may be put in force,
And that his fan may thoroughly purge his floor.

BONNER. So then you hold the Pope--

GARDINER.                          I hold the Pope!
What do I hold him? what do I hold the Pope?
Come, come, the morsel stuck--this Cardinal's fault--
I have gulpt it down. I am wholly for the Pope,
Utterly and altogether for the Pope,
The Eternal Peter of the changeless chair,
Crown'd slave of slaves, and mitred king of kings,
God upon earth! what more? what would you have?
Hence, let's be gone.

    _Enter_ USHER.

USHER.                Well that you be not gone,
My Lord. The Queen, most wroth at first with you,
Is now content to grant you full forgiveness,
So that you crave full pardon of the Legate.
I am sent to fetch you.

GARDINER.               Doth Pole yield, sir, ha!
Did you hear 'em? were you by?

USHER.                         I cannot tell you,
His bearing is so courtly-delicate;
And yet methinks he falters: their two Graces
Do so dear-cousin and royal-cousin him,
So press on him the duty which as Legate
He owes himself, and with such royal smiles--

GARDINER. Smiles that burn men. Bonner, it will be carried.
He falters, ha? 'fore God, we change and change;
Men now are bow'd and old, the doctors tell you,
At three-score years; then if we change at all
We needs must do it quickly; it is an age
Of brief life, and brief purpose, and brief patience,
As I have shown to-day. I am sorry for it
If Pole be like to turn. Our old friend Cranmer,
Your more especial love, hath turn'd so often,
He knows not where he stands, which, if this pass,
We two shall have to teach him; let 'em look to it,
Cranmer and Hooper, Ridley and Latimer,
Rogers and Ferrar, for their time is come,
Their hour is hard at hand, their 'dies Irae'
Their 'dies Illa,' which will test their sect.
I feel it but a duty--you will find in it
Pleasure as well as duty, worthy Bonner,--
To test their sect. Sir, I attend the Queen
To crave most humble pardon--of her most
Royal, Infallible, Papal Legate-cousin.

                                  [_Exeunt_.



SCENE V.--WOODSTOCK.

ELIZABETH, LADY IN WAITING.


ELIZABETH. So they have sent poor Courtenay over sea.

LADY. And banish'd us to Woodstock, and the fields.
The colours of our Queen are green and white,
These fields are only green, they make me gape.

ELIZABETH. There's whitethorn, girl.

  LADY. Ay, for an hour in May.
But court is always May, buds out in masques,
Breaks into feather'd merriments, and flowers
In silken pageants. Why do they keep us here?
Why still suspect your Grace?

ELIZABETH.                    Hard upon both.
    [_Writes on the window with a diamond_.

    Much suspected, of me
    Nothing proven can be.
          Quoth Elizabeth, prisoner.

LADY. What hath your Highness written?

ELIZABETH.                             A true rhyme.

LADY. Cut with a diamond; so to last like truth.

ELIZABETH. Ay, if truth last.

LADY.                         But truth, they say, will out,
So it must last. It is not like a word,
That comes and goes in uttering.

ELIZABETH.                       Truth, a word!
The very Truth and very Word are one.
But truth of story, which I glanced at, girl,
Is like a word that comes from olden days,
And passes thro' the peoples: every tongue
Alters it passing, till it spells and speaks
Quite other than at first.

LADY.                      I do not follow.

ELIZABETH. How many names in the long sweep of time
That so foreshortens greatness, may but hang
On the chance mention of some fool that once
Brake bread with us, perhaps: and my poor chronicle
Is but of glass. Sir Henry Bedingfield
May split it for a spite.

LADY.                     God grant it last,
And witness to your Grace's innocence,
Till doomsday melt it.

ELIZABETH.             Or a second fire,
Like that which lately crackled underfoot
And in this very chamber, fuse the glass,
And char us back again into the dust
We spring from. Never peacock against rain
Scream'd as you did for water.

LADY.                          And I got it.
I woke Sir Henry--and he's true to you
I read his honest horror in his eyes.

ELIZABETH. Or true to you?

LADY.                      Sir Henry Bedingfield!
I will have no man true to me, your Grace,
But one that pares his nails; to me? the clown!

ELIZABETH. Out, girl! you wrong a noble gentleman.

LADY. For, like his cloak, his manners want the nap
And gloss of court; but of this fire he says.
Nay swears, it was no wicked wilfulness,
Only a natural chance.

ELIZABETH.             A chance--perchance
One of those wicked wilfuls that men make,
Nor shame to call it nature. Nay, I know
They hunt my blood. Save for my daily range
Among the pleasant fields of Holy Writ
I might despair. But there hath some one come;
The house is all in movement. Hence, and see.

                                     [_Exit_ LADY.

MILKMAID (_singing without_).

    Shame upon you, Robin,
        Shame upon you now!
    Kiss me would you? with my hands
        Milking the cow?
        Daisies grow again,
        Kingcups blow again,
    And you came and kiss'd me milking the cow.

    Robin came behind me,
        Kiss'd me well I vow;
    Cuff him could I? with my hands
        Milking the cow?
        Swallows fly again,
        Cuckoos cry again,
    And you came and kiss'd me milking the cow.

    Come, Robin, Robin,
        Come and kiss me now;
    Help it can I? with my hands
        Milking the cow?
        Ringdoves coo again,
        All things woo again.
    Come behind and kiss me milking the cow!

ELIZABETH. Right honest and red-cheek'd; Robin was violent,
And she was crafty--a sweet violence,
And a sweet craft. I would I were a milkmaid,
To sing, love, marry, churn, brew, bake, and die,
Then have my simple headstone by the church,
And all things lived and ended honestly.
I could not if I would. I am Harry's daughter:
Gardiner would have my head. They are not sweet,
The violence and the craft that do divide
The world of nature; what is weak must lie;
The lion needs but roar to guard his young;
The lapwing lies, says 'here' when they are there.
Threaten the child; 'I'll scourge you if you did it:'
What weapon hath the child, save his soft tongue,
To say 'I did not?' and my rod's the block.
I never lay my head upon the pillow
But that I think, 'Wilt thou lie there to-morrow?'
How oft the falling axe, that never fell,
Hath shock'd me back into the daylight truth
That it may fall to-day! Those damp, black, dead
Nights in the Tower; dead--with the fear of death
Too dead ev'n for a death-watch! Toll of a bell,
Stroke of a clock, the scurrying of a rat
Affrighted me, and then delighted me,
For there was life--And there was life in death--
The little murder'd princes, in a pale light,
Rose hand in hand, and whisper'd, 'come away!
The civil wars are gone for evermore:
Thou last of all the Tudors, come away!
With us is peace!' The last? It was a dream;
I must not dream, not wink, but watch. She has gone,
Maid Marian to her Robin--by and by
Both happy! a fox may filch a hen by night,
And make a morning outcry in the yard;
But there's no Renard here to 'catch her tripping.'
Catch me who can; yet, sometime I have wish'd
That I were caught, and kill'd away at once
Out of the flutter. The gray rogue, Gardiner,
Went on his knees, and pray'd me to confess
In Wyatt's business, and to cast myself
Upon the good Queen's mercy; ay, when, my Lord?
God save the Queen! My jailor--

    _Enter_ SIR HENRY BEDINGFIELD.

BEDINGFIELD. One, whose bolts,
That jail you from free life, bar you from death.
There haunt some Papist ruffians hereabout
Would murder you.

ELIZABETH.        I thank you heartily, sir,
But I am royal, tho' your prisoner,
And God hath blest or cursed me with a nose--
Your boots are from the horses.

BEDINGFIELD.                    Ay, my Lady.
When next there comes a missive from the Queen
It shall be all my study for one hour
To rose and lavender my horsiness,
Before I dare to glance upon your Grace.

ELIZABETH. A missive from the Queen: last time she wrote,
I had like to have lost my life: it takes my breath:
O God, sir, do you look upon your boots,
Are you so small a man? Help me: what think you,
Is it life or death.

BEDINGFIELD.         I thought not on my boots;
The devil take all boots were ever made
Since man went barefoot. See, I lay it here,
For I will come no nearer to your Grace;

    [_Laying down the letter_.

And, whether it bring you bitter news or sweet,
And God hath given your Grace a nose, or not,
I'll help you, if I may.

ELIZABETH.               Your pardon, then;
It is the heat and narrowness of the cage
That makes the captive testy; with free wing
The world were all one Araby. Leave me now,
Will you, companion to myself, sir?

BEDINGFIELD.                        Will I?
With most exceeding willingness, I will;
You know I never come till I be call'd.
                                    [_Exit_.

ELIZABETH. It lies there folded: is there venom in it?
A snake--and if I touch it, it may sting.
Come, come, the worst!
Best wisdom is to know the worst at once.    [_Reads:_

'It is the King's wish, that you should wed Prince Philibert of Savoy.
You are to come to Court on the instant; and think of this in your
coming.    'MARY THE QUEEN.'

Think I have many thoughts;
I think there may be birdlime here for me;
I think they fain would have me from the realm;
I think the Queen may never bear a child;
I think that I may be some time the Queen,
Then, Queen indeed: no foreign prince or priest
Should fill my throne, myself upon the steps.
I think I will not marry anyone,
Specially not this landless Philibert
Of Savoy; but, if Philip menace me,
I think that I will play with Philibert,
As once the Holy Father did with mine,
Before my father married my good mother,--
For fear of Spain.

    _Enter_ LADY.

LADY.             O Lord! your Grace, your Grace,
I feel so happy: it seems that we shall fly
These bald, blank fields, and dance into the sun
That shines on princes.

ELIZABETH.              Yet, a moment since,
I wish'd myself the milkmaid singing here,
To kiss and cuff among the birds and flowers--
A right rough life and healthful.

LADY.                             But the wench
Hath her own troubles; she is weeping now;
For the wrong Robin took her at her word.
Then the cow kick'd, and all her milk was spilt.
Your Highness such a milkmaid?

ELIZABETH.                     I had kept
My Robins and my cows in sweeter order
Had I been such.

LADY (_slyly_).  And had your Grace a Robin?

ELIZABETH. Come, come, you are chill here; you want the sun
That shines at court; make ready for the journey.
Pray God, we 'scape the sunstroke. Ready at once.

                                          [_Exeunt_.



SCENE VI.--LONDON. A ROOM IN THE PALACE.

LORD PETRE _and_ LORD WILLIAM HOWARD.


PETRE. You cannot see the Queen. Renard denied her,
Ev'n now to me.

HOWARD.         Their Flemish go-between
And all-in-all. I came to thank her Majesty
For freeing my friend Bagenhall from the Tower;
A grace to me! Mercy, that herb-of-grace,
Flowers now but seldom.

PETRE.                  Only now perhaps.
Because the Queen hath been three days in tears
For Philip's going--like the wild hedge-rose
Of a soft winter, possible, not probable,
However you have prov'n it.

HOWARD.                     I must see her.

    _Enter_ RENARD.

RENARD. My Lords, you cannot see her Majesty.

HOWARD. Why then the King! for I would have him bring it
Home to the leisure wisdom of his Queen,
Before he go, that since these statutes past,
Gardiner out-Gardiners Gardiner in his heat,
Bonner cannot out-Bonner his own self--
Beast!--but they play with fire as children do,
And burn the house. I know that these are breeding
A fierce resolve and fixt heart-hate in men
Against the King, the Queen, the Holy Father,
The faith itself. Can I not see him?

RENARD.                              Not now.
And in all this, my Lord, her Majesty
Is flint of flint, you may strike fire from her,
Not hope to melt her. I will give your message.

                          [_Exeunt_ PETRE _and_ HOWARD.

    _Enter_ PHILIP _(musing)_

PHILIP. She will not have Prince Philibert of Savoy,
I talk'd with her in vain--says she will live
And die true maid--a goodly creature too.
Would _she_ had been the Queen! yet she must have him;
She troubles England: that she breathes in England
Is life and lungs to every rebel birth
That passes out of embryo.
                           Simon Renard!
This Howard, whom they fear, what was he saying?

RENARD. What your imperial father said, my liege,
To deal with heresy gentlier. Gardiner burns,
And Bonner burns; and it would seem this people
Care more for our brief life in their wet land,
Than yours in happier Spain. I told my Lord
He should not vex her Highness; she would say
These are the means God works with, that His church
May flourish.

PHILIP.       Ay, sir, but in statesmanship
To strike too soon is oft to miss the blow.
Thou knowest I bad my chaplain, Castro, preach
Against these burnings.

RENARD.                 And the Emperor
Approved you, and when last he wrote, declared
His comfort in your Grace that you were bland
And affable to men of all estates,
In hope to charm them from their hate of Spain.

PHILIP. In hope to crush all heresy under Spain.
But, Renard, I am sicker staying here
Than any sea could make me passing hence,
Tho' I be ever deadly sick at sea.
So sick am I with biding for this child.
Is it the fashion in this clime for women
To go twelve months in bearing of a child?
The nurses yawn'd, the cradle gaped, they led
Processions, chanted litanies, clash'd their bells,
Shot off their lying cannon, and her priests
Have preach'd, the fools, of this fair prince to come;
Till, by St. James, I find myself the fool.
Why do you lift your eyebrow at me thus?

RENARD. I never saw your Highness moved till now.

PHILIP. So weary am I of this wet land of theirs,
And every soul of man that breathes therein.

RENARD. My liege, we must not drop the mask before
The masquerade is over--

PHILIP.                 --Have I dropt it?
I have but shown a loathing face to you,
Who knew it from the first.

    _Enter_ MARY.

MARY (_aside_).             With Renard. Still
Parleying with Renard, all the day with Renard,
And scarce a greeting all the day for me--
And goes to-morrow.
                       [_Exit_ MARY.

PHILIP (_to_ RENARD, _who advances to him_).
                    Well, sir, is there more?

RENARD (_who has perceived the QUEEN_).
May Simon Renard speak a single word?

PHILIP. Ay.

RENARD.     And be forgiven for it?

PHILIP.                             Simon Renard
Knows me too well to speak a single word
That could not be forgiven.

RENARD.                     Well, my liege,
Your Grace hath a most chaste and loving wife.

PHILIP. Why not? The Queen of Philip should be chaste.

RENARD. Ay, but, my Lord, you know what Virgil sings,
Woman is various and most mutable.

PHILIP. She play the harlot! never.

RENARD.                             No, sire, no,
Not dream'd of by the rabidest gospeller.
There was a paper thrown into the palace,
'The King hath wearied of his barren bride.'
She came upon it, read it, and then rent it,
With all the rage of one who hates a truth
He cannot but allow. Sire, I would have you--
What should I say, I cannot pick my words--
Be somewhat less--majestic to your Queen.

PHILIP. Am I to change my manners, Simon Renard,
Because these islanders are brutal beasts?
Or would you have me turn a sonneteer,
And warble those brief-sighted eyes of hers?

RENARD. Brief-sighted tho' they be, I have seen them, sire,
When you perchance were trifling royally
With some fair dame of court, suddenly fill
With such fierce fire--had it been fire indeed
It would have burnt both speakers.

PHILIP.                            Ay, and then?

RENARD. Sire, might it not be policy in some matter
Of small importance now and then to cede
A point to her demand?

PHILIP.                Well, I am going.

RENARD. For should her love when you are gone, my liege,
Witness these papers, there will not be wanting
Those that will urge her injury--should her love--
And I have known such women more than one--
Veer to the counterpoint, and jealousy
Hath in it an alchemic force to fuse
Almost into one metal love and hate,--
And she impress her wrongs upon her Council,
And these again upon her Parliament--
We are not loved here, and would be then perhaps
Not so well holpen in our wars with France,
As else we might be--here she comes.

    _Enter_ MARY.

MARY.                                O Philip!
Nay, must you go indeed?

PHILIP.                  Madam, I must.

MARY. The parting of a husband and a wife
Is like the cleaving of a heart; one half
Will flutter here, one there.

PHILIP.                       You say true, Madam.

MARY. The Holy Virgin will not have me yet
Lose the sweet hope that I may bear a prince.
If such a prince were born and you not here!

PHILIP. I should be here if such a prince were born.

MARY. But must you go?

PHILIP.                Madam, you know my father,
Retiring into cloistral solitude
To yield the remnant of his years to heaven,
Will shift the yoke and weight of all the world
From off his neck to mine. We meet at Brussels.
But since mine absence will not be for long,
Your Majesty shall go to Dover with me,
And wait my coming back.

MARY.                    To Dover? no,
I am too feeble. I will go to Greenwich,
So you will have me with you; and there watch
All that is gracious in the breath of heaven
Draw with your sails from our poor land, and pass
And leave me, Philip, with my prayers for you.

PHILIP. And doubtless I shall profit by your prayers.

MARY. Methinks that would you tarry one day more
(The news was sudden) I could mould myself
To bear your going better; will you do it?

PHILIP. Madam, a day may sink or save a realm.

MARY. A day may save a heart from breaking too.

PHILIP. Well, Simon Renard, shall we stop a day?

RENARD. Your Grace's business will not suffer, sire,
For one day more, so far as I can tell.

PHILIP. Then one day more to please her Majesty.

MARY. The sunshine sweeps across my life again.
O if I knew you felt this parting, Philip,
As I do!

PHILIP.  By St. James I do protest,
Upon the faith and honour of a Spaniard,
I am vastly grieved to leave your Majesty.
Simon, is supper ready?

RENARD.                 Ay, my liege,
I saw the covers laying.

PHILIP.                  Let us have it.

                                   [_Exeunt_.




ACT IV.


SCENE I.--A ROOM IN THE PALACE.

MARY, CARDINAL POLE.


MARY. What have you there?

POLE.                      So please your Majesty,
A long petition from the foreign exiles
To spare the life of Cranmer. Bishop Thirlby,
And my Lord Paget and Lord William Howard,
Crave, in the same cause, hearing of your Grace.
Hath he not written himself--infatuated--
To sue you for his life?

MARY.                    His life? Oh, no;
Not sued for that--he knows it were in vain.
But so much of the anti-papal leaven
Works in him yet, he hath pray'd me not to sully
Mine own prerogative, and degrade the realm
By seeking justice at a stranger's hand
Against my natural subject. King and Queen,
To whom he owes his loyalty after God,
Shall these accuse him to a foreign prince?
Death would not grieve him more. I cannot be
True to this realm of England and the Pope
Together, says the heretic.

POLE.                       And there errs;
As he hath ever err'd thro' vanity.
A secular kingdom is but as the body
Lacking a soul; and in itself a beast.
The Holy Father in a secular kingdom
Is as the soul descending out of heaven
Into a body generate.

MARY.                 Write to him, then.

POLE. I will.

MARY.         And sharply, Pole.

POLE.                            Here come the Cranmerites!

    _Enter_ THIRLBY, LORD PAGET, LORD WILLIAM HOWARD.

HOWARD. Health to your Grace! Good morrow, my Lord Cardinal;
We make our humble prayer unto your Grace
That Cranmer may withdraw to foreign parts,
Or into private life within the realm.
In several bills and declarations, Madam,
He hath recanted all his heresies.

PAGET. Ay, ay; if Bonner have not forged the bills.    [_Aside_.

MARY. Did not More die, and Fisher? he must burn.

HOWARD. He hath recanted, Madam.

MARY.                            The better for him.
He burns in Purgatory, not in Hell.

HOWARD. Ay, ay, your Grace; but it was never seen
That any one recanting thus at full,
As Cranmer hath, came to the fire on earth.

MARY. It will be seen now, then.

THIRLBY.                         O Madam, Madam!
I thus implore you, low upon my knees,
To reach the hand of mercy to my friend.
I have err'd with him; with him I have recanted.
What human reason is there why my friend
Should meet with lesser mercy than myself?

MARY. My Lord of Ely, this. After a riot
We hang the leaders, let their following go.
Cranmer is head and father of these heresies,
New learning as they call it; yea, may God
Forget me at most need when I forget
Her foul divorce--my sainted mother--No!--

HOWARD. Ay, ay, but mighty doctors doubted there.
The Pope himself waver'd; and more than one
Row'd in that galley--Gardiner to wit,
Whom truly I deny not to have been
Your faithful friend and trusty councillor.
Hath not your Highness ever read his book.
His tractate upon True Obedience,
Writ by himself and Bonner?

MARY.                       I will take
Such order with all bad, heretical books
That none shall hold them in his house and live,
Henceforward. No, my Lord.

HOWARD.                    Then never read it.
The truth is here. Your father was a man
Of such colossal kinghood, yet so courteous,
Except when wroth, you scarce could meet his eye
And hold your own; and were he wroth indeed,
You held it less, or not at all. I say,
Your father had a will that beat men down;
Your father had a brain that beat men down--

POLE. Not me, my Lord.

HOWARD.                No, for you were not here;
You sit upon this fallen Cranmer's throne;
And it would more become you, my Lord Legate,
To join a voice, so potent with her Highness,
To ours in plea for Cranmer than to stand
On naked self-assertion.

MARY.                    All your voices
Are waves on flint. The heretic must burn.

HOWARD. Yet once he saved your Majesty's own life;
Stood out against the King in your behalf.
At his own peril.

MARY.             I know not if he did;
And if he did I care not, my Lord Howard.
My life is not so happy, no such boon,
That I should spare to take a heretic priest's,
Who saved it or not saved. Why do you vex me?

PAGET. Yet to save Cranmer were to serve the Church,
Your Majesty's I mean; he is effaced,
Self-blotted out; so wounded in his honour,
He can but creep down into some dark hole
Like a hurt beast, and hide himself and die;
But if you burn him,--well, your Highness knows
The saying, 'Martyr's blood--seed of the Church.'

MARY. Of the true Church; but his is none, nor will be.
You are too politic for me, my Lord Paget.
And if he have to live so loath'd a life,
It were more merciful to burn him now.

THIRLBY. O yet relent. O, Madam, if you knew him
As I do, ever gentle, and so gracious,
With all his learning--

MARY.                  Yet a heretic still.
His learning makes his burning the more just.

THIRLBY. So worshipt of all those that came across him;
The stranger at his hearth, and all his house--

MARY. His children and his concubine, belike.

THIRLBY. To do him any wrong was to beget
A kindness from him, for his heart was rich,
Of such fine mould, that if you sow'd therein
The seed of Hate, it blossom'd Charity.

POLE. 'After his kind it costs him nothing,' there's
An old world English adage to the point.
These are but natural graces, my good Bishop,
Which in the Catholic garden are as flowers,
But on the heretic dunghill only weeds.

HOWARD. Such weeds make dunghills gracious.

MARY.                                       Enough, my Lords.
It is God's will, the Holy Father's will,
And Philip's will, and mine, that he should burn.
He is pronounced anathema.

HOWARD.                    Farewell, Madam,
God grant you ampler mercy at your call
Than you have shown to Cranmer.
                                   [_Exeunt_ LORDS.

POLE.                           After this,
Your Grace will hardly care to overlook
This same petition of the foreign exiles
For Cranmer's life.

MARY.               Make out the writ to-night.

                                          [_Exeunt_.



SCENE II.--OXFORD. CRANMER IN PRISON.


CRANMER. Last night, I dream'd the faggots were alight,
And that myself was fasten'd to the stake, I
And found it all a visionary flame,
Cool as the light in old decaying wood;
And then King Harry look'd from out a cloud,
And bad me have good courage; and I heard
An angel cry 'There is more joy in Heaven,'--
And after that, the trumpet of the dead.
                                    [_Trumpets without_.
Why, there are trumpets blowing now: what is it?

    _Enter_ FATHER COLE.

COLE. Cranmer, I come to question you again;
Have you remain'd in the true Catholic faith
I left you in?

CRANMER.       In the true Catholic faith,
By Heaven's grace, I am more and more confirm'd.
Why are the trumpets blowing, Father Cole?

COLE. Cranmer, it is decided by the Council
That you to-day should read your recantation
Before the people in St. Mary's Church.
And there be many heretics in the town,
Who loathe you for your late return to Rome,
And might assail you passing through the street,
And tear you piecemeal: so you have a guard.

CRANMER. Or seek to rescue me. I thank the Council.

COLE. Do you lack any money?

CRANMER.                     Nay, why should I?
The prison fare is good enough for me.

COLE. Ay, but to give the poor.

CRANMER.                        Hand it me, then!
I thank you.

COLE.        For a little space, farewell;
Until I see you in St. Mary's Church.
                                 [_Exit_ COLE.

CRANMER. It is against all precedent to burn
One who recants; they mean to pardon me.
To give the poor--they give the poor who die.
Well, burn me or not burn me I am fixt;
It is but a communion, not a mass:
A holy supper, not a sacrifice;
No man can make his Maker--Villa Garcia.

    _Enter_ VILLA GARCIA.

VILLA GARCIA. Pray you write out this paper for me, Cranmer.

CRANMER. Have I not writ enough to satisfy you?

VILLA GARCIA. It is the last.

CRANMER.                      Give it me, then.
                                           [_He writes_.

VILLA GARCIA.                                   Now sign.

CRANMER. I have sign'd enough, and I will sign no more.

VILLA GARCIA. It is no more than what you have sign'd already,
The public form thereof.

CRANMER.                 It may be so;
I sign it with my presence, if I read it.

VILLA GARCIA. But this is idle of you. Well, sir, well,
You are to beg the people to pray for you;
Exhort them to a pure and virtuous life;
Declare the Queen's right to the throne; confess
Your faith before all hearers; and retract
That Eucharistic doctrine in your book.
Will you not sign it now?

CRANMER.                  No, Villa Garcia,
I sign no more. Will they have mercy on me?

VILLA GARCIA. Have you good hopes of mercy!
So, farewell.
                 [_Exit_.

CRANMER. Good hopes, not theirs, have I that I am fixt,
Fixt beyond fall; however, in strange hours,
After the long brain-dazing colloquies,
And thousand-times recurring argument
Of those two friars ever in my prison,
When left alone in my despondency,
Without a friend, a book, my faith would seem
Dead or half-drown'd, or else swam heavily
Against the huge corruptions of the Church,
Monsters of mistradition, old enough
To scare me into dreaming, 'what am I,
Cranmer, against whole ages?' was it so,
Or am I slandering my most inward friend,
To veil the fault of my most outward foe--
The soft and tremulous coward in the flesh?
O higher, holier, earlier, purer church,
I have found thee and not leave thee any more.
It is but a communion, not a mass--
No sacrifice, but a life-giving feast!
(_Writes_.) So, so; this will I say--thus will I pray.
                                           [_Puts up the paper_.

    _Enter_ BONNER.

BONNER. Good day, old friend; what, you look somewhat worn;
And yet it is a day to test your health
Ev'n at the best: I scarce have spoken with you
Since when?--your degradation. At your trial
Never stood up a bolder man than you;
You would not cap the Pope's commissioner--
Your learning, and your stoutness, and your heresy,
Dumbfounded half of us. So, after that,
We had to dis-archbishop and unlord,
And make you simple Cranmer once again.
The common barber dipt your hair, and I
Scraped from your finger-points the holy oil;
And worse than all, you had to kneel to _me_;
Which was not pleasant for you, Master Cranmer.
Now you, that would not recognise the Pope,
And you, that would not own the Real Presence,
Have found a real presence in the stake,
Which frights you back into the ancient faith:
And so you have recanted to the Pope.
How are the mighty fallen, Master Cranmer!

CRANMER. You have been more fierce against the Pope than I;
But why fling back the stone he strikes me with?
    [_Aside_.
O Bonner, if I ever did you kindness--
Power hath been given you to try faith by fire--
Pray you, remembering how yourself have changed,
Be somewhat pitiful, after I have gone,
To the poor flock--to women and to children--
That when I was archbishop held with me.

BONNER. Ay--gentle as they call you--live or die!
Pitiful to this pitiful heresy?
I must obey the Queen and Council, man.
Win thro' this day with honour to yourself,
And I'll say something for you--so--good-bye.
                                         [_Exit_.

CRANMER. This hard coarse man of old hath crouch'd to me
Till I myself was half ashamed for him.

    _Enter_ THIRLBY.

Weep not, good Thirlby.

THIRLBY.                Oh, my Lord, my Lord!
My heart is no such block as Bonner's is:
Who would not weep?

CRANMER.            Why do you so my--lord me,
Who am disgraced?

THIRLBY.          On earth; but saved in heaven
By your recanting.

CRANMER.           Will they burn me, Thirlby?

THIRLBY. Alas, they will; these burnings will not help
The purpose of the faith; but my poor voice
Against them is a whisper to the roar
Of a spring-tide.

CRANMER.          And they will surely burn me?

THIRLBY. Ay; and besides, will have you in the church
Repeat your recantation in the ears
Of all men, to the saving of their souls,
Before your execution. May God help you
Thro' that hard hour!

CRANMER.              And may God bless you, Thirlby!
Well, they shall hear my recantation there.

                                 [_Exit_ THIRLBY.

Disgraced, dishonour'd!--not by them, indeed,
By mine own self--by mine own hand!
O thin-skinn'd hand and jutting veins, 'twas you
That sign'd the burning of poor Joan of Kent;
But then she was a witch. You have written much,
But you were never raised to plead for Frith,
Whose dogmas I have reach'd: he was deliver'd
To the secular arm to burn; and there was Lambert;
Who can foresee himself? truly these burnings,
As Thirlby says, are profitless to the burners,
And help the other side. You shall burn too,
Burn first when I am burnt.
Fire--inch by inch to die in agony! Latimer
Had a brief end--not Ridley. Hooper burn'd
Three-quarters of an hour. Will my faggots
Be wet as his were? It is a day of rain.
I will not muse upon it.
My fancy takes the burner's part, and makes
The fire seem even crueller than it is.
No, I not doubt that God will give me strength,
Albeit I have denied him.

    _Enter_ SOTO _and_ VILLA GARCIA.

VILLA GARCIA.             We are ready
To take you to St. Mary's, Master Cranmer.

CRANMER. And I: lead on; ye loose me from my bonds.

                                           [_Exeunt_.



SCENE III.--ST. MARY'S CHURCH.

COLE _in the Pulpit_, LORD WILLIAMS OF THAME _presiding_. LORD WILLIAM
HOWARD, LORD PAGET, _and others_. CRANMER _enters between_ SOTO _and_
VILLA GARCIA, _and the whole Choir strike up_ 'Nunc Dimittis.' CRANMER
_is set upon a Scaffold before the people_.


COLE. Behold him--
              [_A pause: people in the foreground_.

PEOPLE. Oh, unhappy sight!

FIRST PROTESTANT. See how the tears run down his fatherly face.

SECOND PROTESTANT. James, didst thou ever see a carrion crow Stand
watching a sick beast before he dies?

FIRST PROTESTANT. Him perch'd up there? I wish some thunderbolt Would
make this Cole a cinder, pulpit and all.

COLE. Behold him, brethren: he hath cause to weep!--
So have we all: weep with him if ye will,
Yet--
It is expedient for one man to die,
Yea, for the people, lest the people die.
Yet wherefore should he die that hath return'd
To the one Catholic Universal Church,
Repentant of his errors?

PROTESTANT _murmurs_. Ay, tell us that.

COLE. Those of the wrong side will despise the man,
Deeming him one that thro' the fear of death
Gave up his cause, except he seal his faith
In sight of all with flaming martyrdom.

CRANMER. Ay.

COLE.        Ye hear him, and albeit there may seem
According to the canons pardon due
To him that so repents, yet are there causes
Wherefore our Queen and Council at this time
Adjudge him to the death. He hath been a traitor,
A shaker and confounder of the realm;
And when the King's divorce was sued at Rome,
He here, this heretic metropolitan,
As if he had been the Holy Father, sat
And judged it. Did I call him heretic?
A huge heresiarch! never was it known
That any man so writing, preaching so,
So poisoning the Church, so long continuing,
Hath found his pardon; therefore he must die,
For warning and example.
                         Other reasons
There be for this man's ending, which our Queen
And Council at this present deem it not
Expedient to be known.

PROTESTANT _murmurs_.  I warrant you.

COLE. Take therefore, all, example by this man,
For if our Holy Queen not pardon him,
Much less shall others in like cause escape,
That all of you, the highest as the lowest,
May learn there is no power against the Lord.
There stands a man, once of so high degree,
Chief prelate of our Church, archbishop, first
In Council, second person in the realm,
Friend for so long time of a mighty King;
And now ye see downfallen and debased
From councillor to caitiff--fallen so low,
The leprous flutterings of the byway, scum
And offal of the city would not change
Estates with him; in brief, so miserable,
There is no hope of better left for him,
No place for worse.
                    Yet, Cranmer, be thou glad.
This is the work of God. He is glorified
In thy conversion: lo! thou art reclaim'd;
He brings thee home: nor fear but that to-day
Thou shalt receive the penitent thief's award,
And be with Christ the Lord in Paradise.
Remember how God made the fierce fire seem
To those three children like a pleasant dew.
Remember, too,
The triumph of St. Andrew on his cross,
The patience of St. Lawrence in the fire.
Thus, if thou call on God and all the saints,
God will beat down the fury of the flame,
Or give thee saintly strength to undergo.
And for thy soul shall masses here be sung
By every priest in Oxford. Pray for him.

CRANMER. Ay, one and all, dear brothers, pray for me;
Pray with one breath, one heart, one soul for me.

COLE. And now, lest anyone among you doubt
The man's conversion and remorse of heart,
Yourselves shall hear him speak. Speak, Master Cranmer,
Fulfil your promise made me, and proclaim
Your true undoubted faith, that all may hear.

CRANMER. And that I will. O God, Father of Heaven!
O Son of God, Redeemer of the world!
O Holy Ghost! proceeding from them both,
Three persons and one God, have mercy on me,
Most miserable sinner, wretched man.
I have offended against heaven and earth
More grievously than any tongue can tell.
Then whither should I flee for any help?
I am ashamed to lift my eyes to heaven,
And I can find no refuge upon earth.
Shall I despair then?--God forbid! O God,
For thou art merciful, refusing none
That come to Thee for succour, unto Thee,
Therefore, I come; humble myself to Thee;
Saying, O Lord God, although my sins be great,
For thy great mercy have mercy! O God the Son,
Not for slight faults alone, when thou becamest
Man in the Flesh, was the great mystery wrought;
O God the Father, not for little sins
Didst thou yield up thy Son to human death;
But for the greatest sin that can be sinn'd,
Yea, even such as mine, incalculable,
Unpardonable,--sin against the light,
The truth of God, which I had proven and known.
Thy mercy must be greater than all sin.
Forgive me, Father, for no merit of mine,
But that Thy name by man be glorified,
And Thy most blessed Son's, who died for man.

Good people, every man at time of death
Would fain set forth some saying that may live
After his death and better humankind;
For death gives life's last word a power to live,
And, like the stone-cut epitaph, remain
After the vanish'd voice, and speak to men.
God grant me grace to glorify my God!
And first I say it is a grievous case,
Many so dote upon this bubble world,
Whose colours in a moment break and fly,
They care for nothing else. What saith St. John:
'Love of this world is hatred against God.'
Again, I pray you all that, next to God,
You do unmurmuringly and willingly
Obey your King and Queen, and not for dread
Of these alone, but from the fear of Him
Whose ministers they be to govern you.
Thirdly, I pray you all to live together
Like brethren; yet what hatred Christian men
Bear to each other, seeming not as brethren,
But mortal foes! But do you good to all
As much as in you lieth. Hurt no man more
Than you would harm your loving natural brother
Of the same roof, same breast. If any do,
Albeit he think himself at home with God,
Of this be sure, he is whole worlds away.

PROTESTANT _murmurs_. What sort of brothers then be those that lust
To burn each other?

WILLIAMS.           Peace among you, there!

CRANMER. Fourthly, to those that own exceeding wealth,
Remember that sore saying spoken once
By Him that was the truth, 'How hard it is
For the rich man to enter into Heaven;'
Let all rich men remember that hard word.
I have not time for more: if ever, now
Let them flow forth in charity, seeing now
The poor so many, and all food so dear.
Long have I lain in prison, yet have heard
Of all their wretchedness. Give to the poor,
Ye give to God. He is with us in the poor.

And now, and forasmuch as I have come
To the last end of life, and thereupon
Hangs all my past, and all my life to be,
Either to live with Christ in Heaven with joy,
Or to be still in pain with devils in hell;
And, seeing in a moment, I shall find
                                       [_Pointing upwards_.
Heaven or else hell ready to swallow me,
                                  [_Pointing downwards_.
I shall declare to you my very faith
Without all colour.

COLE.               Hear him, my good brethren.

CRANMER. I do believe in God, Father of all;
In every article of the Catholic faith,
And every syllable taught us by our Lord,
His prophets, and apostles, in the Testaments,
Both Old and New.

COLE.           Be plainer, Master Cranmer.

CRANMER. And now I come to the great cause that weighs
Upon my conscience more than anything
Or said or done in all my life by me;
For there be writings I have set abroad
Against the truth I knew within my heart,
Written for fear of death, to save my life,
If that might be; the papers by my hand
Sign'd since my degradation--by this hand
                     [_Holding out his right hand_.
Written and sign'd--I here renounce them all;
And, since my hand offended, having written
Against my heart, my hand shall first be burnt,
So I may come to the fire.
                              [_Dead silence_.

    PROTESTANT _murmurs_.

FIRST PROTESTANT. I knew it would be so.

SECOND PROTESTANT.                       Our prayers are heard!

THIRD PROTESTANT. God bless him!

CATHOLIC _murmurs_.              Out upon him! out upon him!
Liar! dissembler! traitor! to the fire!

WILLIAMS (_raising his voice_).
You know that you recanted all you said
Touching the sacrament in that same book
You wrote against my Lord of Winchester;
Dissemble not; play the plain Christian man.

CRANMER. Alas, my Lord,
I have been a man loved plainness all my life;
I _did_ dissemble, but the hour has come
For utter truth and plainness; wherefore, I say,
I hold by all I wrote within that book.
Moreover,
As for the Pope I count him Antichrist,
With all his devil's doctrines; and refuse,
Reject him, and abhor him. I have said.

[_Cries on all sides_, 'Pull him down! Away with him!'

COLE. Ay, stop the heretic's mouth! Hale him away!

WILLIAMS. Harm him not, harm him not! have him to the fire!

    [CRANMER _goes out between Two Friars, smiling; hands are
    reached to him from the crowd_. LORD WILLIAM HOWARD _and_
    LORD PAGET _are left alone in the church_.

PAGET. The nave and aisles all empty as a fool's jest!
No, here's Lord William Howard. What, my Lord,
You have not gone to see the burning?

HOWARD.                               Fie!
To stand at ease, and stare as at a show,
And watch a good man burn. Never again.
I saw the deaths of Latimer and Ridley.
Moreover, tho' a Catholic, I would not,
For the pure honour of our common nature,
Hear what I might--another recantation
Of Cranmer at the stake.

PAGET.                   You'd not hear that.
He pass'd out smiling, and he walk'd upright;
His eye was like a soldier's, whom the general
He looks to and he leans on as his God,
Hath rated for some backwardness and bidd'n him
Charge one against a thousand, and the man
Hurls his soil'd life against the pikes and dies.

HOWARD. Yet that he might not after all those papers
Of recantation yield again, who knows?

PAGET. Papers of recantation! Think you then
That Cranmer read all papers that he sign'd?
Or sign'd all those they tell us that he sign'd?
Nay, I trow not: and you shall see, my Lord,
That howsoever hero-like the man
Dies in the fire, this Bonner or another
Will in some lying fashion misreport
His ending to the glory of their church.
And you saw Latimer and Ridley die?
Latimer was eighty, was he not? his best
Of life was over then.

HOWARD.                His eighty years
Look'd somewhat crooked on him in his frieze;
But after they had stript him to his shroud,
He stood upright, a lad of twenty-one,
And gather'd with his hands the starting flame,
And wash'd his hands and all his face therein,
Until the powder suddenly blew him dead.
Ridley was longer burning; but he died
As manfully and boldly, and, 'fore God,
I know them heretics, but right English ones.
If ever, as heaven grant, we clash with Spain,
Our Ridley-soldiers and our Latimer-sailors
Will teach her something.

PAGET.                    Your mild Legate Pole
Will tell you that the devil helpt them thro' it.
              [_A murmur of the Crowd in the distance_.
Hark, how those Roman wolfdogs howl and bay him!

HOWARD. Might it not be the other side rejoicing
In his brave end?

PAGET.            They are too crush'd, too broken,
They can but weep in silence.

HOWARD.                       Ay, ay, Paget,
They have brought it in large measure on themselves.
Have I not heard them mock the blessed Host
In songs so lewd, the beast might roar his claim
To being in God's image, more than they?
Have I not seen the gamekeeper, the groom.
Gardener, and huntsman, in the parson's place,
The parson from his own spire swung out dead,
And Ignorance crying in the streets, and all men
Regarding her? I say they have drawn the fire
On their own heads: yet, Paget, I do hold
The Catholic, if he have the greater right,
Hath been the crueller.

PAGET.                  Action and re-action,
The miserable see-saw of our child-world,
Make us despise it at odd hours, my Lord.
Heaven help that this re-action not re-act
Yet fiercelier under Queen Elizabeth,
So that she come to rule us.

HOWARD.                      The world's mad.

PAGET. My Lord, the world is like a drunken man,
Who cannot move straight to his end--but reels
Now to the right, then as far to the left,
Push'd by the crowd beside--and underfoot
An earthquake; for since Henry for a doubt--
Which a young lust had clapt upon the back,
Crying, 'Forward!'--set our old church rocking, men
Have hardly known what to believe, or whether
They should believe in anything; the currents
So shift and change, they see not how they are borne,
Nor whither. I conclude the King a beast;
Verily a lion if you will--the world
A most obedient beast and fool--myself
Half beast and fool as appertaining to it;
Altho' your Lordship hath as little of each
Cleaving to your original Adam-clay,
As may be consonant with mortality.

HOWARD. We talk and Cranmer suffers.
The kindliest man I ever knew; see, see,
I speak of him in the past. Unhappy land!
Hard-natured Queen, half-Spanish in herself,
And grafted on the hard-grain'd stock of Spain--
Her life, since Philip left her, and she lost
Her fierce desire of bearing him a child,
Hath, like a brief and bitter winter's day,
Gone narrowing down and darkening to a close.
There will be more conspiracies, I fear.

PAGET. Ay, ay, beware of France.

HOWARD.                          O Paget, Paget!
I have seen heretics of the poorer sort,
Expectant of the rack from day to day,
To whom the fire were welcome, lying chain'd
In breathless dungeons over steaming sewers,
Fed with rank bread that crawl'd upon the tongue,
And putrid water, every drop a worm,
Until they died of rotted limbs; and then
Cast on the dunghill naked, and become
Hideously alive again from head to heel,
Made even the carrion-nosing mongrel vomit
With hate and horror.

PAGET.                Nay, you sicken _me_
To hear you.

HOWARD.      Fancy-sick; these things are done,
Done right against the promise of this Queen
Twice given.

PAGET.       No faith with heretics, my Lord!
Hist! there be two old gossips--gospellers,
I take it; stand behind the pillar here;
I warrant you they talk about the burning.

    _Enter_ TWO OLD WOMEN. JOAN, _and after her_ TIB.

JOAN. Why, it be Tib!

TIB. I cum behind tha, gall, and couldn't make tha hear. Eh, the wind
and the wet! What a day, what a day! nigh upo' judgement daay loike.
Pwoaps be pretty things, Joan, but they wunt set i' the Lord's cheer
o' that daay.

JOAN. I must set down myself, Tib; it be a var waay vor my owld legs
up vro' Islip. Eh, my rheumatizy be that bad howiver be I to win to
the burnin'.

TIB. I should saay 'twur ower by now. I'd ha' been here avore, but
Dumble wur blow'd wi' the wind, and Dumble's the best milcher in
Islip.

JOAN. Our Daisy's as good 'z her.

TIB. Noa, Joan.

JOAN. Our Daisy's butter's as good'z hern.

TIB. Noa, Joan.

JOAN. Our Daisy's cheeses be better.

TIB. Noa, Joan.

JOAN. Eh, then ha' thy waay wi' me, Tib; ez thou hast wi' thy owld
man.

TIB. Ay, Joan, and my owld man wur up and awaay betimes wi' dree hard
eggs for a good pleace at the burnin'; and barrin' the wet, Hodge 'ud
ha' been a-harrowin' o' white peasen i' the outfield--and barrin' the
wind, Dumble wur blow'd wi' the wind, so 'z we was forced to stick
her, but we fetched her round at last. Thank the Lord therevore.
Dumble's the best milcher in Islip.

JOAN. Thou's thy way wi' man and beast, Tib. I wonder at tha', it
beats me! Eh, but I do know ez Pwoaps and vires be bad things; tell
'ee now, I heerd summat as summun towld summun o' owld Bishop
Gardiner's end; there wur an owld lord a-cum to dine wi' un, and a wur
so owld a couldn't bide vor his dinner, but a had to bide howsomiver,
vor 'I wunt dine,' says my Lord Bishop, says he, 'not till I hears ez
Latimer and Ridley be a-vire;' and so they bided on and on till vour
o' the clock, till his man cum in post vro' here, and tells un ez the
vire has tuk holt. 'Now,' says the Bishop, says he, 'we'll gwo to
dinner;' and the owld lord fell to 's meat wi' a will, God bless un!
but Gardiner wur struck down like by the hand o' God avore a could
taste a mossel, and a set un all a-vire, so 'z the tongue on un cum
a-lolluping out o' 'is mouth as black as a rat. Thank the Lord,
therevore.

PAGET. The fools!

TIB. Ay, Joan; and Queen Mary gwoes on a-burnin' and a-burnin', to get
her baaby born; but all her burnin's 'ill never burn out the hypocrisy
that makes the water in her. There's nought but the vire of God's hell
ez can burn out that.

JOAN. Thank the Lord, therevore.

PAGET. The fools!

TIB. A-burnin', and a-burnin', and a-makin' o' volk madder and madder;
but tek thou my word vor't, Joan,--and I bean't wrong not twice i' ten
year--the burnin' o' the owld archbishop'll burn the Pwoap out o'
this 'ere land vor iver and iver.

HOWARD. Out of the church, you brace of cursed crones, Or I will have
you duck'd! (_Women hurry out_.) Said I not right? For how should
reverend prelate or throned prince Brook for an hour such brute
malignity? Ah, what an acrid wine has Luther brew'd!

PAGET. Pooh, pooh, my Lord! poor garrulous country-wives.
Buy you their cheeses, and they'll side with you;
You cannot judge the liquor from the lees.

HOWARD. I think that in some sort we may. But see,

    _Enter_ PETERS.

Peters, my gentleman, an honest Catholic,
Who follow'd with the crowd to Cranmer's fire.
One that would neither misreport nor lie,
Not to gain paradise: no, nor if the Pope,
Charged him to do it--he is white as death.
Peters, how pale you look! you bring the smoke
Of Cranmer's burning with you.

PETERS.                        Twice or thrice
The smoke of Cranmer's burning wrapt me round.

HOWARD. Peters, you know me Catholic, but English.
Did he die bravely? Tell me that, or leave
All else untold.

PETERS.          My Lord, he died most bravely.

HOWARD. Then tell me all.

PAGET.                    Ay, Master Peters, tell us.

PETERS. You saw him how he past among the crowd;
And ever as he walk'd the Spanish friars
Still plied him with entreaty and reproach:
But Cranmer, as the helmsman at the helm
Steers, ever looking to the happy haven
Where he shall rest at night, moved to his death;
And I could see that many silent hands
Came from the crowd and met his own; and thus
When we had come where Ridley burnt with Latimer,
He, with a cheerful smile, as one whose mind
Is all made up, in haste put off the rags
They had mock'd his misery with, and all in white,
His long white beard, which he had never shaven
Since Henry's death, down-sweeping to the chain,
Wherewith they bound him to the stake, he stood
More like an ancient father of the Church,
Than heretic of these times; and still the friars
Plied him, but Cranmer only shook his head,
Or answer'd them in smiling negatives;
Whereat Lord Williams gave a sudden cry:--
'Make short! make short!' and so they lit the wood.
Then Cranmer lifted his left hand to heaven,
And thrust his right into the bitter flame;
And crying, in his deep voice, more than once,
'This hath offended--this unworthy hand!'
So held it till it all was burn'd, before
The flame had reach'd his body; I stood near--
Mark'd him--he never uttered moan of pain:
He never stirr'd or writhed, but, like a statue,
Unmoving in the greatness of the flame,
Gave up the ghost; and so past martyr-like--
Martyr I may not call him--past--but whither?
PAGET. To purgatory, man, to purgatory.

PETERS. Nay, but, my Lord, he denied purgatory.

PAGET. Why then to heaven, and God ha' mercy on him.

HOWARD. Paget, despite his fearful heresies,
I loved the man, and needs must moan for him;
O Cranmer!

PAGET.     But your moan is useless now:
Come out, my Lord, it is a world of fools.

                                      [_Exeunt_.




ACT V.


SCENE I.--LONDON. HALL IN THE PALACE.

QUEEN, SIR NICHOLAS HEATH.


HEATH. Madam,
I do assure you, that it must be look'd to:
Calais is but ill-garrison'd, in Guisnes
Are scarce two hundred men, and the French fleet
Rule in the narrow seas. It must be look'd to,
If war should fall between yourself and France;
Or you will lose your Calais.

MARY.                         It shall be look'd to;
I wish you a good morning, good Sir Nicholas:
Here is the King.
                     [_Exit_ HEATH.

    _Enter_ PHILIP.

PHILIP.           Sir Nicholas tells you true,
And you must look to Calais when I go.

MARY. Go? must you go, indeed--again--so soon?
Why, nature's licensed vagabond, the swallow,
That might live always in the sun's warm heart,
Stays longer here in our poor north than you:--
Knows where he nested--ever comes again.

PHILIP. And, Madam, so shall I.

MARY.                           O, will you? will you?
I am faint with fear that you will come no more.

PHILIP. Ay, ay; but many voices call me hence.

MARY. Voices--I hear unhappy rumours--nay,
I say not, I believe. What voices call you
Dearer than mine that should be dearest to you?
Alas, my Lord! what voices and how many?

PHILIP. The voices of Castille and Aragon,
Granada, Naples, Sicily, and Milan,--
The voices of Franche-Comte, and the Netherlands,
The voices of Peru and Mexico,
Tunis, and Oran, and the Philippines,
And all the fair spice-islands of the East.

MARY (_admiringly_).
You are the mightiest monarch upon earth,
I but a little Queen: and, so indeed,
Need you the more.

PHILIP.            A little Queen! but when
I came to wed your majesty, Lord Howard,
Sending an insolent shot that dash'd the seas
Upon us, made us lower our kingly flag
To yours of England.

MARY.                Howard is all English!
There is no king, not were he ten times king,
Ten times our husband, but must lower his flag
To that of England in the seas of England.

PHILIP. Is that your answer?

MARY.                        Being Queen of England,
I have none other.

PHILIP.            So.

MARY.                  But wherefore not
Helm the huge vessel of your state, my liege,
Here by the side of her who loves you most?

PHILIP. No, Madam, no! a candle in the sun
Is all but smoke--a star beside the moon
Is all but lost; your people will not crown me--
Your people are as cheerless as your clime;
Hate me and mine: witness the brawls, the gibbets.
Here swings a Spaniard--there an Englishman;
The peoples are unlike as their complexion;
Yet will I be your swallow and return--
But now I cannot bide.

MARY.                  Not to help _me?_
They hate _me_ also for my love to you,
My Philip; and these judgments on the land--
Harvestless autumns, horrible agues, plague--

PHILIP. The blood and sweat of heretics at the stake
Is God's best dew upon the barren field.
Burn more!

MARY.      I will, I will; and you will stay?

PHILIP. Have I not said? Madam, I came to sue
Your Council and yourself to declare war.

MARY. Sir, there are many English in your ranks
To help your battle.

PHILIP.              So far, good. I say
I came to sue your Council and yourself
To declare war against the King of France.

MARY. Not to see me?

PHILIP.              Ay, Madam, to see you.
Unalterably and pesteringly fond!    [_Aside_.
But, soon or late you must have war with France;
King Henry warms your traitors at his hearth.
Carew is there, and Thomas Stafford there.
Courtenay, belike--

MARY.              A fool and featherhead!

PHILIP. Ay, but they use his name. In brief, this Henry
Stirs up your land against you to the intent
That you may lose your English heritage.
And then, your Scottish namesake marrying
The Dauphin, he would weld France, England, Scotland,
Into one sword to hack at Spain and me.

MARY. And yet the Pope is now colleagued with France;
You make your wars upon him down in Italy:--
Philip, can that be well?

PHILIP.                   Content you, Madam;
You must abide my judgment, and my father's,
Who deems it a most just and holy war.
The Pope would cast the Spaniard out of Naples:
He calls us worse than Jews, Moors, Saracens.
The Pope has pushed his horns beyond his mitre--
Beyond his province. Now,
Duke Alva will but touch him on the horns,
And he withdraws; and of his holy head--
For Alva is true son of the true church--
No hair is harm'd. Will you not help me here?

MARY. Alas! the Council will not hear of war.
They say your wars are not the wars of England.
They will not lay more taxes on a land
So hunger-nipt and wretched; and you know
The crown is poor. We have given the church-lands back:
The nobles would not; nay, they clapt their hands
Upon their swords when ask'd; and therefore God
Is hard upon the people. What's to be done?
Sir, I will move them in your cause again,
And we will raise us loans and subsidies
Among the merchants; and Sir Thomas Gresham
Will aid us. There is Antwerp and the Jews.

PHILIP. Madam, my thanks.

MARY.                     And you will stay your going?

PHILIP. And further to discourage and lay lame
The plots of France, altho' you love her not,
You must proclaim Elizabeth your heir.
She stands between you and the Queen of Scots.

MARY. The Queen of Scots at least is Catholic.

PHILIP. Ay, Madam, Catholic; but I will not have
The King of France the King of England too.

MARY. But she's a heretic, and, when I am gone,
Brings the new learning back.

PHILIP.                       It must be done.
You must proclaim Elizabeth your heir.

MARY. Then it is done; but you will stay your going
Somewhat beyond your settled purpose?

PHILIP.                               No!

MARY. What, not one day?

PHILIP.                  You beat upon the rock.

MARY. And I am broken there.

PHILIP.                   Is this a place
To wail in, Madam? what! a public hall.
Go in, I pray you.

MARY.              Do not seem so changed.
Say go; but only say it lovingly.

PHILIP. You do mistake. I am not one to change.
I never loved you more.

MARY.                   Sire, I obey you.
Come quickly.

PHILIP.       Ay.
                     [_Exit_ MARY.

    _Enter_ COUNT DE FERIA.

FERIA (_aside_).  The Queen in tears!

PHILIP.                               Feria!
Hast thou not mark'd--come closer to mine ear--
How doubly aged this Queen of ours hath grown
Since she lost hope of bearing us a child?

FERIA. Sire, if your Grace hath mark'd it, so have I.

PHILIP. Hast thou not likewise mark'd Elizabeth,
How fair and royal--like a Queen, indeed?

FERIA. Allow me the same answer as before--
That if your Grace hath mark'd her, so have I.

PHILIP. Good, now; methinks my Queen is like enough
To leave me by and by.

FERIA.                 To leave you, sire?

PHILIP. I mean not like to live. Elizabeth--
To Philibert of Savoy, as you know,
We meant to wed her; but I am not sure
She will not serve me better--so my Queen
Would leave me--as--my wife.

FERIA.                       Sire, even so.

PHILIP. She will not have Prince Philibert of Savoy.

FERIA. No, sire.

PHILIP.          I have to pray you, some odd time,
To sound the Princess carelessly on this;
Not as from me, but as your phantasy;
And tell me how she takes it.

FERIA.                         Sire, I will.

PHILIP. I am not certain but that Philibert
Shall be the man; and I shall urge his suit
Upon the Queen, because I am not certain:
You understand, Feria.

FERIA.                 Sire, I do.

PHILIP. And if you be not secret in this matter,
You understand me there, too?

FERIA.                        Sire, I do.

PHILIP. You must be sweet and supple, like a Frenchman.
She is none of those who loathe the honeycomb.

                                      [_Exit_ FERIA.

    _Enter_ RENARD.

RENARD. My liege, I bring you goodly tidings.

PHILIP. Well?

RENARD. There _will_ be war with France, at last, my liege;
Sir Thomas Stafford, a bull-headed ass,
Sailing from France, with thirty Englishmen,
Hath taken Scarboro' Castle, north of York;
Proclaims himself protector, and affirms
The Queen has forfeited her right to reign
By marriage with an alien--other things
As idle; a weak Wyatt! Little doubt
This buzz will soon be silenced; but the Council
(I have talk'd with some already) are for war.
This the fifth conspiracy hatch'd in France;
They show their teeth upon it; and your Grace,
So you will take advice of mine, should stay
Yet for awhile, to shape and guide the event.

PHILIP. Good! Renard, I will stay then.

RENARD.                                 Also, sire,
Might I not say--to please your wife, the Queen?

PHILIP. Ay, Renard, if you care to put it so.

                                         [_Exeunt_.



SCENE II.--A ROOM IN THE PALACE.

MARY, _sitting: a rose in her hand_. LADY CLARENCE. ALICE _in the
background_.


MARY. Look! I have play'd with this poor rose so long
I have broken off the head.

LADY CLARENCE. Your Grace hath been
More merciful to many a rebel head
That should have fallen, and may rise again.

MARY. There were not many hang'd for Wyatt's rising.

LADY CLARENCE. Nay, not two hundred.

MARY.                                I could weep for them
And her, and mine own self and all the world.

LADY CLARENCE. For her? for whom, your Grace?

    _Enter_ USHER.

USHER. The Cardinal.

    _Enter_ CARDINAL POLE. (MARY _rises_.)

MARY. Reginald Pole, what news hath plagued thy heart?
What makes thy favour like the bloodless head
Fall'n on the block, and held up by the hair?
Philip?--

POLE.    No, Philip is as warm in life
As ever.

MARY.    Ay, and then as cold as ever.
Is Calais taken?

POLE.            Cousin, there hath chanced
A sharper harm to England and to Rome,
Than Calais taken. Julius the Third
Was ever just, and mild, and father-like;
But this new Pope Caraffa, Paul the Fourth,
Not only reft me of that legateship
Which Julius gave me, and the legateship
Annex'd to Canterbury--nay, but worse--
And yet I must obey the Holy Father,
And so must you, good cousin;--worse than all,
A passing bell toll'd in a dying ear--
He hath cited me to Rome, for heresy,
Before his Inquisition.

MARY.                   I knew it, cousin,
But held from you all papers sent by Rome,
That you might rest among us, till the Pope,
To compass which I wrote myself to Rome,
Reversed his doom, and that you might not seem
To disobey his Holiness.

POLE.                    He hates Philip;
He is all Italian, and he hates the Spaniard;
He cannot dream that _I_ advised the war;
He strikes thro' me at Philip and yourself.
Nay, but I know it of old, he hates me too;
So brands me in the stare of Christendom
A heretic!
Now, even now, when bow'd before my time,
The house half-ruin'd ere the lease be out;
When I should guide the Church in peace at home,
After my twenty years of banishment,
And all my lifelong labour to uphold
The primacy--a heretic. Long ago,
When I was ruler in the patrimony,
I was too lenient to the Lutheran,
And I and learned friends among ourselves
Would freely canvass certain Lutheranisms.
What then, he knew I was no Lutheran.
A heretic!
He drew this shaft against me to the head,
When it was thought I might be chosen Pope,
But then withdrew it. In full consistory,
When I was made Archbishop, he approved me.
And how should he have sent me Legate hither,
Deeming me heretic? and what heresy since?
But he was evermore mine enemy,
And hates the Spaniard--fiery-choleric,
A drinker of black, strong, volcanic wines,
That ever make him fierier. I, a heretic?
Your Highness knows that in pursuing heresy
I have gone beyond your late Lord Chancellor,--
He cried Enough! enough! before his death.--
Gone beyond him and mine own natural man
(It was God's cause); so far they call me now,
The scourge and butcher of their English church.

MARY. Have courage, your reward is Heaven itself.

POLE. They groan amen; they swarm into the fire
Like flies--for what? no dogma. They know nothing;
They burn for nothing.

MARY.                  You have done your best.

POLE. Have done my best, and as a faithful son,
That all day long hath wrought his father's work,
When back he comes at evening hath the door
Shut on him by the father whom he loved,
His early follies cast into his teeth,
And the poor son turn'd out into the street
To sleep, to die--I shall die of it, cousin.

MARY. I pray you be not so disconsolate;
I still will do mine utmost with the Pope.
Poor cousin!
Have not I been the fast friend of your life
Since mine began, and it was thought we two
Might make one flesh, and cleave unto each other
As man and wife?

POLE.            Ah, cousin, I remember
How I would dandle you upon my knee
At lisping-age. I watch'd you dancing once
With your huge father; he look'd the Great Harry,
You but his cockboat; prettily you did it,
And innocently. No--we were not made
One flesh in happiness, no happiness here;
But now we are made one flesh in misery;
Our bridemaids are not lovely--Disappointment,
Ingratitude, Injustice, Evil-tongue,
Labour-in-vain.

MARY.           Surely, not all in vain.
Peace, cousin, peace! I am sad at heart myself.

POLE. Our altar is a mound of dead men's clay,
Dug from the grave that yawns for us beyond;
And there is one Death stands behind the Groom,
And there is one Death stands behind the Bride--

MARY. Have you been looking at the 'Dance of Death'?

POLE. No; but these libellous papers which I found
Strewn in your palace. Look you here--the Pope
Pointing at me with 'Pole, the heretic,
Thou hast burnt others, do thou burn thyself,
Or I will burn thee;' and this other; see!--
'We pray continually for the death
Of our accursed Queen and Cardinal Pole.'
This last--I dare not read it her.    [_Aside_.

MARY.                              Away!
Why do you bring me these?
I thought you knew better. I never read,
I tear them; they come back upon my dreams.
The hands that write them should be burnt clean off
As Cranmer's, and the fiends that utter them
Tongue-torn with pincers, lash'd to death, or lie
Famishing in black cells, while famish'd rats
Eat them alive. Why do they bring me these?
Do you mean to drive me mad?

POLE.                        I had forgotten
How these poor libels trouble you. Your pardon,
Sweet cousin, and farewell! 'O bubble world,
Whose colours in a moment break and fly!'
Why, who said that? I know not--true enough!

    [_Puts up the papers, all but the last, which falls.
    Exit_ POLE.

ALICE. If Cranmer's spirit were a mocking one,
And heard these two, there might be sport for him.    [_Aside_.

MARY. Clarence, they hate me; even while I speak
There lurks a silent dagger, listening
In some dark closet, some long gallery, drawn,
And panting for my blood as I go by.

LADY CLARENCE. Nay, Madam, there be loyal papers too,
And I have often found them.

MARY.                        Find me one!

LADY CLARENCE. Ay, Madam; but Sir Nicholas Heath, the Chancellor,
Would see your Highness.

MARY.                    Wherefore should I see him?

LADY CLARENCE. Well, Madam, he may bring you news from Philip.

MARY. So, Clarence.

LADY CLARENCE.      Let me first put up your hair;
It tumbles all abroad.

MARY.                  And the gray dawn
Of an old age that never will be mine
Is all the clearer seen. No, no; what matters?
Forlorn I am, and let me look forlorn.

    _Enter_ SIR NICHOLAS HEATH.

HEATH. I bring your Majesty such grievous news
I grieve to bring it. Madam, Calais is taken.

MARY. What traitor spoke? Here, let my cousin Pole
Seize him and burn him for a Lutheran.

HEATH. Her Highness is unwell. I will retire.

LADY CLARENCE. Madam, your Chancellor, Sir Nicholas Heath.

MARY. Sir Nicholas! I am stunn'd--Nicholas Heath?
Methought some traitor smote me on the head.
What said you, my good Lord, that our brave English
Had sallied out from Calais and driven back
The Frenchmen from their trenches?

HEATH.                             Alas! no.
That gateway to the mainland over which
Our flag hath floated for two hundred years
Is France again.

MARY.            So; but it is not lost--
Not yet. Send out: let England as of old
Rise lionlike, strike hard and deep into
The prey they are rending from her--ay, and rend
The renders too. Send out, send out, and make
Musters in all the counties; gather all
From sixteen years to sixty; collect the fleet;
Let every craft that carries sail and gun
Steer toward Calais. Guisnes is not taken yet?

HEATH. Guisnes is not taken yet.

MARY.                            There yet is hope.

HEATH. Ah, Madam, but your people are so cold;
I do much fear that England will not care.
Methinks there is no manhood left among us.

MARY. Send out; I am too weak to stir abroad:
Tell my mind to the Council--to the Parliament:
Proclaim it to the winds. Thou art cold thyself
To babble of their coldness. O would I were
My father for an hour! Away now--Quick!

                                   [_Exit_ HEATH.

I hoped I had served God with all my might!
It seems I have not. Ah! much heresy
Shelter'd in Calais. Saints I have rebuilt
Your shrines, set up your broken images;
Be comfortable to me. Suffer not
That my brief reign in England be defamed
Thro' all her angry chronicles hereafter
By loss of Calais. Grant me Calais. Philip,
We have made war upon the Holy Father
All for your sake: what good could come of that?

LADY CLARENCE. No, Madam, not against the Holy Father;
You did but help King Philip's war with France,
Your troops were never down in Italy.

MARY. I am a byword. Heretic and rebel
Point at me and make merry. Philip gone!
And Calais gone! Time that I were gone too!

LADY CLARENCE. Nay, if the fetid gutter had a voice
And cried I was not clean, what should I care?
Or you, for heretic cries? And I believe,
Spite of your melancholy Sir Nicholas,
Your England is as loyal as myself.

MARY (_seeing the paper draft by_ POLE).
There! there! another paper! Said you not
Many of these were loyal? Shall I try
If this be one of such?

LADY CLARENCE.          Let it be, let it be.
God pardon me! I have never yet found one.    [_Aside_.

MARY (_reads_). 'Your people hate you as your husband hates you.'
Clarence, Clarence, what have I done? what sin
Beyond all grace, all pardon? Mother of God,
Thou knowest never woman meant so well,
And fared so ill in this disastrous world.
My people hate me and desire my death.

LADY CLARENCE. No, Madam, no.

MARY. My husband hates me, and desires my death.

LADY CLARENCE. No, Madam; these are libels.

MARY. I hate myself, and I desire my death.

LADY CLARENCE. Long live your Majesty! Shall Alice sing you
One of her pleasant songs? Alice, my child,
Bring us your lute (ALICE _goes_). They say the gloom of Saul
Was lighten'd by young David's harp.

MARY.                                Too young!
And never knew a Philip.

    _Re-enter_ ALICE.

                         Give _me_ the lute.
He hates me!
                (_She sings_.)

    Hapless doom of woman happy in betrothing!
    Beauty passes like a breath and love is lost in loathing:
    Low, my lute; speak low, my lute, but say the world is nothing--
    Low, lute, low!

    Love will hover round the flowers when they first awaken;
    Love will fly the fallen leaf, and not be overtaken;
    Low, my lute! oh low, my lute! we fade and are forsaken--
    Low, dear lute, low!

Take it away! not low enough for me!

ALICE. Your Grace hath a low voice.

MARY.                               How dare you say it?
Even for that he hates me. A low voice
Lost in a wilderness where none can hear!
A voice of shipwreck on a shoreless sea!
A low voice from the dust and from the grave
    (_Sitting on the ground_).
There, am I low enough now?

ALICE. Good Lord! how grim and ghastly looks her Grace,
With both her knees drawn upward to her chin.
There was an old-world tomb beside my father's,
And this was open'd, and the dead were found
Sitting, and in this fashion; she looks a corpse.

    _Enter_ LADY MAGDALEN DACRES.

LADY MAGDALEN. Madam, the Count de Feria waits without,
In hopes to see your Highness.

LADY CLARENCE (_pointing to_ MARY).
Wait he must--
Her trance again. She neither sees nor hears,
And may not speak for hours.

LADY MAGDALEN.               Unhappiest
Of Queens and wives and women!

ALICE (_in the foreground with_ LADY MAGDALEN).
                               And all along
Of Philip.

LADY MAGDALEN. Not so loud! Our Clarence there
Sees ever such an aureole round the Queen,
It gilds the greatest wronger of her peace,
Who stands the nearest to her.

ALICE.                         Ay, this Philip;
I used to love the Queen with all my heart--
God help me, but methinks I love her less
For such a dotage upon such a man.
I would I were as tall and strong as you.

LADY MAGDALEN. I seem half-shamed at times to be so tall.

ALICE. You are the stateliest deer in all the herd--
Beyond his aim--but I am small and scandalous,
And love to hear bad tales of Philip.

LADY MAGDALEN.                        Why?
I never heard him utter worse of you
Than that you were low-statured.

ALICE.                           Does he think
Low stature is low nature, or all women's
Low as his own?

LADY MAGDALEN.  There you strike in the nail.
This coarseness is a want of phantasy.
It is the low man thinks the woman low;
Sin is too dull to see beyond himself.

ALICE. Ah, Magdalen, sin is bold as well as dull.
How dared he?

LADY MAGDALEN. Stupid soldiers oft are bold.
Poor lads, they see not what the general sees,
A risk of utter ruin. I am _not_
Beyond his aim, or was not.

ALICE.                      Who? Not you?
Tell, tell me; save my credit with myself.

LADY MAGDALEN. I never breathed it to a bird in the eaves,
Would not for all the stars and maiden moon
Our drooping Queen should know! In Hampton Court
My window look'd upon the corridor;
And I was robing;--this poor throat of mine,
Barer than I should wish a man to see it,--
When he we speak of drove the window back,
And, like a thief, push'd in his royal hand;
But by God's providence a good stout staff
Lay near me; and you know me strong of arm;
I do believe I lamed his Majesty's
For a day or two, tho', give the Devil his due,
I never found he bore me any spite.

ALICE. I would she could have wedded that poor youth,
My Lord of Devon--light enough, God knows,
And mixt with Wyatt's rising--and the boy
Not out of him--but neither cold, coarse, cruel,
And more than all--no Spaniard.

LADY CLARENCE.                  Not so loud.
Lord Devon, girls! what are you whispering here?

ALICE. Probing an old state-secret--how it chanced
That this young Earl was sent on foreign travel,
Not lost his head.

LADY CLARENCE.     There was no proof against him.

ALICE. Nay, Madam; did not Gardiner intercept
A letter which the Count de Noailles wrote
To that dead traitor Wyatt, with full proof
Of Courtenay's treason? What became of that?

LADY CLARENCE. Some say that Gardiner, out of love for him,
Burnt it, and some relate that it was lost
When Wyatt sack'd the Chancellor's house in Southwark.
Let dead things rest.

ALICE.                Ay, and with him who died
Alone in Italy.

LADY CLARENCE.  Much changed, I hear,
Had put off levity and put graveness on.
The foreign courts report him in his manner
Noble as his young person and old shield.
It might be so--but all is over now;
He caught a chill in the lagoons of Venice,
And died in Padua.

MARY (_looking up suddenly_).
                   Died in the true faith?

LADY CLARENCE. Ay, Madam, happily.

MARY.                              Happier he than I.

LADY MAGDALEN. It seems her Highness hath awaken'd. Think you
That I might dare to tell her that the Count--

MARY. I will see no man hence for evermore,
Saving my confessor and my cousin Pole.

LADY MAGDALEN. It is the Count de Feria, my dear lady.

MARY. What Count?

LADY MAGDALEN.    The Count de Feria, from his Majesty
King Philip.

MARY.        Philip! quick! loop up my hair!
Throw cushions on that seat, and make it throne-like.
Arrange my dress--the gorgeous Indian shawl
That Philip brought me in our happy days!--
That covers all. So--am I somewhat Queenlike,
Bride of the mightiest sovereign upon earth?

LADY CLARENCE. Ay, so your Grace would bide a moment yet.

MARY. No, no, he brings a letter. I may die
Before I read it. Let me see him at once.

    _Enter_ COUNT DE FERIA (_kneels_).

FERIA. I trust your Grace is well. (_Aside_) How her hand burns!

MARY. I am not well, but it will better me,
Sir Count, to read the letter which you bring.

FERIA. Madam, I bring no letter.

MARY.                            How! no letter?

FERIA. His Highness is so vex'd with strange affairs--

MARY. That his own wife is no affair of his.

FERIA. Nay, Madam, nay! he sends his veriest love,
And says, he will come quickly.

MARY.                           Doth he, indeed?
You, sir, do _you_ remember what _you_ said
When last you came to England?

FERIA.                         Madam, I brought
My King's congratulations; it was hoped
Your Highness was once more in happy state
To give him an heir male.

MARY.                     Sir, you said more;
You said he would come quickly. I had horses
On all the road from Dover, day and night;
On all the road from Harwich, night and day;
But the child came not, and the husband came not;
And yet he will come quickly.... Thou hast learnt
Thy lesson, and I mine. There is no need
For Philip so to shame himself again.
Return,
And tell him that I know he comes no more.
Tell him at last I know his love is dead,
And that I am in state to bring forth death--
Thou art commission'd to Elizabeth,
And not to me!

FERIA.         Mere compliments and wishes.
But shall I take some message from your Grace?

MARY. Tell her to come and close my dying eyes,
And wear my crown, and dance upon my grave.

FERIA. Then I may say your Grace will see your sister?
Your Grace is too low-spirited. Air and sunshine.
I would we had you, Madam, in our warm Spain.
You droop in your dim London.

MARY.                         Have him away!
I sicken of his readiness.

LADY CLARENCE.             My Lord Count,
Her Highness is too ill for colloquy.

FERIA (_kneels, and kisses her hand_).
I wish her Highness better. (_Aside_) How her hand burns!

                                                   [_Exeunt_.



SCENE III.--A HOUSE NEAR LONDON.

ELIZABETH, STEWARD OF THE HOUSEHOLD, ATTENDANTS.


ELIZABETH. There's half an angel wrong'd in your account;
Methinks I am all angel, that I bear it
Without more ruffling. Cast it o'er again.

STEWARD. I were whole devil if I wrong'd you, Madam.
                                           [_Exit_ STEWARD.

ATTENDANT. The Count de Feria, from the King of Spain.

ELIZABETH. Ay!--let him enter. Nay, you need not go:
    [_To her_ LADIES.
Remain within the chamber, but apart.
We'll have no private conference. Welcome to
England!

    _Enter_ FERIA.

FERIA.   Fair island star!

ELIZABETH.                 I shine! What else, Sir Count?

FERIA. As far as France, and into Philip's heart.
My King would know if you be fairly served,
And lodged, and treated.

ELIZABETH.               You see the lodging, sir,
I am well-served, and am in everything
Most loyal and most grateful to the Queen.

FERIA. You should be grateful to my master, too.
He spoke of this; and unto him you owe
That Mary hath acknowledged you her heir.

ELIZABETH. No, not to her nor him; but to the people,
Who know my right, and love me, as I love
The people! whom God aid!

FERIA.                    You will be Queen,
And, were I Philip--

ELIZABETH.          Wherefore pause you--what?

FERIA. Nay, but I speak from mine own self, not
him;
Your royal sister cannot last; your hand
Will be much coveted! What a delicate one!
Our Spanish ladies have none such--and there,
Were you in Spain, this fine fair gossamer gold--
Like sun-gilt breathings on a frosty dawn--
That hovers round your shoulder--

ELIZABETH.                       Is it so fine?
Troth, some have said so.

FERIA.                   --would be deemed a miracle.

ELIZABETH. Your Philip hath gold hair and golden beard;
There must be ladies many with hair like mine.

FERIA, Some few of Gothic blood have golden hair,
But none like yours.

ELIZABETH.           I am happy you approve it.

FERIA. But as to Philip and your Grace--consider,
If such a one as you should match with Spain,
What hinders but that Spain and England join'd,
Should make the mightiest empire earth has known.
Spain would be England on her seas, and England
Mistress of the Indies.

ELIZABETH.              It may chance, that England
Will be the Mistress of the Indies yet,
Without the help of Spain.

FERIA.                     Impossible;
Except you put Spain down.
Wide of the mark ev'n for a madman's dream.

ELIZABETH. Perhaps; but we have seamen.
Count de Feria,
I take it that the King hath spoken to you;
But is Don Carlos such a goodly match?

FERIA. Don Carlos, Madam, is but twelve years old.

ELIZABETH. Ay, tell the King that I will muse upon it;
He is my good friend, and I would keep him so;
But--he would have me Catholic of Rome,
And that I scarce can be; and, sir, till now
My sister's marriage, and my father's marriages,
Make me full fain to live and die a maid.
But I am much beholden to your King.
Have you aught else to tell me?

FERIA.                          Nothing, Madam,
Save that methought I gather'd from the Queen
That she would see your Grace before she--died.

ELIZABETH. God's death! and wherefore spake you not before?
We dally with our lazy moments here,
And hers are number'd. Horses there, without!
I am much beholden to the King, your master.
Why did you keep me prating? Horses, there!

                                   [_Exit_ ELIZABETH, _etc_.

FERIA. So from a clear sky falls the thunderbolt!
Don Carlos? Madam, if you marry Philip,
Then I and he will snaffle your 'God's death,'
And break your paces in, and make you tame;
God's death, forsooth--you do not know King Philip.

                                             [_Exit_.



SCENE IV.--LONDON. BEFORE THE PALACE.

_A light burning within_. VOICES _of the night passing_.


FIRST. Is not yon light in the Queen's chamber?

SECOND.                                         Ay,
They say she's dying.

FIRST.                So is Cardinal Pole.
May the great angels join their wings, and make
Down for their heads to heaven!

SECOND. Amen. Come on.
                          [_Exeunt_.

    TWO OTHERS.

FIRST. There's the Queen's light. I hear she cannot live.

SECOND. God curse her and her Legate! Gardiner burns
Already; but to pay them full in kind,
The hottest hold in all the devil's den
Were but a sort of winter; sir, in Guernsey,
I watch'd a woman burn; and in her agony
The mother came upon her--a child was born--
And, sir, they hurl'd it back into the fire,
That, being but baptized in fire, the babe
Might be in fire for ever. Ah, good neighbour,
There should be something fierier than fire
To yield them their deserts.

FIRST.                       Amen to all
Your wish, and further.

A THIRD VOICE. Deserts! Amen to what? Whose deserts? Yours? You have a
gold ring on your finger, and soft raiment about your body; and is not
the woman up yonder sleeping after all she has done, in peace and
quietness, on a soft bed, in a closed room, with light, fire, physic,
tendance; and I have seen the true men of Christ lying famine-dead by
scores, and under no ceiling but the cloud that wept on them, not for
them.

FIRST. Friend, tho' so late, it is not safe to preach.
You had best go home. What are you?

THIRD. What am I? One who cries continually with sweat and tears to
the Lord God that it would please Him out of His infinite love to
break down all kingship and queenship, all priesthood and prelacy; to
cancel and abolish all bonds of human allegiance, all the magistracy,
all the nobles, and all the wealthy; and to send us again, according
to His promise, the one King, the Christ, and all things in common, as
in the day of the first church, when Christ Jesus was King.

FIRST. If ever I heard a madman,--let's away!
Why, you long-winded--Sir, you go beyond me.
I pride myself on being moderate.
Good night! Go home. Besides, you curse so loud,
The watch will hear you. Get you home at once.

                                          [_Exeunt_.



SCENE V.--LONDON. A ROOM IN THE PALACE.

_A Gallery on one side. The moonlight streaming through a range of
windows on the wall opposite_. MARY, LADY CLARENCE, LADY MAGDALEN
DACRES, ALICE. QUEEN _pacing the Gallery. A writing table in front_.
QUEEN _comes to the table and writes and goes again, pacing the
Gallery_.


LADY CLARENCE. Mine eyes are dim: what hath she written? read.

ALICE. 'I am dying, Philip; come to me.'

LADY MAGDALEN. There--up and down, poor lady, up and down.

ALICE. And how her shadow crosses one by one
The moonlight casements pattern'd on the wall,
Following her like her sorrow. She turns again.

    [QUEEN _sits and writes, and goes again_.

LADY CLARENCE. What hath she written now?

ALICE. Nothing; but 'come, come, come,' and all awry,
And blotted by her tears. This cannot last.

    [QUEEN _returns_.

MARY. I whistle to the bird has broken cage,
And all in vain.    [_Sitting down_.
Calais gone--Guisnes gone, too--and Philip gone!

LADY CLARENCE. Dear Madam, Philip is but at the wars;
I cannot doubt but that he comes again;
And he is with you in a measure still.
I never look'd upon so fair a likeness
As your great King in armour there, his hand
Upon his helmet.
                    [_Pointing to the portrait of Philip on the wall_.

MARY.            Doth he not look noble?
I had heard of him in battle over seas,
And I would have my warrior all in arms.
He said it was not courtly to stand helmeted
Before the Queen. He had his gracious moment,
Altho' you'll not believe me. How he smiles
As if he loved me yet!

LADY CLARENCE.         And so he does.

MARY. He never loved me--nay, he could not love me.
It was his father's policy against France.
I am eleven years older than he,
Poor boy!    [_Weeps_.

ALICE. That was a lusty boy of twenty-seven;    [_Aside_.
Poor enough in God's grace!

MARY.                      --And all in vain!
The Queen of Scots is married to the Dauphin,
And Charles, the lord of this low world, is gone;
And all his wars and wisdoms past away:
And in a moment I shall follow him.

LADY CLARENCE. Nay, dearest Lady, see your good physician.

MARY. Drugs--but he knows they cannot help me--says
That rest is all--tells me I must not think--
That I must rest--I shall rest by and by.
Catch the wild cat, cage him, and when he springs
And maims himself against the bars, say 'rest':
Why, you must kill him if you would have him rest--
Dead or alive you cannot make him happy.

LADY CLARENCE. Your Majesty has lived so pure a life,
And done such mighty things by Holy Church,
I trust that God will make you happy yet.

MARY. What is the strange thing happiness? Sit down here:
Tell me thine happiest hour.

LADY CLARENCE.               I will, if that
May make your Grace forget yourself a little.
There runs a shallow brook across our field
For twenty miles, where the black crow flies five,
And doth so bound and babble all the way
As if itself were happy. It was May-time,
And I was walking with the man I loved.
I loved him, but I thought I was not loved.
And both were silent, letting the wild brook
Speak for us--till he stoop'd and gather'd one
From out a bed of thick forget-me-nots,
Look'd hard and sweet at me, and gave it me.
I took it, tho' I did not know I took it,
And put it in my bosom, and all at once
I felt his arms about me, and his lips--

MARY. O God! I have been too slack, too slack;
There are Hot Gospellers even among our guards--
Nobles we dared not touch. We have but burnt
The heretic priest, workmen, and women and children.
Wet, famine, ague, fever, storm, wreck, wrath,--
We have so play'd the coward; but by God's grace,
We'll follow Philip's leading, and set up
The Holy Office here--garner the wheat,
And burn the tares with unquenchable fire!
Burn!--
Fie, what a savour! tell the cooks to close
The doors of all the offices below.
Latimer!
Sir, we are private with our women here--
Ever a rough, blunt, and uncourtly fellow--
Thou light a torch that never will go out!
'Tis out--mine flames. Women, the Holy Father
Has ta'en the legateship from our cousin Pole--
Was that well done? and poor Pole pines of it,
As I do, to the death. I am but a woman,
I have no power.--Ah, weak and meek old man,
Seven-fold dishonour'd even in the sight
Of thine own sectaries--No, no. No pardon!
Why that was false: there is the right hand still
Beckons me hence.
Sir, you were burnt for heresy, not for treason,
Remember that! 'twas I and Bonner did it,
And Pole; we are three to one--Have you found mercy there,
Grant it me here: and see, he smiles and goes,
Gentle as in life.

ALICE.             Madam, who goes? King Philip?

MARY. No, Philip comes and goes, but never goes.
Women, when I am dead,
Open my heart, and there you will find written
Two names, Philip and Calais; open his,--
So that he have one,--
You will find Philip only, policy, policy,--
Ay, worse than that--not one hour true to me!
Foul maggots crawling in a fester'd vice!
Adulterous to the very heart of Hell.
Hast thou a knife?

ALICE.             Ay, Madam, but o' God's mercy--

MARY. Fool, think'st thou I would peril mine own soul
By slaughter of the body? I could not, girl,
Not this way--callous with a constant stripe,
Unwoundable. The knife!

ALICE.                  Take heed, take heed!
The blade is keen as death.

MARY.                       This Philip shall not
Stare in upon me in my haggardness;
Old, miserable, diseased,
Incapable of children. Come thou down.
              [_Cuts out the picture and throws it down_.
Lie there. (_Wails_) O God, I have kill'd my Philip!

ALICE.                                               No,
Madam, you have but cut the canvas out;
We can replace it.

MARY.              All is well then; rest--
I will to rest; he said, I must have rest.
                     [_Cries of_ 'ELIZABETH' _in the street_.
A cry! What's that? Elizabeth? revolt?
A new Northumberland, another Wyatt?
I'll fight it on the threshold of the grave.

LADY CLARENCE. Madam, your royal sister comes to see you.

MARY. I will not see her.
Who knows if Boleyn's daughter be my sister?
I will see none except the priest. Your arm.
                               [_To_ LADY CLARENCE.
O Saint of Aragon, with that sweet worn smile
Among thy patient wrinkles--Help me hence.
                                              [_Exeunt_.

    _The_ PRIEST _passes. Enter_ ELIZABETH _and_ SIR WILLIAM CECIL.

ELIZABETH. Good counsel yours--
                               No one in waiting? still,
As if the chamberlain were Death himself!
The room she sleeps in--is not this the way?
No, that way there are voices. Am I too late?
Cecil ... God guide me lest I lose the way.
                                  [_Exit_ ELIZABETH.

CECIL. Many points weather'd, many perilous ones,
At last a harbour opens; but therein
Sunk rocks--they need fine steering--much it is
To be nor mad, nor bigot--have a mind--
Nor let Priests' talk, or dream of worlds to be,
Miscolour things about her--sudden touches
For him, or him--sunk rocks; no passionate faith--
But--if let be--balance and compromise;
Brave, wary, sane to the heart of her--a Tudor
School'd by the shadow of death--a Boleyn, too,
Glancing across the Tudor--not so well.

    _Enter_ ALICE.

How is the good Queen now?

ALICE.                     Away from Philip.
Back in her childhood--prattling to her mother
Of her betrothal to the Emperor Charles,
And childlike--jealous of him again--and once
She thank'd her father sweetly for his book
Against that godless German. Ah, those days
Were happy. It was never merry world
In England, since the Bible came among us.

CECIL. And who says that?

ALICE. It is a saying among the Catholics.

CECIL. It never will be merry world in England,
Till all men have their Bible, rich and poor.

ALICE. The Queen is dying, or you dare not say it.

    _Enter_ ELIZABETH.

ELIZABETH. The Queen is dead.

CECIL. Then here she stands! my homage.

ELIZABETH. She knew me, and acknowledged me her heir,
Pray'd me to pay her debts, and keep the Faith:
Then claspt the cross, and pass'd away in peace.
I left her lying still and beautiful,
More beautiful than in life. Why would you vex yourself,
Poor sister? Sir, I swear I have no heart
To be your Queen. To reign is restless fence,
Tierce, quart, and trickery. Peace is with the dead.
Her life was winter, for her spring was nipt:
And she loved much: pray God she be forgiven.

CECIL. Peace with the dead, who never were at peace!
Yet she loved one so much--I needs must say--
That never English monarch dying left
England so little.

ELIZABETH. But with Cecil's aid
And others, if our person be secured
From traitor stabs--we will make England great.

    _Enter_ PAGET, _and other_ LORDS OF THE COUNCIL,
    SIR RALPH BAGENHALL, _etc_.

LORDS. God save Elizabeth, the Queen of England!

BAGENHALL. God save the Crown! the Papacy is no more.

PAGET (_aside_).
Are we so sure of that?

ACCLAMATION.            God save the Queen!


END OF QUEEN MARY.






HAROLD: A DRAMA.



TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HON. LORD LYTTON, VICEROY AND
GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA.

My Dear Lord Lytton,--After old-world records--such as the Bayeux
tapestry and the Roman de Rou,--Edward Freeman's History of the Norman
Conquest, and your father's Historical Romance treating of the same
times, have been mainly helpful to me in writing this Drama. Your
father dedicated his 'Harold' to my father's brother; allow me to
dedicate my 'Harold' to yourself.

A. TENNYSON.



SHOW-DAY AT BATTLE ABBEY, 1876.

A garden here--May breath and bloom of spring--
The cuckoo yonder from an English elm
Crying 'with my false egg I overwhelm
The native nest:' and fancy hears the ring
Of harness, and that deathful arrow sing,
And Saxon battleaxe clang on Norman helm.
Here rose the dragon-banner of our realm:
Here fought, here fell, our Norman-slander'd king.
O Garden blossoming out of English blood!
O strange hate-healer Time! We stroll and stare
Where might made right eight hundred years ago;
Might, right? ay good, so all things make for good--
But he and he, if soul be soul, are where
Each stands full face with all he did below.



_DRAMATIS PERSONAE_

KING EDWARD THE CONFESSOR.
STIGAND, _created Archbishop of Canterbury by the Antipope Benedict_.
ALDRED, _Archbishop of York_.
THE NORMAN BISHOP OF LONDON.
HAROLD, _Earl of Wessex, afterwards King of England, Son of Godwin_
TOSTIG, _Earl of Northumbria, Son of Godwin_
GURTH, _Earl of East Anglia, Son of Godwin_
LEOFWIN, _Earl of Kent and Essex, Son of Godwin_
WULFNOTH
COUNT WILLIAM OF NORMANDY.
WILLIAM RUFUS.
WILLIAM MALET, _a Norman Noble_.[1]
EDWIN, _Earl of Mercia, Son of Alfgar of Mercia_
MORCAR, _Earl of Northumbria after Tostig, Son of Alfgar of Mercia_
GAMEL, _a Northumbrian Thane_.
GUY, _Count of Ponthieu_.
ROLF, _a Ponthieu Fisherman_.
HUGH MARGOT, _a Norman Monk_.
OSGOD _and_ ATHELRIC, _Canons from Waltham_.
THE QUEEN, _Edward the Confessor's Wife, Daughter of Godwin_.
ALDWYTH, _Daughter of Alfgar and Widow of Griffyth, King of Wales_.
EDITH, _Ward of King Edward_.
Courtiers, Earls and Thanes, Men-at-Arms, Canons of Waltham,
Fishermen, etc.


[Footnote 1: ... quidam partim Normannus et Anglus
Compater Heraldi. (_Guy of Amiens_, 587.)]



HAROLD




ACT I.


SCENE I.--LONDON. THE KING'S PALACE.

    (_A comet seen through the open window_.)

ALDWYTH, GAMEL, COURTIERS _talking together_.


FIRST COURTIER. Lo! there once more--this is the seventh night!
Yon grimly-glaring, treble-brandish'd scourge Of England!

SECOND COURTIER. Horrible!

FIRST COURTIER.            Look you, there's a star
That dances in it as mad with agony!

THIRD COURTIER. Ay, like a spirit in Hell who skips and flies
To right and left, and cannot scape the flame.

SECOND COURTIER. Steam'd upward from the undescendable
Abysm.

FIRST COURTIER. Or floated downward from the throne
Of God Almighty.

ALDWYTH.         Gamel, son of Orm,
What thinkest thou this means?

GAMEL.                         War, my dear lady!

ALDWYTH. Doth this affright thee?

GAMEL.                            Mightily, my dear lady!

ALDWYTH. Stand by me then, and look upon my face,
Not on the comet.

    _Enter_ MORCAR.

                  Brother! why so pale?

MORCAR. It glares in heaven, it flares upon the Thames,
The people are as thick as bees below,
They hum like bees,--they cannot speak--for awe;
Look to the skies, then to the river, strike
Their hearts, and hold their babies up to it.
I think that they would Molochize them too,
To have the heavens clear.

ALDWYTH. They fright not me.

    _Enter_ LEOFWIN, _after him_ GURTH.

Ask thou Lord Leofwin what he thinks of this!

MORCAR. Lord Leofwin, dost thou believe, that these
Three rods of blood-red fire up yonder mean
The doom of England and the wrath of Heaven?

BISHOP OF LONDON (_passing_).
Did ye not cast with bestial violence
Our holy Norman bishops down from all
Their thrones in England? I alone remain.
Why should not Heaven be wroth?

LEOFWIN. With us, or thee?

BISHOP OF LONDON. Did ye not outlaw your archbishop Robert,
Robert of Jumieges--well-nigh murder him too?
Is there no reason for the wrath of Heaven?

LEOFWIN. Why then the wrath of Heaven hath three tails,
The devil only one.

                       [_Exit_ BISHOP OF LONDON.

    _Enter_ ARCHBISHOP STIGAND.

Ask _our_ Archbishop.
Stigand should know the purposes of Heaven.

STIGAND. Not I. I cannot read the face of heaven;
Perhaps our vines will grow the better for it.

LEOFWIN (_laughing_).
He can but read the king's face on his coins.

STIGAND. Ay, ay, young lord, _there_ the king's face is power.

GURTH. O father, mock not at a public fear,
But tell us, is this pendent hell in heaven
A harm to England?

STIGAND.           Ask it of King Edward!
And he may tell thee, _I_ am a harm to England.
Old uncanonical Stigand--ask of _me_
Who had my pallium from an Antipope!
Not he the man--for in our windy world
What's up is faith, what's down is heresy.
Our friends, the Normans, holp to shake his chair.
I have a Norman fever on me, son,
And cannot answer sanely.... What it means?
Ask our broad Earl.
                       [_Pointing to_ HAROLD, _who enters_.

HAROLD (_seeing_ GAMEL).
                    Hail, Gamel, son of Orm!
Albeit no rolling stone, my good friend Gamel,
Thou hast rounded since we met. Thy life at home
Is easier than mine here. Look! am I not
Work-wan, flesh-fallen?

GAMEL.                  Art thou sick, good Earl?

HAROLD. Sick as an autumn swallow for a voyage,
Sick for an idle week of hawk and hound
Beyond the seas--a change! When camest thou hither?

GAMEL. To-day, good Earl.

HAROLD.                   Is the North quiet, Gamel?

GAMEL. Nay, there be murmurs, for thy brother breaks us
With over-taxing--quiet, ay, as yet--
Nothing as yet.

HAROLD.         Stand by him, mine old friend,
Thou art a great voice in Northumberland!
Advise him: speak him sweetly, he will hear thee.
He is passionate but honest. Stand thou by him!
More talk of this to-morrow, if yon weird sign
Not blast us in our dreams.--Well, father Stigand--
                        [_To_ STIGAND, _who advances to him_.

STIGAND (_pointing to the comet_).
War there, my son? is that the doom of England?

HAROLD. Why not the doom of all the world as well?
For all the world sees it as well as England.
These meteors came and went before our day,
Not harming any: it threatens us no more
Than French or Norman. War? the worst that follows
Things that seem jerk'd out of the common rut
Of Nature is the hot religious fool,
Who, seeing war in heaven, for heaven's credit
Makes it on earth: but look, where Edward draws
A faint foot hither, leaning upon Tostig.
He hath learnt to love our Tostig much of late.

LEOFWIN. And _he_ hath learnt, despite the tiger in him,
To sleek and supple himself to the king's hand.

GURTH. I trust the kingly touch that cures the evil
May serve to charm the tiger out of him.

LEOFWIN. He hath as much of cat as tiger in him.
Our Tostig loves the hand and not the man.

HAROLD. Nay! Better die than lie!

    _Enter_ KING, QUEEN, _and_ TOSTIG.

EDWARD. In heaven signs!
Signs upon earth! signs everywhere! your Priests
Gross, worldly, simoniacal, unlearn'd!
They scarce can read their Psalter; and your churches
Uncouth, unhandsome, while in Normanland
God speaks thro' abler voices, as He dwells
In statelier shrines. I say not this, as being
Half Norman-blooded, nor as some have held,
Because I love the Norman better--no,
But dreading God's revenge upon this realm
For narrowness and coldness: and I say it
For the last time perchance, before I go
To find the sweet refreshment of the Saints.
I have lived a life of utter purity:
I have builded the great church of Holy Peter:
I have wrought miracles--to God the glory--
And miracles will in my name be wrought
Hereafter.--I have fought the fight and go--
I see the flashing of the gates of pearl--
And it is well with me, tho' some of you
Have scorn'd me--ay--but after I am gone
Woe, woe to England! I have had a vision;
The seven sleepers in the cave at Ephesus
Have turn'd from right to left.

HAROLD.                         My most dear Master,
What matters? let them turn from left to right
And sleep again.

TOSTIG.          Too hardy with thy king!
A life of prayer and fasting well may see
Deeper into the mysteries of heaven
Than thou, good brother.

ALDWYTH (_aside_).       Sees he into thine,
That thou wouldst have his promise for the crown?

EDWARD. Tostig says true; my son, thou art too hard,
Not stagger'd by this ominous earth and heaven:
But heaven and earth are threads of the same loom,
Play into one another, and weave the web
That may confound thee yet.

HAROLD.                     Nay, I trust not,
For I have served thee long and honestly.

EDWARD. I know it, son; I am not thankless: thou
Hast broken all my foes, lighten'd for me
The weight of this poor crown, and left me time
And peace for prayer to gain a better one.
Twelve years of service! England loves thee for it.
Thou art the man to rule her!

ALDWYTH (_aside_).            So, not Tostig!

HAROLD. And after those twelve years a boon, my king,
Respite, a holiday: thyself wast wont
To love the chase: thy leave to set my feet
On board, and hunt and hawk beyond the seas!

EDWARD. What, with this flaming horror overhead?

HAROLD. Well, when it passes then.

EDWARD.                            Ay if it pass.
Go not to Normandy--go not to Normandy.

HAROLD. And wherefore not, my king, to Normandy?
Is not my brother Wulfnoth hostage there
For my dead father's loyalty to thee?
I pray thee, let me hence and bring him home.

EDWARD. Not thee, my son: some other messenger.

HAROLD. And why not me, my lord, to Normandy?
Is not the Norman Count thy friend and mine?

EDWARD. I pray thee, do not go to Normandy.

HAROLD. Because my father drove the Normans out
Of England?--That was many a summer gone--
Forgotten and forgiven by them and thee.

EDWARD. Harold, I will not yield thee leave to go.

HAROLD. Why then to Flanders. I will hawk and hunt
In Flanders.

EDWARD.      Be there not fair woods and fields
In England? Wilful, wilful. Go--the Saints
Pilot and prosper all thy wandering out
And homeward. Tostig, I am faint again.
Son Harold, I will in and pray for thee.

    [_Exit, leaning on_ TOSTIG, _and followed by_
    STIGAND, MORCAR, _and_ COURTIERS.

HAROLD. What lies upon the mind of our good king
That he should harp this way on Normandy?

QUEEN. Brother, the king is wiser than he seems;
And Tostig knows it; Tostig loves the king.

HAROLD. And love should know; and--be the
king so wise,--
Then Tostig too were wiser than he seems.
I love the man but not his phantasies.

    _Re-enter_ TOSTIG.

Well, brother,
When didst thou hear from thy Northumbria?

TOSTIG. When did I hear aught but this '_When_' from thee?
Leave me alone, brother, with my Northumbria:
She is _my_ mistress, let _me_ look to her!
The King hath made me Earl; make me not fool!
Nor make the King a fool, who made me Earl!

HAROLD. No, Tostig--lest I make myself a fool
Who made the King who made thee, make thee Earl.

TOSTIG. Why chafe me then? Thou knowest I soon go wild.

GURTH. Come, come! as yet thou art not gone so wild
But thou canst hear the best and wisest of us.

HAROLD. So says old Gurth, not I: yet hear! thine earldom,
Tostig, hath been a kingdom. Their old crown
Is yet a force among them, a sun set
But leaving light enough for Alfgar's house
To strike thee down by--nay, this ghastly glare
May heat their fancies.

TOSTIG.                 My most worthy brother,
Thou art the quietest man in all the world--
Ay, ay and wise in peace and great in war--
Pray God the people choose thee for their king!
But all the powers of the house of Godwin
Are not enframed in thee.

HAROLD.                   Thank the Saints, no!
But thou hast drain'd them shallow by thy tolls,
And thou art ever here about the King:
Thine absence well may seem a want of care.
Cling to their love; for, now the sons of Godwin
Sit topmost in the field of England, envy,
Like the rough bear beneath the tree, good brother,
Waits till the man let go.

TOSTIG.                    Good counsel truly!
I heard from my Northumbria yesterday.

HAROLD. How goes it then with thy Northumbria?
Well?

TOSTIG. And wouldst thou that it went aught else than well?

HAROLD. I would it went as well as with mine earldom,
Leofwin's and Gurth's.

TOSTIG.                Ye govern milder men.

GURTH. We have made them milder by just government.

TOSTIG. Ay, ever give yourselves your own good word.

LEOFWIN. An honest gift, by all the Saints, if giver

And taker be but honest! but they bribe
Each other, and so often, an honest world
Will not believe them.

HAROLD.                I may tell thee, Tostig,
I heard from thy Northumberland to-day.

TOSTIG. From spies of thine to spy my nakedness
In my poor North!

HAROLD.           There is a movement there,
A blind one--nothing yet.

TOSTIG.                   Crush it at once
With all the power I have!--I must--I will!--
Crush it half-born! Fool still? or wisdom there,
My wise head-shaking Harold?

HAROLD.                       Make not thou
The nothing something. Wisdom when in power
And wisest, should not frown as Power, but smile
As kindness, watching all, till the true _must_
Shall make her strike as Power: but when to strike--
O Tostig, O dear brother--If they prance,
Rein in, not lash them, lest they rear and run
And break both neck and axle.

TOSTIG.                       Good again!
Good counsel tho' scarce needed. Pour not water
In the full vessel running out at top
To swamp the house.

LEOFWIN.            Nor thou be a wild thing
Out of the waste, to turn and bite the hand
Would help thee from the trap.

TOSTIG.                        Thou playest in tune.

LEOFWIN. To the deaf adder thee, that wilt not dance
However wisely charm'd.

TOSTIG.                 No more, no more!

GURTH. I likewise cry 'no more.' Unwholesome talk
For Godwin's house! Leofwin, thou hast a tongue!
Tostig, thou look'st as thou wouldst spring upon him.
St. Olaf, not while I am by! Come, come,
Join hands, let brethren dwell in unity;
Let kith and kin stand close as our shield-wall,
Who breaks us then? I say, thou hast a tongue,
And Tostig is not stout enough to bear it.
Vex him not, Leofwin.

TOSTIG.               No, I am not vext,--
Altho' ye seek to vex me, one and all.
I have to make report of my good earldom
To the good king who gave it--not to you--
Not any of you.--I am not vext at all.

HAROLD. The king? the king is ever at his prayers;
In all that handles matter of the state
I am the king.

TOSTIG.        That shall thou never be
If I can thwart thee.

HAROLD.               Brother, brother!

TOSTIG.                                 Away!

                 [_Exit_ TOSTIG.

QUEEN. Spite of this grisly star ye three must gall
Poor Tostig.

LEOFWIN.     Tostig, sister, galls himself;
He cannot smell a rose but pricks his nose
Against the thorn, and rails against the rose.

QUEEN. I am the only rose of all the stock
That never thorn'd him; Edward loves him, so
Ye hate him. Harold always hated him.
Why--how they fought when boys--and, Holy Mary!
How Harold used to beat him!

HAROLD.                      Why, boys will fight.
Leofwin would often fight me, and I beat him.
Even old Gurth would fight. I had much ado
To hold mine own against old Gurth. Old Gurth,
We fought like great states for grave cause; but
Tostig--
On a sudden--at a something--for a nothing--
The boy would fist me hard, and when we fought
I conquer'd, and he loved me none the less,
Till thou wouldst get him all apart, and tell him
That where he was but worsted, he was wrong'd.
Ah! thou hast taught the king to spoil him too;
Now the spoilt child sways both. Take heed, take heed;
Thou art the Queen; ye are boy and girl no more:
Side not with Tostig in any violence,
Lest thou be sideways guilty of the violence.

QUEEN. Come fall not foul on me. I leave thee, brother.

HAROLD. Nay, my good sister--

    [_Exeunt_ QUEEN, HAROLD, GURTH, _and_ LEOFWIN.

ALDWYTH.                     Gamel, son of Orm,
What thinkest thou this means?    [_Pointing to the comet_.

GAMEL.                         War, my dear lady,
War, waste, plague, famine, all malignities.

ALDWYTH. It means the fall of Tostig from his earldom.

GAMEL. That were too small a matter for a comet!

ALDWYTH. It means the lifting of the house of Alfgar.

GAMEL. Too small! a comet would not show for that!

ALDWYTH. Not small for thee, if thou canst compass it.

GAMEL. Thy love?

ALDWYTH. As much as I can give thee, man;
This Tostig is, or like to be, a tyrant;
Stir up thy people: oust him!

GAMEL.                        And thy love?

ALDWYTH. As much as thou canst bear.

GAMEL.                               I can bear all,
And not be giddy.

ALDWYTH.          No more now: to-morrow.



SCENE II.--IN THE GARDEN. THE KING'S HOUSE NEAR LONDON. SUNSET.


EDITH. Mad for thy mate, passionate nightingale....
I love thee for it--ay, but stay a moment;
_He_ can but stay a moment: he is going.
I fain would hear him coming!... near me ... near.
Somewhere--To draw him nearer with a charm
Like thine to thine.
                        (_Singing_.)

    Love is come with a song and a smile,
    Welcome Love with a smile and a song:
    Love can stay but a little while.
    Why cannot he stay? They call him away:
    Ye do him wrong, ye do him wrong;
    Love will stay for a whole life long.

        _Enter_ HAROLD.

HAROLD. The nightingales in Havering-at-the-Bower
Sang out their loves so loud, that Edward's prayers
Were deafen'd and he pray'd them dumb, and thus
I dumb thee too, my wingless nightingale!
                                    [_Kissing her_.

EDITH. Thou art my music! Would their wings were mine
To follow thee to Flanders! Must thou go?

HAROLD. Not must, but will. It is but for one moon.

EDITH. Leaving so many foes in Edward's hall
To league against thy weal. The Lady Aldwyth
Was here to-day, and when she touch'd on thee,
She stammer'd in her hate; I am sure she hates thee,
Pants for thy blood.

HAROLD.              Well, I have given her cause--
I fear no woman.

EDITH.                Hate not one who felt
Some pity for thy hater! I am sure
Her morning wanted sunlight, she so praised
The convent and lone life--within the pale--
Beyond the passion. Nay--she held with Edward,
At least methought she held with holy Edward,
That marriage was half sin.

HAROLD.                     A lesson worth
Finger and thumb--thus (_snaps his fingers_). And my answer to it--
See here--an interwoven H and E!
Take thou this ring; I will demand his ward
From Edward when I come again. Ay, would she?
She to shut up my blossom in the dark!
Thou art _my_ nun, thy cloister in mine arms.

EDITH (_taking the ring_).
Yea, but Earl Tostig--

HAROLD.               That's a truer fear!
For if the North take fire, I should be back;
I shall be, soon enough.

EDITH.                   Ay, but last night
An evil dream that ever came and went--

HAROLD. A gnat that vext thy pillow! Had I been by,
I would have spoil'd his horn. My girl, what was it?

EDITH. Oh! that thou wert not going!
For so methought it was our marriage-morn,
And while we stood together, a dead man
Rose from behind the altar, tore away
My marriage ring, and rent my bridal veil;
And then I turn'd, and saw the church all fill'd
With dead men upright from their graves, and all
The dead men made at thee to murder thee,
But thou didst back thyself against a pillar,
And strike among them with thy battle-axe--
There, what a dream!

HAROLD.              Well, well--a dream--no more!

EDITH. Did not Heaven speak to men in dreams of old?

HAROLD. Ay--well--of old. I tell thee what, my child;
Thou hast misread this merry dream of thine,
Taken the rifted pillars of the wood
For smooth stone columns of the sanctuary,
The shadows of a hundred fat dead deer
For dead men's ghosts. True, that the battle-axe
Was out of place; it should have been the bow.--
Come, thou shalt dream no more such dreams; I swear it,
By mine own eyes--and these two sapphires--these
Twin rubies, that are amulets against all
The kisses of all kind of womankind
In Flanders, till the sea shall roll me back
To tumble at thy feet.

EDITH.                 That would but shame me,
Rather than make me vain. The sea may roll
Sand, shingle, shore-weed, not the living rock
Which guards the land.

HAROLD.                Except it be a soft one,
And undereaten to the fall. Mine amulet ...
This last ... upon thine eyelids, to shut in
A happier dream. Sleep, sleep, and thou shalt see
My grayhounds fleeting like a beam of light,
And hear my peregrine and her bells in heaven;
And other bells on earth, which yet are heaven's;
Guess what they be.

EDITH.              He cannot guess who knows.
Farewell, my king.

HAROLD.            Not yet, but then--my queen.
                               [_Exeunt_.
    _Enter_ ALDWYTH _from the thicket_.

ALDWYTH. The kiss that charms thine eyelids into sleep,
Will hold mine waking. Hate him? I could love him
More, tenfold, than this fearful child can do;
Griffyth I hated: why not hate the foe
Of England? Griffyth when I saw him flee,
Chased deer-like up his mountains, all the blood
That should have only pulsed for Griffyth, beat
For his pursuer. I love him or think I love him.
If he were King of England, I his queen,
I might be sure of it. Nay, I do love him.--
She must be cloister'd somehow, lest the king
Should yield his ward to Harold's will. What harm?
She hath but blood enough to live, not love.--
When Harold goes and Tostig, shall I play
The craftier Tostig with him? fawn upon him?
Chime in with all? 'O thou more saint than king!'
And that were true enough. 'O blessed relics!'
'O Holy Peter!' If he found me thus,
Harold might hate me; he is broad and honest,
Breathing an easy gladness ... not like Aldwyth ...
For which I strangely love him. Should not England
Love Aldwyth, if she stay the feuds that part
The sons of Godwin from the sons of Alfgar
By such a marrying? Courage, noble Aldwyth!
Let all thy people bless thee!
                               Our wild Tostig,
Edward hath made him Earl: he would be king:--
The dog that snapt the shadow, dropt the bone.--
I trust he may do well, this Gamel, whom
I play upon, that he may play the note
Whereat the dog shall howl and run, and Harold
Hear the king's music, all alone with him,
Pronounced his heir of England.
I see the goal and half the way to it.--
Peace-lover is our Harold for the sake
Of England's wholeness--so--to shake the North
With earthquake and disruption--some division--
Then fling mine own fair person in the gap
A sacrifice to Harold, a peace-offering,
A scape-goat marriage--all the sins of both
The houses on mine head--then a fair life
And bless the Queen of England.

MORCAR (_coming from the thicket_).
                                Art thou assured
By this, that Harold loves but Edith?

ALDWYTH.                              Morcar!
Why creep'st thou like a timorous beast of prey
Out of the bush by night?

MORCAR.                   I follow'd thee.

ALDWYTH. Follow my lead, and I will make thee earl.

MORCAR. What lead then?

ALDWYTH.                Thou shalt flash it secretly
Among the good Northumbrian folk, that I--
That Harold loves me--yea, and presently
That I and Harold are betroth'd--and last--
Perchance that Harold wrongs me; tho' I would not
That it should come to that.

MORCAR.                      I will both flash
And thunder for thee.

ALDWYTH.              I said 'secretly;'
It is the flash that murders, the poor thunder
Never harm'd head.

MORCAR.            But thunder may bring down
That which the flash hath stricken.

ALDWYTH.                            Down with Tostig!
That first of all--And when doth Harold go?

MORCAR. To-morrow--first to Bosham, then to Flanders.

ALDWYTH. Not to come back till Tostig shall have shown
And redden'd with his people's blood the teeth
That shall be broken by us--yea, and thou
Chair'd in his place. Good-night, and dream thyself
Their chosen Earl.
                      [_Exit_ ALDWYTH.

MORCAR.            Earl first, and after that
Who knows I may not dream myself their king!




ACT II.


SCENE I.--SEASHORE. PONTHIEU. NIGHT.

HAROLD _and his_ MEN, _wrecked_.


HAROLD. Friends, in that last inhospitable plunge
Our boat hath burst her ribs; but ours are whole;
I have but bark'd my hands.

ATTENDANT.                  I dug mine into
My old fast friend the shore, and clinging thus
Felt the remorseless outdraught of the deep
Haul like a great strong fellow at my legs,
And then I rose and ran. The blast that came
So suddenly hath fallen as suddenly--
Put thou the comet and this blast together--

HAROLD. Put thou thyself and mother-wit together.
Be not a fool!

    _Enter_ FISHERMEN _with torches_, HAROLD _going
    up to one of them_, ROLF.

               Wicked sea-will-o'-the-wisp!
Wolf of the shore! dog, with thy lying lights
Thou hast betray'd us on these rocks of thine!

ROLF. Ay, but thou liest as loud as the black herring-pond behind
thee. We be fishermen; I came to see after my nets.

HAROLD. To drag us into them. Fishermen? devils!
Who, while ye fish for men with your false fires,
Let the great Devil fish for your own souls.

ROLF. Nay then, we be liker the blessed Apostles; _they_ were fishers
of men, Father Jean says.

HAROLD. I had liefer that the fish had swallowed me,
Like Jonah, than have known there were such devils.
What's to be done?
                      [_To his_ MEN--_goes apart with them_.

FISHERMAN. Rolf, what fish did swallow Jonah?

ROLF. A whale!

FISHERMAN. Then a whale to a whelk we have swallowed the King of
England. I saw him over there. Look thee, Rolf, when I was down in the
fever, _she_ was down with the hunger, and thou didst stand by her and
give her thy crabs, and set her up again, till now, by the patient
Saints, she's as crabb'd as ever.

ROLF. And I'll give her my crabs again, when thou art down again.

FISHERMAN. I thank thee, Rolf. Run thou to Count Guy; he is hard at
hand. Tell him what hath crept into our creel, and he will fee thee as
freely as he will wrench this outlander's ransom out of him--and why
not? for what right had he to get himself wrecked on another man's
land?

ROLF. Thou art the human-heartedest, Christian-charitiest of all
crab-catchers. Share and share alike!
                                         [_Exit_.

HAROLD (_to_ FISHERMAN).
Fellow, dost thou catch crabs?

FISHERMAN. As few as I may in a wind, and less than I would in a calm.
Ay!

HAROLD. I have a mind that thou shalt catch no more.

FISHERMAN. How?

HAROLD. I have a mind to brain thee with mine axe.

FISHERMAN. Ay, do, do, and our great Count-crab will make his nippers
meet in thine heart; he'll sweat it out of thee, he'll sweat it out of
thee. Look, he's here! He'll speak for himself! Hold thine own, if
thou canst!

    _Enter_ GUY, COUNT OF PONTHIEU.

HAROLD. Guy, Count of Ponthieu?

GUY.                            Harold, Earl of Wessex!

HAROLD. Thy villains with their lying lights have wreck'd us!

GUY. Art thou not Earl of Wessex?

HAROLD.                           In mine earldom
A man may hang gold bracelets on a bush,
And leave them for a year, and coming back
Find them again.

GUY.             Thou art a mighty man
In thine own earldom!

HAROLD.               Were such murderous liars
In Wessex--if I caught them, they should hang
Cliff-gibbeted for sea-marks; our sea-mew
Winging their only wail!

GUY.                     Ay, but my men
Hold that the shipwreckt are accursed of God;--
What hinders me to hold with mine own men?

HAROLD. The Christian manhood of the man who reigns!

GUY. Ay, rave thy worst, but in our oubliettes
Thou shalt or rot or ransom. Hale him hence!
    [_To one of his_ ATTENDANTS.
Fly thou to William; tell him we have Harold.



SCENE II.--BAYEUX. PALACE.

COUNT WILLIAM _and_ WILLIAM MALET.


WILLIAM. We hold our Saxon woodcock in the springe,
But he begins to flutter. As I think
He was thine host in England when I went
To visit Edward.

MALET.           Yea, and there, my lord,
To make allowance for their rougher fashions,
I found him all a noble host should be.

WILLIAM. Thou art his friend: thou know'st my claim on England
Thro' Edward's promise: we have him in the toils.
And it were well, if thou shouldst let him feel,
How dense a fold of danger nets him round,
So that he bristle himself against my will.

MALET. What would I do, my lord, if I were you?

WILLIAM. What wouldst thou do?

MALET.                         My lord, he is thy guest.

WILLIAM. Nay, by the splendour of God, no guest of mine.
He came not to see me, had past me by
To hunt and hawk elsewhere, save for the fate
Which hunted _him_ when that un-Saxon blast,
And bolts of thunder moulded in high heaven
To serve the Norman purpose, drave and crack'd
His boat on Ponthieu beach; where our friend Guy
Had wrung his ransom from him by the rack,
But that I slept between and purchased him,
Translating his captivity from Guy
To mine own hearth at Bayeux, where he sits
My ransom'd prisoner.

MALET.                Well, if not with gold,
With golden deeds and iron strokes that brought
Thy war with Brittany to a goodlier close
Than else had been, he paid his ransom back.

WILLIAM. So that henceforth they are not like to league
With Harold against _me_.

MALET.                    A marvel, how
He from the liquid sands of Coesnon
Haled thy shore-swallow'd, armour'd Normans up
To fight for thee again!

WILLIAM.                 Perchance against
Their saver, save thou save him from himself.

MALET. But I should let him home again, my lord.

WILLIAM. Simple! let fly the bird within the hand,
To catch the bird again within the bush!
No.
Smooth thou my way, before he clash with me;
I want his voice in England for the crown,
I want thy voice with him to bring him round;
And being brave he must be subtly cow'd,
And being truthful wrought upon to swear
Vows that he dare not break. England our own
Thro' Harold's help, he shall be my dear friend
As well as thine, and thou thyself shalt have
Large lordship there of lands and territory.

MALET. I knew thy purpose; he and Wulfnoth never
Have met, except in public; shall they meet
In private? I have often talk'd with Wulfnoth,
And stuff'd the boy with fears that these may act
On Harold when they meet.

WILLIAM.                  Then let them meet!

MALET. I can but love this noble, honest Harold.

WILLIAM. Love him! why not? thine is a loving office,
I have commission'd thee to save the man:
Help the good ship, showing the sunken rock,
Or he is wreckt for ever.

    _Enter_ WILLIAM RUFUS.

WILLIAM RUFUS.            Father.

WILLIAM.                          Well, boy.

WILLIAM RUFUS. They have taken away the toy thou gavest me,
The Norman knight.

WILLIAM.           Why, boy?

WILLIAM RUFUS.                Because I broke
The horse's leg--it was mine own to break;
I like to have my toys, and break them too.

WILLIAM. Well, thou shalt have another Norman knight!

WILLIAM RUFUS. And may I break his legs?

WILLIAM.                                 Yea,--get thee gone!

WILLIAM RUFUS. I'll tell them I have had my way with thee.
                                                      [_Exit_.

MALET. I never knew thee check thy will for ought
Save for the prattling of thy little ones.

WILLIAM. Who shall be kings of England. I am heir
Of England by the promise of her king.

MALET. But there the great Assembly choose their king,
The choice of England is the voice of England.

WILLIAM. I will be king of England by the laws,
The choice, and voice of England.

MALET.                            Can that be?

WILLIAM. The voice of any people is the sword
That guards them, or the sword that beats them down.
Here comes the would-be what I will be ... king-like ...
Tho' scarce at ease; for, save our meshes break,
More kinglike he than like to prove a king.

    _Enter_ HAROLD, _musing, with his eyes on the ground_.

He sees me not--and yet he dreams of me.
Earl, wilt thou fly my falcons this fair day?
They are of the best, strong-wing'd against the wind.

HAROLD (_looking up suddenly, having caught but the last word_).
_Which_ way does it blow?

WILLIAM.                  Blowing for England, ha?
Not yet. Thou hast not learnt thy quarters here.
The winds so cross and jostle among these towers.

HAROLD. Count of the Normans, thou hast ransom'd us,
Maintain'd, and entertain'd us royally!

WILLIAM. And thou for us hast fought as loyally,
Which binds us friendship-fast for ever!

HAROLD.                                  Good!
But lest we turn the scale of courtesy
By too much pressure on it, I would fain,
Since thou hast promised Wulfnoth home with us,
Be home again with Wulfnoth.

WILLIAM. Stay--as yet
Thou hast but seen how Norman hands can strike,
But walk'd our Norman field, scarce touch'd or tasted
The splendours of our Court.

HAROLD.                      I am in no mood:
I should be as the shadow of a cloud
Crossing your light.

WILLIAM.             Nay, rest a week or two,
And we will fill thee full of Norman sun,
And send thee back among thine island mists
With laughter.

HAROLD.        Count, I thank thee, but had rather
Breathe the free wind from off our Saxon downs,
Tho' charged with all the wet of all the west.

WILLIAM. Why if thou wilt, so let it be--thou shalt.
That were a graceless hospitality
To chain the free guest to the banquet-board;
To-morrow we will ride with thee to Harfleur,
And see thee shipt, and pray in thy behalf
For happier homeward winds than that which crack'd
Thy bark at Ponthieu,--yet to us, in faith,
A happy one--whereby we came to know
Thy valour and thy value, noble earl.
Ay, and perchance a happy one for thee,
Provided--I will go with thee to-morrow--
Nay--but there be conditions, easy ones,
So thou, fair friend, will take them easily.

    _Enter_ PAGE.

PAGE. My lord, there is a post from over seas
With news for thee.    [_Exit_ PAGE.

WILLIAM. Come, Malet, let us hear!

                   [_Exeunt_ COUNT WILLIAM _and_ MALET.

HAROLD. Conditions? What conditions? pay him back
His ransom? 'easy '--that were easy--nay--
No money-lover he! What said the King?
'I pray you do not go to Normandy.'
And fate hath blown me hither, bound me too
With bitter obligation to the Count--
Have I not fought it out? What did he mean?
There lodged a gleaming grimness in his eyes,
Gave his shorn smile the lie. The walls oppress me,
And yon huge keep that hinders half the heaven.
Free air! free field!
               [_Moves to go out. A_ MAN-AT-ARMS _follows him_.

HAROLD (_to the_ MAN-AT-ARMS).
I need thee not. Why dost thou follow me?

MAN-AT-ARMS. I have the Count's commands to follow thee.

HAROLD. What then? Am I in danger in this court?

MAN-AT-ARMS. I cannot tell. I have the Count's commands.

HAROLD. Stand out of earshot then, and keep me still
In eyeshot.

MAN-AT-ARMS. Yea, lord Harold.    [_Withdraws_.

HAROLD.                        And arm'd men
Ever keep watch beside my chamber door,
And if I walk within the lonely wood,
There is an arm'd man ever glides behind!

    _Enter_ MALET.

Why am I follow'd, haunted, harass'd, watch'd?
See yonder!    [_Pointing to the_ MAN-AT-ARMS.

MALET.      'Tis the good Count's care for thee!
The Normans love thee not, nor thou the Normans,
Or--so they deem.

HAROLD.           But wherefore is the wind,
Which way soever the vane-arrow swing,
Not ever fair for England? Why but now
He said (thou heardst him) that I must not hence
Save on conditions.

MALET.              So in truth he said.

HAROLD. Malet, thy mother was an Englishwoman;
There somewhere beats an English pulse in thee!

MALET. Well--for my mother's sake I love your England,
But for my father I love Normandy.

HAROLD. Speak for thy mother's sake, and tell me true.

MALET. Then for my mother's sake, and England's sake
That suffers in the daily want of thee,
Obey the Count's conditions, my good friend.

HAROLD. How, Malet, if they be not honourable!

MALET. Seem to obey them.

HAROLD.                   Better die than lie!

MALET. Choose therefore whether thou wilt have thy conscience
White as a maiden's hand, or whether England
Be shatter'd into fragments.

HAROLD.                      News from England?

MALET. Morcar and Edwin have stirr'd up the Thanes
Against thy brother Tostig's governance;
And all the North of Humber is one storm.

HAROLD. I should be there, Malet, I should be there!

MALET. And Tostig in his own hall on suspicion
Hath massacred the Thane that was his guest,
Gamel, the son of Orm: and there be more
As villainously slain.

HAROLD.                The wolf! the beast!
Ill news for guests, ha, Malet! More? What more?
What do they say? did Edward know of this?

MALET. They say, his wife was knowing and abetting.

HAROLD. They say, his wife!--To marry and have no husband
Makes the wife fool. My God, I should be there.
I'll hack my way to the sea.

MALET.                       Thou canst not, Harold;
Our Duke is all between thee and the sea,
Our Duke is all about thee like a God;
All passes block'd. Obey him, speak him fair,
For he is only debonair to those
That follow where he leads, but stark as death
To those that cross him.--Look thou, here is Wulfnoth!
I leave thee to thy talk with him alone;
How wan, poor lad! how sick and sad for home!
                                         [_Exit_ MALET.

HAROLD (_muttering_).
Go not to Normandy--go not to Normandy!

    _Enter_ WULFNOTH.

Poor brother! still a hostage!

WULFNOTH.                      Yea, and I
Shall see the dewy kiss of dawn no more
Make blush the maiden-white of our tall cliffs,
Nor mark the sea-bird rouse himself and hover
Above the windy ripple, and fill the sky
With free sea-laughter--never--save indeed
Thou canst make yield this iron-mooded Duke
To let me go.

HAROLD.       Why, brother, so he will;
But on conditions. Canst thou guess at them?

WULFNOTH. Draw nearer,--I was in the corridor,
I saw him coming with his brother Odo
The Bayeux bishop, and I hid myself.

HAROLD. They did thee wrong who made thee hostage; thou
Wast ever fearful.

WULFNOTH.          And he spoke--I heard him--
'This Harold is not of the royal blood,
Can have no right to the crown,' and Odo said,
'Thine is the right, for thine the might; he is here,
And yonder is thy keep.'

HAROLD.                  No, Wulfnoth, no.

WULFNOTH. And William laugh'd and swore that might was right,
Far as he knew in this poor world of ours--
'Marry, the Saints must go 'along with us,
And, brother, we will find a way,' said he--
Yea, yea, he would be king of England.

HAROLD. Never!

WULFNOTH.      Yea, but thou must not this way answer _him_.

HAROLD. Is it not better still to speak the truth?

WULFNOTH. Not here, or thou wilt never hence nor I:
For in the racing toward this golden goal
He turns not right or left, but tramples flat
Whatever thwarts him; hast thou never heard
His savagery at Alencon,--the town
Hung out raw hides along their walls, and cried
'Work for the tanner.'

HAROLD.                That had anger'd _me_
Had I been William.

WULFNOTH.           Nay, but he had prisoners,
He tore their eyes out, sliced their hands away,
And flung them streaming o'er the battlements
Upon the heads of those who walk'd within--
O speak him fair, Harold, for thine own sake.

HAROLD. Your Welshman says, 'The Truth against the World,'
Much more the truth against myself.

WULFNOTH.                           Thyself?
But for my sake, oh brother! oh! for my sake!

HAROLD. Poor Wulfnoth! do they not entreat thee well?

WULFNOTH. I see the blackness of my dungeon loom
Across their lamps of revel, and beyond
The merriest murmurs of their banquet clank
The shackles that will bind me to the wall.

HAROLD. Too fearful still!

WULFNOTH. Oh no, no--speak him fair!
Call it to temporize; and not to lie;
Harold, I do not counsel thee to lie.
The man that hath to foil a murderous aim
May, surely, play with words.

HAROLD. Words are the man.
Not ev'n for thy sake, brother, would I lie.

WULFNOTH. Then for thine Edith?

HAROLD. There thou prick'st me deep.

WULFNOTH. And for our Mother England?

HAROLD. Deeper still.

WULFNOTH. And deeper still the deep-down oubliette,
Down thirty feet below the smiling day--
In blackness--dogs' food thrown upon thy head.
And over thee the suns arise and set,
And the lark sings, the sweet stars come and go,
And men are at their markets, in their fields,
And woo their loves and have forgotten thee;
And thou art upright in thy living grave,
Where there is barely room to shift thy side,
And all thine England hath forgotten thee;
And he our lazy-pious Norman King,
With all his Normans round him once again,
Counts his old beads, and hath forgotten thee.

HAROLD. Thou art of my blood, and so methinks, my boy,
Thy fears infect me beyond reason. Peace!

WULFNOTH. And then our fiery Tostig, while thy hands
Are palsied here, if his Northumbrians rise
And hurl him from them,--I have heard the Normans
Count upon this confusion--may he not make
A league with William, so to bring him back?

HAROLD. That lies within the shadow of the chance.

WULFNOTH. And like a river in flood thro' a burst dam
Descends the ruthless Norman--our good King
Kneels mumbling some old bone--our helpless folk
Are wash'd away, wailing, in their own blood--

HAROLD. Wailing! not warring? Boy, thou hast forgotten
That thou art English.

WULFNOTH.              Then our modest women--
I know the Norman license--thine own Edith--

HAROLD. No more! I will not hear thee--William comes.

WULFNOTH. I dare not well be seen in talk with thee.
Make thou not mention that I spake with thee.
                        [_Moves away to the back of the stage_.

    _Enter_ WILLIAM, MALET, _and_ OFFICER.

OFFICER. We have the man that rail'd against thy birth.

WILLIAM. Tear out his tongue.

OFFICER. He shall not rail again.
He said that he should see confusion fall
On thee and on thine house.

WILLIAM. Tear out his eyes, And plunge him into prison.

OFFICER. It shall be done.
                              [_Exit_ OFFICER.

WILLIAM. Look not amazed, fair earl! Better leave undone
Than do by halves--tongueless and eyeless, prison'd--

HAROLD. Better methinks have slain the man at once!

WILLIAM. We have respect for man's immortal soul,
We seldom take man's life, except in war;
It frights the traitor more to maim and blind.

HAROLD. In mine own land I should have scorn'd the man,
Or lash'd his rascal back, and let him go.

WILLIAM. And let him go? To slander thee again!
Yet in thine own land in thy father's day
They blinded my young kinsman, Alfred--ay,
Some said it was thy father's deed.

HAROLD. They lied.

WILLIAM. But thou and he--whom at thy word, for thou
Art known a speaker of the truth, I free
From this foul charge--

HAROLD. Nay, nay, he freed himself
By oath and compurgation from the charge.
The king, the lords, the people clear'd him of it.

WILLIAM. But thou and he drove our good Normans out
From England, and this rankles in us yet.
Archbishop Robert hardly scaped with life.

HAROLD. Archbishop Robert! Robert the Archbishop!
Robert of Jumieges, he that--

MALET.                       Quiet! quiet!

HAROLD. Count! if there sat within the Norman chair
A ruler all for England--one who fill'd
All offices, all bishopricks with English--
We could not move from Dover to the Humber
Saving thro' Norman bishopricks--I say
Ye would applaud that Norman who should drive
The stranger to the fiends!

WILLIAM. Why, that is reason!
Warrior thou art, and mighty wise withal!
Ay, ay, but many among our Norman lords
Hate thee for this, and press upon me--saying
God and the sea have given thee to our hands--
To plunge thee into life-long prison here:--
Yet I hold out against them, as I may,
Yea--would hold out, yea, tho' they should revolt--
For thou hast done the battle in my cause;
I am thy fastest friend in Normandy.

HAROLD. I am doubly bound to thee ... if this be so.

WILLIAM. And I would bind thee more, and would myself
Be bounden to thee more.

HAROLD. Then let me hence With Wulfnoth to King Edward.

WILLIAM. So we will. We hear he hath not long to live.

HAROLD. It may be.

WILLIAM. Why then the heir of England, who is he?

HAROLD. The Atheling is nearest to the throne.

WILLIAM. But sickly, slight, half-witted and a child,
Will England have him king?

HAROLD.                     It may be, no.

WILLIAM. And hath King Edward not pronounced his heir?

HAROLD. Not that I know.

WILLIAM. When he was here in Normandy,
He loved us and we him, because we found him.
A Norman of the Normans.

HAROLD.                  So did we.

WILLIAM. A gentle, gracious, pure and saintly man!
And grateful to the hand that shielded him,
He promised that if ever he were king
In England, he would give his kingly voice
To me as his successor. Knowest thou this?

HAROLD. I learn it now.

WILLIAM.                Thou knowest I am his cousin,
And that my wife descends from Alfred?

HAROLD.                                Ay.

WILLIAM. Who hath a better claim then to the crown
So that ye will not crown the Atheling?

HAROLD. None that I know ... if that but hung upon
King Edward's will.

WILLIAM. Wilt thou uphold my claim?

MALET (_aside to_ HAROLD).
Be careful of thine answer, my good friend.

WULFNOTH (_aside to_ HAROLD).
Oh! Harold, for my sake and for thine own!

HAROLD. Ay ... if the king have not revoked his promise.

WILLIAM. But hath he done it then?

HAROLD. Not that I know.

WILLIAM. Good, good, and thou wilt help me to the crown?

HAROLD. Ay ... if the Witan will consent to this.

WILLIAM. Thou art the mightiest voice in England, man,
Thy voice will lead the Witan--shall I have it?

WULFNOTH (_aside to_ HAROLD).
Oh! Harold, if thou love thine Edith, ay.

HAROLD. Ay, if--

MALET (_aside to_ HAROLD).
Thine 'ifs' will sear thine eyes out--ay.

WILLIAM. I ask thee, wilt thou help me to the crown?
And I will make thee my great Earl of Earls,
Foremost in England and in Normandy;
Thou shalt be verily king--all but the name--
For I shall most sojourn in Normandy;
And thou be my vice-king in England. Speak.

WULFNOTH (_aside to_ HAROLD).
Ay, brother--for the sake of England--ay.

HAROLD. My lord--

MALET (_aside to_ HAROLD).
                 Take heed now.

HAROLD.                         Ay.

WILLIAM.                            I am content,
For thou art truthful, and thy word thy bond.
To-morrow will we ride with thee to Harfleur.
                                      [_Exit_ WILLIAM.

MALET. Harold, I am thy friend, one life with thee,
And even as I should bless thee saving mine,
I thank thee now for having saved thyself.
                                      [_Exit_ MALET.

HAROLD. For having lost myself to save myself,
Said 'ay' when I meant 'no,' lied like a lad
That dreads the pendent scourge, said 'ay' for 'no'!
Ay! No!--he hath not bound me by an oath--
Is 'ay' an oath? is 'ay' strong as an oath?
Or is it the same sin to break my word
As break mine oath? He call'd my word my bond!
He is a liar who knows I am a liar,
And makes believe that he believes my word--
The crime be on his head--not bounden--no.

    [_Suddenly doors are flung open, discovering in an
    inner hall_ COUNT WILLIAM _in his state robes,
    seated upon his throne, between two_ BISHOPS,
    ODO OP BAYEUX _being one: in the centre of
    the hall an ark covered with cloth of gold;
    and on either side of it the_ NORMAN BARONS.

    _Enter a_ JAILOR _before_ WILLIAM'S _throne_.

WILLIAM (_to_ JAILOR).
Knave, hast thou let thy prisoner scape?

JAILOR.                                  Sir Count,
He had but one foot, he must have hopt away,
Yea, some familiar spirit must have help'd him.

WILLIAM. Woe knave to thy familiar and to thee!
Give me thy keys.    [_They fall clashing_.
Nay let them lie. Stand there and wait my will.

                           [_The_ JAILOR _stands aside_.

WILLIAM (_to_ HAROLD).
Hast thou such trustless jailors in thy North?

HAROLD. We have few prisoners in mine earldom there,
So less chance for false keepers.

WILLIAM.                          We have heard
Of thy just, mild, and equal governance;
Honour to thee! thou art perfect in all honour!
Thy naked word thy bond! confirm it now
Before our gather'd Norman baronage,
For they will not believe thee--as I believe.
        [_Descends from his throne and stands by the ark_.
Let all men here bear witness of our bond!
        [_Beckons to_ HAROLD, _who advances_.

    _Enter_ MALET _behind him_.

Lay thou thy hand upon this golden pall!
Behold the jewel of St. Pancratius
Woven into the gold. Swear thou on this!

HAROLD. What should I swear? Why should I swear on this?

WILLIAM (_savagely_).
Swear thou to help me to the crown of England.

MALET (_whispering_ HAROLD).
My friend, thou hast gone too far to palter now.

WULFNOTH (_whispering_ HAROLD).
Swear thou to-day, to-morrow is thine own.

HAROLD. I swear to help thee to the crown of England ...
According as King Edward promises.

WILLIAM. Thou must swear absolutely, noble Earl.

MALET (_whispering_).
Delay is death to thee, ruin to England.

WULFNOTH (_whispering_).
Swear, dearest brother, I beseech thee, swear!

HAROLD (_putting his hand on the jewel_).
I swear to help thee to the crown of England.

WILLIAM. Thanks, truthful Earl; I did not doubt thy word,
But that my barons might believe thy word,
And that the Holy Saints of Normandy
When thou art home in England, with thine own,
Might strengthen thee in keeping of thy word,
I made thee swear.--Show him by whom he hath sworn.

    [_The two_ BISHOPS _advance, and raise the cloth of gold.
    The bodies and bones of Saints are seen lying in the ark_.

The holy bones of all the Canonised
From all the holiest shrines in Normandy!

HAROLD. Horrible!    [_They let the cloth fall again_.

WILLIAM. Ay, for thou hast sworn an oath
Which, if not kept, would make the hard earth rive
To the very Devil's horns, the bright sky cleave
To the very feet of God, and send her hosts
Of injured Saints to scatter sparks of plague
Thro' all your cities, blast your infants, dash
The torch of war among your standing corn,
Dabble your hearths with your own blood.--Enough!
Thou wilt not break it! I, the Count--the King--
Thy friend--am grateful for thine honest oath,
Not coming fiercely like a conqueror, now,
But softly as a bridegroom to his own.
For I shall rule according to your laws,
And make your ever-jarring Earldoms move
To music and in order--Angle, Jute,
Dane, Saxon, Norman, help to build a throne
Out-towering hers of France.... The wind is fair
For England now.... To-night we will be merry.
To-morrow will I ride with thee to Harfleur.

       [_Exeunt_ WILLIAM _and all the_ NORMAN BARONS, _etc_.

HAROLD. To-night we will be merry--and to-morrow--
Juggler and bastard--bastard--he hates that most--
William the tanner's bastard! Would he heard me!
O God, that I were in some wide, waste field
With nothing but my battle-axe and him
To spatter his brains! Why let earth rive, gulf in
These cursed Normans--yea and mine own self.
Cleave heaven, and send thy saints that I may say
Ev'n to their faces, 'If ye side with William
Ye are not noble.' How their pointed fingers
Glared at me! Am I Harold, Harold, son
Of our great Godwin? Lo! I touch mine arms,
My limbs--they are not mine--they are a liar's--
I mean to be a liar--I am not bound--
Stigand shall give me absolution for it--
Did the chest move? did it move? I am utter craven!
O Wulfnoth, Wulfnoth, brother, thou hast betray'd me!

WULFNOTH. Forgive me, brother, I will live here and die.

    _Enter_ PAGE.

PAGE. My lord! the Duke awaits thee at the banquet.

HAROLD. Where they eat dead men's flesh, and drink their blood.

PAGE. My lord--

HAROLD.        I know your Norman cookery is so spiced,
It masks all this.

PAGE.              My lord! thou art white as death.

HAROLD. With looking on the dead. Am I so white?
Thy Duke will seem the darker. Hence, I follow.

                                         [_Exeunt_.




ACT III.


SCENE I.--THE KING'S PALACE. LONDON.

KING EDWARD _dying on a couch, and by him standing the_ QUEEN, HAROLD,
ARCHBISHOP STIGAND, GURTH, LEOFWIN, ARCHBISHOP ALDRED, ALDWYTH, _and_
EDITH.


STIGAND. Sleeping or dying there? If this be death,
Then our great Council wait to crown thee King--
Come hither, I have a power;    [_To_ HAROLD.
They call me near, for I am close to thee
And England--I, old shrivell'd Stigand, I,
Dry as an old wood-fungus on a dead tree,
I have a power!
See here this little key about my neck!
There lies a treasure buried down in Ely:
If e'er the Norman grow too hard for thee,
Ask me for this at thy most need, son Harold,
At thy most need--not sooner.

HAROLD.                       So I will.

STIGAND. Red gold--a hundred purses--yea, and more!
If thou canst make a wholesome use of these
To chink against the Norman, I do believe
My old crook'd spine would bud out two young wings
To fly to heaven straight with.

HAROLD.                         Thank thee, father!
Thou art English, Edward too is English now,
He hath clean repented of his Normanism.

STIGAND. Ay, as the libertine repents who cannot
Make done undone, when thro' his dying sense
Shrills 'lost thro' thee.' They have built their castles here;
Our priories are Norman; the Norman adder
Hath bitten us; we are poison'd: our dear England
Is demi-Norman. He!--
                  [_Pointing to_ KING EDWARD, _sleeping_.

HAROLD.              I would I were
As holy and as passionless as he!
That I might rest as calmly! Look at him--
The rosy face, and long down-silvering beard,
The brows unwrinkled as a summer mere.--

STIGAND. A summer mere with sudden wreckful gusts
From a side-gorge. Passionless? How he flamed
When Tostig's anger'd earldom flung him, nay,
He fain had calcined all Northumbria
To one black ash, but that thy patriot passion
Siding with our great Council against Tostig,
Out-passion'd his! Holy? ay, ay, forsooth,
A conscience for his own soul, not his realm;
A twilight conscience lighted thro' a chink;
Thine by the sun; nay, by some sun to be,
When all the world hath learnt to speak the truth,
And lying were self-murder by that state
Which was the exception.

HAROLD.                  That sun may God speed!

STIGAND. Come, Harold, shake the cloud off!

HAROLD.                                     Can I, father?
Our Tostig parted cursing me and England;
Our sister hates us for his banishment;
He hath gone to kindle Norway against England,
And Wulfnoth is alone in Normandy.
For when I rode with William down to Harfleur,
'Wulfnoth is sick,' he said; 'he cannot follow;'
Then with that friendly-fiendly smile of his,
'We have learnt to love him, let him a little longer
Remain a hostage for the loyalty
Of Godwin's house.' As far as touches Wulfnoth
I that so prized plain word and naked truth
Have sinn'd against it--all in vain.

LEOFWIN.                             Good brother,
By all the truths that ever priest hath preach'd,
Of all the lies that ever men have lied,
Thine is the pardonablest.

HAROLD.                    May be so!
I think it so, I think I am a fool
To think it can be otherwise than so.

STIGAND. Tut, tut, I have absolved thee: dost thou scorn me,
Because I had my Canterbury pallium,
From one whom they dispoped?

HAROLD.                      No, Stigand, no!

STIGAND. Is naked truth actable in true life?
I have heard a saying of thy father Godwin,
That, were a man of state nakedly true,
Men would but take him for the craftier liar.

LEOFWIN. Be men less delicate than the Devil himself?
I thought that naked Truth would shame the Devil,
The Devil is so modest.

GURTH.                  He never said it!

LEOFWIN. Be thou not stupid-honest, brother Gurth!

HAROLD. Better to be a liar's dog, and hold
My master honest, than believe that lying
And ruling men are fatal twins that cannot
Move one without the other. Edward wakes!--
Dazed--he hath seen a vision.

EDWARD.                       The green tree!
Then a great Angel past along the highest
Crying 'the doom of England,' and at once
He stood beside me, in his grasp a sword
Of lightnings, wherewithal he cleft the tree
From off the bearing trunk, and hurl'd it from him
Three fields away, and then he dash'd and drench'd,
He dyed, he soak'd the trunk with human blood,
And brought the sunder'd tree again, and set it
Straight on the trunk, that thus baptized in blood
Grew ever high and higher, beyond my seeing,
And shot out sidelong boughs across the deep
That dropt themselves, and rooted in far isles
Beyond my seeing: and the great Angel rose
And past again along the highest crying
'The doom of England!'--Tostig, raise my head!
                                  [_Falls back senseless_.

HAROLD (_raising him_).
Let Harold serve for Tostig!

_QUEEN_.                     Harold served
Tostig so ill, he cannot serve for Tostig!
Ay, raise his head, for thou hast laid it low!
The sickness of our saintly king, for whom
My prayers go up as fast as my tears fall,
I well believe, hath mainly drawn itself
From lack of Tostig--thou hast banish'd him.

HAROLD. Nay--but the council, and the king himself.

QUEEN. Thou hatest him, hatest him.

HAROLD (_coldly_).
                                    Ay--Stigand, unriddle
This vision, canst thou?

STIGAND.                 Dotage!

EDWARD (_starting up_).
                                 It is finish'd.
I have built the Lord a house--the Lord hath dwelt
In darkness. I have built the Lord a house--
Palms, flowers, pomegranates, golden cherubim
With twenty-cubit wings from wall to wall--
I have built the Lord a house--sing, Asaph! clash
The cymbal, Heman! blow the trumpet, priest!
Fall, cloud, and fill the house--lo! my two pillars,
Jachin and Boaz!--    [_Seeing_ HAROLD _and_ GURTH.
Harold, Gurth,--where am I?
Where is the charter of our Westminster?

STIGAND. It lies beside thee, king, upon thy bed.

EDWARD. Sign, sign at once--take, sign it, Stigand, Aldred!
Sign it, my good son Harold, Gurth, and Leofwin,
Sign it, my queen!

ALL.               We have sign'd it.

EDWARD.                               It is finish'd!
The kingliest Abbey in all Christian lands,
The lordliest, loftiest minster ever built
To Holy Peter in our English isle!
Let me be buried there, and all our kings,
And all our just and wise and holy men
That shall be born hereafter. It is finish'd!
Hast thou had absolution for thine oath?    [_To_ HAROLD.

HAROLD. Stigand hath given me absolution for it.

EDWARD. Stigand is not canonical enough
To save thee from the wrath of Norman Saints.

STIGAND. Norman enough! Be there no Saints of England
To help us from their brethren yonder?

EDWARD.                                Prelate,
The Saints are one, but those of Normanland
Are mightier than our own. Ask it of Aldred.
                                       [_To_ HAROLD.

ALDRED. It shall be granted him, my king; for he
Who vows a vow to strangle his own mother
Is guiltier keeping this, than breaking it.

EDWARD. O friends, I shall not overlive the day.

STIGAND. Why then the throne is empty. Who inherits?
For tho' we be not bound by the king's voice
In making of a king, yet the king's voice
Is much toward his making. Who inherits?
Edgar the Atheling?

EDWARD.             No, no, but Harold.
I love him: he hath served me: none but he
Can rule all England. Yet the curse is on him
For swearing falsely by those blessed bones;
He did not mean to keep his vow.

HAROLD.                          Not mean
To make our England Norman.

EDWARD.                     There spake Godwin,
Who hated all the Normans; but their Saints
Have heard thee, Harold.

EDITH.                   Oh! my lord, my king!
He knew not whom he sware by.

EDWARD.                       Yea, I know
He knew not, but those heavenly ears have heard,
Their curse is on him; wilt thou bring another,
Edith, upon his head?

EDITH.                No, no, not I.

EDWARD. Why then, thou must not wed him.

HAROLD.                                  Wherefore, wherefore?

EDWARD. O son, when thou didst tell me of thine oath,
I sorrow'd for my random promise given
To yon fox-lion. I did not dream then
I should be king.--My son, the Saints are virgins;
They love the white rose of virginity,
The cold, white lily blowing in her cell:
I have been myself a virgin; and I sware
To consecrate my virgin here to heaven--
The silent, cloister'd, solitary life,
A life of life-long prayer against the curse
That lies on thee and England.

HAROLD.                        No, no, no.

EDWARD. Treble denial of the tongue of flesh,
Like Peter's when he fell, and thou wilt have
To wail for it like Peter. O my son!
Are all oaths to be broken then, all promises
Made in our agony for help from heaven?
Son, there is one who loves thee: and a wife,
What matters who, so she be serviceable
In all obedience, as mine own hath been:
God bless thee, wedded daughter.
                  [_Laying his hand on the_ QUEEN'S _head_.

QUEEN.                           Bless thou too
That brother whom I love beyond the rest,
My banish'd Tostig.

EDWARD.             All the sweet Saints bless him!
Spare and forbear him, Harold, if he comes!
And let him pass unscathed; he loves me, Harold!
Be kindly to the Normans left among us,
Who follow'd me for love! and dear son, swear
When thou art king, to see my solemn vow
Accomplish'd.

HAROLD.       Nay, dear lord, for I have sworn
Not to swear falsely twice.

EDWARD.                     Thou wilt not swear?

HAROLD. I cannot.

EDWARD.           Then on thee remains the curse,
Harold, if thou embrace her: and on thee,
Edith, if thou abide it,--

    [_The_ KING _swoons;_ EDITH _falls and kneels by the couch_.

STIGAND.                  He hath swoon'd!
Death?... no, as yet a breath.

HAROLD.                        Look up! look up!
Edith!

ALDRED. Confuse her not; she hath begun
Her life-long prayer for thee.

ALDWYTH.                       O noble Harold,
I would thou couldst have sworn.

HAROLD.                          For thine own pleasure?

ALDWYTH. No, but to please our dying king, and those
Who make thy good their own--all England, Earl.

ALDRED. _I_ would thou couldst have sworn. Our holy king
Hath given his virgin lamb to Holy Church
To save thee from the curse.

HAROLD.                      Alas! poor man,
_His_ promise brought it on me.

ALDRED.                         O good son!
That knowledge made him all the carefuller
To find a means whereby the curse might glance
From thee and England.

HAROLD.                Father, we so loved--

ALDRED. The more the love, the mightier is the prayer;
The more the love, the more acceptable
The sacrifice of both your loves to heaven.
No sacrifice to heaven, no help from heaven;
That runs thro' all the faiths of all the world.
And sacrifice there must be, for the king
Is holy, and hath talk'd with God, and seen
A shadowing horror; there are signs in heaven--

HAROLD. Your comet came and went.

ALDRED. And signs on earth!
Knowest thou Senlac hill?

HAROLD. I know all Sussex;
A good entrenchment for a perilous hour!

ALDRED. Pray God that come not suddenly! There is one
Who passing by that hill three nights ago--
He shook so that he scarce could out with it--
Heard, heard--

HAROLD.       The wind in his hair?

ALDRED.                             A ghostly horn
Blowing continually, and faint battle-hymns,
And cries, and clashes, and the groans of men;
And dreadful shadows strove upon the hill,
And dreadful lights crept up from out the marsh--
Corpse-candles gliding over nameless graves--

HAROLD. At Senlac?

ALDRED.            Senlac.

EDWARD (_waking_).
                           Senlac! Sanguelac,
The Lake of Blood!

STIGAND.           This lightning before death
Plays on the word,--and Normanizes too!

HAROLD. Hush, father, hush!

EDWARD.                     Thou uncanonical fool,
Wilt _thou_ play with the thunder? North and South
Thunder together, showers of blood are blown
Before a never-ending blast, and hiss
Against the blaze they cannot quench--a lake,
A sea of blood--we are drown'd in blood--for God
Has fill'd the quiver, and Death has drawn the bow--
Sanguelac! Sanguelac! the arrow! the arrow!    [_Dies_.

STIGAND. It is the arrow of death in his own heart--
And our great Council wait to crown thee King.



SCENE II.--IN THE GARDEN. THE KING'S HOUSE NEAR LONDON.


EDITH. Crown'd, crown'd and lost, crown'd King--and lost to me!

           (_Singing_.)

    Two young lovers in winter weather,
      None to guide them,
    Walk'd at night on the misty heather;
    Night, as black as a raven's feather;
    Both were lost and found together,
      None beside them.

That is the burthen of it--lost and found
Together in the cruel river Swale
A hundred years ago; and there's another,

      Lost, lost, the light of day,

To which the lover answers lovingly

      'I am beside thee.'
    Lost, lost, we have lost the way.
      'Love, I will guide thee.'
    Whither, O whither? into the river,
    Where we two may be lost together,
    And lost for ever? 'Oh! never, oh! never,
    Tho' we be lost and be found together.'

Some think they loved within the pale forbidden
By Holy Church: but who shall say? the truth
Was lost in that fierce North, where _they_ were lost,
Where all good things are lost, where Tostig lost
The good hearts of his people. It is Harold!

    _Enter_ HAROLD.

Harold the King!

HAROLD.          Call me not King, but Harold.

EDITH. Nay, thou art King!

HAROLD.                    Thine, thine, or King or churl!
My girl, thou hast been weeping: turn not thou
Thy face away, but rather let me be
King of the moment to thee, and command
That kiss my due when subject, which will make
My kingship kinglier to me than to reign
King of the world without it.

EDITH.                        Ask me not,
Lest I should yield it, and the second curse
Descend upon thine head, and thou be only
King of the moment over England.

HAROLD.                          Edith,
Tho' somewhat less a king to my true self
Than ere they crown'd me one, for I have lost
Somewhat of upright stature thro' mine oath,
Yet thee I would not lose, and sell not thou
Our living passion for a dead man's dream;
Stigand believed he knew not what he spake.
Oh God! I cannot help it, but at times
They seem to me too narrow, all the faiths
Of this grown world of ours, whose baby eye
Saw them sufficient. Fool and wise, I fear
This curse, and scorn it. But a little light!--
And on it falls the shadow of the priest;
Heaven yield us more! for better, Woden, all
Our cancell'd warrior-gods, our grim Walhalla,
Eternal war, than that the Saints at peace
The Holiest of our Holiest one should be
This William's fellow-tricksters;--better die
Than credit this, for death is death, or else
Lifts us beyond the lie. Kiss me--thou art not
A holy sister yet, my girl, to fear
There might be more than brother in my kiss,
And more than sister in thine own.

EDITH.                             I dare not.

HAROLD. Scared by the church--'Love for a whole life long'
When was that sung?

EDITH.              Here to the nightingales.

HAROLD. Their anthems of no church, how sweet they are!
Nor kingly priest, nor priestly king to cross
Their billings ere they nest.

EDITH.                        They are but of spring,
They fly the winter change--not so with us--
No wings to come and go.

HAROLD.                  But wing'd souls flying
Beyond all change and in the eternal distance
To settle on the Truth.

EDITH.                  They are not so true,
They change their mates.

HAROLD.                  Do they? I did not know it.

EDITH. They say thou art to wed the Lady Aldwyth.

HAROLD. They say, they say.

EDITH.                      If this be politic,
And well for thee and England--and for her--
Care not for me who love thee.

GURTH (_calling_).             Harold, Harold!

HAROLD. The voice of Gurth! (_Enter_ GURTH.)
                            Good even, my good brother!

GURTH. Good even, gentle Edith.

EDITH.                          Good even, Gurth.

GURTH. Ill news hath come! Our hapless brother, Tostig--
He, and the giant King of Norway, Harold
Hardrada--Scotland, Ireland, Iceland, Orkney,
Are landed North of Humber, and in a field
So packt with carnage that the dykes and brooks
Were bridged and damm'd with dead, have overthrown
Morcar and Edwin.

HAROLD.           Well then, we must fight.
How blows the wind?

GURTH.              Against St. Valery
And William.

HAROLD.      Well then, we will to the North.

GURTH. Ay, but worse news: this William sent to Rome,
Swearing thou swarest falsely by his Saints:
The Pope and that Archdeacon Hildebrand
His master, heard him, and have sent him back
A holy gonfanon, and a blessed hair
Of Peter, and all France, all Burgundy,
Poitou, all Christendom is raised against thee;
He hath cursed thee, and all those who fight for thee,
And given thy realm of England to the bastard.

HAROLD. Ha! ha!

EDITH. Oh! laugh not!... Strange and ghastly in the gloom
And shadowing of this double thunder-cloud
That lours on England--laughter!

HAROLD. No, not strange!
This was old human laughter in old Rome
Before a Pope was born, when that which reign'd
Call'd itself God.--A kindly rendering
Of 'Render unto Caesar.' ... The Good Shepherd!
Take this, and render that.

GURTH.                      They have taken York.

HAROLD. The Lord was God and came as man--the Pope
Is man and comes as God.--York taken?

GURTH.                                Yea,
Tostig hath taken York!

HAROLD.                 To York then. Edith,
Hadst thou been braver, I had better braved
All--but I love thee and thou me--and that
Remains beyond all chances and all churches,
And that thou knowest.

EDITH.                 Ay, but take back thy ring.
It burns my hand--a curse to thee and me.
I dare not wear it.
            [_Proffers_ HAROLD _the ring, which he takes_.

HAROLD.             But I dare. God with thee!

                          [_Exeunt_ HAROLD _and_ GURTH.

EDITH. The King hath cursed him, if he marry me;
The Pope hath cursed him, marry me or no!
God help me! I know nothing--can but pray
For Harold--pray, pray, pray--no help but prayer,
A breath that fleets beyond this iron world,
And touches Him that made it.




ACT IV.


SCENE I.--IN NORTHUMBRIA.

ARCHBISHOP ALDRED, MORCAR, EDWIN, _and_ FORCES. _Enter_ HAROLD.
_The standard of the golden Dragon of Wessex preceding him_.


HAROLD. What! are thy people sullen from defeat?
Our Wessex dragon flies beyond the Humber,
No voice to greet it.

EDWIN.                Let not our great king
Believe us sullen--only shamed to the quick
Before the king--as having been so bruised
By Harold, king of Norway; but our help
Is Harold, king of England. Pardon us, thou!
Our silence is our reverence for the king!

HAROLD. Earl of the Mercians! if the truth be gall,
Cram me not thou with honey, when our good hive
Needs every sting to save it.

VOICES.                       Aldwyth! Aldwyth!

HAROLD. Why cry thy people on thy sister's name?

MORCAR. She hath won upon our people thro' her beauty,
And pleasantness among them.

VOICES. Aldwyth, Aldwyth!

HAROLD. They shout as they would have her for a queen.

MORCAR. She hath followed with our host, and suffer'd all.

HAROLD. What would ye, men?

VOICE. Our old Northumbrian crown,
And kings of our own choosing.

HAROLD.                        Your old crown
Were little help without our Saxon carles
Against Hardrada.

VOICE.            Little! we are Danes,
Who conquer'd what we walk on, our own field.

HAROLD. They have been plotting here!    [_Aside_.

VOICE.                                He calls us little!

HAROLD. The kingdoms of this world began with little,
A hill, a fort, a city--that reach'd a hand
Down to the field beneath it, 'Be thou mine,
Then to the next, 'Thou also!' If the field
Cried out 'I am mine own;' another hill
Or fort, or city, took it, and the first
Fell, and the next became an Empire.

VOICE.                               Yet
Thou art but a West Saxon: _we_ are Danes!

HAROLD. My mother is a Dane, and I am English;
There is a pleasant fable in old books,
Ye take a stick, and break it; bind a score
All in one faggot, snap it over knee,
Ye cannot.

VOICE.     Hear King Harold! he says true!

HAROLD. Would ye be Norsemen?

VOICES.                       No!

HAROLD.                           Or Norman?

VOICES.                                      No!

HAROLD. Snap not the faggot-band then.

VOICE.                                 That is true!

VOICE. Ay, but thou art not kingly, only grandson
To Wulfnoth, a poor cow-herd.

HAROLD.                       This old Wulfnoth
Would take me on his knees and tell me tales
Of Alfred and of Athelstan the Great
Who drove you Danes; and yet he held that Dane,
Jute, Angle, Saxon, were or should be all
One England, for this cow-herd, like my father,
Who shook the Norman scoundrels off the throne,
Had in him kingly thoughts--a king of men,
Not made but born, like the great king of all,
A light among the oxen.

VOICE.                  That is true!

VOICE. Ay, and I love him now, for mine own father
Was great, and cobbled.

VOICE.                  Thou art Tostig's brother,
Who wastes the land.

HAROLD.              This brother comes to save
Your land from waste; I saved it once before,
For when your people banish'd Tostig hence,
And Edward would have sent a host against you,
Then I, who loved my brother, bad the king
Who doted on him, sanction your decree
Of Tostig's banishment, and choice of Morcar,
To help the realm from scattering.

VOICE.                             King! thy brother,
If one may dare to speak the truth, was wrong'd.
Wild was he, born so: but the plots against him
Had madden'd tamer men.

MORCAR.                 Thou art one of those
Who brake into Lord Tostig's treasure-house
And slew two hundred of his following,
And now, when Tostig hath come back with power,
Are frighted back to Tostig.

OLD THANE.                   Ugh! Plots and feuds!
This is my ninetieth birthday. Can ye not
Be brethren? Godwin still at feud with Alfgar,
And Alfgar hates King Harold. Plots and feuds!
This is my ninetieth birthday!

HAROLD.                        Old man, Harold
Hates nothing; not _his_ fault, if our two houses
Be less than brothers.

VOICES.                Aldwyth, Harold, Aldwyth!

HAROLD. Again! Morcar! Edwin! What do they mean?

EDWIN. So the good king would deign to lend an ear
Not overscornful, we might chance--perchance--
To guess their meaning.

MORCAR.                 Thine own meaning, Harold,
To make all England one, to close all feuds,
Mixing our bloods, that thence a king may rise
Half-Godwin and half-Alfgar, one to rule
All England beyond question, beyond quarrel.

HAROLD. Who sow'd this fancy here among the people?

MORCAR. Who knows what sows itself among the people?
A goodly flower at times.

HAROLD.                   The Queen of Wales?
Why, Morcar, it is all but duty in her
To hate me; I have heard she hates me.

MORCAR.                                No!
For I can swear to that, but cannot swear
That these will follow thee against the Norsemen,
If thou deny them this.

HAROLD.                 Morcar and Edwin,
When will you cease to plot against my house?

EDWIN. The king can scarcely dream that we, who know
His prowess in the mountains of the West,
Should care to plot against him in the North.

MORCAR. Who dares arraign us, king, of such a plot?

HAROLD. Ye heard one witness even now.

MORCAR.                                The craven!
There is a faction risen again for Tostig,
Since Tostig came with Norway--fright not love.

HAROLD. Morcar and Edwin, will ye, if I yield,
Follow against the Norseman?

MORCAR.                      Surely, surely!

HAROLD. Morcar and Edwin, will ye upon oath,
Help us against the Norman?

MORCAR.                     With good will;
Yea, take the Sacrament upon it, king.

HAROLD. Where is thy sister?

MORCAR.                      Somewhere hard at hand.
Call and she comes.

    [_One goes out, then enter_ ALDWYTH.

HAROLD.             I doubt not but thou knowest
Why thou art summon'd.

ALDWYTH.               Why?--I stay with these,
Lest thy fierce Tostig spy me out alone,
And flay me all alive.

HAROLD.                Canst thou love one
Who did discrown thine husband, unqueen thee?
Didst thou not love thine husband?

ALDWYTH.                           Oh! my lord,
The nimble, wild, red, wiry, savage king--
That was, my lord, a match of policy.

HAROLD.                               Was it?
I knew him brave: he loved his land: he fain
Had made her great: his finger on her harp
(I heard him more than once) had in it Wales,
Her floods, her woods, her hills: had I been his,
I had been all Welsh.

ALDWYTH.              Oh, ay--all Welsh--and yet
I saw thee drive him up his hills--and women
Cling to the conquer'd, if they love, the more;
If not, they cannot hate the conqueror.
We never--oh! good Morcar, speak for us,
His conqueror conquer'd Aldwyth.

HAROLD.                          Goodly news!

MORCAR. Doubt it not thou! Since Griffith's
head was sent
To Edward, she hath said it.

HAROLD.                      I had rather
She would have loved her husband. Aldwyth, Aldwyth,
Canst thou love me, thou knowing where I love?

ALDWYTH. I can, my lord, for mine own sake, for thine,
For England, for thy poor white dove, who flutters
Between thee and the porch, but then would find
Her nest within the cloister, and be still.

HAROLD. Canst thou love one, who cannot love again?

ALDWYTH. Full hope have I that love will answer love.

HAROLD. Then in the name of the great God, so be it!
Come, Aldred, join our hands before the hosts,
That all may see.

    [ALDRED _joins the hands of_ HAROLD _and_ ALDWYTH
    _and blesses them_.

VOICES.           Harold, Harold and Aldwyth!

HAROLD. Set forth our golden Dragon, let him flap
The wings that beat down Wales!
Advance our Standard of the Warrior,
Dark among gems and gold; and thou, brave banner,
Blaze like a night of fatal stars on those
Who read their doom and die.
Where lie the Norsemen? on the Derwent? ay
At Stamford-bridge.
Morcar, collect thy men; Edwin, my friend--
Thou lingerest.--Gurth,--
Last night King Edward came to me in dreams--
The rosy face and long down-silvering beard--
He told me I should conquer:--
I am no woman to put faith in dreams.
    (To his army.)
Last night King Edward came to me in dreams,
And told me we should conquer.

VOICES.                        Forward! Forward!
Harold and Holy Cross!

ALDWYTH.               The day is won!



SCENE II.--A PLAIN. BEFORE THE BATTLE OF STAMFORD-BRIDGE.

HAROLD _and his_ GUARD.


HAROLD. Who is it comes this way? Tostig?
(_Enter_ TOSTIG _with a small force_.)    O brother,
What art thou doing here?

TOSTIG.                   I am foraging
For Norway's army.

HAROLD.            I could take and slay thee.
Thou art in arms against us.

TOSTIG.                      Take and slay me,
For Edward loved me.

HAROLD.              Edward bad me spare thee.

TOSTIG. I hate King Edward, for he join'd with thee
To drive me outlaw'd. Take and slay me, I say,
Or I shall count thee fool.

HAROLD.                     Take thee, or free thee,
Free thee or slay thee, Norway will have war;
No man would strike with Tostig, save for Norway.
Thou art nothing in thine England, save for Norway,
Who loves not thee but war. What dost thou here,
Trampling thy mother's bosom into blood?

TOSTIG. She hath wean'd me from it with such bitterness.
I come for mine own Earldom, my Northumbria;
Thou hast given it to the enemy of our house.

HAROLD. Northumbria threw thee off, she will not have thee,
Thou hast misused her: and, O crowning crime!
Hast murder'd thine own guest, the son of Orm,
Gamel, at thine own hearth.

TOSTIG.                     The slow, fat fool!
He drawl'd and prated so, I smote him suddenly,
I knew not what I did. He held with Morcar.--
I hate myself for all things that I do.

HAROLD. And Morcar holds with us. Come back with him.
Know what thou dost; and we may find for thee,
So thou be chasten'd by thy banishment,
Some easier earldom.

TOSTIG.              What for Norway then?
He looks for land among us, he and his.

HAROLD. Seven feet of English land, or something more,
Seeing he is a giant.

TOSTIG.               That is noble!
That sounds of Godwin.

HAROLD.                Come thou back, and be
Once more a son of Godwin.

TOSTIG (_turns away_).     O brother, brother,
O Harold--

HAROLD (_laying his hand on_ TOSTIG'S _shoulder_).
          Nay then, come thou back to us!

TOSTIG (_after a pause turning to him_).  Never
shall any man say that I, that Tostig
Conjured the mightier Harold from his North
To do the battle for me here in England,
Then left him for the meaner! thee!--
Thou hast no passion for the House of Godwin--
Thou hast but cared to make thyself a king--
Thou hast sold me for a cry.--
Thou gavest thy voice against me in the Council--
I hate thee, and despise thee, and defy thee.
Farewell for ever!
                      [_Exit_.

HAROLD. On to Stamford-bridge!



SCENE III.


AFTER THE BATTLE OF STAMFORD-BRIDGE. BANQUET.

HAROLD _and_ ALDWYTH. GURTH, LEOFWIN, MORCAR, EDWIN,
_and other_ EARLS _and_ THANES.


VOICES. Hail! Harold! Aldwyth! hail, bridegroom and bride!

ALDWYTH (_talking with_ HAROLD).
Answer them thou!
Is this our marriage-banquet? Would the wines
Of wedding had been dash'd into the cups
Of victory, and our marriage and thy glory
Been drunk together! these poor hands but sew,
Spin, broider--would that they were man's to have held
The battle-axe by thee!

HAROLD.                 There _was_ a moment
When being forced aloof from all my guard,
And striking at Hardrada and his madmen
I had wish'd for any weapon.

ALDWYTH.                     Why art thou sad?

HAROLD. I have lost the boy who play'd at ball with me,
With whom I fought another fight than this
Of Stamford-bridge.

ALDWYTH.            Ay! ay! thy victories
Over our own poor Wales, when at thy side
He conquer'd with thee.

HAROLD.                 No--the childish fist
That cannot strike again.

ALDWYTH.                  Thou art too kindly.
Why didst thou let so many Norsemen hence?
Thy fierce forekings had clench'd their pirate hides
To the bleak church doors, like kites upon a barn.

HAROLD. Is there so great a need to tell thee why?

ALDWYTH. Yea, am I not thy wife?

VOICES.                          Hail, Harold, Aldwyth!
Bridegroom and bride!

ALDWYTH. Answer them!    [_To_ HAROLD.

HAROLD (_to all_).    Earls and Thanes!
Full thanks for your fair greeting of my bride!
Earls, Thanes, and all our countrymen! the day,
Our day beside the Derwent will not shine
Less than a star among the goldenest hours
Of Alfred, or of Edward his great son,
Or Athelstan, or English Ironside
Who fought with Knut, or Knut who coming Dane
Died English. Every man about his king
Fought like a king; the king like his own man,
No better; one for all, and all for one,
One soul! and therefore have we shatter'd back
The hugest wave from Norseland ever yet
Surged on us, and our battle-axes broken
The Raven's wing, and dumb'd his carrion croak
From the gray sea for ever. Many are gone--
Drink to the dead who died for us, the living
Who fought and would have died, but happier lived,
If happier be to live; they both have life
In the large mouth of England, till _her_ voice
Die with the world. Hail--hail!

MORCAR. May all invaders perish like Hardrada!
All traitors fail like Tostig.     [_All drink but_ HAROLD.

ALDWYTH.                       Thy cup's full!

HAROLD. I saw the hand of Tostig cover it.
Our dear, dead, traitor-brother, Tostig, him
Reverently we buried. Friends, had I been here,
Without too large self-lauding I must hold
The sequel had been other than his league
With Norway, and this battle. Peace be with him!
He was not of the worst. If there be those
At banquet in this hall, and hearing me--
For there be those I fear who prick'd the lion
To make him spring, that sight of Danish blood
Might serve an end not English--peace with them
Likewise, if they can be at peace with what
God gave us to divide us from the wolf!

ALDWYTH (_aside to_ HAROLD).
Make not our Morcar sullen: it is not wise.

HAROLD. Hail to the living who fought, the dead who fell!

VOICES. Hail, hail!

FIRST THANE. How ran that answer which King Harold gave
To his dead namesake, when he ask'd for England?

LEOFWIN. 'Seven feet of English earth, or something more,
Seeing he is a giant!'

FIRST THANE.           Then for the bastard
Six feet and nothing more!

LEOFWIN.                   Ay, but belike
Thou hast not learnt his measure.

FIRST THANE.                      By St. Edmund
I over-measure him. Sound sleep to the man
Here by dead Norway without dream or dawn!

SECOND THANE. What is he bragging still that he will come
To thrust our Harold's throne from under him?
My nurse would tell me of a molehill crying
To a mountain 'Stand aside and room for me!'

FIRST THANE. Let him come! let him come.
Here's to him, sink or swim!    [_Drinks_.

SECOND THANE.                God sink him!

FIRST THANE. Cannot hands which had the strength
To shove that stranded iceberg off our shores,
And send the shatter'd North again to sea,
Scuttle his cockle-shell? What's Brunanburg
To Stamford-bridge? a war-crash, and so hard,
So loud, that, by St. Dunstan, old St. Thor--
By God, we thought him dead--but our old Thor
Heard his own thunder again, and woke and came
Among us again, and mark'd the sons of those
Who made this Britain England, break the North:

    Mark'd how the war-axe swang,
    Heard how the war-horn sang,
    Mark'd how the spear-head sprang,
    Heard how the shield-wall rang,
    Iron on iron clang,
    Anvil on hammer bang--

SECOND THANE. Hammer on anvil, hammer on anvil. Old dog,
Thou art drunk, old dog!

FIRST THANE.             Too drunk to fight with thee!

SECOND THANE. Fight thou with thine own double, not with me,
Keep that for Norman William!

FIRST THANE.                  Down with William!

THIRD THANE. The washerwoman's brat!

FOURTH THANE.                        The tanner's bastard!

FIFTH THANE.
The Falaise byblow!

    [_Enter a_ THANE, _from Pevensey, spattered with mud_.

HAROLD.             Ay, but what late guest,
As haggard as a fast of forty days,
And caked and plaster'd with a hundred mires,
Hath stumbled on our cups?

THANE _from Pevensey_.     My lord the King!
William the Norman, for the wind had changed--

HAROLD. I felt it in the middle of that fierce fight
At Stamford-bridge. William hath landed, ha?

THANE _from Pevensey_.  Landed at Pevensey--I am from Pevensey--
Hath wasted all the land at Pevensey--
Hath harried mine own cattle--God confound him!
I have ridden night and day from Pevensey--
A thousand ships--a hundred thousand men--
Thousands of horses, like as many lions
Neighing and roaring as they leapt to land--

HAROLD. How oft in coming hast thou broken bread?

THANE _from Pevensey_.
Some thrice, or so.

HAROLD.             Bring not thy hollowness
On our full feast. Famine is fear, were it but
Of being starved. Sit down, sit down, and eat,
And, when again red-blooded, speak again;
(_Aside_.) The men that guarded England to the South
Were scatter'd to the harvest.... No power mine
To hold their force together.... Many are fallen
At Stamford-bridge ... the people stupid-sure
Sleep like their swine ... in South and North at once
I could not be.
     (_Aloud_.) Gurth, Leofwin, Morcar, Edwin!
(_Pointing to the revellers_.)
The curse of England! these are drown'd in wassail,
And cannot see the world but thro' their wines!
Leave them! and thee too, Aldwyth, must I leave--
Harsh is the news! hard is our honeymoon!
Thy pardon.    (_Turning round to his_ ATTENDANTS.)
            Break the banquet up ... Ye four!
And thou, my carrier-pigeon of black news,
Cram thy crop full, but come when thou art call'd.

                                      [_Exit_ HAROLD.




ACT V.


SCENE I.--A TENT ON A MOUND, FROM WHICH CAN BE SEEN THE FIELD OF
SENLAC.

HAROLD, _sitting; by him standing_ HUGH MARGOT _the Monk_, GURTH,
LEOFWIN,


HAROLD. Refer my cause, my crown to Rome!... The wolf
Mudded the brook and predetermined all.
Monk,
Thou hast said thy say, and had my constant 'No'
For all but instant battle. I hear no more.

MARGOT. Hear me again--for the last time. Arise,
Scatter thy people home, descend the hill,
Lay hands of full allegiance in thy Lord's
And crave his mercy, for the Holy Father
Hath given this realm of England to the Norman.

HAROLD. Then for the last time, monk, I ask again
When had the Lateran and the Holy Father
To do with England's choice of her own king?

MARGOT. Earl, the first Christian Caesar drew to the East
To leave the Pope dominion in the West
He gave him all the kingdoms of the West.

HAROLD. So!--did he?--Earl--I have a mind to play
The William with thine eyesight and thy tongue.
Earl--ay--thou art but a messenger of William.
I am weary--go: make me not wroth with thee!

MARGOT. Mock-king, I am the messenger of God,
His Norman Daniel! Mene, Mene, Tekel!
Is thy wrath Hell, that I should spare to cry,
Yon heaven is wroth with _thee?_ Hear me again!
Our Saints have moved the Church that moves the world,
And all the Heavens and very God: they heard--
They know King Edward's promise and thine--thine.

HAROLD. Should they not know free England crowns herself?
Not know that he nor I had power to promise?
Not know that Edward cancell'd his own promise?
And for my part therein--Back to that juggler,
                                        [_Rising_.
Tell him the saints are nobler than he dreams,
Tell him that God is nobler than the Saints,
And tell him we stand arm'd on Senlac Hill,
And bide the doom of God.

MARGOT.                   Hear it thro' me.
The realm for which thou art forsworn is cursed,
The babe enwomb'd and at the breast is cursed,
The corpse thou whelmest with thine earth is cursed,
The soul who fighteth on thy side is cursed,
The seed thou sowest in thy field is cursed,
The steer wherewith thou plowest thy field is cursed,
The fowl that fleeth o'er thy field is cursed,
And thou, usurper, liar--

HAROLD.                  Out, beast monk!
    [_Lifting his hand to strike him_. GURTH _stops the blow_.
I ever hated monks.

MARGOT.             I am but a voice
Among you: murder, martyr me if ye will--

HAROLD. Thanks, Gurth! The simple, silent, selfless man
Is worth a world of tonguesters. (_To_ MARGOT.) Get thee gone!
He means the thing he says. See him out safe!

LEOFWIN. He hath blown himself as red as fire with curses.
An honest fool! Follow me, honest fool,
But if thou blurt thy curse among our folk,
I know not--I may give that egg-bald head
The tap that silences.

HAROLD.                See him out safe.
                            [_Exeunt_ LEOFWIN _and_ MARGOT.

GURTH. Thou hast lost thine even temper, brother Harold!

HAROLD. Gurth, when I past by Waltham, my foundation
For men who serve the neighbour, not themselves,
I cast me down prone, praying; and, when I rose,
They told me that the Holy Rood had lean'd
And bow'd above me; whether that which held it
Had weaken'd, and the Rood itself were bound
To that necessity which binds us down;
Whether it bow'd at all but in their fancy;
Or if it bow'd, whether it symbol'd ruin
Or glory, who shall tell? but they were sad,
And somewhat sadden'd me.

GURTH.                    Yet if a fear,
Or shadow of a fear, lest the strange Saints
By whom thou swarest, should have power to balk
Thy puissance in this fight with him, who made
And heard thee swear--brother--_I_ have not sworn--
If the king fall, may not the kingdom fall?
But if I fall, I fall, and thou art king;
And, if I win, I win, and thou art king;
Draw thou to London, there make strength to breast
Whatever chance, but leave this day to me.

LEOFWIN (_entering_). And waste the land about thee as thou goest,
And be thy hand as winter on the field,
To leave the foe no forage.

HAROLD.                     Noble Gurth!
Best son of Godwin! If I fall, I fall--
The doom of God! How should the people fight
When the king flies? And, Leofwin, art thou mad?
How should the King of England waste the fields
Of England, his own people?--No glance yet
Of the Northumbrian helmet on the heath?

LEOFWIN. No, but a shoal of wives upon the heath,
And someone saw thy willy-nilly nun
Vying a tress against our golden fern.

HAROLD. Vying a tear with our cold dews, a sigh
With these low-moaning heavens. Let her be fetch'd.
We have parted from our wife without reproach,
Tho' we have dived thro' all her practices;
And that is well.

LEOFWIN.          I saw her even now:
She hath not left us.

HAROLD.               Nought of Morcar then?

GURTH. Nor seen, nor heard; thine, William's or his own
As wind blows, or tide flows: belike he watches,
If this war-storm in one of its rough rolls
Wash up that old crown of Northumberland.

HAROLD. I married her for Morcar--a sin against
The truth of love. Evil for good, it seems,
Is oft as childless of the good as evil
For evil.

LEOFWIN.  Good for good hath borne at times
A bastard false as William.

HAROLD.                     Ay, if Wisdom
Pair'd not with Good. But I am somewhat worn,
A snatch of sleep were like the peace of God.
Gurth, Leofwin, go once more about the hill--
What did the dead man call it--Sanguelac,
The lake of blood?

LEOFWIN.           A lake that dips in William
As well as Harold.

HAROLD.            Like enough. I have seen
The trenches dug, the palisades uprear'd
And wattled thick with ash and willow-wands;
Yea, wrought at them myself. Go round once more;
See all be sound and whole. No Norman horse
Can shatter England, standing shield by shield;
Tell that again to all.

GURTH.                  I will, good brother.

HAROLD. Our guardsman hath but toil'd his hand and foot,
I hand, foot, heart and head. Some wine!
    (_One pours wine into a goblet which he hands to_ HAROLD.)
                                         Too much!
What? we must use our battle-axe to-day.
Our guardsmen have slept well, since we came in?

LEOFWIN. Ay, slept and snored. Your second-sighted man
That scared the dying conscience of the king,
Misheard their snores for groans. They are up again
And chanting that old song of Brunanburg
Where England conquer'd.

HAROLD.                  That is well. The Norman,
What is he doing?

LEOFWIN.          Praying for Normandy;
Our scouts have heard the tinkle of their bells.

HAROLD. And our old songs are prayers for England too!
But by all Saints--

LEOFWIN.           Barring the Norman!

HAROLD.                                Nay,
Were the great trumpet blowing doomsday dawn,
I needs must rest. Call when the Norman moves--

                            [_Exeunt all, but_ HAROLD.

No horse--thousands of horses--our shield wall--
Wall--break it not--break not--break--    [_Sleeps_.

VISION OF EDWARD. Son Harold, I thy king, who came before
To tell thee thou shouldst win at Stamford-bridge,
Come yet once more, from where I am at peace,
Because I loved thee in my mortal day,
To tell thee them shalt die on Senlac hill--
Sanguelac!

VISION OF WULFNOTH. O brother, from my ghastly oubliette
I send my voice across the narrow seas--
No more, no more, dear brother, nevermore--
Sanguelac!

VISION OF TOSTIG. O brother, most unbrotherlike to me,
Thou gavest thy voice against me in my life,
I give my voice against thee from the grave--
Sanguelac!

VISION OF NORMAN SAINTS. O hapless Harold!
King but for an hour!
Thou swarest falsely by our blessed bones,
We give our voice against thee out of heaven!
Sanguelac! Sanguelac! The arrow! the arrow!

HAROLD (_starting up, battle-axe in hand_.) Away!
My battle-axe against your voices. Peace!
The king's last word--'the arrow!' I shall die--
I die for England then, who lived for England--
What nobler? men must die.
I cannot fall into a falser world--
I have done no man wrong. Tostig, poor brother,
Art _thou_ so anger'd?
Fain had I kept thine earldom in thy hands
Save for thy wild and violent will that wrench'd
All hearts of freemen from thee. I could do
No other than this way advise the king
Against the race of Godwin. Is it possible
That mortal men should bear their earthly heats
Into yon bloodless world, and threaten us thence
Unschool'd of Death? Thus then thou art revenged--
I left our England naked to the South
To meet thee in the North. The Norseman's raid
Hath helpt the Norman, and the race of Godwin
Hath ruin'd Godwin. No--our waking thoughts
Suffer a stormless shipwreck in the pools
Of sullen slumber, and arise again
Disjointed: only dreams--where mine own self
Takes part against myself! Why? for a spark
Of self-disdain born in me when I sware
Falsely to him, the falser Norman, over
His gilded ark of mummy-saints, by whom
I knew not that I sware,--not for myself--
For England--yet not wholly--

    _Enter_ EDITH.

                             Edith, Edith,
Get thou into thy cloister as the king
Will'd it: be safe: the perjury-mongering Count
Hath made too good an use of Holy Church
To break her close! There the great God of truth
Fill all thine hours with peace!--A lying devil
Hath haunted me--mine oath--my wife--I fain
Had made my marriage not a lie; I could not:
Thou art my bride! and thou in after years
Praying perchance for this poor soul of mine
In cold, white cells beneath an icy moon--
This memory to thee!--and this to England,
My legacy of war against the Pope
From child to child, from Pope to Pope, from age to age,
Till the sea wash her level with her shores,
Or till the Pope be Christ's.

    _Enter_ ALDWYTH.

ALDWYTH (_to_ EDITH).         Away from him!

EDITH. I will.... I have not spoken to the king
One word; and one I must. Farewell!    [_Going_.

HAROLD.                             Not yet.
Stay.

EDITH. To what use?

HAROLD.             The king commands thee, woman!
    (_To_ ALDWYTH.)
Have thy two brethren sent their forces in?

ALDWYTH. Nay, I fear not.

HAROLD.                   Then there's no force in thee!
Thou didst possess thyself of Edward's ear
To part me from the woman that I loved!
Thou didst arouse the fierce Northumbrians!
Thou hast been false to England and to me!--
As ... in some sort ... I have been false to thee.
Leave me. No more--Pardon on both sides--Go!

ALDWYTH. Alas, my lord, I loved thee.

HAROLD (_bitterly_).                  With a love
Passing thy love for Griffyth! wherefore now
Obey my first and last commandment. Go!

ALDWYTH. O Harold! husband! Shall we meet again?

HAROLD. After the battle--after the battle. Go.

ALDWYTH. I go. (_Aside_.) That I could stab her standing there!
                                                  [_Exit_ ALDWYTH.

EDITH. Alas, my lord, she loved thee.

HAROLD.                               Never! never!

EDITH. I saw it in her eyes!

HAROLD.                      I see it in thine.
And not on thee--nor England--fall God's doom!

EDITH. On _thee?_ on me. And thou art England! Alfred
Was England. Ethelred was nothing. England
Is but her king, and thou art Harold!

HAROLD.                               Edith,
The sign in heaven--the sudden blast at sea--
My fatal oath--the dead Saints--the dark dreams--
The Pope's Anathema--the Holy Rood
That bow'd to me at Waltham--Edith, if
I, the last English King of England--

EDITH.                               No,
First of a line that coming from the people,
And chosen by the people--

HAROLD.                   And fighting for
And dying for the people--

EDITH.                    Living! living!

HAROLD. Yea so, good cheer! thou art Harold, I am Edith!
Look not thus wan!

EDITH.             What matters how I look?
Have we not broken Wales and Norseland? slain,
Whose life was all one battle, incarnate war,
Their giant-king, a mightier man-in-arms
Than William.

HAROLD.       Ay, my girl, no tricks in him--
No bastard he! when all was lost, he yell'd,
And bit his shield, and dash'd it on the ground,
And swaying his two-handed sword about him,
Two deaths at every swing, ran in upon us
And died so, and I loved him as I hate
This liar who made me liar. If Hate can kill,
And Loathing wield a Saxon battle-axe--

EDITH. Waste not thy might before the battle!

HAROLD.                                       No,
And thou must hence. Stigand will see thee safe,
And so--Farewell.    [_He is going, but turns back_.
The ring thou darest not wear.
I have had it fashion'd, see, to meet my hand.
          [HAROLD _shows the ring which is on his finger_.

Farewell!    [_He is going, but turns back again_.
I am dead as Death this day to ought of earth's
Save William's death or mine.

EDITH.                        Thy death!--to-day!
Is it not thy birthday?

HAROLD.                 Ay, that happy day!
A birthday welcome! happy days and many!
One--this!    [_They embrace_.
Look, I will bear thy blessing into the battle
And front the doom of God.

NORMAN CRIES (_heard in the distance_).
                           Ha Rou! Ha Rou!

    _Enter_ GURTH.

GURTH. The Norman moves!

HAROLD.                  Harold and Holy Cross!

                           [_Exeunt_ HAROLD _and_ GURTH.

    _Enter_ STIGAND.

STIGAND. Our Church in arms--the lamb the lion--not
Spear into pruning-hook--the counter way--
Cowl, helm; and crozier, battle-axe. Abbot Alfwig,
Leofric, and all the monks of Peterboro'
Strike for the king; but I, old wretch, old Stigand,
With hands too limp to brandish iron--and yet
I have a power--would Harold ask me for it--
I have a power.

EDITH.          What power, holy father?

STIGAND. Power now from Harold to command thee hence
And see thee safe from Senlac.

EDITH.                         I remain!

STIGAND. Yea, so will I, daughter, until I find
Which way the battle balance. I can see it
From where we stand: and, live or die, I would
I were among them!

CANONS _from Waltham (singing without)_.

    Salva patriam
    Sancte Pater,
    Salva Fili,
    Salva Spiritus,
    Salva patriam,
      Sancta Mater.[1]

  [Footnote 1: The _a_ throughout these Latin hymns should be
  sounded broad, as in 'father.']

EDITH. Are those the blessed angels quiring, father?

STIGAND. No, daughter, but the canons out of Waltham,
The king's foundation, that have follow'd him.

EDITH. O God of battles, make their wall of shields
Firm as thy cliffs, strengthen their palisades!
What is that whirring sound?

STIGAND.                     The Norman arrow!

EDITH. Look out upon the battle--is he safe?

STIGAND. The king of England stands between his banners.
He glitters on the crowning of the hill.
God save King Harold!

EDITH.               --chosen by his people
And fighting for his people!

STIGAND.                     There is one
Come as Goliath came of yore--he flings
His brand in air and catches it again,
He is chanting some old warsong.

EDITH.                           And no David
To meet him?

STIGAND.     Ay, there springs a Saxon on him,
Falls--and another falls.

EDITH.                    Have mercy on us!

STIGAND. Lo! our good Gurth hath smitten him to the death.

EDITH. So perish all the enemies of Harold!

CANONS (_singing_).

    Hostis in Angliam
      Ruit praedator,
    Illorum, Domine,
      Scutum scindatur!
    Hostis per Angliae
      Plagas bacchatur;
      Casa crematur,
      Pastor fugatur
      Grex trucidatur--

STIGAND. Illos trucida, Domine.

EDITH.                          Ay, good father.

CANONS (_singing_).

    Illorum scelera
      Poena sequatur!

ENGLISH CRIES. Harold and Holy Cross! Out! out!

STIGAND.                                        Our javelins
Answer their arrows. All the Norman foot
Are storming up the hill. The range of knights
Sit, each a statue on his horse, and wait.

ENGLISH CRIES. Harold and God Almighty!

NORMAN CRIES.                           Ha Rou! Ha Rou!

CANONS (_singing_).

    Eques cum pedite
      Praepediatur!
    Illorum in lacrymas
      Cruor fundatur!
    Pereant, pereant,
      Anglia precatur.

STIGAND. Look, daughter, look.

EDITH.                         Nay, father, look for me!

STIGAND. Our axes lighten with a single flash
About the summit of the hill, and heads
And arms are sliver'd off and splinter'd by
Their lightning--and they fly--the Norman flies.

EDITH. Stigand, O father, have we won the day?

STIGAND. No, daughter, no--they fall behind the horse--
Their horse are thronging to the barricades;
I see the gonfanon of Holy Peter
Floating above their helmets--ha! he is down!

EDITH. He down! Who down?

STIGAND.                  The Norman Count is down.

EDITH. So perish all the enemies of England!

STIGAND. No, no, he hath risen again--he bares his face--
Shouts something--he points onward--all their horse
Swallow the hill locust-like, swarming up.

EDITH. O God of battles, make his battle-axe keen
As thine own sharp-dividing justice, heavy
As thine own bolts that fall on crimeful heads
Charged with the weight of heaven wherefrom they fall!

CANONS (_singing_).

    Jacta tonitrua
      Deus bellator!
    Surgas e tenebris,
      Sis vindicator!
    Fulmina, fulmina
      Deus vastator!

EDITH. O God of battles, they are three to one,
Make thou one man as three to roll them down!

CANONS (_singing_).

    Equus cum equite
      Dejiciatur!
    Acies, Acies
      Prona sternatur!
    Illorum lanceas
      Frange Creator!

STIGAND. Yea, yea, for how their lances snap and shiver
Against the shifting blaze of Harold's axe!
War-woodman of old Woden, how he fells
The mortal copse of faces! There! And there!
The horse and horseman cannot meet the shield,
The blow that brains the horseman cleaves the horse,
The horse and horseman roll along the hill,
They fly once more, they fly, the Norman flies!

    Equus cum equite
      Praecipitatur.

EDITH. O God, the God of truth hath heard my cry.
Follow them, follow them, drive them to the sea!

    Illorum scelera
      Poena sequatur!

STIGAND. Truth! no; a lie; a trick, a Norman trick!
They turn on the pursuer, horse against foot,
They murder all that follow.

EDITH.                       Have mercy on us!

STIGAND. Hot-headed fools--to burst the wall of shields!
They have broken the commandment of the king!

EDITH. His oath was broken--O holy Norman Saints,
Ye that are now of heaven, and see beyond
Your Norman shrines, pardon it, pardon it,
That he forsware himself for all he loved,
Me, me and all! Look out upon the battle!

STIGAND. They thunder again upon the barricades.
My sight is eagle, but the strife so thick--
This is the hottest of it: hold, ash! hold, willow!

ENGLISH CRIES. Out, out!

NORMAN CRIES.            Ha Rou!

STIGAND. Ha! Gurth hath leapt upon him
And slain him: he hath fallen.

EDITH.                         And I am heard.
Glory to God in the Highest! fallen, fallen!

STIGAND. No, no, his horse--he mounts another--wields
His war-club, dashes it on Gurth, and Gurth,
Our noble Gurth, is down!

EDITH.                    Have mercy on us!

STIGAND. And Leofwin is down!

EDITH.                        Have mercy on us!
O Thou that knowest, let not my strong prayer
Be weaken'd in thy sight, because I love
The husband of another!

NORMAN CRIES.           Ha Rou! Ha Rou!

EDITH. I do not hear our English war-cry.

STIGAND.                                  No.

EDITH. Look out upon the battle--is he safe?

STIGAND. He stands between the banners with the dead
So piled about him he can hardly move.

EDITH (_takes up the war-cry_).
Out! out!

NORMAN CRIES. Ha Rou!

EDITH (_cries out_).  Harold and Holy Cross!

NORMAN CRIES. Ha Rou! Ha Rou!

EDITH.                        What is that whirring sound?

STIGAND. The Norman sends his arrows up to Heaven,
They fall on those within the palisade!

EDITH. Look out upon the hill--is Harold there?

STIGAND. Sanguelac--Sanguelac--the arrow--the arrow!--away!



SCENE II--FIELD OF THE DEAD. NIGHT.

ALDWYTH _and_ EDITH.


ALDWYTH. O Edith, art thou here? O Harold, Harold--
Our Harold--we shall never see him more.

EDITH. For there was more than sister in my kiss,
And so the saints were wroth. I cannot love them,
For they are Norman saints--and yet I should--
They are so much holier than their harlot's son
With whom they play'd their game against the king!

ALDWYTH, The king is slain, the kingdom over-thrown!

EDITH. No matter!

ALDWYTH.          How no matter, Harold slain?--
I cannot find his body. O help me thou!
O Edith, if I ever wrought against thee,
Forgive me thou, and help me here!

EDITH.                             No matter!

ALDWYTH. Not help me, nor forgive me?

EDITH.                                So thou saidest.

ALDWYTH. I say it now, forgive me!

EDITH.                             Cross me not!
I am seeking one who wedded me in secret.
Whisper! God's angels only know it. Ha!
What art thou doing here among the dead?
They are stripping the dead bodies naked yonder,
And thou art come to rob them of their rings!

ALDWYTH. O Edith, Edith, I have lost both crown
And husband.

EDITH.       So have I.

ALDWYTH.                I tell thee, girl,
I am seeking my dead Harold.

EDITH.                       And I mine!
The Holy Father strangled him with a hair
Of Peter, and his brother Tostig helpt;
The wicked sister clapt her hands and laugh'd;
Then all the dead fell on him.

ALDWYTH.                       Edith, Edith--

EDITH. What was he like, this husband? like to thee?
Call not for help from me. I knew him not.
He lies not here: not close beside the standard.
Here fell the truest, manliest hearts of England.
Go further hence and find him.

ALDWYTH.                       She is crazed!

EDITH. That doth not matter either. Lower the light.
He must be here.

    _Enter two_ CANONS, OSGOD _and_ ATHELRIC, _with
    torches. They turn over the dead bodies and
    examine them as they pass_.

OSGOD.           I think that this is Thurkill.

ATHELRIC. More likely Godric.

OSGOD.                       I am sure this body
Is Alfwig, the king's uncle.

ATHELRIC.                    So it is!
No, no--brave Gurth, one gash from brow to knee!

OSGOD. And here is Leofwin.

EDITH.                      And here is _He!_

ALDWYTH. Harold? Oh no--nay, if it were--my God,
They have so maim'd and murder'd all his face
There is no man can swear to him.

EDITH.                            But one woman!
Look you, we never mean to part again.
I have found him, I am happy.
Was there not someone ask'd me for forgiveness?
I yield it freely, being the true wife
Of this dead King, who never bore revenge.

    _Enter_ COUNT WILLIAM _and_ WILLIAM MALET.

WILLIAM. Who be these women? And what body is this?

EDITH. Harold, thy better!

WILLIAM.                   Ay, and what art thou?

EDITH. His wife!

MALET.           Not true, my girl, here is the Queen!
                                      [_Pointing out_ ALDWYTH.

WILLIAM (_to_ ALDWYTH).
Wast thou his Queen?

ALDWYTH.             I was the Queen of Wales.

WILLIAM. Why then of England. Madam, fear us not.
(_To_ MALET.) Knowest thou this other?

MALET.                                 When I visited England,
Some held she was his wife in secret--some--
Well--some believed she was his paramour.

EDITH. Norman, thou liest! liars all of you,
Your Saints and all! I am his wife! and she--
For look, our marriage ring!
               [_She draws it off the finger of_ HAROLD.
                             I lost it somehow--
I lost it, playing with it when I was wild.
_That_ bred the doubt! but I am wiser now ...
I am too wise.... Will none among you all
Bear me true witness--only for this once--
That I have found it here again?    [_She puts it on_.
                                 And thou,
Thy wife am I for ever and evermore.
                         [_Falls on the body and dies_.

WILLIAM. Death!--and enough of death for this one day,
The day of St. Calixtus, and the day,
My day when I was born.

MALET.                  And this dead king's
Who, king or not, hath kinglike fought and fallen,
His birthday, too. It seems but yestereven
I held it with him in his English halls,
His day, with all his rooftree ringing 'Harold,'
Before he fell into the snare of Guy;
When all men counted Harold would be king,
And Harold was most happy.

WILLIAM.                   Thou art half English
Take them away!
Malet, I vow to build a church to God
Here on the hill of battle; let our high altar
Stand where their standard fell ... where these two lie.
Take them away, I do not love to see them.
Pluck the dead woman off the dead man, Malet!

MALET. Faster than ivy. Must I hack her arms off?
How shall I part them?

WILLIAM.               Leave them. Let them be!
Bury him and his paramour together.
He that was false in oath to me, it seems
Was false to his own wife. We will not give him
A Christian burial: yet he was a warrior,
And wise, yea truthful, till that blighted vow
Which God avenged to-day.
Wrap them together in a purple cloak
And lay them both upon the waste sea-shore
At Hastings, there to guard the land for which
He did forswear himself--a warrior--ay,
And but that Holy Peter fought for us,
And that the false Northumbrian held aloof,
And save for that chance arrow which the Saints
Sharpen'd and sent against him--who can tell?--
Three horses had I slain beneath me: twice
I thought that all was lost. Since I knew battle,
And that was from my boyhood, never yet--
No, by the splendour of God--have I fought men
Like Harold and his brethren, and his guard
Of English. Every man about his king
Fell where he stood. They loved him: and, pray God
My Normans may but move as true with me
To the door of death. Of one self-stock at first,
Make them again one people--Norman, English;
And English, Norman; we should have a hand
To grasp the world with, and a foot to stamp it ...
Flat. Praise the Saints, It is over. No more blood!
I am king of England, so they thwart me not,
And I will rule according to their laws.
(_To_ ALDWYTH.) Madam, we will entreat thee with all honour.

ALDWYTH. My punishment is more than I can bear.





THE EARLY POEMS

OF

ALFRED LORD TENNYSON



EDITED WITH A CRITICAL INTRODUCTION. COMMENTARIES AND NOTES,

TOGETHER WITH THE VARIOUS READINGS,

A TRANSCRIPT OF THE POEMS TEMPORARILY AND FINALLY SUPPRESSED

AND A BIBLIOGRAPHY



BY

JOHN CHURTON COLLINS




PREFACE

A Critical edition of Tennyson's poems has long been an acknowledged
want. He has taken his place among the English Classics, and as a
Classic he is, and will be, studied, seriously and minutely, by many
thousands of his countrymen, both in the present generation as well as
in future ages. As in the works of his more illustrious brethren, so in
his trifles will become subjects of curious interest, and assume an
importance of which we have no conception now. Here he will engage the
attention of the antiquary, there of the social historian. Long after
his politics, his ethics, his theology have ceased to be immediately
influential, they will be of immense historical significance. A
consummate artist and a consummate master of our language, the process
by which he achieved results so memorable can never fail to be of
interest, and of absorbing interest, to critical students.

I must, I fear, claim the indulgence due to one who attempts, for the
first time, a critical edition of a text so perplexingly voluminous in
variants as Tennyson's. I can only say that I have spared neither time
nor labour to be accurate and exhaustive. I have myself collated, or
have had collated for me, every edition recorded in the British Museum
Catalogue, and where that has been deficient I have had recourse to
other public libraries, and to the libraries of private friends. I am
not conscious that I have left any variant unrecorded, but I should not
like to assert that this is the case. Tennyson was so restlessly
indefatigable in his corrections that there may lurk, in editions of the
poems which I have not seen, other variants; and it is also possible
that, in spite of my vigilance, some may have escaped me even in the
editions which have been collated, and some may have been made at a date
earlier than the date recorded. But I trust this has not been the case.

Of the Bibliography I can say no more than that I have done my utmost to
make it complete, and that it is very much fuller than any which has
hitherto appeared. That it is exhaustive I dare not promise.

With regard to the Notes and Commentaries, I have spared no pains to
explain everything which seemed to need explanation. There are, I think,
only two points which I have not been able to clear up, namely, the name
of the friend to whom the 'Palace of Art' was addressed, and the name
of the friend to whom the 'Verses after Reading a Life and Letters'
were addressed. I have consulted every one who would be likely to throw
light on the subject, including the poet's surviving sister, many of his
friends, and the present Lord Tennyson, but without success; so the
names, if they were not those of some imaginary person, appear to be
irrecoverable. The Prize Poem, 'Timbuctoo', as well as the poems which
were temporarily or finally suppressed in the volumes published in 1830
and 1832 have been printed in the Appendix: those which were
subsequently incorporated in his Works, in large type; those which he
never reprinted, in small.

The text here adopted is that of 1857, but Messrs. Macmillan, to whom I
beg to express my hearty thanks, have most generously allowed me to
record all the variants which are still protected by copyright. I have
to thank them, too, for assistance in the Bibliography. I have also to
thank Mr. J. T. Wise for his kindness in lending me the privately
printed volume containing the 'Morte d'Arthur, Dora,' etc.





INTRODUCTION

I

The development of Tennyson's genius, methods, aims and capacity of
achievement in poetry can be studied with singular precision and fulness
in the history of the poems included in the present volume. In 1842 he
published the two volumes which gave him, by almost general consent, the
first place among the poets of his time, for, though Wordsworth was
alive, Wordsworth's best work had long been done. These two volumes
contained poems which had appeared before, some in 1830 and some in
1832, and some which were then given to the world for the first time, so
that they represent work belonging to three eras in the poet's life,
poems written before he had completed his twenty-second year and
belonging for the most part to his boyhood, poems written in his early
manhood, and poems written between his thirty-first and thirty-fourth
year.

The poems published in 1830 had the following title-page:

  "Poems, Chiefly Lyrical, by Alfred Tennyson.
  London: Effingham Wilson, Royal Exchange, 1830".

They are fifty-six in number and the titles are:--


  Claribel.
  Lilian.  
  Isabel.  
  Elegiacs.
  The "How" and the "Why".
  Mariana. 
  To----. Madeline.
  The Merman.
  The Mermaid. 
  Supposed Confessions of a second-rate sensitive mind not in unity with
    itself. 
  The Burial of Love.
  To--(Sainted Juliet dearest name.)
  Song. The Owl. 
  Second Song. To the same. 
  Recollections of the Arabian Nights. 
  Ode to Memory. 
  Song. (I'the the glooming light.)
  Song. (A spirit haunts.) 
  Adeline. 
  A Character. 
  Song. (The lint-white and the throstle cock.)
  Song. (Every day hath its night.)
  The Poet. 
  The Poet's Mind. 
  Nothing will die. 
  All things will die. 
  Hero to Leander.
  The Mystic.
  The Dying Swan. 
  A Dirge. 
  The Grasshopper.
  Love, Pride and Forgetfulness.
  Chorus (in an unpublished drama written very early).
  Lost Hope.
  The Deserted House. 
  The Tears of Heaven.
  Love and Sorrow.
  To a Lady Sleeping.
  Sonnet. (Could I outwear my present state of woe.)
  Sonnet. (Though Night hath climbed her peak of highest noon.)
  Sonnet. (Shall the hag Evil die with child of Good.)
  Sonnet. (The pallid thunderstricken sigh for gain.)
  Love.
  Love and Death. 
  The Kraken. 
  The Ballad of Oriana. 
  Circumstance. 
  English War Song.
  National Song.
  The Sleeping Beauty. 
  Dualisms.
  We are Free.
  The Sea-Fairies. 
  Sonnet
  to J.M.K. 
  [Greek (transliterated): oi rheontes] 


   Of these the poems marked  appeared in the edition of 1842, and
were not much altered.

   Those marked  were, in addition to the italicised poems, afterwards
included among the 'Juvenilia' in the collected works (1871-1872),
though excluded from all preceding editions of the poems.

  Those marked  were restored in editions previous to the first
collected editions of the works.




In December, 1832, appeared a second volume (it is dated on the
title-page, 1833):

"Poems by Alfred Tennyson. London: Moxon, MDCCCXXXIII."

This contains thirty poems:--


  Sonnet. (Mine be the strength of spirit fierce and free.) 
  To--.   (All good things have not kept aloof.) 
  Buonaparte. 
  Sonnet I. (O Beauty passing beauty, sweetest Sweet.)
  Sonnet II. (But were I loved, as I desire to be.) 
  The Lady of Shalott. 
  Mariana in the South. 
  Eleanore. 
  The Miller's Daughter. 
  [Greek: phainetai moi kaenos isos theoisin hemmen anaer] 
  none. 
  The Sisters. 
  To--. (With the Palace of Art.)
  The Palace of Art 
  The May Queen. 
  New Year's Eve. 
  The Hesperides.
  The Lotos Eaters. 
  Rosalind. 
  A Dream of Fair Women 
  Song. (Who can say.)
  Margaret. 
  Kate.
  Sonnet. Written on hearing of the outbreak of the Polish Insurrection.
  Sonnet. On the result of the late Russian invasion of Poland. 
  Sonnet. (As when with downcast eyes we muse and brood.) 
  O Darling Room.
  To Christopher North.
  The Death of the Old Year. 
  To J. S. 


   Of these the poems marked  were included in the edition of 1842;

   those marked  being greatly altered and in some cases almost
      rewritten,

   those marked  being practically unaltered.

  To those reprinted in the collected works  is added.






In 1842 appeared the two volumes which contained, in addition to the
selections made from the two former volumes, several new poems:--

"Poems by Alfred Tennyson. In two volumes. London: Edward Moxon,
MDCCCXLII."

The first volume is divided into two parts:

(1) Selections from the poems published in 1830, 'Claribel' to the
'Sonnet to J. M. K.' inclusive.

(2) Selections from the poems of 1832, 'The Lady of Shalott' to 'The
Goose' inclusive.

The second volume contains poems then, with two exceptions, first
published.


INTRODUCTION

  The Epic.
  Morte d'Arthur.
  The Gardener's Daughter.
  Dora.
  Audley Court.
  Walking to the Mail.
  St. Simeon Stylites.
  Conclusion to the May Queen.
  The Talking Oak.
  Lady Clara Vere de Vere.
  Love and Duty.
  Ulysses.
  Locksley Hall.
  Godiva.
  The Two Voices.
  The Day Dream.
  Prologue.
  The Sleeping Palace.
  The Sleeping Beauty.
  The Arrival.
  The Revival.
  The Departure.
  Moral.
  L'Envoi.
  Epilogue.
  Amphion.
  St. Agnes.
  Sir Galahad.
  Edward Gray.
  Will Waterproofs Lyrical Monologue, made at the Cock.
  Lady Clare.
  The Lord of Burleigh.
  Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere.
  A Farewell.
  The Beggar Maid.
  The Vision of Sin.
  The Skipping Rope.
  Move Eastward, happy Earth.
  "Break, break, break."
  The Poet's Song.


Only two of these poems had been published before, namely, 'St. Agnes',
which was printed in 'The Keepsake' for 1837, and 'The Sleeping Beauty'
in 'The Day Dream', which was adopted with some alterations from the
1830 poem, and only one of these poems was afterwards suppressed, 'The
Skipping Rope', which was, however, allowed to stand till 1851. In 1843
appeared the second edition of these poems, which is merely a reprint
with a few unimportant alterations, and which was followed in 1845 and
in 1846 by a third and fourth edition equally unimportant in their
variants, but in the fourth 'The Golden Year' was added. In the next
edition, the fifth, 1848, 'The Deserted House' was included from the
poems of 1830. In the sixth edition, 1850, was included another poem,
'To--, after reading a Life and Letters', reprinted, with some
alterations, from the 'Examiner' of 24th March, 1849.

The seventh edition, 1851, contained important additions. First the
Dedication to the Queen, then 'Edwin Morris,' the fragment of 'The
Eagle,' and the stanzas, "Come not when I am dead," first printed in
'The Keepsake' for 1851, under the title of 'Stanzas.' In this edition
the absurd trifle 'The Skipping Rope' was excised and finally cancelled.
In the eighth edition, 1853, 'The Sea-Fairies,' though greatly altered,
was included from the poems of 1830, and the poem 'To E. L. on his
Travels in Greece' was added. This edition, the eighth, may be regarded
as the final one. Nothing afterwards of much importance was added or
subtracted, and comparatively few alterations were made in the text from
that date to the last collected edition in 1898.

All the editions up to, and including, that of 1898 have been carefully
collated, so that the student of Tennyson can follow step by step the
process by which he arrived at that perfection of expression which is
perhaps his most striking characteristic as a poet. And it was indeed a
trophy of labour, of the application "of patient touches of unwearied
art". Whoever will turn, say to 'The Palace of Art,' to 'none,' to the
'Dream of Fair Women,' or even to 'The Sea-Fairies' and to 'The Lady of
Shalott,' will see what labour was expended on their composition.
Nothing indeed can be more interesting than to note the touches, the
substitution of which measured the whole distance between mediocrity and
excellence. Take, for example, the magical alteration in the couplet in
the 'Dream of Fair Women':--


  One drew a sharp knife thro' my tender throat
  Slowly,--and nothing more,


into


  The bright death quiver'd at the victim's throat;
  Touch'd; and I knew no more.


Or, in the same poem:--


  What nights we had in Egypt!
  I could hit His humours while I cross'd him.
  O the life I led him, and the dalliance and the wit,


into

  We drank the Libyan Sun to sleep, and lit
  Lamps which outburn'd Canopus.
  O my life In Egypt!
  O the dalliance and the wit,
  The flattery and the strife.


Or, in 'Mariana in the South':--

  She mov'd her lips, she pray'd alone,
  She praying, disarray'd and warm
  From slumber, deep her wavy form
  In the dark lustrous mirror shone,

into

  Complaining, "Mother, give me grace
  To help me of my weary load".
  And on the liquid mirror glow'd
  The clear perfection of her face.


How happy is this slight alteration in the verses 'To J. S.' which
corrects one of the falsest notes ever struck by a poet:--

 A tear Dropt on _my tablets_ as I wrote.

  A tear Dropt on _the letters_ as I wrote.

or where in 'Locksley Hall' a splendidly graphic touch of description is
gained by the alteration of "_droops_ the trailer from the crag" into
"_swings_ the trailer".

So again in 'Love and Duty':--

  Should my shadow cross thy thoughts
  Too sadly for their peace, _so put it back_.
  For calmer hours in memory's darkest hold,

where by altering "so put it back" into "remand it thou," a somewhat
ludicrous image is at all events softened.

What great care Tennyson took with his phraseology is curiously
illustrated in 'The May Queen'. In the 1842 edition "Robin" was the name
of the May Queen's lover. In 1843 it was altered to "Robert," and in
1845 and subsequent editions back to "Robin".

Compare, again, the old stanza in 'The Miller's Daughter':--

  How dear to me in youth, my love,
  Was everything about the mill;
  The black and silent pool above,
  The pool beneath it never still,


with what was afterwards substituted:--


  I loved the brimming wave that swam
  Through quiet meadows round the mill,
  The sleepy pool above the dam,
  The pool beneath it never still.


Another most felicitous emendation is to be found in 'The Poet',
where the edition of 1830 reads:--


  And in the bordure of her robe was writ
  Wisdom, a name to shake
  Hoar anarchies, as with a thunderfit.


This in 1842 appears as:--


  And in her raiment's hem was trac'd in flame
  Wisdom, a name to shake
  All evil dreams of power--a sacred name.


Again, in the 'Lotos Eaters'


  _Three thunder-cloven thrones of oldest snow_
  Stood sunset-flushed


is changed into

  _Three silent pinnacles of aged snow_.


So in 'Will Waterproof' the cumbrous


  Like Hezekiah's backward runs The shadow of my days,


was afterwards simplified into


  Against its fountain upward runs
  The current of my days.


Not less felicitous have been the additions made from time to time. Thus
in 'Audley Court' the concluding lines ran:--


  The harbour buoy,
  With one green sparkle ever and anon
  Dipt by itself.


But what vividness is there in the subsequent insertion of


  "Sole star of phosphorescence in the calm."


between the first line and the second.

So again in the 'Morte d'Arthur' how greatly are imagery and rhythm
improved by the insertion of


  Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere,


between


  Then went Sir Bedivere the second time,


and


  Counting the dewy pebbles, fix'd in thought.


There is an alteration in none which is very interesting. Till 1884
this was allowed to stand:--


  The lizard, with his shadow on the stone,
  Rests like a shadow, _and the cicala sleeps_.


No one could have known better than Tennyson that the cicala is loudest
in the torrid calm of the noonday, as Theocritus, Virgil, Byron and
innumerable other poets have noticed; at last he altered it, but at the
heavy price of a cumbrous pleonasm, into "and the winds are dead".

He allowed many years to elapse before he corrected another error in
natural history--but at last the alteration came. In 'The Poet's Song'
in the line--


  The swallow stopt as he hunted the _bee_,


the "fly" which the swallow does hunt was substituted for what it does
not hunt, and that for very obvious reasons. But whoever would see what
Tennyson's poetry has owed to elaborate revision and scrupulous care
would do well to compare the first edition of 'Mariana in the South',
'The Sea-Fairies', 'OEnone', 'The Lady of Shalott', 'The Palace of Art'
and 'A Dream of Fair Women' with the poems as they are presented in
1853. Poets do not always improve their verses by revision, as all
students of Wordsworth's text could abundantly illustrate; but it may be
doubted whether, in these poems at least, Tennyson ever made a single
alteration which was not for the better. Fitzgerald, indeed, contended
that in some cases, particularly in 'The Miller's Daughter', Tennyson
would have done well to let the first reading stand, but few critics
would agree with him in the instances he gives. We may perhaps regret
the sacrifice of such a stanza as this--

Each coltsfoot down the grassy bent, Whose round leaves hold the
gathered shower, Each quaintly folded cuckoo pint, And silver-paly
cuckoo flower.




II

Tennyson's genius was slow in maturing. The poems contributed by him to
the volume of 1827, 'Poems by Two Brothers', are not without some slight
promise, but are very far from indicating extraordinary powers. A great
advance is discernible in 'Timbuctoo', but that Matthew Arnold should
have discovered in it the germ of Tennyson's future powers is probably
to be attributed to the youth of the critic. Tennyson was in his
twenty-second year when the 'Poems Chiefly Lyrical' appeared, and what
strikes us in these poems is certainly not what Arthur Hallam saw in
them: much rather what Coleridge and Wilson discerned in them. They are
the poems of a fragile and somewhat morbid young man in whose temper we
seem to see a touch of Hamlet, a touch of Romeo and, more healthily, a
touch of Mercutio. Their most promising characteristic is the
versatility displayed. Thus we find 'Mariana' side by side with the
'Supposed Confessions', the 'Ode to Memory' with Greek['oi rheontes'],
'The Ballad of Oriana' with 'The Dying Swan', 'Recollections of The
Arabian Nights' with 'The Poet'. Their worst fault is affectation.
Perhaps the utmost that can be said for them is that they display a fine
but somewhat thin vein of original genius, after deducing what they owe
to Coleridge, to Keats and to other poets. This is seen in the magical
touches of description, in the exquisite felicity of expression and
rhythm which frequently mark them, in the pathos and power of such a
poem as 'Oriana', in the pathos and charm of such poems as 'Mariana' and
'A Dirge', in the rich and almost gorgeous fancy displayed in 'The
Recollections'.

The poems of 1833 are much more ambitious and strike deeper notes. Here
comes in for the first time that Greek[spondai_otaes'], that high
seriousness which is one of Tennyson's chief characteristics--we see it
in 'The Palace of Art', in 'none' and in the verses 'To J. S.' But in
intrinsic merit the poems were no advance on their predecessors, for the
execution was not equal to the design. The best, such as 'none', 'A
Dream of Fair Women', 'The Palace of Art', 'The Lady of Shalott'--I am
speaking of course of these poems in their first form--were full of
extraordinary blemishes. The volume was degraded by pieces which were
very unworthy of him, such as 'O Darling Room' and the verses 'To
Christopher North', and affectations of the worst kind deformed many,
nay, perhaps the majority of the poems. But the capital defect lay in
the workmanship. The diction is often languid and slipshod, sometimes
quaintly affected, and we can never go far without encountering lines,
stanzas, whole poems which cry aloud for the file. The power and charm
of Tennyson's poetry, even at its ripest, depend very largely, often
mainly, on expression, and the couplet which he envied Browning,

  The little more, and how much it is,
  The little less, and what worlds away,

is strangely applicable to his own art. On a single word, on a subtle
collocation, on a slight touch depend often his finest effects: "the
little less" reduces him to mediocrity, "the little more" and he is with
the masters. To no poetry would the application of Goethe's test be, as
a rule, more fatal--that the real poetic quality in poetry is that which
remains when it has been translated literally into prose.

Whoever will compare the poems of 1832 with the same poems as they
appeared in 1842 will see that the difference is not so much a
difference in degree, but almost a difference in kind. In the collection
of 1832 there were three gems, 'The Sisters', the lines 'To J. S.' and
'The May Queen'. Almost all the others which are of any value were, in
the edition of 1842, carefully revised, and in some cases practically
rewritten. If Tennyson's career had closed in 1833 he would hardly have
won a prominent place among the minor poets of the present century. The
nine years which intervened between the publication of his second volume
and the volumes of 1842 were the making of him, and transformed a mere
dilettante into a master. Much has been said about the brutality of
Lockhart's review in the 'Quarterly'. In some respects it was stupid, in
some respects it was unjust, but of one thing there can be no doubt--it
had a most salutary effect. It held up the mirror to weaknesses and
deficiencies which, if Tennyson did not care to acknowledge to others,
he must certainly have acknowledged to himself. It roused him and put
him on his mettle. It was a wholesome antidote to the enervating
flattery of coteries and "apostles" who were certainly talking a great
deal of nonsense about him, as Arthur Hallam's essay in the 'Englishman'
shows. During the next nine years he published nothing, with the
exception of two unimportant contributions to certain minor
periodicals.[1] But he was educating himself, saturating himself with
all that is best in the poetry of Ancient Greece and Rome, of modern
Italy, of Germany and of his own country, studying theology,
metaphysics, natural history, geology, astronomy and travels, observing
nature with the eye of a poet, a painter and a naturalist. Nor was he a
recluse. He threw himself heartily into the life of his time, following
with the keenest interest all the great political and social movements,
the progress and effects of the Reform Bill, the troubles in Ireland,
the troubles with the Colonies, the struggles between the Protectionists
and the Free Traders, Municipal Reform, the advance of the democracy,
Chartism, the popular education question. He travelled on the Continent,
he travelled in Wales and Scotland, he visited most parts of England,
not as an idle tourist, but as a student with note-book in hand. And he
had been submitted also to the discipline which is of all disciplines
the most necessary to the poet, and without which, as Goethe says, "he
knows not the heavenly powers": he had "ate his bread in sorrow". The
death of his father in 1831 had already brought him face to face, as he
has himself expressed it, with the most solemn of all mysteries. In 1833
he had an awful shock in the sudden death of his friend Arthur Hallam,
"an overwhelming sorrow which blotted out all joy from his life and made
him long for death". He had other minor troubles which contributed
greatly to depress him,--the breaking up of the old home at Somersby,
his own poverty and uncertain prospects, his being compelled in
consequence to break off all intercourse with Miss Emily Selwood. It is
possible that 'Love and Duty' may have reference to this sorrow; it is
certain that 'The Two Voices' is autobiographical.

Such was his education between 1832 and 1842, and such the influences
which were moulding him, while he was slowly evolving 'In Memoriam' and
the poems first published in the latter year. To the revision of the old
poems he brought tastes and instincts cultivated by the critical study
of all that was best in the poetry of the world, and more particularly
by a familiarity singularly intimate and affectionate with the
masterpieces of the ancient classics; he brought also the skill of a
practised workman, for his diligence in production was literally that of
Sir Joshua Reynolds in the sister art--'nulla dies sine line'. Into the
composition of the new poems all this entered. He was no longer a
trifler and a Hedonist. As Spedding has said, his former poems betrayed
"an over-indulgence in the luxuries of the senses, a profusion of
splendours, harmonies, perfumes, gorgeous apparel, luscious meals and
drinks, and creature comforts which rather pall upon the sense, and make
the glories of the outward world to obscure a little the world within".
Like his own 'Lady of Shalott', he had communed too much with shadows.
But the serious poet now speaks. He appeals less to the ear and the eye,
and more to the heart. The sensuous is subordinated to the spiritual and
the moral. He deals immediately with the dearest concerns of man and of
society. He has ceased to trifle. The the [Greek: spondai_otaes,] the
high seriousness of the true poet, occasional before, now pervades and
enters essentially into his work. It is interesting to note how many of
these poems have direct didactic purpose. How solemn is the message
delivered in such poems as 'The Palace of Art' and 'The Vision of Sin',
how noble the teaching in 'Love and Duty', in 'Oenone', in 'Godiva', in
'Ulysses'; to how many must such a poem as 'The Two Voices' have brought
solace and light; how full of salutary lessons are the political poems
'You ask me, why, though ill at ease' and 'Love thou thy Land', and how
noble is their expression! And, even where the poems are less directly
didactic, it is such refreshment as busy life needs to converse with
them, so pure, so wholesome, so graciously human is their tone, so
tranquilly beautiful is their world. Who could lay down 'The Miller's
Daughter, Dora, The Golden Year, The Gardener's Daughter, The Talking
Oak, Audley Court, The Day Dream' without something of the feeling which
Goethe felt when he first laid down 'The Vicar of Wakefield?' In the
best lyrics in these volumes, such as 'Break, Break', and 'Move
Eastward', 'Happy Earth', the most fastidious of critics must recognise
flawless gems. In the two volumes of 1842 Tennyson carried to perfection
all that was best in his earlier poems, and displayed powers of which he
may have given some indication in his cruder efforts, but which must
certainly have exceeded the expectation of the most sanguine of his
rational admirers. These volumes justly gave him the first place among
the poets of his time, and that supremacy he maintained--in the opinion
of most--till the day of his death. It would be absurd to contend that
Tennyson's subsequent publications added nothing to the fame which will
be secured to him by these poems. But this at least is certain, that,
taken with 'In Memorium', they represent the crown and flower of his
achievement. What is best in them he never excelled and perhaps never
equalled. We should be the poorer, and much the poorer, for the loss of
anything which he produced subsequently, it is true; but would we
exchange half a dozen of the best of these poems or a score of the best
sections of 'In Memoriam' for all that he produced between 1850 and his
death?

[Footnote 1: In 'The Keepsake', "St. Agnes' Eve"; in 'The Tribute',
"Stanzas": "Oh! that 'twere possible". Between 1831 and 1832 he had
contributed to 'The Gem' three, "No more," "Anacreontics," and "A
Fragment"; in 'The Englishman's Magazine', a Sonnet; in 'The Yorkshire
Literary Annual', lines, "There are three things that fill my heart with
sighs"; in 'Friendship's Offering', lines, "Me my own fate".]



III

The poems of 1842 naturally divide themselves into seven groups:--

1. STUDIES IN FANCY.

  'Claribel'.
  'Lilian'.
  'Isabel'.
  'Madeline'.
  'A Spirit Haunts'.
  'Recollections of the Arabian Nights'.
  'Adeline'.
  'The Dying Swan'.
  'A Dream of Fair Women'.
  'The Sea-Fairies'.
  'The Deserted House'.
  'Love and Death'.
  'The Merman'.
  'The Mermaid'.
  'The Lady of Shalott'.
  'Eleanore'.
  'Margaret'.
  'The Death of the Old Year'.
  'St. Agnes.'
  'Sir Galahad'.
  'The Day Dream'.
  'Will Waterproof's Monologue'.
  'Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere'.
  'The Talking Oak'.
  'The Poet's Song'.


2. STUDIES OF PASSION

  'Mariana'.
  'Mariana in the South.'
  'Oriana'.
  'Fatima'.
  'The Sisters'.
  'Locksley Hall'.
  'Edward Gray'.


3. PSYCHOLOGICAL STUDIES

  'A Character'.
  'The Poet'.
  'The Poet's Mind'.
  'The Two Voices'.
  'The Palace of Art'.
  'The Vision of Sin'.
  'St. Simeon Stylites'.


4. IDYLLS

  (a) Classical.

    'none'.
    'The Lotos Eaters'.
    'Ulysses'.

  (b) English

    'The Miller's Daughter'.
    'The May Queen'.
    'Morte d'Arthur'.
    'The Gardener's Daughter'.
    'Dora'.
    'Audley Court'.
    'Walking to the Mail'.
    'Edwin Morris'.
    'The Golden Year'.


5. BALLADS

  'Oriana'.
  'Lady Clara Vere de Vere'.
  'Edward Gray'.
  'Lady Clare'.
  'The Lord of Burleigh'.
  'The Beggar Maid'.


6. AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL

  'Ode to Memory'.
  'Sonnet to J. M. K'.
  'To---------with the Palace of Art'.
  'To J.S.'
  'Amphion'.
  'To E. L. on his Travels in Greece'.
  'To--------after reading a Life and Letters'.
  '"Come not when I am Dead'."
  'A Farewell'.
  "'Move Eastward, Happy Earth'."
  "'Break, Break, Break'."


7. POLITICAL GROUP

  '"You ask me."'
  '"Of old sat Freedom."'
  '"Love thou thy Land."'
  'The Goose.'


In surveying these poems two things must strike every one--their very
wide range and their very fragmentary character. There is scarcely any
side of life on which they do not touch, scarcely any phase of passion
and emotion to which they do not give exquisite expression. Take the
love poems: compare 'Fatima' with 'Isabel', 'The Miller's Daughter' with
'Locksley Hall', 'The Gardener's Daughter' with 'Madeline', or 'Mariana'
with Cleopatra in the 'Dream of Fair Women'. When did love find purer
and nobler expression than in 'Love and Duty?' When has sorrow found
utterance more perfect than in the verses 'To J. S '., or the passion for
the past than in 'Break, Break, Break', or revenge and jealousy than in
'The Sisters?' In 'The Two Voices', 'The Palace of Art' and 'The Vision
of Sin' we are in another sphere. They are appeals to the soul of man on
subjects of momentous concern to him. And each is a masterpiece. What is
proper to philosophy and what is proper to poetry have never perhaps
been so happily blended. They have all the sensuous charm of Keats, but
the prose of Hume could not have presented the truths which they are
designed to convey with more lucidity and precision. In that superb
fragment the 'Morte d'Arthur' we have many of the noblest attributes of
Epic poetry. 'none' is the perfection of the classical idyll, 'The
Gardener's Daughter' and the idylls that follow it of the romantic. 'Sir
Galahad' and 'St. Agnes' are in the vein of Keats and Coleridge, but
Keats and Coleridge have produced nothing more exquisite and nothing so
ethereal. 'The Lotos* Eaters' is perhaps the most purely delicious poem
ever written, the 'ne plus ultra' of sensuous loveliness, and yet the
poet who gave us that has given us also the political poems, poems as
trenchant and austerely dignified in style as they are pregnant with
practical wisdom. There is the same versatility displayed in the
trifles.

But all is fragmentary. No thread strings these jewels. They form a
collection of gems unset and unarranged. Without any system or any
definite scope they have nothing of that unity in diversity which is so
perceptible in the lyrics and minor poems of Goethe and Wordsworth.
Capricious as the gyrations of a sea-gull seem the poet's moods and
movements. We have now the reveries of a love-sick maiden, now the
picture of a soul wrestling with despair and death; here a study from
rural life, or a study in character, there a sermon on politics, or a
descent into the depths of psychological truth, or a sketch from nature.
But nothing could be more concentrated than the power employed to shape
each fragment into form. What Pope says of the 'Aeneid' may be applied
with very literal truth to these poems:--


  Finish'd the whole, and laboured every part
  With patient touches of unwearied art.


In the poems of 1842 we have the secret of Tennyson's eminence as a poet
as well as the secret of his limitations. He appears to have been
constitutionally deficient in what the Greeks called 'architektonik',
combination and disposition on a large scale. The measure of his power
as a constructive artist is given us in the poem in which the English
idylls may be said to culminate, namely, 'Enoch Arden'. 'In Memoriam'
and the 'Idylls of the King' have a sort of spiritual unity, but they
are a series of fragments tacked rather than fused together. It is the
same with 'Maud', and it is the same with 'The Princess'. His poems have
always a tendency to resolve themselves into a series of cameos: it is
only the short poems which have organic unity. A gift of felicitous and
musical expression which is absolutely marvellous; an instinctive
sympathy with what is best and most elevated in the sphere of ordinary
life, of ordinary thought and sentiment, of ordinary activity with
consummate representative power; a most rare faculty of seizing and
fixing in very perfect form what is commonly so inexpressible because so
impalpable and evanescent in emotion and expression; a power of catching
and rendering the charm of nature with a fidelity and vividness which
resemble magic; and lastly, unrivalled skill in choosing, repolishing
and remounting the gems which are our common inheritance from the past:
these are the gifts which will secure permanence for his work as long as
the English language lasts.

In his power of crystallising commonplaces he stands next to Pope, in
subtle felicity of expression beside Virgil. And, when he says of Virgil
that we find in his diction "all the grace of all the muses often
flowering in one lonely word," he says what is literally true of his own
work. As a master of style his place is in the first rank among English
classical poets. But his style is the perfection of art. His diction,
like the diction of Milton and Gray, resembles mosaic work. With a touch
here and a touch there, now from memory, now from unconscious
assimilation, inlaying here an epithet and there a phrase, adding,
subtracting, heightening, modifying, substituting one metaphor for
another, developing what is latent in the suggestive imagery of a
predecessor, laying under contribution the most intimate familiarity
with what is best in the literature of the ancient and modern world, the
unwearied artist toils patiently on till his precious mosaic work is
without a flaw. All the resources of rhetoric are employed to give
distinction to his style and every figure in rhetoric finds expression
in his diction: Hypallage as in


  _The pillard dusk_ Of sounding sycamores.

--_Audley Court_.


Paronomasia as in


  The seawind sang _Shrill, chill_ with flakes of foam.

--_Morte d'Arthur_.


Oxymoron as

  _Behold_ them _unbeheld, unheard Hear_ all.

--'none'.


Hyperbaton as in

  The _dew-impearled_ winds of dawn.

--'Ode to Memory'.


Metonymy as in

  The _bright death_ quiver'd at the victim's throat.

--'Dream of Fair Women'.


or in

  For some three _careless moans_ The summer pilot of an empty heart.

--'Gardener's Daughter'.


No poet since Milton has employed what is known as Onomatopoeia with so
much effect. Not to go farther than the poems of 1842, we have in the
'Morte d'Arthur':--

  So all day long the noise of battle _rolled
  Among the mountains by the winter sea_;

or

  _Dry clashed_ his harness in the icy caves
  And _barren chasms_, and all to left and right
  The _bare black cliff clang'd round_ him, as he bas'd
  His feet _on juts of slippery crag that rang
  Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels_--

or the exquisite

  I heard the _water lapping on the crag_,
  And the _long ripple washing in the reeds_.

So in 'The Dying Swan',

  And _the wavy swell of the soughing reeds_.

See too the whole of 'Oriana' and the description of the dance at
the beginning of 'The Vision of Sin.'

Assonance, alliteration, the revival or adoption of obsolete and
provincial words, the transplantation of phrases and idioms from the
Greek and Latin languages, the employment of common words in uncommon
senses, all are pressed into the service of adding distinction to his
diction. His diction blends the two extremes of simplicity and
artificiality, but with such fine tact that this strange combination has
seldom the effect of incongruity. Longinus has remarked that "as the
fainter lustre of the stars is put out of sight by the all-encompassing
rays of the sun, so when sublimity sheds its light round the sophistries
of rhetoric they become invisible".[1] What Longinus says of "sublimity"
is equally true of sincerity and truthfulness in combination with
exquisitely harmonious expression. We have an illustration in Gray's
'Elegy'. Nothing could be more artificial than the style, but what poem
in the world appeals more directly to the heart and to the eye? It is
one thing to call art to the assistance of art, it is quite another
thing to call art to the assistance of nature. And this is what both
Gray and Tennyson do, and this is why their artificiality, so far from
shocking us, "passes in music out of sight". But this cannot be said of
Tennyson without reserve. At times his strained endeavours to give
distinction to his style by putting common things in an uncommon way led
him into intolerable affectation. Thus we have "the knightly growth that
fringed his lips" for a moustache, "azure pillars of the hearth" for
ascending smoke, "ambrosial orbs" for apples, "frayed magnificence" for
a shabby dress, "the secular abyss to come" for future ages, "the
sinless years that breathed beneath the Syrian blue" for the life of
Christ, "up went the hush'd amaze of hand and eye" for a gesture of
surprise, and the like. One of the worst instances is in 'In Memoriam',
where what is appropriate to the simple sentiment finds, as it should
do, corresponding simplicity of expression in the first couplet, to
collapse into the falsetto of strained artificiality in the second:--


  To rest beneath the clover sod
  That takes the sunshine and the rains,
  _Or where the kneeling hamlet drains
  The chalice of the grapes of God_.


An illustration of the same thing, almost as offensive, is in 'Enoch
Arden', where, in an otherwise studiously simple diction, Enoch's wares
as a fisherman become

  Enoch's _ocean spoil_
  In ocean-smelling osier.


But these peculiarities are less common in the earlier poems than in the
later: it was a vicious habit which grew on him.

But, if exception may sometimes be taken to his diction, no exception
can be taken to his rhythm. No English poet since Milton, Tennyson's
only superior in this respect, had a finer ear or a more consummate
mastery over all the resources of rhythmical expression. What colours
are to a painter rhythm is, in description, to the poet, and few have
rivalled, none have excelled Tennyson in this. Take the following:--


  And ghastly thro' the drizzling rain
  _On the bald street strikes the blank day_.

--'In Memoriam'.

See particularly 'In Memoriam', cvii., the lines beginning "Fiercely
flies," to "darken on the rolling brine": the description of the island
in 'Enoch Arden'; but specification is needless, it applies to all his
descriptive poetry. It is marvellous that he can produce such effects by
such simple means: a mere enumeration of particulars will often do it,
as here:--


  No gray old grange or lonely fold,
  Or low morass and whispering reed,
  Or simple style from mead to mead,
  Or sheep walk up the windy wold.

--'In Memoriam', c.

Or here:--


  The meal sacks on the whitened floor,
  The dark round of the dripping wheel,
  The very air about the door Made misty with the floating meal.

--'The Miller's Daughter'.


His blank verse is best described by negatives. It has not the endless
variety, the elasticity and freedom of Shakespeare's, it has not the
massiveness and majesty of Milton's, it has not the austere grandeur of
Wordsworth's at its best, it has not the wavy swell, "the linked
sweetness long drawn out" of Shelley's, but its distinguishing feature
is, if we may use the expression, its importunate beauty. What Coleridge
said of Claudian's style may be applied to it: "Every line, nay every
word stops, looks full in your face and asks and begs for praise". His
earlier blank verse is less elaborate and seemingly more spontaneous and
easy than his later. [2] But it is in his lyric verse that his rhythm is
seen in its greatest perfection. No English lyrics have more magic or
more haunting beauty, more of that which charms at once and charms for
ever.

In his description of nature he is incomparable. Take the following from
'The Dying Swan':--


  Some blue peaks in the distance rose,
  And white against the cold-white sky,
  Shone out their crowning snows.
  One willow over the river wept,
  And shook the wave as the wind did sigh;
  Above in the wind was the swallow,
  Chasing itself at its own wild will,


or the opening scene in 'none' and in 'The Lotos Eaters', or the
meadow scene in 'The Gardener's Daughter', or the conclusion of 'Audley
Court', or the forest scene in the 'Dream of Fair Women', or this stanza
in 'Mariana in the South':--


  There all in spaces rosy-bright
  Large Hesper glitter'd on her tears,
  And deepening through the silent spheres,
  Heaven over Heaven rose the night.


A single line, nay, a single word, and a scene is by magic before us, as
here where the sea is looked down upon from an immense height:--


  The _wrinkled_ sea beneath him _crawls_.

--'The Eagle'.


Or here of a ship at sea, in the distance:--


  And on through zones of light and shadow
  _Glimmer away to the lonely deep_.

--'To the Rev. F. D. Maurice'.


Or here of waters falling high up on mountains:--


  Their thousand _wreaths of dangling water-smoke_.

--'The Princess'.


Or of a water-fall seen at a distance:--


  And _like a downward smoke_ the slender stream
  Along the cliff _to fall and pause and fall_ did seem.


Or here again:--


  We left the dying ebb that _faintly lipp'd
  The flat red granite_.


Or here of a wave:--


  Like a wave in the wild North Sea
  _Green glimmering toward the summit_ bears with all
  _Its stormy crests that smoke_ against the skies
  Down on a bark.

--'Elaine'.


  That beech will _gather brown_,
  This _maple burn itself away_.

--'In Memoriam'.


  The _wide-wing'd sunset_ of the misty marsh.

--'Last Tournament'.


But illustrations would be endless. Nothing seems to escape him in
Nature. Take the following:--


  Like _a purple beech among the greens
  Looks out of place_.

--'Edwin Morris'.


Or

  Delays _as the tender ash delays
  To clothe herself, when all the woods are green_.

--'The Princess'.


  As _black as ash-buds in the front of March_.

--'The Gardener's Daughter'.


  A gusty April morn
  That _puff'd_ the swaying _branches into smoke_.

--'Holy Grail'.


So with flowers, trees, birds and insects:--


  The fox-glove _clusters dappled bells_.

--'The Two Voices'.


The sunflower:--


  _Rays round with flame its disk of seed_.

--'In Memoriam'.


The dog-rose:--


  _Tufts of rosy-tinted snow_.

--'Two Voices'.


  A _million emeralds_ break from the _ruby-budded lime_.

--'Maud'.


  In gloss and hue the chestnut, _when the shell
  Divides threefold to show the fruit within_.

--'The Brook'.


Or of a chrysalis:--


  And flash'd as those
  _Dull-coated_ things, _that making slide apart
  Their dusk wing cases, all beneath there burns
  A Jewell'd harness_, ere they pass and fly.

--'Gareth and Lynette'.

So again:--


  Wan-sallow, as _the plant that feeds itself,
  Root-bitten by white lichen_.

--'Id'.


And again:--


  All the _silvery gossamers_
  That _twinkle into green and gold_.

--'In Memoriam'.


His epithets are in themselves a study: "the _dewy-tassell'd_ wood,"
"the _tender-pencill'd_ shadow," "_crimson-circl'd_ star," the "_hoary_
clematis," "_creamy_ spray," "_dry-tongued_ laurels". But whatever he
describes is described with the same felicitous vividness. How magical
is this in the verses to Edward Lear:--


  Naiads oar'd
  A _glimmering shoulder_ under _gloom_
  Of _cavern pillars_.


Or this:--


  She lock'd her lips: she left me where I stood:
  "Glory to God," she sang, and past afar,
  Thridding the sombre boskage of the wood,
  Toward the morning-star.

--'A Dream of Fair Women'.


But if in the world of Nature nothing escaped his sensitive and
sympathetic observation,--and indeed it might be said of him as truly as
of Shelley's 'Alastor'


  Every sight
  And sound from the vast earth and ambient air
  Sent to his heart its choicest impulses,


--he had studied the world of books with not less sympathy and
attention. In the sense of a profound and extensive acquaintance with
all that is best in ancient and modern poetry, and in an extraordinarily
wide knowledge of general literature, of philosophy and theology, of
geography and travel, and of various branches of natural science, he is
one of the most erudite of English poets. With the poetry of the Greek
and Latin classics he was, like Milton and Gray, thoroughly saturated.
Its influence penetrates his work, now in indirect reminiscence, now in
direct imitation, now inspiring, now modifying, now moulding. He tells
us in 'The Daisy' how when at Como "the rich Virgilian rustic measure of
'Lari Maxume'" haunted him all day, and in a later fragment how, as he
rowed from Desenzano to Sirmio, Catullus was with him. And they and
their brethren, from Homer to Theocritus, from Lucretius to Claudian,
always were with him. I have illustrated so fully in the notes and
elsewhere [1] the influence of the Greek and Roman classics on the poems
of 1842 that it is not necessary to go into detail here. But a few
examples of the various ways in which they affected Tennyson's work
generally may be given. Sometimes he transfers a happy epithet or
expression in literal translation, as in:--


  On either _shining_ shoulder laid a hand,


which is Homer's epithet for the shoulder--


  [Greek: ana phaidimps omps]

--'Od'., xi., 128.



  It was the red cock _shouting_ to the light,


exactly the


  [Greek: heos eboaesen alektor] (Until the cock _shouted_).

--'Batrachomyomachia', 192.



  And all in passion utter'd a 'dry' shriek,


which is the 'sicca vox' of the Roman poets. So in 'The Lotos Eaters':--


  His voice was _thin_ as voices from the grave,


which is Theocritus' voice of Hylas from his watery grave:--


  [Greek: araia d' Iketo ph_ona]

  (_Thin_ came the voice).


So in 'The Princess', sect. i.:--


  And _cook'd his spleen_,


which is a phrase from the Greek, as in Homer, 'Il'., iv., 513:--

  [Greek: epi naeusi cholon thumalgea pessei]

  (At the ships he cooks his heart-grieving spleen).


Again in 'The Princess', sect. iv.:--

  _Laugh'd with alien lips_,


which is Homer's ('Od'., 69-70)--

  [Greek: did' aedae gnathmoisi gelps_on allotrioisi]


So in 'Edwin Morris'--

  All perfect, finished _to the finger nail_,

which is a phrase transferred from Latin through the Greek; 'cf.',
Horace, 'Sat'., i., v., 32:--

  _Ad unguem_ Factus homo

  (A man fashioned to the finger nail).


"The _brute_ earth," 'In Memoriam', cxxvii., which is Horace's

  _Bruta_ tellus.

--'Odes', i., xxxiv., 9.


So again:--

  A bevy of roses _apple-cheek'd_


in 'The Island', which is Theocritus' [Greek: maloparaeos].
The line in the 'Morte d'Arthur',

  This way and that, dividing the swift mind,


is an almost literal translation of Virgil's 'Aen'., iv., 285:--

  Atque animum nunc huc celerem nunc dividit illuc

 (And this way and that he divides his swift mind).


Another way in which they affect him is where, without direct imitation,
they colour passages and poems as in 'Oenone', 'The Lotos Eaters',
'Tithonus', 'Tiresias', 'The Death of Oenone', 'Demeter and Persephone',
the passage beginning "From the woods" in 'The Gardener's Daughter',
which is a parody of Theocritus, 'Id.', vii., 139 'seq.', while the
Cyclops' invocation to Galatea in Theocritus, 'Id.', xi., 29-79, was
plainly the model for the idyll, "Come down, O Maid," in the seventh
section of 'The Princess', just as the tournament in the same poem
recalls closely the epic of Homer and Virgil. Tennyson had a wonderful
way of transfusing, as it were, the essence of some beautiful passage in
a Greek or Roman poet into English. A striking illustration of this
would be the influence of reminiscences of Virgil's fourth 'Aeneid' on
the idyll of 'Elaine and Guinevere'. Compare, for instance, the
following: he is describing the love-wasted Elaine, as she sits brooding
in the lonely evening, with the shadow of the wished-for death falling
on her:--

  But when they left her to herself again,
  Death, like a friend's voice from a distant field,
  Approaching through the darkness, call'd; the owls
  Wailing had power upon her, and she mix'd
  Her fancies with the sallow-rifted glooms
  Of evening and the moanings of the wind.


How exactly does this recall, in a manner to be felt rather than exactly
defined, a passage equally exquisite and equally pathetic in Virgil's
picture of Dido, where, with the shadow of her death also falling upon
her, she seems to hear the phantom voice of her dead husband, and "mixes
her fancies" with the glooms of night and the owl's funereal wail:--

  Hinc exaudiri voces et verba vocantis
  Visa viri, nox quum terras obscura teneret;
  Solaque culminibus ferali carmine bubo
  Spe queri, et longas in fletum ducere voces.

--'Aen'., iv., 460.

  (From it she thought she clearly heard a voice, even the accents of
  her husband calling her when night was wrapping the earth with
  darkness; and on the roof the lonely owl in funereal strains kept oft
  complaining, drawing out into a wail its protracted notes.)

Similar passages, though not so striking, would be the picture of
Pindar's Elysium in 'Tiresias', the sentiment pervading 'The Lotos
Eaters' transferred so faithfully from the Greek poets, the scenery in
'none' so crowded with details from Homer, Theocritus and Callimachus.
Sometimes we find similes suggested by the classical poets, but enriched
by touches from original observation, as here in 'The Princess':--

  As one that climbs a peak to gaze
  O'er land and main, and sees a great black cloud
  Drag inward from the deeps, a wall of night
  Blot out the slope of sea from verge to shore.
  ...
  And quenching lake by lake and tarn by tarn Expunge the world,


which was plainly suggested by Homer, iv., 275:--

  [Greek: hos d' hot apo skopiaes eide nephos aipolos anaer
  erchomenon kata ponton hupo Zephuroio i_oaes tps de t' aneuthen eonti,
  melanteron aeute pissa, phainet ion kata ponton, agei de te lailapa
  pollaen.]

  (As when a goat-herd from some hill-peak sees a cloud coming across
  the deep with the blast of the west wind behind it; and to him, being
  as he is afar, it seems blacker, even as pitch, as it goes along the
  deep, bringing with it a great whirlwind.)


So again the fine simile in 'Elaine', beginning

  Bare as a wild wave in the wide North Sea,


is at least modelled on the simile in 'Iliad', xv., 381-4, with
reminiscences of the same similes in 'Iliad', xv., 624, and 'Iliad',
iv., 42-56. The simile in the first section of the 'Princess',

  As when a field of corn
  Bows all its ears before the roaring East,


reminds us of Homer's

  [Greek: hos d' ote kinaesae Zephyros Bathulaeon, elthon labros,
  epaigixon, epi t' aemuei astachuessin]

  (As when the west wind tosses a deep cornfield rushing down with
  furious blast, and it bows with all its ears.)


Nothing could be more happy than such an adaptation as the following--

  Ever fail'd to draw
  The quiet night into her blood,


from Virgil, 'Aen'., iv., 530:--

  Neque unquam Solvitur in somnos _oculisve aut pectore noctem
  Accipit_.

  (And she never relaxes into sleep, or receives the night in eyes or
  bosom),


or than the following (in 'Enid') from Theocritus:--

  Arms on which the standing muscle sloped,
  As slopes a wild brook o'er a little stone,
  Running too vehemently to break upon it.

  [Greek: en de mues stereoisi brachiosin akron hyp' _omon estasan,
  aeute petroi oloitrochoi ous te kylind_on cheimarrhous potamos
  megalais periexese dinais.]

--'Idyll', xxii., 48 'seq.'

  (And the muscles on his brawny arms close under the shoulder stood out
  like boulders which the wintry torrent has rolled and worn smooth with
  the mighty eddies.)

But there was another use to which Tennyson applied his accurate and
intimate acquaintance with the classics. It lay in developing what was
suggested by them, in unfolding, so to speak, what was furled in their
imagery. Nothing is more striking in ancient classical poetry than its
pregnant condensation. It often expresses in an epithet what might be
expanded into a detailed picture, or calls up in a single phrase a whole
scene or a whole position. Where in 'Merlin and Vivian' Tennyson
described

  The _blind wave feeling round his long sea hall
  In silence_,


he was merely unfolding to its full Homer's [Greek: kuma k_ophon]--"dumb
wave"; just as the best of all comments on Horace's expression, "Vultus
nimium lubricus aspici," 'Odes', I., xix., 8, is given us in Tennyson's
picture of the Oread in Lucretius:--


  How the sun delights
  To _glance and shift about her slippery sides_.

Or take again this passage in the 'Agamemnon', 404-5, describing
Menelaus pining in his desolate palace for the lost Helen:--

  [Greek: pothoi d' uperpontias phasma doxei dom_on anassein.]

  (And in his yearning love for her who is over the sea a phantom will
  seem to reign over his palace.)


What are the lines in 'Guinevere' but an expansion of what is latent but
unfolded in the pregnant suggestiveness of the Greek poet:--

  And in thy bowers of Camelot or of Usk
  Thy shadow still would glide from room to room,
  And I should evermore be vex'd with thee
  In hanging robe or vacant ornament,
  Or ghostly foot-fall echoing on the stair--


with a reminiscence also perhaps of Constance's speech in 'King John',
III., iv.

It need hardly be said that these particular passages, and possibly some
of the others, may be mere coincidences, but they illustrate what
numberless other passages which could be cited prove that Tennyson's
careful and meditative study of the Greek and Roman poets enabled him to
enrich his work by these felicitous adaptations.

He used those poets as his master Virgil used his Greek predecessors,
and what the elder Seneca said of Ovid, who had appropriated a line from
Virgil, might exactly be applied to Tennyson: "Fecisse quod in multis
aliis versibus Virgilius fecerat, non surripiendi caus sed palam
imitandi, hoc animo ut vellet agnosci".[4]

He had plainly studied with equal attention the chief Italian poets,
especially Dante, Petrarch, Ariosto and Tasso. On a passage in Dante he
founded his 'Ulysses', and imitations of that master are frequent
throughout his poems. 'In Memoriam', both in its general scheme as
well as in numberless particular passages, closely recalls Petrarch; and
Ariosto and Tasso have each influenced his work. In the poetry of his
own country nothing seems to have escaped him, either in the masters or
the minor poets.[5] To apply the term plagiarism to Tennyson's use of
his predecessors would be as absurd as to resolve some noble fabric into
its stones and bricks, and confounding the one with the other to taunt
the architect with appropriating an honour which belongs to the quarry
and the potter. Tennyson's method was exactly the method of two of the
greatest poets in the world, Virgil and Milton, of the poet who stands
second to Virgil in Roman poetry, Horace, of one of the most illustrious
of our own minor poets, Gray.

An artist more fastidious than Tennyson never existed. As scrupulous a
purist in language as Cicero, Chesterfield and Macaulay in prose, as
Virgil, Milton, and Leopardi in verse, his care extended to the nicest
minutiae of word-forms. Thus "ancle" is always spelt with a "c" when it
stands alone, with a "k" when used in compounds; thus he spelt "Idylls"
with one "l" in the short poems, with two "l's" in the epic poems; thus
the employment of "through" or "thro'," of "bad" or "bade," and the
retention or suppression of "e" in past participles are always carefully
studied. He took immense pains to avoid the clash of "s" with "s," and
to secure the predominance of open vowels when rhythm rendered them
appropriate. Like the Greek painter with his partridge, he thought
nothing of sacrificing good things if, in any way, they interfered with
unity and symmetry, and thus, his son tells us, many stanzas, in
themselves of exquisite beauty, have been lost to us.


[Footnote 1: 'De Sublimitate,' xvii.]

[Footnote 2: Tennyson's blank verse in the _Idylls of the King_
(excepting in the _Morte d'Arthur_ and in the grander passages), is
obviously modelled in rhythm on that of Shakespeare's earlier style seen
to perfection in _King John_. Compare the following lines with the
rhythm say of _Elaine_ or _Guinevere_;--

  But now will canker sorrow eat my bud,
  And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
  And he will look as hollow as a ghost;
  As dim and meagre as an ague's fit:
  And so he'll die; and, rising so again,
  When I shall meet him in the court of heaven
  I shall not know him: therefore never, never
  Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.

--_King John_, III., iv.]

[Footnote 3: 'Illustrations of Tennyson'.]

[Footnote 4: Seneca, third 'Suasoria'.]

[Footnote 5: For fuller illustrations of all this, and for the influence
of the ancient classics on Tennyson, I may perhaps venture to refer the
reader to my 'Illustrations of Tennyson'. And may I here take the
opportunity of pointing out that nothing could have been farther from my
intention in that book than what has so often been most unfairly
attributed to it, namely, an attempt to show that a charge of plagiarism
might be justly urged against Tennyson. No honest critic, who had even
cursorily inspected the book, could so utterly misrepresent its purpose.]






IV


Tennyson's place is not among the "lords of the visionary eye," among
seers, among prophets, but not the least part of the debt which his
countrymen owe to him is his dedication of his art to the noblest
purposes. At a time when poetry was beginning to degenerate into what it
has now almost universally become--a mere sense-pampering siren, and
when critics were telling us, as they are still telling us, that we are
to understand by it "all literary production which attains the power of
giving pleasure by its form as distinct from its matter," he remained
true to the creed of his great predecessors. "L'art pour art," he would
say, quoting Georges Sand, "est un vain mot: l'art pour le vrai, l'art
pour le beau et le bon, voila la religion que je cherche." When he
succeeded to the laureateship he was proud to remember that the wreath
which had descended to him was

  greener from the brows
  Of him that utter'd nothing base,

and he was a loyal disciple of that poet whose aim had been, in his own
words, "to console the afflicted, to add sunshine to daylight by making
the happy happier, to teach the young and the gracious of every age to
see, to think, to feel, and therefore to become more actively and
securely virtuous". [1] Wordsworth had said that he wished to be
regarded as a teacher or as nothing, but unhappily he did not always
distinguish between the way in which a poet and a philosopher should
teach. He forgot that the didactic element in a poem should be, to
employ a homely illustration, what garlic should be in a salad, "scarce
suspected, animate the whole," that the poet teaches not as the moralist
and the preacher teach, but as nature and life teach us. He taught us
when he wrote 'The Fountain' and 'The Highland Reaper, The
Leach-gatherer' and 'Michael', he merely wearied us when he sermonised
in 'The Excursion' and in 'The Prelude'. Tennyson never makes this
mistake. He is seldom directly didactic. Would he inculcate subjugation
to the law of duty--he gives us the funeral ode on Wellington, 'The
Charge of the Light Brigade', and 'Love and Duty'. Would he inculcate
resignation to the will of God, and the moral efficacy of conventional
Christianity--he gives us 'Enoch Arden'. Would he picture the endless
struggle between the sensual and the spiritual, and the relation of
ideals to life--he gives us the 'Idylls of the King'. Would he point to
what atheism may lead--he gives us 'Lucretius'. Poems which are
masterpieces of sensuous art, such as mere aesthetes, like Rosetti and
his school, must contemplate with admiring despair, he makes vehicles of
the most serious moral and spiritual teaching. 'The Vision of Sin' is
worth a hundred sermons on the disastrous effects of unbridled
profligacy. In 'The Palace of Art' we have the quintessence of 'The Book
of Ecclesiastes' and much more besides. Even in 'The Lotos Eaters' we
have the mirror held up to Hedonism. On the education of the affections
and on the purity of domestic life must depend very largely, not merely
the happiness of individuals, but the well-being of society, and how
wide a space is filled by poems in Tennyson's works bearing
influentially on these subjects is obvious. And they admit us into a
pleasaunce with which it is good to be familiar, so pure and wholesome
is their atmosphere, so tranquilly beautiful the world in which the
characters move and the little dramas unfold themselves. They preach
nothing, but deep into every heart must sink their silent lessons. "Upon
the sacredness of home life," writes his son, "he would maintain that
the stability and greatness of a nation largely depend; and one of the
secrets of his power over mankind was his true joy in the family duties
and affections." What sermons have we in 'The Miller's Daughter', in
'Dora', in 'The Gardener's Daughter' and in 'Love and Duty'. 'The
Princess' was a direct contribution to a social question of momentous
importance to our time. 'Maud' had an immediate political purpose, while
in 'In Memoriam' he became the interpreter and teacher of his generation
in a still higher sense.

Since Shakespeare no English poet has been so essentially patriotic, or
appealed so directly to the political conscience of the nation. In his
noble eulogies of the English constitution and of the virtue and wisdom
of its architects, in his spirit-stirring pictures of the heroic actions
of our forefathers and contemporaries both by land and sea, in his
passionate denunciations of all that he believed would detract from
England's greatness and be prejudicial to her real interests, in his
hearty sympathy with every movement and with every measure which he
believed would contribute to her honour and her power, in all this he
stands alone among modern poets. But if he loved England as Shakespeare
loved her, he had other lessons than Shakespeare's to teach her. The
responsibilities imposed on the England of our time--and no poet knew
this better--are very different from those imposed on the England of
Elizabeth. An empire vaster and more populous than that of the Csars
has since then been added to our dominion. Millions, indeed, who are of
the same blood as ourselves and who speak our language have, by the
folly of common ancestors, become aliens. But how immense are the realms
peopled by the colonies which are still loyal to us, and by the three
hundred millions who in India own us as their rulers: of this vast
empire England is now the capital and centre. That she should fulfil
completely and honourably the duties to which destiny has called her
will be the prayer of every patriot, that he should by his own efforts
contribute all in his power to further such fulfilment must be his
earnest desire. It would be no exaggeration to say that Tennyson
contributed more than any man who has ever lived to what may be called
the higher political education of the English-speaking races. Of
imperial federation he was at once the apostle and the pioneer. In
poetry which appealed as probably no other poetry has appealed to every
class, wherever our language is spoken, he dwelt fondly on all that
constitutes the greatness and glory of England, on her grandeur in the
past, on the magnificent promise of the part she will play in the
future, if her sons are true to her. There should be no distinction, for
she recognises no distinction between her children at home and her
children in her colonies. She is the common mother of a common race: one
flag, one sceptre, the same proud ancestry, the same splendid
inheritance. "How strange England cannot see," he once wrote, "that her
true policy lies in a close union with her colonies."

  Sharers of our glorious past,
  Shall we not thro' good and ill
  Cleave to one another still?
  Britain's myriad voices call,
  Sons be welded all and all
  Into one imperial whole,
  One with Britain, heart and soul!
  One life, one flag, one fleet, one Throne!

Thus did the poetry of Tennyson draw closer, and thus will it continue
to draw closer those sentimental ties--ties, in Burke's phrase, "light
as air, but strong as links of iron," which bind the colonies to the
mother country; and in so doing, if he did not actually initiate, he
furthered, as no other single man has furthered, the most important
movement of our time. Nor has any man of genius in the present
century--not Dickens, not Ruskin--been moved by a purer spirit of
philanthropy, or done more to show how little the qualities and actions
which dignify humanity depend, or need depend, on the accidents of
fortune. He brought poetry into touch with the discoveries of science,
and with the speculations of theology and metaphysics, and though, in
treating such subjects, his power is not, perhaps, equal to his charm,
the debt which his countrymen owe him, even intellectually, is
incalculable.


[Footnote 1: See Wordsworth's letter to Lady Beaumont, 'Prose Works',
vol. ii., p. 176.]




TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

EARLY POEMS:--
  To the Queen
  Claribel: a Melody
  Lilian
  Isabel
  Mariana
  To----("Clear-headed friend, whose joyful scorn")
  Madeline
  Song--The Owl
  Second Song to the Same
  Recollections of the Arabian Nights
  Ode to Memory
  Song ("A spirit haunts the year's last hours")
  Adeline
  A Character
  The Poet
  The Poet's Mind
  The Sea-Fairies
  The Deserted House
  The Dying Swan
  A Dirge
  Love and Death
  The Ballad of Oriana
  Circumstance
  The Merman
  The Mermaid
  Sonnet to J. M. K.
  The Lady of Shalott
  Mariana in the South
  Elenore
  The Miller's Daughter
  Fatima *
  none
  The Sisters
  To-----("I send you here a sort of allegory")
  The Palace of Art
  Lady Clara Vere de Vere
  The May Queen
  New Year's Eve
  Conclusion
  The Lotos-Eaters
  Dream of Fair Women
  Margaret
  The Blackbird
  The Death of the Old Year
  To J. S.
  "You ask me, why, tho' ill at ease"
  "Of old sat Freedom on the heights"
  "Love thou thy land, with love far-brought"
  The Goose
  The Epic
  Morte d'Arthur
  The Gardener's Daughter; or, The Pictures
  Dora
  Audley Court
  Walking to the Mail
  Edwin Morris; or, The Lake
  St. Simeon Stylites
  The Talking Oak
  Love and Duty
  The Golden Year
  Ulysses
  Locksley Hall
  Godiva
  The Two Voices
  The Day-Dream:--Prologue
  The Sleeping Palace
  The Sleeping Beauty
  The Arrival
  The Revival
  The Departure
  Moral
  L'Envoi
  Epilogue
  Amphion
  St. Agnes
  Sir Galahad
  Edward Gray
  Will Waterproofs Lyrical Monologue
  To----, after reading a Life and Letters
  To E.L., on his Travels in Greece
  Lady Clare
  The Lord of Burleigh
  Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere: a Fragment
  A Farewell
  The Beggar Maid
  The Vision of Sin
  "Come not, when I am dead"
  The Eagle
  "Move eastward, happy earth, and leave"
  "Break, break, break"
  The Poet's Song


APPENDIX.--SUPPRESSED POEMS:--

  Elegiacs
  The "How" and the "Why"
  Supposed Confessions
  The Burial of Love
  To----("Sainted Juliet! dearest name !")
  Song ("I' the glooming light")
  Song ("The lintwhite and the throstlecock")
  Song ("Every day hath its night")
  Nothing will Die
  All Things will Die
  Hero to Leander
  The Mystic
  The Grasshopper
  Love, Pride and Forgetfulness
  Chorus ("The varied earth, the moving heaven")
  Lost Hope
  The Tears of Heaven
  Love and Sorrow
  To a Lady Sleeping
  Sonnet ("Could I outwear my present state of woe")
  Sonnet ("Though Night hath climbed her peak of highest noon")
  Sonnet ("Shall the hag Evil die with child of Good")
  Sonnet ("The pallid thunderstricken sigh for gain")
  Love
  The Kraken
  English War Song
  National Song
  Dualisms
  We are Free
  [Greek: oi rheontes]
  "Mine be the strength of spirit, full and free"
  To--("All good things have not kept aloof)
  Buonaparte
  Sonnet ("Oh, Beauty, passing beauty! sweetest Sweet!")
  The Hesperides
  Song ("The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit")
  Rosalind
  Song ("Who can say")
  Kate
  Sonnet ("Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afar")
  Poland
  To--("As when with downcast eyes we muse and brood")
  O Darling Room
  To Christopher North
  The Skipping Rope
  Timbuctoo


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE POEMS OF 1842





TO THE QUEEN

This dedication was first prefixed to the seventh edition of these poems
in 1851, Tennyson having succeeded Wordsworth as Poet Laureate, 19th
Nov., 1850.

  Revered, beloved [1]--O you that hold
  A nobler office upon earth
  Than arms, or power of brain, or birth
  Could give the warrior kings of old,

  Victoria, [2]--since your Royal grace
  To one of less desert allows
  This laurel greener from the brows
  Of him that utter'd nothing base;

  And should your greatness, and the care
  That yokes with empire, yield you time
  To make demand of modern rhyme
  If aught of ancient worth be there;

  Then--while [3] a sweeter music wakes,
  And thro' wild March the throstle calls,
  Where all about your palace-walls
  The sun-lit almond-blossom shakes--

  Take, Madam, this poor book of song;
  For tho' the faults were thick as dust
  In vacant chambers, I could trust
  Your kindness. [4] May you rule us long.

  And leave us rulers of your blood
  As noble till the latest day!
  May children of our children say,
  "She wrought her people lasting good; [5]

  "Her court was pure; her life serene;
  God gave her peace; her land reposed;
  A thousand claims to reverence closed
  In her as Mother, Wife and Queen;

  "And statesmen at her council met
  Who knew the seasons, when to take
  Occasion by the hand, and make
  The bounds of freedom wider yet [6]

  "By shaping some august decree,
  Which kept her throne unshaken still,
  Broad-based upon her people's will, [7]
  And compass'd by the inviolate sea."

  MARCH, 1851.


[Footnote 1: 1851. Revered Victoria, you that hold.]

[Footnote 2: 1851. I thank you that your Royal grace.]

[Footnote 3: This stanza added in 1853.]

[Footnote 4: 1851. Your sweetness.]

[Footnote 5: In 1851 the following stanza referring to the first Crystal
Palace, opened 1st May, 1851, was inserted here:--

  She brought a vast design to pass,
  When Europe and the scatter'd ends
  Of our fierce world were mixt as friends
  And brethren, in her halls of glass.]

[Footnote 6: 1851. Broader yet.]

[Footnote 7: With this cf. Shelley, 'Ode to Liberty':--

  Athens diviner yet
  Gleam'd with its crest of columns _on the will_
  Of man.]





CLARIBEL

A MELODY


First published in 1830.

In 1830 and in 1842 edd. the poem is in one long stanza, with a full
stop in 1830 ed. after line 8; 1842 ed. omits the full stop. The name
"Claribel" may have been suggested by Spenser ('F. Q.', ii., iv., or
Shakespeare, 'Tempest').


1

  Where Claribel low-lieth
  The breezes pause and die,
  Letting the rose-leaves fall:
  But the solemn oak-tree sigheth,
  Thick-leaved, ambrosial,
  With an ancient melody
  Of an inward agony,
  Where Claribel low-lieth.

2

  At eve the beetle boometh
  Athwart the thicket lone:
  At noon the wild bee [1] hummeth
  About the moss'd headstone:
  At midnight the moon cometh,
  And looketh down alone.
  Her song the lintwhite swelleth,
  The clear-voiced mavis dwelleth,
  The callow throstle [2] lispeth,
  The slumbrous wave outwelleth,
  The babbling runnel crispeth,
  The hollow grot replieth
  Where Claribel low-lieth.


[Footnote 1: 1830. "Wild" omitted, and "low" inserted with a hyphen
before "hummeth".]

[Footnote 2: 1851 and all previous editions, "fledgling" for "callow".]





LILIAN

First printed in 1830.

1

  Airy, fairy Lilian,
  Flitting, fairy Lilian,
  When I ask her if she love me,
  Claps her tiny hands above me,
  Laughing all she can;
  She'll not tell me if she love me,
  Cruel little Lilian.


2

  When my passion seeks
  Pleasance in love-sighs
  She, looking thro' and thro' [1] me
  Thoroughly to undo me,
  Smiling, never speaks:
  So innocent-arch, so cunning-simple,
  From beneath her gather'd wimple [2]
  Glancing with black-beaded eyes,
  Till the lightning laughters dimple
  The baby-roses in her cheeks;
  Then away she flies.


3

  Prythee weep, May Lilian!
  Gaiety without eclipse
  Wearieth me, May Lilian:
  Thro' [3] my very heart it thrilleth
  When from crimson-threaded [4] lips
  Silver-treble laughter [5] trilleth:
  Prythee weep, May Lilian.


4

  Praying all I can,
  If prayers will not hush thee,
  Airy Lilian,
  Like a rose-leaf I will crush thee,
  Fairy Lilian.


[Footnote 1: 1830. Through and through me.]

[Footnote 2: 1830. Purfled.]

[Footnote 3: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 4: With "crimson-threaded" 'cf.' Cleveland's 'Sing-song on
Clarinda's Wedding', "Her 'lips those threads of scarlet dye'"; but the
original is 'Solomons Song' iv. 3, "Thy lips are 'like a thread of
scarlet'".]

[Footnote 5: 1830. Silver treble-laughter.]





ISABEL

First printed in 1830.

Lord Tennyson tells us ('Life of Tennyson', i., 43) that in this poem
his father more or less described his own mother, who was a "remarkable
and saintly woman". In this as in the other poems elaborately painting
women we may perhaps suspect the influence of Wordsworth's 'Triad',
which should be compared with them.


1

  Eyes not down-dropt nor over-bright, but fed
  With the clear-pointed flame of chastity,
  Clear, without heat, undying, tended by
  Pure vestal thoughts in the translucent fane
  Of her still spirit [1]; locks not wide-dispread,
  Madonna-wise on either side her head;
  Sweet lips whereon perpetually did reign
  The summer calm of golden charity,
  Were fixed shadows of thy fixed mood,
  Revered Isabel, the crown and head,
  The stately flower of female fortitude,
  Of perfect wifehood and pure lowlihead. [2]


2

  The intuitive decision of a bright
  And thorough-edged intellect to part
  Error from crime; a prudence to withhold;
  The laws of marriage [3] character'd in gold
  Upon the blanched [4] tablets of her heart;
  A love still burning upward, giving light
  To read those laws; an accent very low
  In blandishment, but a most silver flow
  Of subtle-paced counsel in distress,
  Right to the heart and brain, tho' undescried,
  Winning its way with extreme gentleness
  Thro' [5] all the outworks of suspicious pride.
  A courage to endure and to obey;
  A hate of gossip parlance, and of sway,
  Crown'd Isabel, thro' [6] all her placid life,
  The queen of marriage, a most perfect wife.


3


  The mellow'd reflex of a winter moon;
  A clear stream flowing with a muddy one,
  Till in its onward current it absorbs
  With swifter movement and in purer light
  The vexed eddies of its wayward brother:
  A leaning and upbearing parasite,
  Clothing the stem, which else had fallen quite,
  With cluster'd flower-bells and ambrosial orbs
  Of rich fruit-bunches leaning on each other--
  Shadow forth thee:--the world hath not another
  (Though all her fairest forms are types of thee,
  And thou of God in thy great charity)
  Of such a finish'd chasten'd purity,


[Footnote 1: With these lines may be compared Shelley, 'Dedication to
the Revolt of Islam':--

  And through thine eyes, e'en in thy soul, I see
  A lamp of vestal fire burning eternally.]


[Footnote 2: Lowlihead a favourite word with Chaucer and Spenser.]

[Footnote 3: 1830. Wifehood.]

[Footnote 4: 1830. Blenched.]

[Footnote 5: 1830 and all before 1853. Through.]

[Footnote 6: 1830. Through.]




MARIANA

"Mariana in the moated grange."--'Measure for Measure'.

First printed in 1830.


This poem as we know from the motto prefixed to it was suggested by
Shakespeare ('Measure for Measure', iii., 1, "at the moated grange
resides this dejected Mariana,") but the poet may have had in his mind
the  exquisite fragment of Sappho:--

  [Greek: deduke men ha selanna kai Plaeades, mesai de nuktes, para d'
  erchet h'ora ego de mona kateud'o.]

  "The moon has set and the Pleiades, and it is midnight: the hour too
  is going by, but I sleep alone."

It was long popularly supposed that the scene of the poem was a farm
near Somersby known as Baumber's farm, but Tennyson denied this and said
it was a purely "imaginary house in the fen," and that he "never so much
as dreamed of Baumbers farm". See 'Life', i., 28.



  With blackest moss the flower-plots
  Were thickly crusted, one and all:
  The rusted nails fell from the knots
  That held the peach [1] to the garden-wall. [2]
  The broken sheds look'd sad and strange:
  Unlifted was the clinking latch;
  Weeded and worn the ancient thatch
  Upon the lonely moated grange.
  She only said, "My life is dreary,
  He cometh not," she said;
  She said, "I am aweary, aweary,
  I would that I were dead!"

  Her tears fell with the dews at even;
  Her tears fell ere the dews were dried; [3]
  She could not look on the sweet heaven,
  Either at morn or eventide.
  After the flitting of the bats,
  When thickest dark did trance the sky,
  She drew her casement-curtain by,
  And glanced athwart the glooming flats.
  She only said, "The night is dreary,
  He cometh not," she said;
  She said, "I am aweary, aweary,
  I would that I were dead!"

  Upon the middle of the night,
  Waking she heard the night-fowl crow:
  The cock sung out an hour ere light:
  From the dark fen the oxen's low
  Came to her: without hope of change,
  In sleep she seem'd to walk forlorn,
  Till cold winds woke the gray-eyed [4] morn
  About the lonely moated grange.
  She only said, "The day is dreary,
  He cometh not," she said;
  She said, "I am aweary, aweary,
  I would that I were dead!"

  About a stone-cast from the wall
  A sluice with blacken'd waters slept,
  And o'er it many, round and small,
  The cluster'd marish-mosses crept.
  Hard by a poplar shook alway,
  All silver-green with gnarled bark:
  For leagues no other tree did mark [5]
  The level waste, the rounding gray.[6]
  She only said, "My life is dreary,
  He cometh not," she said;
  She said, "I am aweary, aweary,
  I would that I were dead!"

  And ever when the moon was low,
  And the shrill winds were up and away,[7]
  In the white curtain, to and fro,
  She saw the gusty shadow sway.
  But when the moon was very low,
  And wild winds bound within their cell,
  The shadow of the poplar fell
  Upon her bed, across her brow.
  She only said, "The night is dreary,
  He cometh not," she said;
  She said, "I am aweary, aweary,
  I would that I were dead!"

  All day within the dreamy house,
  The doors upon their hinges creak'd;
  The blue fly sung in the pane; [8] the mouse
  Behind the mouldering wainscot shriek'd,
  Or from the crevice peer'd about.
  Old faces glimmer'd thro' the doors,
  Old footsteps trod the upper floors,
  Old voices called her from without.
  She only said, "My life is dreary,
  He cometh not," she said;
  She said, "I am aweary, aweary,
  I would that I were dead!"

  The sparrow's chirrup on the roof,
  The slow clock ticking, and the sound,
  Which to the wooing wind aloof
  The poplar made, did all confound
  Her sense; but most she loathed the hour
  When the thick-moted sunbeam lay
  Athwart the chambers, and the day
  Was sloping [9] toward his western bower.
  Then, said she, "I am very dreary,
  He will not come," she said;
  She wept, "I am aweary, aweary,
  O God, that I were dead!".


[Footnote 1: 1863. Pear.]

[Footnote 2: 1872. Gable-wall.]

[Footnote 3: With this beautiful couplet may be compared a couplet of
Helvius Cinna:--

  Te matutinus flentem conspexit Eous,
  Te flentem paullo vidit post Hesperus idem.
--'Cinnae Reliq'. Ed. Mueller, p. 83.]


[Footnote 4: 1830. _Grey_-eyed. 'Cf'. 'Romeo and Juliet', ii., 3,
  "The _grey morn_ smiles on the frowning night".]

[Footnote 5: 1830, 1842, 1843. Dark.]

[Footnote 6: 1830. Grey.]

[Footnote 7: 1830. An' away.]

[Footnote 8: All editions before 1851. I' the pane. With this line
'cf'. 'Maud', I., vi., 8, "and the shrieking rush of the wainscot
mouse".]

[Footnote 9: 1830. Downsloped was westering in his bower.]




TO----

First printed in 1830.

The friend to whom these verses were addressed was Joseph William
Blakesley, third Classic and Senior Chancellor's Medallist in 1831, and
afterwards Dean of Lincoln. Tennyson said of him: "He ought to be Lord
Chancellor, for he is a subtle and powerful reasoner, and an honest
man".--'Life', i., 65. He was a contributor to the 'Edinburgh' and
'Quarterly Reviews', and died in April, 1885. See memoir of him in the
'Dictionary of National Biography'.


1

  Clear-headed friend, whose joyful scorn,
  Edged with sharp laughter, cuts atwain
  The knots that tangle human creeds, [1]
  The wounding cords that [2] bind and strain
  The heart until it bleeds,
  Ray-fringed eyelids of the morn
  Roof not a glance so keen as thine:
  If aught of prophecy be mine,
  Thou wilt not live in vain.


2

  Low-cowering shall the Sophist sit;
  Falsehood shall bear her plaited brow:
  Fair-fronted Truth shall droop not now
  With shrilling shafts of subtle wit.
  Nor martyr-flames, nor trenchant swords
  Can do away that ancient lie;
  A gentler death shall Falsehood die,
  Shot thro' and thro'[3] with cunning words.


3

  Weak Truth a-leaning on her crutch,
  Wan, wasted Truth in her utmost need,
  Thy kingly intellect shall feed,
  Until she be an athlete bold,
  And weary with a finger's touch
  Those writhed limbs of lightning speed;
  Like that strange angel [4] which of old,
  Until the breaking of the light,
  Wrestled with wandering Israel,
  Past Yabbok brook the livelong night,
  And heaven's mazed signs stood still
  In the dim tract of Penuel.


[Footnote 1: 1830. The knotted lies of human creeds.]

[Footnote 2: 1830. "Which" for "that".]

[Footnote 3: 1830. Through and through.]

[Footnote 4: The reference is to Genesis xxxii. 24-32.]




MADELINE

First published in 1830.


1

Thou art not steep'd in golden languors,
No tranced summer calm is thine,
Ever varying Madeline.
Thro' [1] light and shadow thou dost range,
Sudden glances, sweet and strange,
Delicious spites and darling angers,
And airy [2] forms of flitting change.


2

Smiling, frowning, evermore,
Thou art perfect in love-lore.
Revealings deep and clear are thine
Of wealthy smiles: but who may know
Whether smile or frown be fleeter?
Whether smile or frown be sweeter,
Who may know?
Frowns perfect-sweet along the brow
Light-glooming over eyes divine,
Like little clouds sun-fringed, are thine,
Ever varying Madeline.
Thy smile and frown are not aloof
From one another,
Each to each is dearest brother;
Hues of the silken sheeny woof
Momently shot into each other.
All the mystery is thine;
Smiling, frowning, evermore,
Thou art perfect in love-lore,
Ever varying Madeline.


3

A subtle, sudden flame,
By veering passion fann'd,
About thee breaks and dances
When I would kiss thy hand,
The flush of anger'd shame
O'erflows thy calmer glances,
And o'er black brows drops down
A sudden curved frown:
But when I turn away,
Thou, willing me to stay,
Wooest not, nor vainly wranglest;
But, looking fixedly the while,
All my bounding heart entanglest
In a golden-netted smile;
Then in madness and in bliss,
If my lips should dare to kiss
Thy taper fingers amorously, [3]
Again thou blushest angerly;
And o'er black brows drops down
A sudden-curved frown.


[Footnote 1: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 2: 1830. Aery.]

[Footnote 3: 1830. Three-times-three; though noted as an _erratum_ for
amorously.]






SONG.--THE OWL

First printed in 1830.


1

  When cats run home and light is come,
  And dew is cold upon the ground,
  And the far-off stream is dumb,
  And the whirring sail goes round,
  And the whirring sail goes round;
  Alone and warming his five wits,
  The white owl in the belfry sits.


2

  When merry milkmaids click the latch,
  And rarely smells the new-mown hay,
  And the cock hath sung beneath the thatch
  Twice or thrice his roundelay,
  Twice or thrice his roundelay;
  Alone and warming his five wits,
  The white owl in the belfry sits.






SECOND SONG

TO THE SAME.

First printed in 1830.


1

  Thy tuwhits are lull'd I wot,
  Thy tuwhoos of yesternight,
  Which upon the dark afloat,
  So took echo with delight,
  So took echo with delight,
  That her voice untuneful grown,
  Wears all day a fainter tone.


2

  I would mock thy chaunt anew;
  But I cannot mimick it;
  Not a whit of thy tuwhoo,
  Thee to woo to thy tuwhit,
  Thee to woo to thy tuwhit,
  With a lengthen'd loud halloo,
  Tuwhoo, tuwhit, tuwhit, tuwhoo-o-o.






RECOLLECTIONS OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS


First printed in 1830.

With this poem should be compared the description of Harun al Rashid's
Garden of Gladness in the story of Nur-al-din Ali and the damsel Anis al
Talis in the Thirty-Sixth Night. The style appears to have been modelled
on Coleridge's 'Kubla Khan' and 'Lewti', and the influence of Coleridge
is very perceptible throughout the poem.


  When the breeze of a joyful dawn blew free
  In the silken sail of infancy,
  The tide of time flow'd back with me,
  The forward-flowing tide of time;
  And many a sheeny summer-morn,
  Adown the Tigris I was borne,
  By Bagdat's shrines of fretted gold,
  High-walled gardens green and old;
  True Mussulman was I and sworn,
  For it was in the golden prime [1]
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Anight my shallop, rustling thro' [2]
  The low and bloomed foliage, drove
  The fragrant, glistening deeps, and clove
  The citron-shadows in the blue:
  By garden porches on the brim,
  The costly doors flung open wide,
  Gold glittering thro' [3] lamplight dim,
  And broider'd sofas [4] on each side:
  In sooth it was a goodly time,
  For it was in the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Often, where clear-stemm'd platans guard
  The outlet, did I turn away
  The boat-head down a broad canal
  From the main river sluiced, where all
  The sloping of the moon-lit sward
  Was damask-work, and deep inlay
  Of braided blooms [5] unmown, which crept
  Adown to where the waters slept.
  A goodly place, a goodly time,
  For it was in the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  A motion from the river won
  Ridged the smooth level, bearing on
  My shallop thro' the star-strown calm,
  Until another night in night
  I enter'd, from the clearer light,
  Imbower'd vaults of pillar'd palm,
  Imprisoning sweets, which, as they clomb
  Heavenward, were stay'd beneath the dome
  Of hollow boughs.--A goodly time,
  For it was in the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Still onward; and the clear canal
  Is rounded to as clear a lake.
  From the green rivage many a fall
  Of diamond rillets musical,
  Thro' little crystal [6] arches low
  Down from the central fountain's flow
  Fall'n silver-chiming, seem'd to shake
  The sparkling flints beneath the prow.
  A goodly place, a goodly time,
  For it was in the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Above thro' [7] many a bowery turn
  A walk with vary-colour'd shells
  Wander'd engrain'd. On either side
  All round about the fragrant marge
  From fluted vase, and brazen urn
  In order, eastern flowers large,
  Some dropping low their crimson bells
  Half-closed, and others studded wide
  With disks and tiars, fed the time
  With odour in the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Far off, and where the lemon-grove
  In closest coverture upsprung,
  The living airs of middle night
  Died round the bulbul [8] as he sung;
  Not he: but something which possess'd
  The darkness of the world, delight,
  Life, anguish, death, immortal love,
  Ceasing not, mingled, unrepress'd.
  Apart from place, withholding [9] time,
  But flattering the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Black the [10] garden-bowers and grots
  Slumber'd: the solemn palms were ranged
  Above, unwoo'd of summer wind:
  A sudden splendour from behind
  Flush'd all the leaves with rich gold-green,
  And, flowing rapidly between
  Their interspaces, counterchanged
  The level lake with diamond-plots
  Of dark and bright. [11] A lovely time,
  For it was in the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Dark-blue the deep sphere overhead,
  Distinct with vivid stars inlaid, [12]
  Grew darker from that under-flame:
  So, leaping lightly from the boat,
  With silver anchor left afloat,
  In marvel whence that glory came
  Upon me, as in sleep I sank
  In cool soft turf upon the bank,
  Entranced with that place and time,
  So worthy of the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.


  Thence thro' the garden I was drawn--[13]
  A realm of pleasance, many a mound,
  And many a shadow-chequer'd lawn
  Full of the city's stilly sound, [14]
  And deep myrrh-thickets blowing round
  The stately cedar, tamarisks,
  Thick rosaries [15] of scented thorn,
  Tall orient shrubs, and obelisks
  Graven with emblems of the time,
  In honour of the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  With dazed vision unawares
  From the long alley's latticed shade
  Emerged, I came upon the great
  Pavilion of the Caliphat.
  Right to the carven cedarn doors,
  Flung inward over spangled floors,
  Broad-based flights of marble stairs
  Ran up with golden balustrade,
  After the fashion of the time,
  And humour of the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  The fourscore windows all alight
  As with the quintessence of flame,
  A million tapers flaring bright
  From twisted silvers look'd [16] to shame
  The hollow-vaulted dark, and stream'd
  Upon the mooned domes aloof
  In inmost Bagdat, till there seem'd
  Hundreds of crescents on the roof
  Of night new-risen, that marvellous time,
  To celebrate the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Then stole I up, and trancedly
  Gazed on the Persian girl alone,
  Serene with argent-lidded eyes
  Amorous, and lashes like to rays
  Of darkness, and a brow of pearl
  Tressed with redolent ebony,
  In many a dark delicious curl,
  Flowing beneath [17] her rose-hued zone;
  The sweetest lady of the time,
  Well worthy of the golden prime
  Of good Haroun Alraschid.

  Six columns, three on either side,
  Pure silver, underpropt [18] a rich
  Throne of the [19] massive ore, from which
  Down-droop'd, in many a floating fold,
  Engarlanded and diaper'd
  With inwrought flowers, a cloth of gold.
  Thereon, his deep eye laughter-stirr'd
  With merriment of kingly pride,
  Sole star of all that place and time,
  I saw him--in his golden prime,
  THE GOOD HAROUN ALRASCHID!


[Footnote 1: "Golden prime" from Shakespeare.

  "That cropp'd  the _golden prime_ of this sweet prince."

--_Rich. III._, i., sc. ii., 248.]

[Footnote 2: 1830. Through.]         [Footnote 3: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 4: 1830 and 1842. Sophas.] [Footnote 5: 1830. Breaded blosms.]

[Footnote 6: 1830. Through crystal.] [Footnote 7: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 8: "Bulbul" is the Persian for nightingale. _Cf. Princes_,
iv., 104:--

  "O Bulbul, any rose of Gulistan Shall brush her veil".]

[Footnote 9: 1830. Witholding. So 1842, 1843, 1845.]

[Footnote 10: 1830. Blackgreen.]  [Footnote 11: 1830. Of saffron light.]

[Footnote 12: 1830. Unrayed.]     [Footnote 13: 1830. Through ... borne.]

[Footnote 14: Shakespeare has the same expression:

  "The hum of either army _stilly sounds_".

--_Henry V_., act iv., prol.]

[Footnote 15: 1842. Roseries.]     [Footnote 16: 1830. Wreathed.]

[Footnote 17: 1830. Below.]

[Footnote 18: 1830. Underpropped. 1842. Underpropp'd.]

[Footnote 19: 1830. O' the.]






ODE TO MEMORY

First printed in 1830.

After the title in 1830 ed. is "Written very early in life". The
influence most perceptible in this poem is plainly Coleridge, on whose
'Songs of the Pixies' it seems to have been modelled. Tennyson
considered it, and no wonder, as one of the very best of "his early and
peculiarly concentrated Nature-poems". See 'Life', i., 27. It is full
of vivid and accurate pictures of his Lincolnshire home and haunts. See
'Life', i., 25-48, 'passim'.


1

  Thou who stealest fire,
  From the fountains of the past,
  To glorify the present; oh, haste,
  Visit my low desire!
  Strengthen me, enlighten me!
  I faint in this obscurity,
  Thou dewy dawn of memory.


2

  Come not as thou camest [1] of late,
  Flinging the gloom of yesternight
  On the white day; but robed in soften'd light
  Of orient state.
  Whilome thou camest with the morning mist,
  Even as a maid, whose stately brow
  The dew-impearled winds of dawn have kiss'd, [2]
  When she, as thou,
  Stays on her floating locks the lovely freight
  Of overflowing blooms, and earliest shoots
  Of orient green, giving safe pledge of fruits,
  Which in wintertide shall star
  The black earth with brilliance rare.


3

  Whilome thou camest with the morning mist.
  And with the evening cloud,
  Showering thy gleaned wealth into my open breast,
  (Those peerless flowers which in the rudest wind
  Never grow sere,
  When rooted in the garden of the mind,
  Because they are the earliest of the year).
  Nor was the night thy shroud.
  In sweet dreams softer than unbroken rest
  Thou leddest by the hand thine infant Hope.
  The eddying of her garments caught from thee
  The light of thy great presence; and the cope
  Of the half-attain'd futurity,
  Though deep not fathomless,
  Was cloven with the million stars which tremble
  O'er the deep mind of dauntless infancy.
  Small thought was there of life's distress;
  For sure she deem'd no mist of earth could dull
  Those spirit-thrilling eyes so keen and beautiful:
  Sure she was nigher to heaven's spheres,
  Listening the lordly music flowing from
  The illimitable years.[3]
  O strengthen me, enlighten me!
  I faint in this obscurity,
  Thou dewy dawn of memory.


4

  Come forth I charge thee, arise,
  Thou of the many tongues, the myriad eyes!
  Thou comest not with shows of flaunting vines
  Unto mine inner eye,
  Divinest Memory!
  Thou wert not nursed by the waterfall
  Which ever sounds and shines
  A pillar of white light upon the wall
  Of purple cliffs, aloof descried:
  Come from the woods that belt the grey hill-side,
  The seven elms, the poplars [4] four
  That stand beside my father's door,
  And chiefly from the brook [5] that loves
  To purl o'er matted cress and ribbed sand,
  Or dimple in the dark of rushy coves,
  Drawing into his narrow earthen urn,
  In every elbow and turn,
  The filter'd tribute of the rough woodland.
  O! hither lead thy feet!
  Pour round mine ears the livelong bleat
  Of the thick-fleeced sheep from wattled folds,
  Upon the ridged wolds,
  When the first matin-song hath waken'd [6] loud
  Over the dark dewy earth forlorn,
  What time the amber morn
  Forth gushes from beneath a low-hung cloud.


5

  Large dowries doth the raptured eye
  To the young spirit present
  When first she is wed;
  And like a bride of old
  In triumph led,
  With music and sweet showers
  Of festal flowers,
  Unto the dwelling she must sway.
  Well hast thou done, great artist Memory,
  In setting round thy first experiment
  With royal frame-work of wrought gold;
  Needs must thou dearly love thy first essay,
  And foremost in thy various gallery
  Place it, where sweetest sunlight falls
  Upon the storied walls;
  For the discovery
  And newness of thine art so pleased thee,
  That all which thou hast drawn of fairest
  Or boldest since, but lightly weighs
  With thee unto the love thou bearest
  The first-born of thy genius.
  Artist-like,
  Ever retiring thou dost gaze
  On the prime labour of thine early days:
  No matter what the sketch might be;
  Whether the high field on the bushless Pike,
  Or even a sand-built ridge
  Of heaped hills that mound the sea,
  Overblown with murmurs harsh,
  Or even a lowly cottage [7] whence we see
  Stretch'd wide and wild the waste enormous marsh,
  Where from the frequent bridge,
  Like emblems of infinity, [8]
  The trenched waters run from sky to sky;
  Or a garden bower'd close
  With plaited [9] alleys of the trailing rose,
  Long alleys falling down to twilight grots,
  Or opening upon level plots
  Of crowned lilies, standing near
  Purple-spiked lavender:
  Whither in after life retired
  From brawling storms,
  From weary wind,
  With youthful fancy reinspired,
  We may hold converse with all forms
  Of the many-sided mind,
  And those [10] whom passion hath not blinded,
  Subtle-thoughted, myriad-minded.
  My friend, with you [11] to live alone,
  Were how much [12] better than to own
  A crown, a sceptre, and a throne!
  O strengthen, enlighten me!
  I faint in this obscurity,
  Thou dewy dawn of memory.


[Footnote 1: 1830. Cam'st.]

[Footnote 2: 1830. Kist.]

[Footnote 3:  Transferred from 'Timbuctoo'.

  And these with lavish'd sense
  Listenist the lordly music flowing from
  The illimitable years.]

[Footnote 4:  The poplars have now disappeared but the seven elms are
still to be seen in the garden behind the house. See Napier, 'The
Laureate's County', pp. 22, 40-41.]

[Footnote 5:  This is the Somersby brook which so often reappears in
Tennyson's poetry, cf. 'Millers Daughter, A Farewell', and 'In
Memoriam', 1 xxix. and c.]

[Footnote 6:  1830. Waked. For the epithet "dew-impearled" 'cf'.
Drayton, Ideas, sonnet liii., "amongst the dainty 'dew-impearled
flowers'," where the epithet is more appropriate and intelligible.]

[Footnote 7: 1830. The few.]

[Footnote 8: 1830 and 1842. Thee.]

[Footnote 9: 1830. Methinks were, so till 1850, when it was altered to
the present reading.]

[Footnote 10: The cottage at Maplethorpe where the Tennysons used to
spend the summer holidays. (See 'Life', i., 46.)]

[Footnote 11: 1830. Emblems or Glimpses of Eternity.]

[Footnote 12: 1830. Pleached. The whole of this passage is an exact
description of the Parsonage garden at Somersby. See 'Life', i., 27.]




SONG

First printed in 1830.

The poem was written in the garden at the Old Rectory, Somersby; an
autumn scene there which it faithfully describes. This poem seems to
have haunted Poe, a fervent admirer of Tennyson's early poems.


1

  A Spirit haunts the year's last hours
  Dwelling amid these yellowing bowers:
  To himself he talks;
  For at eventide, listening earnestly,
  At his work you may hear him sob and sigh
  In the walks;
  Earthward he boweth the heavy stalks
  Of the mouldering flowers:
  Heavily hangs the broad sunflower
  Over its grave i' the earth so chilly;
  Heavily hangs the hollyhock,
  Heavily hangs the tiger-lily.


2

  The air is damp, and hush'd, and close,
  As a sick man's room when he taketh repose
  An hour before death;
  My very heart faints and my whole soul grieves
  At the moist rich smell of the rotting leaves,
  And the breath
  Of the fading edges of box beneath,
  And the year's last rose.
  Heavily hangs the broad sunflower
  Over its grave i' the earth so chilly;
  Heavily hangs the hollyhock,
  Heavily hangs the tiger-lily.






ADELINE

First printed in 1830.


1

  Mystery of mysteries,
  Faintly smiling Adeline,
  Scarce of earth nor all divine,
  Nor unhappy, nor at rest,
  But beyond expression fair
  With thy floating flaxen hair;
  Thy rose-lips and full blue eyes
  Take the heart from out my breast.
  Wherefore those dim looks of thine,
  Shadowy, dreaming Adeline?


2

  Whence that aery bloom of thine,
  Like a lily which the sun
  Looks thro' in his sad decline,
  And a rose-bush leans upon,
  Thou that faintly smilest still,
  As a Naiad in a well,
  Looking at the set of day,
  Or a phantom two hours old
  Of a maiden passed away,
  Ere the placid lips be cold?
  Wherefore those faint smiles of thine,
  Spiritual Adeline?


3

  What hope or fear or joy is thine?
  Who talketh with thee, Adeline?
  For sure thou art not all alone:
  Do beating hearts of salient springs
  Keep measure with thine own?
  Hast thou heard the butterflies
  What they say betwixt their wings?
  Or in stillest evenings
  With what voice the violet woos
  To his heart the silver dews?
  Or when little airs arise,
  How the merry bluebell rings [1]
  To the mosses underneath?
  Hast thou look'd upon the breath
  Of the lilies at sunrise?
  Wherefore that faint smile of thine,
  Shadowy, dreaming Adeline?


4

  Some honey-converse feeds thy mind,
  Some spirit of a crimson rose
  In love with thee forgets to close
  His curtains, wasting odorous sighs
  All night long on darkness blind.
  What aileth thee? whom waitest thou
  With thy soften'd, shadow'd brow,
  And those dew-lit eyes of thine, [2]
  Thou faint smiler, Adeline?


5

  Lovest thou the doleful wind
  When thou gazest at the skies?
  Doth the low-tongued Orient [3]
  Wander from the side of [4] the morn,
  Dripping with Sabsean spice
  On thy pillow, lowly bent
  With melodious airs lovelorn,
  Breathing Light against thy face,
  While his locks a-dropping [5] twined
  Round thy neck in subtle ring
  Make a 'carcanet of rays',[6]
  And ye talk together still,
  In the language wherewith Spring
  Letters cowslips on the hill?
  Hence that look and smile of thine,
  Spiritual Adeline.


[Footnote 1: This conceit seems to have been borrowed from Shelley,
'Sensitive Plant', i.:--

  And the hyacinth, purple and white and blue,
  Which flung from its bells a sweet peal anew
  Of music.]

[Footnote 2: 'Cf'. Collins, 'Ode to Pity', "and 'eyes of dewy light'".]

[Footnote 3: What "the low-tongued Orient" may mean I cannot explain.]

[Footnote 4: 1830 and all editions till 1853. O'.]

[Footnote 5: 1863. A-drooping.]

[Footnote 6: A carcanet is a necklace, diminutive from old French
"Carcan". Cf. 'Comedy of Errors', in., i, "To see the making of her
'Carcanet".]





A CHARACTER

First printed in 1830.

The only authoritative light thrown on the person here described is what
the present Lord Tennyson gives, who tells us that "the then well-known
Cambridge orator S--was partly described". He was "a very plausible,
parliament-like, self-satisfied speaker at the Union Debating Society ".
The character reminds us of Wordsworth's Moralist. See 'Poet's Epitaph';--

  One to whose smooth-rubbed soul can cling,
  Nor form nor feeling, great nor small;
  A reasoning, self-sufficient thing,
  An intellectual all in all.

Shakespeare's fop, too (Hotspur's speech, 'Henry IV.', i., i., 2), seems
to have suggested a touch or two.


  With a half-glance upon the sky
  At night he said, "The wanderings
  Of this most intricate Universe
  Teach me the nothingness of things".
  Yet could not all creation pierce
  Beyond the bottom of his eye.

  He spake of beauty: that the dull
  Saw no divinity in grass,
  Life in dead stones, or spirit in air;
  Then looking as 'twere in a glass,
  He smooth'd his chin and sleek'd his hair,
  And said the earth was beautiful.

  He spake of virtue: not the gods
  More purely, when they wish to charm
  Pallas and Juno sitting by:
  And with a sweeping of the arm,
  And a lack-lustre dead-blue eye,
  Devolved his rounded periods.

  Most delicately hour by hour
  He canvass'd human mysteries,
  And trod on silk, as if the winds
  Blew his own praises in his eyes,
  And stood aloof from other minds
  In impotence of fancied power.

  With lips depress'd as he were meek,
  Himself unto himself he sold:
  Upon himself himself did feed:
  Quiet, dispassionate, and cold,
  And other than his form of creed,
  With chisell'd features clear and sleek.






THE POET

First printed in 1830.

In this poem we have the first grand note struck by Tennyson, the first
poem exhibiting the [Greek: spoudaiotaes] of the true poet.


  The poet in a golden clime was born,
  With golden stars above;
  Dower'd with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn,[1]
  The love of love.

  He saw thro' [2] life and death, thro' [2] good and ill,
  He saw thro' [2] his own soul.
  The marvel of the everlasting will,
  An open scroll,

  Before him lay: with echoing feet he threaded
  The secretest walks of fame:
  The viewless arrows of his thoughts were headed
  And wing'd with flame,--

  Like Indian reeds blown from his silver tongue,
  And of so fierce a flight,
  From Calpe unto Caucasus they sung,
  Filling with light

  And vagrant melodies the winds which bore
  Them earthward till they lit;
  Then, like the arrow-seeds of the field flower,
  The fruitful wit

  Cleaving, took root, and springing forth anew
  Where'er they fell, behold,
  Like to the mother plant in semblance, grew
  A flower all gold,

  And bravely furnish'd all abroad to fling
  The winged shafts of truth,
  To throng with stately blooms the breathing spring
  Of Hope and Youth.

  So many minds did gird their orbs with beams,
  Tho' [3] one did fling the fire.
  Heaven flow'd upon the soul in many dreams
  Of high desire.

  Thus truth was multiplied on truth, the world
  Like one [4] great garden show'd,
  And thro' the wreaths of floating dark upcurl'd,
  Rare sunrise flow'd.

  And Freedom rear'd in that august sunrise
  Her beautiful bold brow,
  When rites and forms before his burning eyes
  Melted like snow.

  There was no blood upon her maiden robes
  Sunn'd by those orient skies;
  But round about the circles of the globes
  Of her keen eyes

  And in her raiment's hem was traced in flame
  WISDOM, a name to shake
  All evil dreams of power--a sacred name. [5]
  And when she spake,

  Her words did gather thunder as they ran,
  And as the lightning to the thunder
  Which follows it, riving the spirit of man,
  Making earth wonder,

  So was their meaning to her words.
  No sword
  Of wrath her right arm whirl'd, [6]
  But one poor poet's scroll, and with 'his' word
  She shook the world.


[Footnote 1: The expression, as is not uncommon with Tennyson, is
extremely ambiguous; it may mean that he hated hatred, scorned scorn,
and loved love, or that he had hatred, scorn and love as it were in
quintessence, like Dante, and that is no doubt the meaning.]

[Footnotes 2: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 3: 1830 till 1851. Though.]

[Footnote 4: 2 1830. A.]

[Footnote 5: 1830.

  And in the bordure of her robe was writ
  Wisdom, a name to shake
  Hoar anarchies, as with a thunderfit.]

[Footnote 6: 1830. Hurled.]






THE POET'S MIND

First published in 1830.

A companion poem to the preceding. After line 7
in 1830 appears this stanza, afterwards omitted:--

  Clear as summer mountain streams,
  Bright as the inwoven beams,
  Which beneath their crisping sapphire
  In the midday, floating o'er
  The golden sands, make evermore
  To a blossom-starrd shore.
  Hence away, unhallowed laughter!




1

  Vex not thou the poet's mind
  With thy shallow wit:
  Vex not thou the poet's mind;
  For thou canst not fathom it.
  Clear and bright it should be ever,
  Flowing like a crystal river;
  Bright as light, and clear as wind.


2

  Dark-brow'd sophist, come not anear;
  All the place [1] is holy ground;
  Hollow smile and frozen sneer
  Come not here.
  Holy water will I pour
  Into every spicy flower
  Of the laurel-shrubs that hedge it around.
  The flowers would faint at your cruel cheer.
  In your eye there is death,
  There is frost in your breath
  Which would blight the plants.
  Where you stand you cannot hear
  From the groves within
  The wild-bird's din.
  In the heart of the garden the merry bird chants,
  It would fall to the ground if you came in.
  In the middle leaps a fountain
  Like sheet lightning,
  Ever brightening
  With a low melodious thunder;
  All day and all night it is ever drawn
  From the brain of the purple mountain
  Which stands in the distance yonder:
  It springs on a level of bowery lawn,
  And the mountain draws it from Heaven above,
  And it sings a song of undying love;
  And yet, tho' [2] its voice be so clear and full,
  You never would hear it; your ears are so dull;
  So keep where you are: you are foul with sin;
  It would shrink to the earth if you came in.


[Footnote 1: 1830. The poet's mind. With this may be compared the
opening stanza of Gray's 'Installation Ode': "Hence! avaunt! 'tis holy
ground," and for the sentiments 'cf'. Wordsworth's 'Poet's Epitaph.'

[Footnote 2: 1830 to 1851. Though.]






THE SEA-FAIRIES

First published in 1830 but excluded from all editions till its
restoration, when it was greatly altered, in 1853. I here give the text
as it appeared in 1830; where the present text is the same as that of
1830 asterisks indicate it.

This poem is a sort of prelude to the Lotus-Eaters, the burthen being
the same, a siren song: "Why work, why toil, when all must be over so
soon, and when at best there is so little to reward?"


  Slow sailed the weary mariners, and saw
  Between the green brink and the running foam
  White limbs unrobed in a chrystal air,
  Sweet faces, etc.
  ...
                    middle sea.


                 SONG.

  Whither away, whither away, whither away?
  Fly no more!
  Whither away wi' the singing sail? whither away wi' the oar?
  Whither away from the high green field and the happy blossoming shore?
  Weary mariners, hither away,
  One and all, one and all,
  Weary mariners, come and play;
  We will sing to you all the day;
  Furl the sail and the foam will fall
  From the prow! one and all
  Furl the sail! drop the oar!
  Leap ashore!
  Know danger and trouble and toil no more.
  Whither away wi' the sail and the oar?
  Drop the oar,
  Leap ashore,
  Fly no more!
  Whither away wi' the sail? whither away wi' the oar?
  Day and night to the billow, etc.
  ...
                                    over the lea;
  They freshen the silvery-crimson shells,
  And thick with white bells the cloverhill swells
  High over the full-toned sea.
  Merrily carol the revelling gales
  Over the islands free:
  From the green seabanks the rose downtrails
  To the happy brimmd sea.
  Come hither, come hither, and be our lords,
  For merry brides are we:
  We will kiss sweet kisses, etc.
  ...
  With pleasure and love and revelry;
  ...
                                      ridgd sea.
  Ye will not find so happy a shore
  Weary mariners! all the world o'er;
  Oh! fly no more!
  Harken ye, harken ye, sorrow shall darken ye,
  Danger and trouble and toil no more;
  Whither away?
  Drop the oar;
  Hither away,
  Leap ashore;
  Oh! fly no more--no more.
  Whither away, whither away, whither away with the sail and the oar?

  Slow sail'd the weary mariners and saw,
  Betwixt the green brink and the running foam,
  Sweet faces, rounded arms, and bosoms prest
  To little harps of gold; and while they mused,
  Whispering to each other half in fear,
  Shrill music reach'd them on the middle sea.

  Whither away, whither away, whither away? fly no more.
  Whither away from the high green field, and the happy blossoming shore?
  Day and night to the billow the fountain calls;
  Down shower the gambolling waterfalls
  From wandering over the lea:
  Out of the live-green heart of the dells
  They freshen the silvery-crimsoned shells,
  And thick with white bells the clover-hill swells
  High over the full-toned sea:
  O hither, come hither and furl your sails,
  Come hither to me and to me:
  Hither, come hither and frolic and play;
  Here it is only the mew that wails;
  We will sing to you all the day:
  Mariner, mariner, furl your sails,
  For here are the blissful downs and dales,
  And merrily merrily carol the gales,
  And the spangle dances in bight [1] and bay,
  And the rainbow forms and flies on the land
  Over the islands free;
  And the rainbow lives in the curve of the sand;
  Hither, come hither and see;
  And the rainbow hangs on the poising wave,
  And sweet is the colour of cove and cave,

  And sweet shall your welcome be:
  O hither, come hither, and be our lords
  For merry brides are we:
  We will kiss sweet kisses, and speak sweet words:
  O listen, listen, your eyes shall glisten
  With pleasure and love and jubilee:
  O listen, listen, your eyes shall glisten
  When the sharp clear twang of the golden cords
  Runs up the ridged sea.
  Who can light on as happy a shore
  All the world o'er, all the world o'er?
  Whither away? listen and stay: mariner, mariner, fly no more.


[Footnote 1: Bight is properly the coil of a rope; it then came to mean
a bend, and so a corner or bay. The same phrase occurs in the 'Voyage of
Maledune', v.: "and flung them in bight and bay".]






THE DESERTED HOUSE

First printed in 1830, omitted in all the editions till 1848 when it was
restored. The poem is of course allegorical, and is very much in the
vein of many poems in Anglo-Saxon poetry.


1

  Life and Thought have gone away
  Side by side,
  Leaving door and windows wide:
  Careless tenants they!


2

  All within is dark as night:
  In the windows is no light;
  And no murmur at the door,
  So frequent on its hinge before.


3

  Close the door, the shutters close,
  Or thro' [1] the windows we shall see
  The nakedness and vacancy
  Of the dark deserted house.


4

  Come away: no more of mirth
  Is here or merry-making sound.
  The house was builded of the earth,
  And shall fall again to ground.


5

  Come away: for Life and Thought
  Here no longer dwell;
  But in a city glorious--
  A great and distant city--have bought
  A mansion incorruptible.
  Would they could have stayed with us!


[Footnote 1: 1848 and 1851. Through.]






THE DYING SWAN

First printed in 1830.

The superstition here assumed is so familiar from the Classics as well
as from modern tradition that it scarcely needs illustration or
commentary. But see Plato, 'Phaedrus', xxxi., and Shakespeare, 'King
John', v., 7.


1

  The plain was grassy, wild and bare,
  Wide, wild, and open to the air,
  Which had built up everywhere
  An under-roof of doleful gray. [1]
  With an inner voice the river ran,
  Adown it floated a dying swan,
  And [2] loudly did lament.
  It was the middle of the day.
  Ever the weary wind went on,
  And took the reed-tops as it went.


2

  Some blue peaks in the distance rose,
  And white against the cold-white sky,
  Shone out their crowning snows.
  One willow over the water [3] wept,
  And shook the wave as the wind did sigh;
  Above in the wind was [4] the swallow,
  Chasing itself at its own wild will,
  And far thro' [5] the marish green and still
  The tangled water-courses slept,
  Shot over with purple, and green, and yellow.


3

  The wild swan's death-hymn took the soul
  Of that waste place with joy
  Hidden in sorrow: at first to the ear
  The warble was low, and full and clear;
  And floating about the under-sky,
  Prevailing in weakness, the coronach [6] stole
  Sometimes afar, and sometimes anear;
  But anon her awful jubilant voice,
  With a music strange and manifold,
  Flow'd forth on a carol free and bold;
  As when a mighty people rejoice
  With shawms, and with cymbals, and harps of gold,
  And the tumult of their acclaim is roll'd
  Thro' [7] the open gates of the city afar,
  To the shepherd who watcheth the evening star.
  And the creeping mosses and clambering weeds,
  And the willow-branches hoar and dank,
  And the wavy swell of the soughing reeds,
  And the wave-worn horns of the echoing bank,
  And the silvery marish-flowers that throng
  The desolate creeks and pools among,
  Were flooded over with eddying song.


[Footnote 1: 1830. Grey.]

[Footnote 2: 1830 till 1848. Which.]

[Footnote 3: 1863. River.]

[Footnote 4: 1830. Sung.]

[Footnote 5: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 6: A coronach is a funeral song or lamentation, from the
Gaelic 'Corranach'. 'Cf'. Scott's 'Waverley', ch. xv.,

  "Their wives and daughters came clapping their hands and 'crying the
  coronach' and shrieking".]


[Footnote 7: 1830 till 1851. Through.]





A DIRGE

First printed in 1830.


1

  Now is done thy long day's work;
  Fold thy palms across thy breast,
  Fold thine arms, turn to thy rest.
  Let them rave.
  Shadows of the silver birk [1]
  Sweep the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


2

  Thee nor carketh [2] care nor slander;
  Nothing but the small cold worm
  Fretteth thine enshrouded form.
  Let them rave.
  Light and shadow ever wander
  O'er the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


3

  Thou wilt not turn upon thy bed;
  Chaunteth not the brooding bee
  Sweeter tones than calumny?
  Let them rave.
  Thou wilt never raise thine head
  From the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


4

  Crocodiles wept tears for thee;
  The woodbine and eglatere
  Drip sweeter dews than traitor's tear.
  Let them rave.
  Rain makes music in the tree
  O'er the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


5

  Round thee blow, self-pleached [1] deep,
  Bramble-roses, faint and pale,
  And long purples [2] of the dale.
  Let them rave.
  These in every shower creep.
  Thro' [3] the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


6

  The gold-eyed kingcups fine:
  The frail bluebell peereth over
  Rare broidry of the purple clover.
  Let them rave.
  Kings have no such couch as thine,
  As the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


7

  Wild words wander here and there;
  God's great gift of speech abused
  Makes thy memory confused:
  But let them rave.
  The balm-cricket [4] carols clear
  In the green that folds thy grave.
  Let them rave.


[Footnote 1: Still used in the north of England for "birch".]

[Footnote 2: Carketh. Here used transitively, "troubles," though in Old
English it is generally intransitive, meaning to be careful or
thoughtful; it is from the Anglo-Saxon 'Carian'; it became obsolete in
the seventeenth century. The substantive cark, trouble or anxiety, is
generally in Old English coupled with "care".]

[Footnote 3: Self-pleached, self-entangled or intertwined. 'Cf'.
Shakespeare, "pleached bower," 'Much Ado', iii., i., 7.]

[Footnote 4: 1830. "'Long purples'," thus marking that the phrase is
borrowed from Shakespeare, 'Hamlet', iv., vii., 169:--

  and 'long purples'
  That liberal shepherds give a grosser name.
  It is the purple-flowered orchis, 'orchis mascula'.]

[Footnote 5: 1830. Through.]

[Footnote 6: Balm cricket, the tree cricket; 'balm' is a corruption of
'baum'.]






LOVE AND DEATH

First printed in 1830.

  What time the mighty moon was gathering light [1]
  Love paced the thymy plots of Paradise,
  And all about him roll'd his lustrous eyes;
  When, turning round a cassia, full in view
  Death, walking all alone beneath a yew,
  And talking to himself, first met his sight:
  "You must begone," said Death, "these walks are mine".
  Love wept and spread his sheeny vans [2] for flight;
  Yet ere he parted said, "This hour is thine;
  Thou art the shadow of life, and as the tree
  Stands in the sun and shadows all beneath,
  So in the light of great eternity
  Life eminent creates the shade of death;
  The shadow passeth when the tree shall fall,
  But I shall reign for ever over all". [3]


[Footnote 1: The expression is Virgil's, 'Georg'., i., 427: "Luna
revertentes cum primum 'colligit ignes'".]

[Footnote 2: Vans used also for "wings" by Milton, 'Paradise Lost', ii.,
927-8:--

  His sail-broad 'vans'
  He spreads for flight.

So also Tasso, 'Ger. Lib'., ix., 60:

  "Indi spiega al gran volo 'i vanni' aurati".]

[Footnote 3: 'Cf. Lockley Hall Sixty Years After': "Love will conquer at
the last".]






THE BALLAD OF ORIANA

First published in 1830, not in 1833.

This fine ballad was evidently suggested by the old ballad of Helen of
Kirkconnel, both poems being based on a similar incident, and both being
the passionate soliloquy of the bereaved lover, though Tennyson's
treatment of the subject is his own. Helen of Kirkconnel was one of the
poems which he was fond of reciting, and Fitzgerald says that he used
also to recite this poem, in a way not to be forgotten, at Cambridge
tables. 'Life', i., p. 77.

  My heart is wasted with my woe, Oriana.
  There is no rest for me below, Oriana.
  When the long dun wolds are ribb'd with snow,
  And loud the Norland whirlwinds blow, Oriana,
  Alone I wander to and fro, Oriana.

  Ere the light on dark was growing, Oriana,
  At midnight the cock was crowing, Oriana:
  Winds were blowing, waters flowing,
  We heard the steeds to battle going, Oriana;
  Aloud the hollow bugle blowing, Oriana.

  In the yew-wood black as night, Oriana,
  Ere I rode into the fight, Oriana,
  While blissful tears blinded my sight
  By star-shine and by moonlight, Oriana,
  I to thee my troth did plight, Oriana.

  She stood upon the castle wall, Oriana:
  She watch'd my crest among them all, Oriana:
  She saw me fight, she heard me call,
  When forth there stept a foeman tall, Oriana,
  Atween me and the castle wall, Oriana.

  The bitter arrow went aside, Oriana:
  The false, false arrow went aside, Oriana:
  The damned arrow glanced aside,
  And pierced thy heart, my love, my bride, Oriana!
  Thy heart, my life, my love, my bride, Oriana!

  Oh! narrow, narrow was the space, Oriana.
  Loud, loud rung out the bugle's brays, Oriana.
  Oh! deathful stabs were dealt apace,
  The battle deepen'd in its place, Oriana;
  But I was down upon my face, Oriana.

  They should have stabb'd me where I lay, Oriana!
  How could I rise and come away, Oriana?
  How could I look upon the day?
  They should have stabb'd me where I lay, Oriana
  They should have trod me into clay, Oriana.

  O breaking heart that will not break, Oriana!
  O pale, pale face so sweet and meek, Oriana!
  Thou smilest, but thou dost not speak,
  And then the tears run down my cheek, Oriana:
  What wantest thou? whom dost thou seek, Oriana?

  I cry aloud: none hear my cries, Oriana.
  Thou comest atween me and the skies, Oriana.
  I feel the tears of blood arise
  Up from my heart unto my eyes, Oriana.
  Within my heart my arrow lies, Oriana.

  O cursed hand! O cursed blow! Oriana!
  O happy thou that liest low, Oriana!
  All night the silence seems to flow
  Beside me in my utter woe, Oriana.
  A weary, weary way I go, Oriana.

  When Norland winds pipe down the sea, Oriana,
  I walk, I dare not think of thee, Oriana.
  Thou liest beneath the greenwood tree,
  I dare not die and come to thee, Oriana.
  I hear the roaring of the sea, Oriana.






CIRCUMSTANCE

First published in 1830.


  Two children in two neighbour villages
  Playing mad pranks along the healthy leas;
  Two strangers meeting at a festival;
  Two lovers whispering by an orchard wall;
  Two lives bound fast in one with golden ease;
  Two graves grass-green beside a gray church-tower,
  Wash'd with still rains and daisy-blossomed;
  Two children in one hamlet born and bred;
  So runs [1] the round of life from hour to hour.


[Footnote 1: 1830. Fill up.]






THE MERMAN

First printed in 1830.


1

  Who would be
  A merman bold,
  Sitting alone,
  Singing alone
  Under the sea,
  With a crown of gold,
  On a throne?


2

  I would be a merman bold;
  I would sit and sing the whole of the day;
  I would fill the sea-halls with a voice of power;
  But at night I would roam abroad and play
  With the mermaids in and out of the rocks,
  Dressing their hair with the white sea-flower;
  And holding them back by their flowing locks
  I would kiss them often under the sea,
  And kiss them again till they kiss'd me
  Laughingly, laughingly;
  And then we would wander away, away
  To the pale-green sea-groves straight and high,
  Chasing each other merrily.


3

  There would be neither moon nor star;
  But the wave would make music above us afar--
  Low thunder and light in the magic night--
  Neither moon nor star.
  We would call aloud in the dreamy dells,
  Call to each other and whoop and cry
  All night, merrily, merrily;
  They would pelt me with starry spangles and shells,
  Laughing and clapping their hands between,
  All night, merrily, merrily:
  But I would throw to them back in mine
  Turkis and agate and almondine: [1]
  Then leaping out upon them unseen
  I would kiss them often under the sea,
  And kiss them again till they kiss'd me
  Laughingly, laughingly.
  Oh! what a happy life were mine
  Under the hollow-hung ocean green!
  Soft are the moss-beds under the sea;
  We would live merrily, merrily.


[Foootnote 1: Almondine. This should be "almandine," the word probably
being a corruption of alabandina, a gem so called because found at
Alabanda in Caria; it is a garnet of a violet or amethystine tint. 'Cf.'
Browning, 'Fefine at the Fair', xv., "that string of mock-turquoise,
these 'almandines' of glass".]






THE MERMAID

First printed in 1830.


1

  Who would be
  A mermaid fair,
  Singing alone,
  Combing her hair
  Under the sea,
  In a golden curl
  With a comb of pearl,
  On a throne?


2

  I would be a mermaid fair;
  I would sing to myself the whole of the day;
  With a comb of pearl I would comb my hair;
  And still as I comb'd I would sing and say,
  "Who is it loves me? who loves not me?"
  I would comb my hair till my ringlets would fall,
  Low adown, low adown,
  From under my starry sea-bud crown
  Low adown and around,
  And I should look like a fountain of gold
  Springing alone
  With a shrill inner sound,
  Over the throne
  In the midst of the hall;
  Till that [1] great sea-snake under the sea
  From his coiled sleeps in the central deeps
  Would slowly trail himself sevenfold
  Round the hall where I sate, and look in at the gate
  With his large calm eyes for the love of me.
  And all the mermen under the sea
  Would feel their [2] immortality
  Die in their hearts for the love of me.


3

  But at night I would wander away, away,
  I would fling on each side my low-flowing locks,
  And lightly vault from the throne and play
  With the mermen in and out of the rocks;
  We would run to and fro, and hide and seek,
  On the broad sea-wolds in the [1] crimson shells,
  Whose silvery spikes are nighest the sea.
  But if any came near I would call, and shriek,
  And adown the steep like a wave I would leap
  From the diamond-ledges that jut from the dells;
  For I would not be kiss'd [2] by all who would list,
  Of the bold merry mermen under the sea;
  They would sue me, and woo me, and flatter me,
  In the purple twilights under the sea;
  But the king of them all would carry me,
  Woo me, and win me, and marry me,
  In the branching jaspers under the sea;
  Then all the dry pied things that be
  In the hueless mosses under the sea
  Would curl round my silver feet silently,
  All looking up for the love of me.
  And if I should carol aloud, from aloft
  All things that are forked, and horned, and soft
  Would lean out from the hollow sphere of the sea,
  All looking down for the love of me.


[Footnote 1: Till 1857. The.]

[Footnote 2: Till 1857. The.]

[Footnote 3: 1830. 'I the. So till 1853.]

[Footnote 4: 1830 Kist.]






SONNET TO J. M. K.

First printed in 1830, not in 1833.

This sonnet was addressed to John Mitchell Kemble, the well-known Editor
of the 'Beowulf' and other Anglo-Saxon poems. He intended to go into the
Church, but was never ordained, and devoted his life to early English
studies. See memoir of him in 'Dict, of Nat. Biography'.


  My hope and heart is with thee--thou wilt be
  A latter Luther, and a soldier-priest
  To scare church-harpies from the master's feast;
  Our dusted velvets have much need of thee:
  Thou art no Sabbath-drawler of old saws,
  Distill'd from some worm-canker'd homily;
  But spurr'd at heart with fieriest energy
  To embattail and to wall about thy cause
  With iron-worded proof, hating to hark
  The humming of the drowsy pulpit-drone
  Half God's good sabbath, while the worn-out clerk
  Brow-beats his desk below. Thou from a throne
  Mounted in heaven wilt shoot into the dark
  Arrows of lightnings. I will stand and mark.




THE LADY OF SHALOTT

First published in 1833.

This poem was composed in its first form as early as May, 1832 or 1833,
as we learn from Fitzgerald's note--of the exact year he was not certain
('Life of Tennyson', i., 147). The evolution of the poem is an
interesting study. How greatly it was altered in the second edition of
1842 will be evident from the collation which follows. The text of 1842
became the permanent text, and in this no subsequent material
alterations were made. The poem is more purely fanciful than Tennyson
perhaps was willing to own; certainly his explanation of the allegory,
as he gave it to Canon Ainger, is not very intelligible: "The new-born
love for something, for some one in the wide world from which she has
been so long excluded, takes her out of the region of shadows into that
of realities". Poe's commentary is most to the point: "Why do some
persons fatigue themselves in endeavours to unravel such phantasy pieces
as the 'Lady of Shallot'? As well unweave the ventum
textilem".--'Democratic Review', Dec., 1844, quoted by Mr. Herne
Shepherd. Mr. Palgrave says (selection from the 'Lyric Poems of
Tennyson', p. 257) the poem was suggested by an Italian romance upon the
Donna di Scalotta. On what authority this is said I do not know, nor can
I identify the novel. In Novella, lxxxi., a collection of novels printed
at Milan in 1804, there is one which tells but very briefly the story of
Elaine's love and death, "Qui conta come la Damigella di scalot mori per
amore di Lancealotto di Lac," and as in this novel Camelot is placed
near the sea, this may be the novel referred to. In any case the poem is
a fanciful and possibly an allegorical variant of the story of Elaine,
Shalott being a form, through the French, of Astolat.


PART I

  On either side the river lie
  Long fields of barley and of rye,
  That clothe the wold and meet the sky;
  And thro' the field the road runs by
  To many-tower'd Camelot;
  And up and down the people go,
  Gazing where the lilies blow
  Round an island there below,
  The island of Shalott. [1]

  Willows whiten, aspens quiver, [2]
  Little breezes dusk and shiver
  Thro' the wave that runs for ever
  By the island in the river
  Flowing down to Camelot.
  Four gray walls, and four gray towers,
  Overlook a space of flowers,
  And the silent isle imbowers
  The Lady of Shalott.

  By the margin, willow-veil'd
  Slide the heavy barges trail'd
  By slow horses; and unhail'd
  The shallop flitteth silken-sail'd
  Skimming down to Camelot:
  But who hath seen her wave her hand?
  Or at the casement seen her stand?
  Or is she known in all the land,
  The Lady of Shalott? [3]

  Only reapers, reaping early
  In among the bearded barley,
  Hear a song that echoes cheerly
  From the river winding clearly,
  Down to tower'd Camelot:
  And by the moon the reaper weary,
  Piling sheaves in uplands airy,
  Listening, whispers "'Tis the fairy
  Lady of Shalott". [4]


PART II

  There she weaves by night and day
  A magic web with colours gay.
  She has heard a whisper say,
  A curse is on her if she stay [5]
  To look down to Camelot.
  She knows not what the 'curse' may be,
  And so [6] she weaveth steadily,
  And little other care hath she,
  The Lady of Shalott.

  And moving thro' a mirror clear
  That hangs before her all the year,
  Shadows of the world appear.
  There she sees the highway near
  Winding down to Camelot:
  There the river eddy whirls,
  And there the surly village-churls, [7]
  And the red cloaks of market girls,
  Pass onward from Shalott.

  Sometimes a troop of damsels glad,
  An abbot on an ambling pad,
  Sometimes a curly shepherd-lad,
  Or long-hair'd page in crimson clad,
  Goes by to tower'd Camelot;

  And sometimes thro' the mirror blue
  The knights come riding two and two:
  She hath no loyal knight and true,
  The Lady of Shalott.

  But in her web she still delights
  To weave the mirror's magic sights,
  For often thro' the silent nights
  A funeral, with plumes and lights,
  And music, went to Camelot: [8]
  Or when the moon was overhead,
  Came two young lovers lately wed;
  "I am half-sick of shadows," said
  The Lady of Shalott. [9]



PART III

  A bow-shot from her bower-eaves,
  He rode between the barley sheaves,
  The sun came dazzling thro' the leaves,
  And flamed upon the brazen greaves
  Of bold Sir Lancelot.
  A redcross knight for ever kneel'd
  To a lady in his shield,
  That sparkled on the yellow field,
  Beside remote Shalott.

  The gemmy bridle glitter'd free,
  Like to some branch of stars we see
  Hung in the golden Galaxy. [10]
  The bridle bells rang merrily
  As he rode down to [11] Camelot:
  And from his blazon'd baldric slung
  A mighty silver bugle hung,
  And as he rode his armour rung,
  Beside remote Shalott.

  All in the blue unclouded weather
  Thick-jewell'd shone the saddle-leather,
  The helmet and the helmet-feather
  Burn'd like one burning flame together,
  As he rode down to Camelot. [12]
  As often thro' the purple night,
  Below the starry clusters bright,
  Some bearded meteor, trailing light,
  Moves over still Shalott. [13]

  His broad clear brow in sunlight glow'd;
  On burnish'd hooves his war-horse trode;
  From underneath his helmet flow'd
  His coal-black curls as on he rode,
  As he rode down to Camelot. [14]
  From the bank and from the river
  He flashed into the crystal mirror,
  "Tirra lirra," by the river [15]
  Sang Sir Lancelot.

  She left the web, she left the loom;
  She made three paces thro' the room,
  She saw the water-lily [16] bloom,
  She saw the helmet and the plume,
  She look'd down to Camelot.
  Out flew the web and floated wide;
  The mirror crack'd from side to side;
  "The curse is come upon me," cried
  The Lady of Shalott.


PART IV

  In the stormy east-wind straining,
  The pale yellow woods were waning,
  The broad stream in his banks complaining,
  Heavily the low sky raining
  Over tower'd Camelot;
  Down she came and found a boat
  Beneath a willow left afloat,
  And round about the prow she wrote
  'The Lady of Shalott.' [17]

  And down the river's dim expanse--
  Like some bold ser in a trance,
  Seeing all his own mischance--
  With a glassy countenance
  Did she look to Camelot.
  And at the closing of the day
  She loosed the chain, and down she lay;
  The broad stream bore her far away,
  The Lady of Shalott.

  Lying, robed in snowy white
  That loosely flew to left and right--
  The leaves upon her falling light--
  Thro' the noises of the night
  She floated down to Camelot;
  And as the boat-head wound along
  The willowy hills and fields among,
  They heard her singing her last song,
  The Lady of Shalott. [18]

  Heard a carol, mournful, holy,
  Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
  Till her blood was frozen slowly,
  And her eyes were darken'd wholly, [19]
  Turn'd to tower'd Camelot;
  For ere she reach'd upon the tide
  The first house by the water-side,
  Singing in her song she died,
  The Lady of Shalott.

  Under tower and balcony,
  By garden-wall and gallery,
  A gleaming shape she floated by,
  Dead-pale [20] between the houses high,
  Silent into Camelot.
  Out upon the wharfs they came,
  Knight and burgher, lord and dame,
  And round the prow they read her name,
  'The Lady of Shalott' [21]

  Who is this? and what is here?
  And in the lighted palace near
  Died the sound of royal cheer;
  And they cross'd themselves for fear,
  All the knights at Camelot:
  But Lancelot [22] mused a little space;
  He said, "She has a lovely face;
  God in his mercy lend her grace,
  The Lady of Shalott". [23]




[Footnote 1: 1833.

  To many towered Camelot
  The yellow leaved water lily,
  The green sheathed daffodilly,
  Tremble in the water chilly,
  Round about Shalott.]


[Footnote 2: 1833.

  shiver,
  The sunbeam-showers break and quiver
  In the stream that runneth ever
  By the island, etc.]


[Footnote 3: 1833.

  Underneath the bearded barley,
  The reaper, reaping late and early,
  Hears her ever chanting cheerly,
  Like an angel, singing clearly,
  O'er the stream of Camelot.
  Piling the sheaves in furrows airy,
  Beneath the moon, the reaper weary
  Listening whispers, "'tis the fairy
  Lady of Shalott".]


[Footnote 4: 1833.

  The little isle is all inrailed
  With a rose-fence, and overtrailed
  With roses: by the marge unhailed
  The shallop flitteth silkensailed,
  Skimming down to Camelot.
  A pearl garland winds her head:
  She leaneth on a velvet bed,
  Full royally apparelled,
  The Lady of Shalott.]


[Footnote 5: 1833.

  No time hath she to sport and play:
  A charmed web she weaves alway.
  A curse is on her, if she stay
  Her weaving, either night or day]


[Footnote 6: 1833.

  Therefore
  ...
  Therefore
  ...
  The Lady of Shalott.]


[Footnote 7: 1833.

  She lives with little joy or fear
  Over the water running near,
  The sheep bell tinkles in her ear,
  Before her hangs a mirror clear,
  Reflecting towered Camelot.
  And, as the mazy web she whirls,
  She sees the surly village-churls.]


[Footnote 8: 1833. Came from Camelot.]

[Footnote 9: In these lines are to be found, says the present Lord
Tennyson, the key to the mystic symbolism of the poem. But it is not
easy to see how death could be an advantageous exchange for
fancy-haunted solitude. The allegory is clearer in lines 114-115, for
love will so break up mere phantasy.]

[Footnote 10: 1833. Hung in the golden galaxy.]

[Footnote 11: 1833. From.]

[Footnote 12: 1833. From Camelot.]

[Footnote 13: 1833. Green Shalott.]

[Footnote 14: 1833. From Camelot.]

[Footnote 15: 1833. "Tirra lirra, tirra lirra."]

[Footnote 16: 1833. Water flower.]

[Footnote 17: 1833.

  Outside the isle a shallow boat
  Beneath a willow lay afloat,
  Below the carven stern she wrote,
  THE LADY OF SHALOTT.]


[Footnote 18: 1833.

  A cloud-white crown of pearl she dight,
  All raimented in snowy white
  That loosely flew (her zone in sight,
  Clasped with one blinding diamond bright),
  Her wide eyes fixed on Camelot,
  Though the squally eastwind keenly
  Blew, with folded arms serenely
  By the water stood the queenly
  Lady of Shalott.

  With a steady, stony glance--
  Like some bold seer in a trance,
  Beholding all his own mischance,
  Mute, with a glassy countenance--
  She looked down to Camelot.
  It was the closing of the day,
  She loosed the chain, and down she lay,
  The broad stream bore her far away,
  The Lady of Shalott.

  As when to sailors while they roam,
  By creeks and outfalls far from home,
  Rising and dropping with the foam,
  From dying swans wild warblings come,
  Blown shoreward; so to Camelot
  Still as the boat-head wound along
  The willowy hills and fields among,
  They heard her chanting her death song,
  The Lady of Shalott.]


[Footnote 19: 1833.

  A long drawn carol, mournful, holy,
  She chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
  Till her eyes were darkened wholly,
  And her smooth face sharpened slowly.]


[Footnote 20: "A corse" (1853) is a variant for the "Dead-pale" of 1857.]

[Footnote 21: 1833.

  A pale, pale corpse she floated by,
  Dead cold, between the houses high,
  Dead into towered Camelot.
  Knight and burgher, lord and dame,
  To the plankd wharfage came:
  Below the stern they read her name,
  "The Lady of Shalott".]


[Footnote 22: 1833. Spells it "Launcelot" all through.]

[Footnote 23: 1833.

  They crossed themselves, their stars they blest,
  Knight, minstrel, abbot, squire and guest,
  There lay a parchment on her breast,
  That puzzled more than all the rest,
  The well-fed wits at Camelot.
  "'The web was woven curiously,
  The charm is broken utterly,
  Draw near and fear not--this is I,
  The Lady of Shalott.'"]







MARIANA IN THE SOUTH

First printed in 1833.

This poem had been written as early as 1831 (see Arthur Hallam's letter,
'Life', i., 284-5, Appendix), and Lord Tennyson tells us that it
"came to my father as he was travelling between Narbonne and Perpignan";
how vividly the characteristic features of Southern France are depicted
must be obvious to every one who is familiar with them. It is
interesting to compare it with the companion poem; the central position
is the same in both, desolate loneliness, and the mood is the same, but
the setting is far more picturesque and is therefore more dwelt upon.
The poem was very greatly altered when re-published in 1842, that text
being practically the final one, there being no important variants
afterwards.

In the edition of 1833 the poem opened with the following stanza, which
was afterwards excised and the stanza of the present text substituted.


  Behind the barren hill upsprung
  With pointed rocks against the light,
  The crag sharpshadowed overhung
  Each glaring creek and inlet bright.
  Far, far, one light blue ridge was seen,
  Looming like baseless fairyland;
  Eastward a slip of burning sand,
  Dark-rimmed with sea, and bare of green,
  Down in the dry salt-marshes stood
  That house dark latticed. Not a breath
  Swayed the sick vineyard underneath,
  Or moved the dusty southernwood.
  "Madonna," with melodious moan
  Sang Mariana, night and morn,
  "Madonna! lo! I am all alone,
  Love-forgotten and love-forlorn."

  With one black shadow at its feet,
  The house thro' all the level shines,
  Close-latticed to the brooding heat,
  And silent in its dusty vines:
  A faint-blue ridge upon the right,
  An empty river-bed before,
  And shallows on a distant shore,
  In glaring sand and inlets bright.
  But "Ave Mary," made she moan,
  And "Ave Mary," night and morn,
  And "Ah," she sang, "to be all alone,
  To live forgotten, and love forlorn".

  She, as her carol sadder grew,
  From brow and bosom slowly down [1]
  Thro' rosy taper fingers drew
  Her streaming curls of deepest brown
  To left and right, [2] and made appear,
  Still-lighted in a secret shrine,
  Her melancholy eyes divine, [3]
  The home of woe without a tear.
  And "Ave Mary," was her moan, [4]
  "Madonna, sad is night and morn";
  And "Ah," she sang, "to be all alone,
  To live forgotten, and love forlorn".

  Till all the crimson changed, [5] and past
  Into deep orange o'er the sea,
  Low on her knees herself she cast,
  Before Our Lady murmur'd she;
  Complaining, "Mother, give me grace
  To help me of my weary load".
  And on the liquid mirror glow'd
  The clear perfection of her face.
  "Is this the form," she made her moan,
  "That won his praises night and morn?"
  And "Ah," she said, "but I wake alone,
  I sleep forgotten, I wake forlorn". [6]

  Nor bird would sing, nor lamb would bleat,
  Nor any cloud would cross the vault,
  But day increased from heat to heat,
  On stony drought and steaming salt;
  Till now at noon she slept again,
  And seem'd knee-deep in mountain grass,
  And heard her native breezes pass,
  And runlets babbling down the glen.
  She breathed in sleep a lower moan,
  And murmuring, as at night and morn,
  She thought, "My spirit is here alone,
  Walks forgotten, and is forlorn". [7]

  Dreaming, she knew it was a dream:
  She felt he was and was not there, [8]
  She woke: the babble of the stream
  Fell, and without the steady glare
  Shrank one sick willow [9] sere and small.
  The river-bed was dusty-white;
  And all the furnace of the light
  Struck up against the blinding wall. [10]
  She whisper'd, with a stifled moan
  More inward than at night or morn,
  "Sweet Mother, let me not here alone
  Live forgotten, and die forlorn". [11]

  [12] And rising, from her bosom drew
  Old letters, breathing of her worth,
  For "Love," they said, "must needs be true,
  To what is loveliest upon earth".
  An image seem'd to pass the door,
  To look at her with slight, and say,
  "But now thy beauty flows away,
  So be alone for evermore".
  "O cruel heart," she changed her tone,
  "And cruel love, whose end is scorn,
  Is this the end to be left alone,
  To live forgotten, and die forlorn!"

  But sometimes in the falling day
  An image seem'd to pass the door,
  To look into her eyes and say,
  "But thou shalt be alone no more".
  And flaming downward over all
  From heat to heat the day decreased,
  And slowly rounded to the east
  The one black shadow from the wall.
  "The day to night," she made her moan,
  "The day to night, the night to morn,
  And day and night I am left alone
  To live forgotten, and love forlorn."

  At eve a dry cicala sung,
  There came a sound as of the sea;
  Backward the lattice-blind she flung,
  And lean'd upon the balcony.
  There all in spaces rosy-bright
  Large Hesper glitter'd on her tears,
  And deepening thro' the silent spheres,
  Heaven over Heaven rose the night.
  And weeping then she made her moan,
  "The night comes on that knows not morn,
  When I shall cease to be all alone,
  To live forgotten, and love forlorn". [13]



[Footnote 1: 1833 From her warm brow and bosom down.]

[Footnote 2: 1833. On either side.]

[Footnote 3: Compare Keats, 'Eve of St. Agnes', "her maiden eyes
divine".]

[Footnote 4: 1833. "Madonna," with melodious moan Sang Mariana, etc.]

[Footnote 5: 1833. When the dawncrimson changed.]

[Footnote 6: 1833.

  Unto our Lady prayed she.
  She moved her lips, she prayed alone,
  She praying disarrayed and warm
  From slumber, deep her wavy form
  In the dark-lustrous mirror shone.
  "Madonna," in a low clear tone
  Said Mariana, night and morn,
  Low she mourned, "I am all alone,
  Love-forgotten, and love-forlorn".]


[Footnote 7: 1833.

  At noon she slumbered. All along
  The silvery field, the large leaves talked
  With one another, as among
  The spikd maize in dreams she walked.
  The lizard leapt: the sunlight played:
  She heard the callow nestling lisp,
  And brimful meadow-runnels crisp.
  In the full-leavd platan-shade.
  In sleep she breathed in a lower tone,
  Murmuring as at night and morn,
  "Madonna! lo! I am all alone.
  Love-forgotten and love-forlorn".]


[Footnote 8: 1835. Most false: he was and was not there.]

[Footnote 9: 1833. The sick olive. So the text remained till 1850, when
"one" was substituted.]

[Footnote 10: 1833.

  From the bald rock the blinding light
  Beat ever on the sunwhite wall.]


[Footnote 11: 1833.

  "Madonna, leave me not all alone,
  To die forgotten and live forlorn."]


[Footnote 12: This stanza and the next not in 1833.]

[Footnote 13: 1833.

  One dry cicala's summer song
  At night filled all the gallery.
  Ever the low wave seemed to roll
  Up to the coast: far on, alone
  In the East, large Hesper overshone
  The mourning gulf, and on her soul
  Poured divine solace, or the rise
  Of moonlight from the margin gleamed,
  Volcano-like, afar, and streamed
  On her white arm, and heavenward eyes.
  Not all alone she made her moan,
  Yet ever sang she, night and morn,
  "Madonna! lo! I am all alone,
  Love-forgotten and love-forlorn".]






ELENORE

First printed in 1833. When reprinted in 1842 the alterations noted were
then made, and after that the text remained unchanged.


1

  Thy dark eyes open'd not,
  Nor first reveal'd themselves to English air,
  For there is nothing here,
  Which, from the outward to the inward brought,
  Moulded thy baby thought.
  Far off from human neighbourhood,
  Thou wert born, on a summer morn,
  A mile beneath the cedar-wood.
  Thy bounteous forehead was not fann'd
  With breezes from our oaken glades,
  But thou wert nursed in some delicious land
  Of lavish lights, and floating shades:
  And flattering thy childish thought
  The oriental fairy brought,
  At the moment of thy birth,
  From old well-heads of haunted rills,
  And the hearts of purple hills,
  And shadow'd coves on a sunny shore,
  The choicest wealth of all the earth,
  Jewel or shell, or starry ore,
  To deck thy cradle, Elenore. [1]


2

  Or the yellow-banded bees, [2]
  Thro' [3] half-open lattices
  Coming in the scented breeze,
  Fed thee, a child, lying alone,
  With whitest honey in fairy gardens cull'd--
  A glorious child, dreaming alone,
  In silk-soft folds, upon yielding down,
  With the hum of swarming bees
  Into dreamful slumber lull'd.


3

  Who may minister to thee?
  Summer herself should minister
  To thee, with fruitage golden-rinded
  On golden salvers, or it may be,
  Youngest Autumn, in a bower
  Grape-thicken'd from the light, and blinded
  With many a deep-hued bell-like flower
  Of fragrant trailers, when the air
  Sleepeth over all the heaven,
  And the crag that fronts the Even,
  All along the shadowing shore,
  Crimsons over an inland [4] mere,
  [5] Elenore!


4

  How may full-sail'd verse express,
  How may measured words adore
  The full-flowing harmony
  Of thy swan-like stateliness,
  Elenore?
  The luxuriant symmetry
  Of thy floating gracefulness,
  Elenore?
  Every turn and glance of thine,
  Every lineament divine,
  Elenore,
  And the steady sunset glow,
  That stays upon thee? For in thee
  Is nothing sudden, nothing single;
  Like two streams of incense free
  From one censer, in one shrine,
  Thought and motion mingle,
  Mingle ever. Motions flow
  To one another, even as tho' [6]
  They were modulated so
  To an unheard melody,
  Which lives about thee, and a sweep
  Of richest pauses, evermore
  Drawn from each other mellow-deep;
  Who may express thee, Elenore?


5

  I stand before thee, Eleanore;
  I see thy beauty gradually unfold,
  Daily and hourly, more and more.
  I muse, as in a trance, the while
  Slowly, as from a cloud of gold,
  Comes out thy deep ambrosial smile. [7]
  I muse, as in a trance, whene'er
  The languors of thy love-deep eyes
  Float on to me. _I_ would _I_ were
  So tranced, so rapt in ecstacies,
  To stand apart, and to adore,
  Gazing on thee for evermore,
  Serene, imperial Eleanore!


6

  Sometimes, with most intensity
  Gazing, I seem to see
  Thought folded over thought, smiling asleep,
  Slowly awaken'd, grow so full and deep
  In thy large eyes, that, overpower'd quite,
  I cannot veil, or droop my sight,
  But am as nothing in its light:
  As tho' [8] a star, in inmost heaven set,
  Ev'n while we gaze on it,
  Should slowly round his orb, and slowly grow
  To a full face, there like a sun remain
  Fix'd--then as slowly fade again,
  And draw itself to what it was before;
  So full, so deep, so slow,
  Thought seems to come and go
  In thy large eyes, imperial Eleanore.


7

  As thunder-clouds that, hung on high,
  Roof'd the world with doubt and fear, [9]
  Floating thro' an evening atmosphere,
  Grow golden all about the sky;
  In thee all passion becomes passionless,
  Touch'd by thy spirit's mellowness,
  Losing his fire and active might
  In a silent meditation,
  Falling into a still delight,
  And luxury of contemplation:
  As waves that up a quiet cove
  Rolling slide, and lying still
  Shadow forth the banks at will: [10]
  Or sometimes they swell and move,
  Pressing up against the land,
  With motions of the outer sea:
  And the self-same influence
  Controlleth all the soul and sense
  Of Passion gazing upon thee.
  His bow-string slacken'd, languid Love,
  Leaning his cheek upon his hand, [11]
  Droops both his wings, regarding thee,
  And so would languish evermore,
  Serene, imperial Elenore.


8

  But when I see thee roam, with tresses unconfined,
  While the amorous, odorous wind
  Breathes low between the sunset and the moon;
  Or, in a shadowy saloon,
  On silken cushions half reclined;
  I watch thy grace; and in its place
  My heart a charmed slumber keeps, [12]
  While I muse upon thy face;
  And a languid fire creeps
  Thro' my veins to all my frame,
  Dissolvingly and slowly: soon
  From thy rose-red lips MY name
  Floweth; and then, as in a swoon, [13]
  With dinning sound my ears are rife,
  My tremulous tongue faltereth,
  I lose my colour, I lose my breath,
  I drink the cup of a costly death,
  Brimm'd with delirious draughts of warmest life.
  I die with my delight, before
  I hear what I would hear from thee;
  Yet tell my name again to me,
  I _would_ [14] be dying evermore,
  So dying ever, Elenore.


[Footnote 1: With the picture of Elenore may be compared the
description which Ibycus gives of Euryalus. See Bergk's 'Anthologia
Lyrica' (Ibycus), p. 396.]

[Footnote 2: With yellow banded bees 'cf'. Keats's "yellow girted bees,"
'Endymion', i. With this may be compared Pindar's beautiful picture of
lamus, who was also fed on honey, 'Olympian', vi., 50-80.]

[Footnote 3: 1833 and 1842. Through.]

[Footnote 4: Till 1857. Island.]

[Footnote 5: 1833. Meer.]

[Footnote 6: 1842 and 1843. Though.]

[Footnote 7: Ambrosial, the Greek sense of [Greek: ambrosios], divine.]

[Footnote 8: 1833 to 1851. Though.]

[Footnote 9: 1833. Did roof noonday with doubt and fear.]

[Footnote 10: 1833.

  As waves that from the outer deep
  Roll into a quiet cove,
  There fall away, and lying still,
  Having glorious dreams in sleep,
  Shadow forth the banks at will.]


[Footnote 11: 'Cf.' Horace, 'Odes', iii., xxvii., 66-8:

  Aderat querenti
  Perfidum ridens Venus, et _remisso_
  Filius _arcu_.]


[Footnote 12: 1833.

  I gaze on thee the cloudless noon
  Of mortal beauty.]


[Footnote 13: 1833. Then I faint, I swoon. The latter part of the eighth
stanza is little more than an adaptation of Sappho's famous Ode,
filtered perhaps through the version of Catullus.]

[Footnote 14: It is curious that a poet so scrupulous as Tennyson should
have retained to the last the italics.]




THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER


First published in 1833. It was greatly altered when republished in
1842, and in some respects, so Fitzgerald thought, not for the better.
No alterations of much importance were made in it after 1842. The
characters as well as the scenery were, it seems, purely imaginary.
Tennyson said that if he thought of any mill it was that of Trumpington,
near Cambridge, which bears a general resemblance to the picture here
given.

In the first edition the poem opened with the following stanza, which
the 'Quarterly' ridiculed, and which was afterwards excised. Its
omission is surely not to be regretted, whatever Fitzgerald may have
thought.

  I met in all the close green ways,
  While walking with my line and rod,
  The wealthy miller's mealy face,
  Like the moon in an ivy-tod.
  He looked so jolly and so good--
  While fishing in the milldam-water,
  I laughed to see him as he stood,
  And dreamt not of the miller's daughter.

  *       *       *       *       *      *


  I see the wealthy miller yet,
  His double chin, his portly size,
  And who that knew him could forget
  The busy wrinkles round his eyes?
  The slow wise smile that, round about
  His dusty forehead drily curl'd,
  Seem'd half-within and half-without,
  And full of dealings with the world?

  In yonder chair I see him sit,
  Three fingers round the old silver cup--
  I see his gray eyes twinkle yet
  At his own jest--gray eyes lit up
  With summer lightnings of a soul
  So full of summer warmth, so glad,
  So healthy, sound, and clear and whole,
  His memory scarce can make me [1] sad.

  Yet fill my glass: give me one kiss:
  My own sweet [2] Alice, we must die.
  There's somewhat in this world amiss
  Shall be unriddled by and by.
  There's somewhat flows to us in life,
  But more is taken quite away.
  Pray, Alice, pray, my darling wife, [3]
  That we may die the self-same day.

  Have I not found a happy earth?
  I least should breathe a thought of pain.
  Would God renew me from my birth
  I'd almost live my life again.
  So sweet it seems with thee to walk,
  And once again to woo thee mine--
  It seems in after-dinner talk
  Across the walnuts and the wine--[4]

  To be the long and listless boy
  Late-left an orphan of the squire,
  Where this old mansion mounted high
  Looks down upon the village spire: [5]
  For even here, [6] where I and you
  Have lived and loved alone so long,
  Each morn my sleep was broken thro'
  By some wild skylark's matin song.

  And oft I heard the tender dove
  In firry woodlands making moan; [7]
  But ere I saw your eyes, my love,
  I had no motion of my own.
  For scarce my life with fancy play'd
  Before I dream'd that pleasant dream--
  Still hither thither idly sway'd
  Like those long mosses [8] in the stream.

  Or from the bridge I lean'd to hear
  The milldam rushing down with noise,
  And see the minnows everywhere
  In crystal eddies glance and poise,
  The tall flag-flowers when [9] they sprung
  Below the range of stepping-stones,
  Or those three chestnuts near, that hung
  In masses thick with milky cones. [10]

  But, Alice, what an hour was that,
  When after roving in the woods
  ('Twas April then), I came and sat
  Below the chestnuts, when their buds
  Were glistening to the breezy blue;
  And on the slope, an absent fool,
  I cast me down, nor thought of you,
  But angled in the higher pool. [11]

  A love-song I had somewhere read,
  An echo from a measured strain,
  Beat time to nothing in my head
  From some odd corner of the brain.
  It haunted me, the morning long,
  With weary sameness in the rhymes,
  The phantom of a silent song,
  That went and came a thousand times.

  Then leapt a trout. In lazy mood
  I watch'd the little circles die;
  They past into the level flood,
  And there a vision caught my eye;
  The reflex of a beauteous form,
  A glowing arm, a gleaming neck,
  As when a sunbeam wavers warm
  Within the dark and dimpled beck. [12]

  For you remember, you had set,
  That morning, on the casement's edge [13]
  A long green box of mignonette,
  And you were leaning from the ledge:
  And when I raised my eyes, above
  They met with two so full and bright--
  Such eyes! I swear to you, my love,
  That these have never lost their light. [14]

  I loved, and love dispell'd the fear
  That I should die an early death:
  For love possess'd the atmosphere,
  And filled the breast with purer breath.
  My mother thought, What ails the boy?
  For I was alter'd, and began
  To move about the house with joy,
  And with the certain step of man.

  I loved the brimming wave that swam
  Thro' quiet meadows round the mill,
  The sleepy pool above the dam,
  The pool beneath it never still,
  The meal-sacks on the whiten'd floor,
  The dark round of the dripping wheel,
  The very air about the door
  Made misty with the floating meal.

  And oft in ramblings on the wold,
  When April nights begin to blow,
  And April's crescent glimmer'd cold,
  I saw the village lights below;
  I knew your taper far away,
  And full at heart of trembling hope,
  From off the wold I came, and lay
  Upon the freshly-flower'd slope. [15]

  The deep brook groan'd beneath the mill;
  And "by that lamp," I thought "she sits!"
  The white chalk-quarry [16] from the hill
  Gleam'd to the flying moon by fits.
  "O that I were beside her now!
  O will she answer if I call?
  O would she give me vow for vow,
  Sweet Alice, if I told her all?" [17]

  Sometimes I saw you sit and spin;
  And, in the pauses of the wind,
  Sometimes I heard you sing within;
  Sometimes your shadow cross'd the blind.
  At last you rose and moved the light,
  And the long shadow of the chair
  Flitted across into the night,
  And all the casement darken'd there.

  But when at last I dared to speak,
  The lanes, you know, were white with may,
  Your ripe lips moved not, but your cheek
  Flush'd like the coming of the day; [18]
  And so it was--half-sly, half-shy, [19]
  You would, and would not, little one!
  Although I pleaded tenderly,
  And you and I were all alone.

  And slowly was my mother brought
  To yield consent to my desire:
  She wish'd me happy, but she thought
  I might have look'd a little higher;
  And I was young--too young to wed:
  "Yet must I love her for your sake;
  Go fetch your Alice here," she said:
  Her eyelid quiver'd as she spake.

  And down I went to fetch my bride:
  But, Alice, you were ill at ease;
  This dress and that by turns you tried,
  Too fearful that you should not please.
  I loved you better for your fears,
  I knew you could not look but well;
  And dews, that would have fall'n in tears,
  I kiss'd away before they fell. [20]

  I watch'd the little flutterings,
  The doubt my mother would not see;
  She spoke at large of many things,
  And at the last she spoke of me;
  And turning look'd upon your face,
  As near this door you sat apart,
  And rose, and, with a silent grace
  Approaching, press'd you heart to heart. [21]

  Ah, well--but sing the foolish song
  I gave you, Alice, on the day [22]
  When, arm in arm, we went along,
  A pensive pair, and you were gay,
  With bridal flowers--that I may seem,
  As in the nights of old, to lie
  Beside the mill-wheel in the stream,
  While those full chestnuts whisper by. [23]

  It is the miller's daughter,
  And she is grown so dear, so dear,
  That I would be the jewel
  That trembles at [24] her ear:
  For hid in ringlets day and night,
  I'd touch her neck so warm and white.

  And I would be the girdle
  About her dainty, dainty waist,
  And her heart would beat against me,
  In sorrow and in rest:
  And I should know if it beat right,
  I'd clasp it round so close and tight. [25]

  And I would be the necklace,
  And all day long to fall and rise [26]
  Upon her balmy bosom,
  With her laughter or her sighs,
  And I would lie so light, so light, [27]
  I scarce should be [28] unclasp'd at night.

  A trifle, sweet! which true love spells
  True love interprets--right alone.
  His light upon the letter dwells,
  For all the spirit is his own. [29]
  So, if I waste words now, in truth
  You must blame Love. His early rage
  Had force to make me rhyme in youth
  And makes me talk too much in age. [30]

  And now those vivid hours are gone,
  Like mine own life to me thou art,
  Where Past and Present, wound in one,
  Do make a garland for the heart:
  So sing [31] that other song I made,
  Half anger'd with my happy lot,
  The day, when in the chestnut shade
  I found the blue Forget-me-not. [32]

  Love that hath us in the net, [33]
  Can he pass, and we forget?
  Many suns arise and set.
  Many a chance the years beget.
  Love the gift is Love the debt.
  Even so.
  Love is hurt with jar and fret.
  Love is made a vague regret.
  Eyes with idle tears are wet.
  Idle habit links us yet.
  What is love? for we forget:
  Ah, no! no!  [34]

  Look thro' mine eyes with thine. True wife,
  Round my true heart thine arms entwine;
  My other dearer life in life,
  Look thro' my very soul with thine!
  Untouch'd with any shade of years,
  May those kind eyes for ever dwell!
  They have not shed a many tears,
  Dear eyes, since first I knew them well.

  Yet tears they shed: they had their part
  Of sorrow: for when time was ripe,
  The still affection of the heart
  Became an outward breathing type,
  That into stillness past again,
  And left a want unknown before;
  Although the loss that brought us pain,
  That loss but made us love the more.

  With farther lookings on. The kiss,
  The woven arms, seem but to be
  Weak symbols of the settled bliss,
  The comfort, I have found in thee:
  But that God bless thee, dear--who wrought
  Two spirits to one equal mind--
  With blessings beyond hope or thought,
  With blessings which no words can find.

  Arise, and let us wander forth,
  To yon old mill across the wolds;
  For look, the sunset, south and north, [35]
  Winds all the vale in rosy folds,
  And fires your narrow casement glass,
  Touching the sullen pool below:
  On the chalk-hill the bearded grass
  Is dry and dewless. Let us go.



[Footnote 1: 1833. Scarce makes me.]

[Footnote 2: 1833. Darling.]

[Footnote 3: 1833. Own sweet wife.]

[Footnote 4: This stanza was added in 1842.]

[Footnote 5: 1833.

  My father's mansion, mounted high
  Looked down upon the village spire.
  I was a long and listless boy,
  And son and heir unto the squire.]


[Footnote 6: 1833. In these dear walls.]

[Footnote 7:  1833.

  I often heard the cooing dove
  In firry woodlands mourn alone.]


[Footnote 8:  1833.  The long mosses.]

[Footnote 9: 1842-1851.  Where.]

[Footnote 10:  This stanza was added in 1842, taking the place of the
following which was excised:--

  Sometimes I whistled in the wind,
  Sometimes I angled, thought and deed
  Torpid, as swallows left behind
  That winter 'neath the floating weed:
  At will to wander every way
  From brook to brook my sole delight,
  As lithe eels over meadows gray
  Oft shift their glimmering pool by night.

In 1833 this stanza ran thus:--

  I loved from off the bridge to hear
  The rushing sound the water made,
  And see the fish that everywhere
  In the back-current glanced and played;
  Low down the tall flag-flower that sprung
  Beside the noisy stepping-stones,
  And the massed chestnut boughs that hung
  Thick-studded over with white cones,]


[Footnote 11: In 1833 the following took the place of the above stanza
which was added in 1842:--

  How dear to me in youth, my love,
  Was everything about the mill,
  The black and silent pool above,
  The pool beneath that ne'er stood still,
  The meal sacks on the whitened floor,
  The dark round of the dripping wheel,
  The very air about the door--
  Made misty with the floating meal!

Thus in 1833:--

  Remember you that pleasant day
  When, after roving in the woods,
  ('Twas April then) I came and lay
  Beneath those gummy chestnut bud
  That glistened in the April blue,
  Upon the slope so smooth and cool,
  I lay and never thought of _you_,
  But angled in the deep mill pool.]


[Footnote 12: Thus in 1833:--

  A water-rat from off the bank
  Plunged in the stream. With idle care,
  Downlooking thro' the sedges rank,
  I saw your troubled image there.
  Upon the dark and dimpled beck
  It wandered like a floating light,
  A full fair form, a warm white neck,
  And two white arms--how rosy white!]


[Footnote 13: 1872. Casement-edge.]

[Footnote 14: Thus in 1833:--

  If you remember, you had set
  Upon the narrow casement-edge
  A long green box of mignonette,
  And you were leaning from the ledge.
  I raised my eyes at once: above
  They met two eyes so blue and bright,
  Such eyes! I swear to you, my love,
  That they have never lost their light.

After this stanza the following was inserted in 1833 but excised in
1842:--

  That slope beneath the chestnut tall
  Is wooed with choicest breaths of air:
  Methinks that I could tell you all
  The cowslips and the kingcups there.
  Each coltsfoot down the grassy bent,
  Whose round leaves hold the gathered shower,
  Each quaintly-folded cuckoo pint,
  And silver-paly cuckoo flower.]


[Footnote 15: Thus in 1833:--

  In rambling on the eastern wold,
  When thro' the showery April nights
  Their hueless crescent glimmered cold,
  From all the other village lights
  I knew your taper far away.
  My heart was full of trembling hope,
  Down from the wold I came and lay
  Upon the dewy-swarded slope.]


[Footnote 16; Mr. Cuming Walters in his interesting volume 'In Tennyson
Land', p. 75, notices that the white chalk quarry at Thetford can be
seen from Stockworth Mill, which seems to show that if Tennyson did take
the mill from Trumpington he must also have had his mind on Thetford
Mill. Tennyson seems to have taken delight in baffling those who wished
to localise his scenes. He went out of his way to say that the
topographical studies of Messrs. Church and Napier were the only ones
which could he relied upon. But Mr. Cuming Walters' book is far more
satisfactory than their thin studies.]

[Footnote 17: Thus in 1833:--

  The white chalk quarry from the hill
  Upon the broken ripple gleamed,
  I murmured lowly, sitting still,
  While round my feet the eddy streamed:
  "Oh! that I were the wreath she wreathes,
  The mirror where her sight she feeds,
  The song she sings, the air she breathes,
  The letters of the books she reads".]


[Footnote 18: 1833.

  I loved, but when I dared to speak
  My love, the lanes were white with May
  Your ripe lips moved not, but your cheek
  Flushed like the coming of the day.]


[Footnote 19: 1833. Rosecheekt, roselipt, half-sly, half-shy.]

[Footnote 20: Cf. Milton, 'Paradise Lost';--

  Two other precious drops that ready stood
  He, ere they fell, kiss'd.]


[Footnote 21: These three stanzas were added in 1842, the following
being excised:--

  Remember you the clear moonlight,
  That whitened all the eastern ridge,
  When o'er the water, dancing white,
  I stepped upon the old mill-bridge.
  I heard you whisper from above
  A lute-toned whisper, "I am here";
  I murmured, "Speak again, my love,
  The stream is loud: I cannot hear ".

  I heard, as I have seemed to hear,
  When all the under-air was still,
  The low voice of the glad new year
  Call to the freshly-flowered hill.
  I heard, as I have often heard
  The nightingale in leavy woods
  Call to its mate, when nothing stirred
  To left or right but falling floods.]


[Footnote 22: 1842. I gave you on the joyful day.]

[Footnote 23: In 1833 the following stanza took the place of the one
here substituted in 1842:--

  Come, Alice, sing to me the song
  I made you on our marriage day,
  When, arm in arm, we went along
  Half-tearfully, and you were gay
  With brooch and ring: for I shall seem,
  The while you sing that song, to hear
  The mill-wheel turning in the stream,
  And the green chestnut whisper near.

In 1833 the song began thus, the present stanza taking its place in
1842:--

  I wish I were her earring,
  Ambushed in auburn ringlets sleek,
  (So might my shadow tremble
  Over her downy cheek),
  Hid in her hair, all day and night,
  Touching her neck so warm and white.]


[Footnote 24: 1872. In.]

[Footnote 25: 1833.

  I wish I were the girdle
  Buckled about her dainty waist,
  That her heart might beat against me,
  In sorrow and in rest.
  I should know well if it beat right,
  I'd clasp it round so close and tight.

This stanza bears so close a resemblance to a stanza in Joshua
Sylvester's 'Woodman's Bear' (see Sylvester's 'Works', ed. 1641, p. 616)
that a correspondent asked Tennyson whether Sylvester had suggested it.
Tennyson replied that he had never seen Sylvester's lines ('Life of
Tennyson', iii., 51). The lines are:--

  But her slender virgin waste
  Made mee beare her girdle spight
  Which the same by day imbrac't
  Though it were cast off by night
  That I wisht, I dare not say,
  To be girdle night and day.

For other parallels see the present Editor's 'Illustrations of
Tennyson', p. 39.]


[Footnote 26: 1833.

  I wish I were her necklace,
  So might I ever fall and rise.]


[Footnote 27: 1833. So warm and light.]

[Footnote 28: 1833. I would not be.]

[Footnote 29: 1833.

  For o'er each letter broods and dwells,
  (Like light from running waters thrown
  On flowery swaths) the blissful flame
  Of his sweet eyes, that, day and night,
  With pulses thrilling thro' his frame
  Do inly tremble, starry bright.]


[Footnote 30: Thus in 1833:--

  How I waste language--yet in truth
  You must blame love, whose early rage
  Made me a rhymster in my youth,
  And over-garrulous in age.]


[Footnote 31: 1833. Sing me.]

[Footnote 32: 1833.

  When in the breezy limewood-shade.
  I found the blue forget-me-not.]


[Footnote 33: In 1833 the following song took the place of the song in
the text:--

  All yesternight you met me not,
  My ladylove, forget me not.
  When I am gone, regret me not.
  But, here or there, forget me not.
  With your arched eyebrow threat me not,
  And tremulous eyes, like April skies,
  That seem to say, "forget me not,"
  I pray you, love, forget me not.

  In idle sorrow set me not;
  Regret me not; forget me not;
  Oh! leave me not: oh, let me not
  Wear quite away;--forget me not.
  With roguish laughter fret me not.
  From dewy eyes, like April skies,
  That ever _look_, "forget me not".
  Blue as the blue forget-me-not.]


[Footnote 34: These two stanzas were added in 1842.]

[Footnote 35: 1833.

  I've half a mind to walk, my love,
  To the old mill across the wolds
  For look! the sunset from above,]





FATIMA

First printed in 1833.

The 1833 edition has no title but this quotation from Sappho prefixed:--

'Phainetai moi kaenos isos theoisin Emmen anaer'--SAPPHO.

The title was prefixed in 1842; it is a name taken from 'The Arabian
Nights' or from the Moallkat. The poem was evidently inspired by
Sappho's great ode. 'Cf.' also Fragment I. of Ibycus. In the intensity
of the passion it stands alone among Tennyson's poems.


  O Love, Love, Love! O withering might!
  O sun, that from [1] thy noonday height
  Shudderest when I strain my sight,
  Throbbing thro' all thy heat and light,
  Lo, falling from my constant mind,
  Lo, parch'd and wither'd, deaf and blind,
  I whirl like leaves in roaring wind.

  Last night I wasted hateful hours
  Below the city's eastern towers:
  I thirsted for the brooks, the showers:
  I roll'd among the tender flowers:
  I crush'd them on my breast, my mouth:
  I look'd athwart the burning drouth
  Of that long desert to the south. [2]

  Last night, when some one spoke his name, [3]
  From my swift blood that went and came
  A thousand little shafts of flame.
  Were shiver'd in my narrow frame
  O Love, O fire! once he drew
  With one long kiss, my whole soul thro'
  My lips, as sunlight drinketh dew. [4]

  Before he mounts the hill, I know
  He cometh quickly: from below
  Sweet gales, as from deep gardens, blow
  Before him, striking on my brow.
  In my dry brain my spirit soon,
  Down-deepening from swoon to swoon,
  Faints like a dazzled morning moon.

  The wind sounds like a silver wire,
  And from beyond the noon a fire
  Is pour'd upon the hills, and nigher
  The skies stoop down in their desire;
  And, isled in sudden seas of light,
  My heart, pierced thro' with fierce delight,
  Bursts into blossom in his sight.

  My whole soul waiting silently,
  All naked in a sultry sky,
  Droops blinded with his shining eye:
  I 'will' possess him or will die.
  I will grow round him in his place,
  Grow, live, die looking on his face,
  Die, dying clasp'd in his embrace.


[Footnote 1: 1833. At.]

[Footnote 2: This stanza was added in 1842.]

[Footnote 3: 'Cf.' Byron, 'Occasional Pieces':--

They name thee before me A knell to mine ear, A shudder comes o'er me,
Why wert thou so dear?]


[Footnote 4: 'Cf,' Achilles Tatius, 'Clitophon and Leucippe', bk. i., I:

[Greek: 'de (psyche) tarachtheisa tps philaemati palletai, ei de
mae tois splagchnois in dedemenae aekolouthaesen an elkaetheisa ano tois
philaemasin.']

(Her soul, distracted by the kiss, throbs, and had it not been close
bound by the flesh would have followed, drawn upward by the kisses.)]




NONE

First published in 1833, On being republished in 1842 this poem was
practically rewritten, the alterations and additions so transforming the
poem as to make it almost a new work. I have therefore printed a
complete transcript of the edition of 1833, which the reader can
compare. The final text is, with the exception of one alteration which
will be noticed, precisely that of 1842, so there is no trouble with
variants. 'none' is the first of Tennyson's fine classical studies. The
poem is modelled partly on the Alexandrian Idyll, such an Idyll for
instance as the second Idyll of Theocritus or the 'Megara' or 'Europa'
of Moschus, and partly perhaps on the narratives in the 'Metamorphoses'
of Ovid, to which the opening bears a typical resemblance. It is
possible that the poem may have been suggested by Beattie's 'Judgment of
Paris' which tells the same story, and tells it on the same lines on
which it is told here, though it is not placed in the mouth of none.
Beattie's poem opens with an elaborate description of Ida and of Troy in
the distance. Paris, the husband of none, is one afternoon confronted
with the three goddesses who are, as in Tennyson's Idyll, elaborately
delineated as symbolising what they here symbolise. Each makes her
speech and each offers what she has to offer, worldly dominion, wisdom,
sensual pleasure. There is, of course, no comparison in point of merit
between the two poems, Beattie's being in truth perfectly commonplace.
In its symbolic aspect the poem may be compared with the temptations to
which Christ is submitted in 'Paradise Regained'. See books iii. and iv.


  There lies a vale in Ida, lovelier [1]
  Than all the valleys of Ionian hills.
  The swimming vapour slopes athwart the glen,
  Puts forth an arm, and creeps from pine to pine,
  And loiters, slowly drawn. On either hand
  The lawns and meadow-ledges midway down
  Hang rich in flowers, and far below them roars
  The long brook falling thro' the clov'n ravine
  In cataract after cataract to the sea.
  Behind the valley topmost Gargarus [2]
  Stands up and takes the morning: but in front
  The gorges, opening wide apart, reveal
  Troas and Ilion's column'd citadel,
  The crown of Troas.

  Hither came at noon
  Mournful none, wandering forlorn
  Of Paris, once her playmate on the hills.
  Her cheek had lost the rose, and round her neck
  Floated her hair or seem'd to float in rest.
  She, leaning on a fragment twined with vine,
  Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shade
  Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.

  "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd [3] Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  For now the noonday quiet holds the hill: [4]
  The grasshopper is silent in the grass;
  The lizard, with his shadow on the stone, [5]
  Rests like a shadow, and the cicala sleeps. [6]
  The purple flowers droop: the golden bee
  Is lily-cradled: I alone awake.
  My eyes are full of tears, my heart of love,
  My heart is breaking, and my eyes are dim, [7]
  And I am all aweary of my life.

  "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  Hear me O Earth, hear me O Hills, O Caves
  That house the cold crown'd snake! O mountain brooks,
  I am the daughter of a River-God, [8]
  Hear me, for I will speak, and build up all
  My sorrow with my song, as yonder walls
  Rose slowly to a music slowly breathed, [9]
  A cloud that gather'd shape: for it may be
  That, while I speak of it, a little while
  My heart may wander from its deeper woe.

  "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  I waited underneath the dawning hills,
  Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
  And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
  Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
  Leading a jet-black goat white-horn'd, white-hooved,
  Came up from reedy Simois [10] all alone.

  "O mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  Far-off the torrent call'd me from the cleft:
  Far up the solitary morning smote
  The streaks of virgin snow. With down-dropt eyes
  I sat alone: white-breasted like a star
  Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard skin
  Droop'd from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
  Cluster'd about his temples like a God's;
  And his cheek brighten'd as the foam-bow brightens
  When the wind blows the foam, and all my heart
  Went forth to embrace him coming ere he came.

  "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
  Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,
  That smelt ambrosially, and while I look'd
  And listen'd, the full-flowing river of speech
  Came down upon my heart.

  "'My own none,
  Beautiful-brow'd none, my own soul,
  Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingrav'n
  "For the most fair," would seem to award it thine,
  As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
  The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
  Of movement, and the charm of married brows.'[11]

  "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
  And added 'This was cast upon the board,
  When all the full-faced presence of the Gods
  Ranged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
  Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twere due:
  But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve,
  Delivering, that to me, by common voice
  Elected umpire, Her comes to-day,
  Pallas and Aphrodite, claiming each
  This meed of fairest. Thou, within the cave
  Behind yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
  Mayst well behold them unbeheld, unheard
  Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of Gods.'

  "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  It was the deep midnoon: one silvery cloud
  Had lost his way between the piney sides
  Of this long glen. Then to the bower they came,
  Naked they came to that smooth-swarded bower,
  And at their feet the crocus brake like fire,[12]
  Violet, amaracus, and asphodel,
  Lotos and lilies: and a wind arose,
  And overhead the wandering ivy and vine,
  This way and that, in many a wild festoon
  Ran riot, garlanding the gnarled boughs
  With bunch and berry and flower thro' and thro'.

  "O mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  On the tree-tops a crested peacock lit,
  And o'er him flow'd a golden cloud, and lean'd
  Upon him, slowing dropping fragrant dew.
  Then first I heard the voice of her, to whom
  Coming thro' Heaven, like a light that grows
  Larger and clearer, with one mind the Gods
  Rise up for reverence. She to Paris made
  Proffer of royal power, ample rule
  Unquestion'd, overflowing revenue
  Wherewith to embellish state, 'from many a vale
  And river-sunder'd champaign clothed with corn,
  Or labour'd mines undrainable of ore.
  Honour,' she said, 'and homage, tax and toll,
  From many an inland town and haven large,
  Mast-throng'd beneath her shadowing citadel
  In glassy bays among her tallest towers.'

  "O mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  Still she spake on and still she spake of power,
  'Which in all action is the end of all;
  Power fitted to the season; wisdom-bred
  And throned of wisdom--from all neighbour crowns
  Alliance and allegiance, till thy hand
  Fail from the sceptre staff. Such boon from me,
  From me, Heaven's Queen, Paris to thee king-born,
  A shepherd all thy life but yet king-born,
  Should come most welcome, seeing men, in power
  Only, are likest gods, who have attain'd
  Rest in a happy place and quiet seats
  Above the thunder, with undying bliss
  In knowledge of their own supremacy.'

  "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  She ceased, and Paris held the costly fruit
  Out at arm's-length, so much the thought of power
  Flatter'd his spirit; but Pallas where she stood
  Somewhat apart, her clear and bared limbs
  O'erthwarted with the brazen-headed spear
  Upon her pearly shoulder leaning cold,
  The while, above, her full and earnest eye
  Over her snow-cold breast and angry cheek [13]
  Kept watch, waiting decision, made reply.

  "'Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control,
  These three alone lead life to sovereign power.
  Yet not for power, (power of herself
  Would come uncall'd for) but to live by law,
  Acting the law we live by without fear;
  And, because right is right, to follow right [14]
  Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.'

  "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  Again she said: 'I woo thee not with gifts.
  Sequel of guerdon could not alter me
  To fairer. Judge thou me by what I am,
  So shalt thou find me fairest. Yet indeed,

  If gazing on divinity disrobed
  Thy mortal eyes are frail to judge of fair,
  Unbiass'd by self-profit, oh! rest thee sure
  That I shall love thee well and cleave to thee,

  So that my vigour, wedded to thy blood, [15]
  Shall strike within thy pulses, like a God's,
  To push thee forward thro' a life of shocks,
  Dangers, and deeds, until endurance grow
  Sinew'd with action, and the full-grown will.
  Circled thro' all experiences, pure law,
  Commeasure perfect freedom.' "Here she ceased,
  And Paris ponder'd, and I cried, 'O Paris,
  Give it to Pallas!' but he heard me not,
  Or hearing would not hear me, woe is me!

  "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida.
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  Idalian Aphrodite, beautiful,
  Fresh as the foam, new-bathed in Paphian [16] wells,
  With rosy slender fingers backward drew
  From her warm brows and bosom [17] her deep hair
  Ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat
  And shoulder: from the violets her light foot
  Shone rosy-white, and o'er her rounded form
  Between the shadows of the vine-bunches
  Floated the glowing sunlights, as she moved.

  "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes,
  The herald of her triumph, drawing nigh
  Half-whisper'd in his ear, 'I promise thee
  The fairest and most loving wife in Greece'.
  She spoke and laugh'd: I shut my sight for fear:
  But when I look'd, Paris had raised his arm,
  And I beheld great Her's angry eyes,
  As she withdrew into the golden cloud,
  And I was left alone within the bower;
  And from that time to this I am alone,
  And I shall be alone until I die.

  "Yet, mother Ida, harken ere I die.
  Fairest--why fairest wife? am I not fair?
  My love hath told me so a thousand times.
  Methinks I must be fair, for yesterday,
  When I past by, a wild and wanton pard,
  Eyed like the evening star, with playful tail
  Crouch'd fawning in the weed. Most loving is she?
  Ah me, my mountain shepherd, that my arms
  Were wound about thee, and my hot lips prest
  Close, close to thine in that quick-falling dew
  Of fruitful kisses, thick as Autumn rains
  Flash in the pools of whirling Simois.

  "O mother, hear me yet before I die.
  They came, they cut away my tallest pines,
  My dark tall pines, that plumed the craggy ledge
  High over the blue gorge, and all between
  The snowy peak and snow-white cataract
  Foster'd the callow eaglet--from beneath
  Whose thick mysterious boughs in the dark morn
  The panther's roar came muffled, while I sat
  Low in the valley. Never, never more
  Shall lone none see the morning mist
  Sweep thro' them; never see them overlaid
  With narrow moon-lit slips of silver cloud,
  Between the loud stream and the trembling stars.

  "O mother, here me yet before I die.
  I wish that somewhere in the ruin'd folds,
  Among the fragments tumbled from the glens,
  Or the dry thickets, I could meet with her,
  The Abominable, [18] that uninvited came
  Into the fair Pelean banquet-hall,
  And cast the golden fruit upon the board,
  And bred this change; that I might speak my mind,
  And tell her to her face how much I hate
  Her presence, hated both of Gods and men.

  "O mother, here me yet before I die.
  Hath he not sworn his love a thousand times,
  In this green valley, under this green hill,
  Ev'n on this hand, and sitting on this stone?
  Seal'd it with kisses? water'd it with tears?
  O happy tears, and how unlike to these!
  O happy Heaven, how canst thou see my face?
  O happy earth, how canst thou bear my weight?
  O death, death, death, thou ever-floating cloud,
  There are enough unhappy on this earth,
  Pass by the happy souls, that love to live:
  I pray thee, pass before my light of life,
  And shadow all my soul, that I may die.
  Thou weighest heavy on the heart within,
  Weigh heavy on my eyelids: let me die.

  "O mother, hear me yet before I die.
  I will not die alone, for fiery thoughts
  Do shape themselves within me, more and more,
  Whereof I catch the issue, as I hear
  Dead sounds at night come from the inmost hills,
  Like footsteps upon wool. I dimly see
  My far-off doubtful purpose, as a mother
  Conjectures of the features of her child
  Ere it is born: her child!--a shudder comes
  Across me: never child be born of me,
  Unblest, to vex me with his father's eyes!

  "O mother, hear me yet before I die.
  Hear me, O earth. I will not die alone,
  Lest their shrill happy laughter come to me
  Walking the cold and starless road of
  Death Uncomforted, leaving my ancient love
  With the Greek woman. [19] I will rise and go
  Down into Troy, and ere the stars come forth
  Talk with the wild Cassandra, [20] for she says
  A fire dances before her, and a sound
  Rings ever in her ears of armed men.
  What this may be I know not, but I know
  That, wheresoe'er I am by night and day,
  All earth and air seem only burning fire."



[1833.]

  There is a dale in Ida, lovelier
  Than any in old Ionia, beautiful
  With emerald slopes of sunny sward, that lean
  Above the loud glenriver, which hath worn
  A path thro' steepdown granite walls below
  Mantled with flowering tendriltwine. In front
  The cedarshadowy valleys open wide.
  Far-seen, high over all the God-built wall
  And many a snowycolumned range divine,
  Mounted with awful sculptures--men and Gods,
  The work of Gods--bright on the dark-blue sky
  The windy citadel of Ilion
  Shone, like the crown of Troas. Hither came
  Mournful none wandering forlorn
  Of Paris, once her playmate. Round her neck,
  Her neck all marblewhite and marblecold,
  Floated her hair or seemed to float in rest.
  She, leaning on a vine-entwind stone,
  Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shadow
  Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.

  "O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  The grasshopper is silent in the grass,
  The lizard with his shadow on the stone
  Sleeps like a shadow, and the scarletwinged [21]
  Cicala in the noonday leapeth not
  Along the water-rounded granite-rock.
  The purple flower droops: the golden bee
  Is lilycradled: I alone awake.
  My eyes are full of tears, my heart of love,
  My heart is breaking and my eyes are dim,
  And I am all aweary of my life.

  "O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Hear me O Earth, hear me O Hills, O Caves
  That house the cold crowned snake! O mountain brooks,
  I am the daughter of a River-God,
  Hear me, for I will speak, and build up all
  My sorrow with my song, as yonder walls
  Rose slowly to a music slowly breathed,
  A cloud that gathered shape: for it may be
  That, while I speak of it, a little while
  My heart may wander from its deeper woe.

  "O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Aloft the mountain lawn was dewydark,
  And dewydark aloft the mountain pine;
  Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
  Leading a jetblack goat whitehorned, whitehooved,
  Came up from reedy Simois all alone.

  "O mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  I sate alone: the goldensandalled morn
  Rosehued the scornful hills: I sate alone
  With downdropt eyes: white-breasted like a star
  Fronting the dawn he came: a leopard skin
  From his white shoulder drooped: his sunny hair
  Clustered about his temples like a God's:
  And his cheek brightened, as the foambow brightens
  When the wind blows the foam; and I called out,
  'Welcome Apollo, welcome home Apollo,
  Apollo, my Apollo, loved Apollo'.

  "Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  He, mildly smiling, in his milk-white palm
  Close-held a golden apple, lightningbright
  With changeful flashes, dropt with dew of Heaven
  Ambrosially smelling. From his lip,
  Curved crimson, the full-flowing river of speech
  Came down upon my heart.

                           "' My own none,
  Beautifulbrowed none, mine own soul,
  Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingrav'n
  "For the most fair," in aftertime may breed
  Deep evilwilledness of heaven and sore
  Heartburning toward hallowed Ilion;
  And all the colour of my afterlife
  Will be the shadow of to-day. To-day
  Hera and Pallas and the floating grace
  Of laughter-loving Aphrodite meet
  In manyfolded Ida to receive
  This meed of beauty, she to whom my hand
  Award the palm. Within the green hillside,
  Under yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
  Is an ingoing grotto, strown with spar
  And ivymatted at the mouth, wherein
  Thou unbeholden may'st behold, unheard
  Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of Gods.'

  "Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  It was the deep midnoon: one silvery cloud
  Had lost his way between the piney hills.
  They came--all three--the Olympian goddesses.
  Naked they came to the smoothswarded bower,
  Lustrous with lilyflower, violeteyed
  Both white and blue, with lotetree-fruit thickset,
  Shadowed with singing-pine; and all the while,
  Above, the overwandering ivy and vine
  This way and that in many a wild festoon
  Ran riot, garlanding the gnarled boughs
  With bunch and berry and flower thro' and thro'.
  On the treetops a golden glorious cloud
  Leaned, slowly dropping down ambrosial dew.
  How beautiful they were, too beautiful
  To look upon! but Paris was to me
  More lovelier than all the world beside.

  "O mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  First spake the imperial Olympian
  With archd eyebrow smiling sovranly,
  Fulleyd here. She to Paris made
  Proffer of royal power, ample rule
  Unquestioned, overflowing revenue
  Wherewith to embellish state, 'from many a vale
  And river-sundered champaign clothed with corn,
  Or upland glebe wealthy in oil and wine--
  Honour and homage, tribute, tax and toll,
  From many an inland town and haven large,
  Mast-thronged below her shadowing citadel
  In glassy bays among her tallest towers.'

  "O mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Still she spake on and still she spake of power
  'Which in all action is the end of all.
  Power fitted to the season, measured by
  The height of the general feeling, wisdomborn
  And throned of wisdom--from all neighbour crowns
  Alliance and allegiance evermore. Such boon from me
  Heaven's Queen to thee kingborn,
  A shepherd all thy life and yet kingborn,
  Should come most welcome, seeing men, in this
  Only are likest gods, who have attained
  Rest in a happy place and quiet seats
  Above the thunder, with undying bliss
  In knowledge of their own supremacy;
  The changeless calm of undisputed right,
  The highest height and topmost strength of power.'

  "Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  She ceased, and Paris held the costly fruit
  Out at arm's length, so much the thought of power
  Flattered his heart: but Pallas where she stood
  Somewhat apart, her clear and bard limbs
  O'erthwarted with the brazen-headed spear
  Upon her pearly shoulder leaning cold;
  The while, above, her full and earnest eye
  Over her snowcold breast and angry cheek
  Kept watch, waiting decision, made reply.

  "'Selfreverence, selfknowledge, selfcontrol
  Are the three hinges of the gates of Life,
  That open into power, everyway
  Without horizon, bound or shadow or cloud.
  Yet not for power (power of herself
  Will come uncalled-for) but to live by law
  Acting the law we live by without fear,
  And, because right is right, to follow right
  Were wisdom, in the scorn of consequence.

  (Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.)
  Not as men value gold because it tricks
  And blazons outward Life with ornament,
  But rather as the miser, for itself.
  Good for selfgood doth half destroy selfgood.
  The means and end, like two coiled snakes, infect
  Each other, bound in one with hateful love.
  So both into the fountain and the stream
  A drop of poison falls. Come hearken to me,
  And look upon me and consider me,
  So shall thou find me fairest, so endurance,
  Like to an athlete's arm, shall still become
  Sinewed with motion, till thine active will
  (As the dark body of the Sun robed round
  With his own ever-emanating lights)
  Be flooded o'er with her own effluences,
  And thereby grow to freedom.' "Here she ceased
  And Paris pondered. I cried out, 'Oh, Paris,
  Give it to Pallas!' but he heard me not,
  Or hearing would not hear me, woe is me!

  "O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Idalian Aphrodite oceanborn,
  Fresh as the foam, newbathed in Paphian wells,
  With rosy slender fingers upward drew
  From her warm brow and bosom her dark hair
  Fragrant and thick, and on her head upbound
  In a purple band: below her lucid neck
  Shone ivorylike, and from the ground her foot
  Gleamed rosywhite, and o'er her rounded form
  Between the shadows of the vine-bunches
  Floated the glowing sunlights, as she moved.

  "Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes,
  The herald of her triumph, drawing nigh
  Half-whispered in his ear, 'I promise thee
  The fairest and most loving wife in Greece'.
  I only saw my Paris raise his arm:
  I only saw great Her's angry eyes,
  As she withdrew into the golden cloud,
  And I was left alone within the bower;
  And from that time to this I am alone.
  And I shall be alone until I die.

  "Yet, mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Fairest--why fairest wife? am I not fair?
  My love hath told me so a thousand times.
  Methinks I must be fair, for yesterday,
  When I passed by, a wild and wanton pard,
  Eyed like the evening star, with playful tail
  Crouched fawning in the weed. Most loving is she?
  Ah me, my mountain shepherd, that my arms
  Were wound about thee, and my hot lips prest
  Close-close to thine in that quickfalling dew
  Of fruitful kisses, thick as Autumn rains
  Flash in the pools of whirling Simois.

  "Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  They came, they cut away my tallest pines--
  My dark tall pines, that plumed the craggy ledge
  High over the blue gorge, or lower down
  Filling greengulphd Ida, all between
  The snowy peak and snowwhite cataract
  Fostered the callow eaglet--from beneath
  Whose thick mysterious boughs in the dark
  The panther's roar came muffled, while I sat
  Low in the valley. Never, nevermore
  Shall lone none see the morning mist
  Sweep thro' them--never see them overlaid
  With narrow moon-lit slips of silver cloud,
  Between the loud stream and the trembling stars.

  "Oh! mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Hath he not sworn his love a thousand times,
  In this green valley, under this green hill,
  Ev'n on this hand, and sitting on this stone?
  Sealed it with kisses? watered it with tears?
  Oh happy tears, and how unlike to these!
  Oh happy Heaven, how can'st thou see my face?
  Oh happy earth, how can'st thou bear my weight?
  O death, death, death, thou ever-floating cloud,
  There are enough unhappy on this earth,
  Pass by the happy souls, that love to live:
  I pray thee, pass before my light of life.
  And shadow all my soul, that I may die.
  Thou weighest heavy on the heart within,
  Weigh heavy on my eyelids--let me die.

  "Yet, mother Ida, hear me ere I die.
  I will not die alone, for fiery thoughts
  Do shape themselves within me, more and more,
  Whereof I catch the issue, as I hear
  Dead sounds at night come from the inmost hills,
  Like footsteps upon wool. I dimly see
  My far-off doubtful purpose, as a mother
  Conjectures of the features of her child
  Ere it is born. I will not die alone.

  "Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.
  Hear me, O earth. I will not die alone,
  Lest their shrill, happy laughter, etc.

  (Same as last stanza of subsequent editions.)


[Footnote 1: Tennyson, as we learn from his 'Life' (vol. i., p. 83),
began 'none' while he and Arthur Hallam were in Spain, whither they
went with money for the insurgent allies of Torrigos in the summer of
1830. He wrote part of it in the valley of Cauteretz in the Pyrenees,
the picturesque beauty of which fascinated him and not only suggested
the scenery of this Idyll, but inspired many years afterwards the poem
'All along the valley'. The exquisite scene with which the Idyll opens
bears no resemblance at all to Mount Ida and the Troad.]

[Footnote 2: Gargarus or Gargaron is the highest peak of the Ida range,
rising about 4650 feet above the level of the sea.]

[Footnote 3: The epithet many-fountain'd [Greek:'polpidax'] is Homer's
stock epithet for Ida. 'Cf. Iliad', viii., 47; xiv., 283, etc., etc.]

[Footnote 4: A literal translation from a line in Callimachus, 'Lavacrum
Palladis', 72:

  [Greek: 'mesambrinae d'eich horos haesuchia']
  (noonday quiet held the hill).]


[Footnote 5: So Theocritus, 'Idyll', vii., 22:--

  [Greek: 'Anika dae kai sauros eph aimasiaisi katheudei.']
  (When indeed the very lizard is sleeping on the loose stones of the
  wall.)]


[Footnote 6: This extraordinary mistake in natural history (the cicala
being of course loudest in mid noonday when the heat is greatest)
Tennyson allowed to stand, till securing accuracy at the heavy price of
a pointless pleonasm, he substituted in 1884 "and the winds are dead".]

[Footnote 7: An echo from 'Henry VI.', part ii., act ii., se.
iii.:--

  Mine eyes arc full of tears, my heart of grief.]


[Footnote 8: none was the daughter of the River-God Kebren.]

[Footnote 9: For the myth here referred to see Ovid, 'Heroides',
xvi., 179-80:--

  Ilion aspicies, firmataque turribus altis Moenia,
  Phoeboeae; structa canore lyrae.

It was probably an application of the Theban legend of Amphion, and
arose from the association of Apollo with Poseidon in founding Troy.

A fabric huge 'Rose like an exhalation,'

--Milton's 'Paradise Lost', i., 710-11.

'Cf. Gareth and Lynette', 254-7.]


[Footnote 10: The river Simois, so often referred to in the 'Iliad',
had its origin in Mount Cotylus, and passing by Ilion joined the
Scamander below the city.]

[Footnote 11: 'Cf'. the [Greek: synophrys kora](the maid of the meeting
brows) of Theocritus, 'Id'., viii., 72. This was considered a great
beauty among the Greeks, Romans and Orientals. Ovid, 'Ars. Amat'., iii.,
201, speaks of women effecting this by art: "Arte, supercilii confinia
nuda repletis".]

[Footnote 12: The whole of this gorgeous passage is taken, with one or
two additions and alterations in the names of the flowers, from
'Iliad', xiv., 347-52, with a reminiscence no doubt of Milton,
'Paradise Lost', iv., 695-702.]

[Footnote 13: The "'angry' cheek" is a fine touch.]

[Footnote 14: This fine sentiment is, of course, a commonplace among
ancient philosophers, but it may be interesting to put beside it a
passage from Cicero, 'De Finibus', ii., 14, 45:

  "Honestum id intelligimus quod tale est ut, detract omni utilitate,
  sine ullis praemiis fructibusve per se ipsum possit jure laudari".

  We are to understand by the truly honourable that which, setting aside
  all consideration of utility, may be rightly praised in itself,
  exclusive of any prospect of reward or compensation.]


[Footnote 15: This passage is very obscurely expressed, but the general
meaning is clear: "Until endurance grow sinewed with action, and the
full-grown will, circled through all experiences grow or become law, be
identified with law, and commeasure perfect freedom". The true moral
ideal is to bring the will into absolute harmony with law, so that
virtuous action becomes an instinct, the will no longer rebelling
against the law, "service" being in very truth "perfect freedom".]

[Footnote 16: The Paphos referred to is the old Paphos which was sacred
to Aphrodite; it was on the south-west extremity of Cyprus.]

[Footnote 17: Adopted from a line excised in 'Mariana in the South'.
See 'supra'.]

[Footnote 18: This was Eris.]

[Footnote 19: Helen.]

[Footnote 20: With these verses should be compared Schiller's fine lyric
'Kassandra', and with the line, "All earth and air seem only
burning fire,' from Webster's 'Duchess of Malfi':--

  The heaven o'er my head seems made of molten brass,
  The earth of flaming sulphur.]


[Footnote 21: In the Pyrenees, where part of this poem was written, I saw
a very beautiful species of Cicala, which had scarlet wings spotted with
black. Probably nothing of the kind exists in Mount Ida.]








THE SISTERS


First published in 1833.

The only alterations which have been made in it since have simply
consisted in the alteration of "'an'" for "and" in the third line of
each stanza, and "through and through" for "thro' and thro'" in line 29,
and "wrapt" for "wrapped" in line 34. It is curious that in 1842 the
original "bad" was altered to "bade," but all subsequent editions keep
to the original. It has been said that this poem was founded on the old
Scotch ballad "The Twa Sisters" (see for that ballad Sharpe's 'Ballad
Book', No. x., p. 30), but there is no resemblance at all between the
ballad and this poem beyond the fact that in each there are two sisters
who are both loved by a certain squire, the elder in jealousy pushing
the younger into a river and drowning her.


  We were two daughters of one race:
  She was the fairest in the face:
  The wind is blowing in turret and tree.
  They were together and she fell;
  Therefore revenge became me well.
  O the Earl was fair to see!

  She died: she went to burning flame:
  She mix'd her ancient blood with shame.
  The wind is howling in turret and tree.
  Whole weeks and months, and early and late,
  To win his love I lay in wait:
  O the Earl was fair to see!

  I made a feast; I bad him come;
  I won his love, I brought him home.
  The wind is roaring in turret and tree.
  And after supper, on a bed,
  Upon my lap he laid his head:
  O the Earl was fair to see!

  I kiss'd his eyelids into rest:
  His ruddy cheek upon my breast.
  The wind is raging in turret and tree.
  I hated him with the hate of hell,
  But I loved his beauty passing well.
  O the Earl was fair to see!

  I rose up in the silent night:
  I made my dagger sharp and bright.
  The wind is raving in turret and tree.
  As half-asleep his breath he drew,
  Three times I stabb'd him thro' and thro'.
  O the Earl was fair to see!

  I curl'd and comb'd his comely head,
  He look'd so grand when he was dead.
  The wind is blowing in turret and tree.
  I wrapt his body in the sheet,
  And laid him at his mother's feet.
  O the Earl was fair to see!





TO-----

WITH THE FOLLOWING POEM

I have not been able to ascertain to whom this dedication was addressed.
Sir Franklin Lushington tells me that he thinks it was an imaginary
person. The dedication explains the allegory intended. The poem appears
to have been suggested, as we learn from 'Tennyson's Life' (vol. i., p.
150), by a remark of Trench to Tennyson when they were undergraduates at
Trinity: "We cannot live in art". It was the embodiment Tennyson added
of his belief "that the God-like life is with man and for man". 'Cf.'
his own lines in 'Love and Duty':--$

  For a man is not as God,
  But then most God-like being most a man.

It is a companion poem to the 'Vision of Sin'; in that poem is traced
the effect of indulgence in the grosser pleasures of sense, in this the
effect of the indulgence in the more refined pleasures of sense.


  I send you here a sort of allegory,
  (For you will understand it) of a soul, [1]
  A sinful soul possess'd of many gifts,
  A spacious garden full of flowering weeds,
  A glorious Devil, large in heart and brain,
  That did love Beauty only, (Beauty seen
  In all varieties of mould and mind)
  And Knowledge for its beauty; or if Good,
  Good only for its beauty, seeing not
  That beauty, Good, and Knowledge, are three sisters
  That doat upon each other, friends to man,
  Living together under the same roof,
  And never can be sunder'd without tears.
  And he that shuts Love out, in turn shall be
  Shut out from Love, and on her threshold lie
  Howling in outer darkness. Not for this
  Was common clay ta'en from the common earth,
  Moulded by God, and temper'd with the tears
  Of angels to the perfect shape of man.


[Footnote 1: 1833.

I send you, Friend, a sort of allegory,
(You are an artist and will understand
Its many lesser meanings) of a soul.]






THE PALACE OF ART

First published in 1833, but altered so extensively on its republication
in 1842 as to be practically rewritten. The alterations in it after 1842
were not numerous, consisting chiefly in the deletion of two stanzas
after line 192 and the insertion of the three stanzas which follow in
the present text, together with other minor verbal corrections, all of
which have been noted. No alterations were made in the text after 1853.
The allegory Tennyson explains in the dedicatory verses, but the
framework of the poem was evidently suggested by 'Ecclesiastes' ii.
1-17. The position of the hero is precisely that of Solomon. Both began
by assuming that man is self-sufficing and the world sufficient; the
verdict of the one in consequence being "vanity of vanities, all is
vanity," of the other what the poet here records. An admirable
commentary on the poem is afforded by Matthew Arnold's picture of the
Romans before Christ taught the secret of the only real happiness
possible to man. See 'Obermann Once More'. The teaching of the poem
has been admirably explained by Spedding. It "represents allegorically
the condition of a mind which, in the love of beauty and the triumphant
consciousness of knowledge and intellectual supremacy, in the intense
enjoyment of its own power and glory, has lost sight of its relation to
man and God". See 'Tennyson's Life', vol. i., p. 226.



  I built my soul a lordly pleasure-house
  Wherein at ease for aye to dwell.
  I said, "O Soul, make merry and carouse,
  Dear soul, for all is well".

  A huge crag-platform, smooth as burnish'd brass,
  I chose. The ranged ramparts bright
  From level meadow-bases of deep grass [1]
  Suddenly scaled the light.

  Thereon I built it firm. Of ledge or shelf
  The rock rose clear, or winding stair.
  My soul would live alone unto herself
  In her high palace there.

  And "while the world [2] runs round and round,"
  I said, "Reign thou apart, a quiet king,
  Still as, while Saturn [3] whirls, his stedfast [4] shade
  Sleeps on his luminous [5] ring."

  To which my soul made answer readily:
  "Trust me, in bliss I shall abide
  In this great mansion, that is built for me,
  So royal-rich and wide"

  *       *       *       *      *

  Four courts I made, East, West and South and North,
  In each a squared lawn, wherefrom
  The golden gorge of dragons spouted forth
  A flood of fountain-foam. [6]

  And round the cool green courts there ran a row
  Of cloisters, branch'd like mighty woods,
  Echoing all night to that sonorous flow
  Of spouted fountain-floods. [6]

  And round the roofs a gilded gallery
  That lent broad verge to distant lands,
  Far as the wild swan wings, to where the sky
  Dipt down to sea and sands. [6]

  From those four jets four currents in one swell
  Across the mountain stream'd below
  In misty folds, that floating as they fell
  Lit up a torrent-bow. [6]

  And high on every peak a statue seem'd
  To hang on tiptoe, tossing up
  A cloud of incense of all odour steam'd
  From out a golden cup. [6]

  So that she thought, "And who shall gaze upon
  My palace with unblinded eyes,
  While this great bow will waver in the sun,
  And that sweet incense rise?" [6]

  For that sweet incense rose and never fail'd,
  And, while day sank or mounted higher,
  The light aerial gallery, golden-rail'd,
  Burnt like a fringe of fire. [6]

  Likewise the deep-set windows, stain'd and traced,
  Would seem slow-flaming crimson fires
  From shadow'd grots of arches interlaced,
  And tipt with frost-like spires. [6]

  *       *       *       *       *

  Full of long-sounding corridors it was,
  That over-vaulted grateful gloom, [7]
  Thro' which the livelong day my soul did pass,
  Well-pleased, from room to room.

  Full of great rooms and small the palace stood,
  All various, each a perfect whole
  From living Nature, fit for every mood [8]
  And change of my still soul.

  For some were hung with arras green and blue,
  Showing a gaudy summer-morn,
  Where with puff'd cheek the belted hunter blew
  His wreathed bugle-horn. [9]

  One seem'd all dark and red--a tract of sand,
  And some one pacing there alone,
  Who paced for ever in a glimmering land,
  Lit with a low large moon. [10]

  One show'd an iron coast and angry waves.
  You seem'd to hear them climb and fall
  And roar rock-thwarted under bellowing caves,
  Beneath the windy wall. [11]

  And one, a full-fed river winding slow
  By herds upon an endless plain,
  The ragged rims of thunder brooding low,
  With shadow-streaks of rain. [11]

  And one, the reapers at their sultry toil.
  In front they bound the sheaves.
  Behind Were realms of upland, prodigal in oil,
  And hoary to the wind. [11]

  And one, a foreground black with stones and slags,
  Beyond, a line of heights, and higher
  All barr'd with long white cloud the scornful crags,
  And highest, snow and fire. [12]

  And one, an English home--gray twilight pour'd
  On dewy pastures, dewy trees,
  Softer than sleep--all things in order stored,
  A haunt of ancient Peace. [13]

  Nor these alone, but every landscape fair,
  As fit for every mood of mind,
  Or gay, or grave, or sweet, or stern, was there,
  Not less than truth design'd. [14]

  *          *          *          *

  Or the maid-mother by a crucifix,
  In tracts of pasture sunny-warm,
  Beneath branch-work of costly sardonyx
  Sat smiling, babe in arm. [15]

  Or in a clear-wall'd city on the sea,
  Near gilded organ-pipes, her hair
  Wound with white roses, slept St. Cecily;
  An angel look'd at her.

  Or thronging all one porch of Paradise,
  A group of Houris bow'd to see
  The dying Islamite, with hands and eyes
  That said, We wait for thee. [16]

  Or mythic Uther's deeply-wounded son
  In some fair space of sloping greens
  Lay, dozing in the vale of Avalon,
  And watch'd by weeping queens. [17]

  Or hollowing one hand against his ear,
  To list a foot-fall, ere he saw
  The wood-nymph, stay'd the Ausonian king to hear
  Of wisdom and of law. [18]

  Or over hills with peaky tops engrail'd,
  And many a tract of palm and rice,
  The throne of Indian Cama [19] slowly sail'd
  A summer fann'd with spice.

  Or sweet Europa's [20] mantle blew unclasp'd,
  From off her shoulder backward borne:
  From one hand droop'd a crocus: one hand grasp'd
  The mild bull's golden horn. [21]

  Or else flush'd Ganymede, his rosy thigh
  Half-buried in the Eagle's down,
  Sole as a flying star shot thro' the sky
  Above [22] the pillar'd town.

  Nor [23] these alone: but every [24] legend fair
  Which the supreme Caucasian mind [25]
  Carved out of Nature for itself, was there,
  Not less than life, design'd. [26]

   *       *       *       *

  Then in the towers I placed great bells that swung,
  Moved of themselves, with silver sound;
  And with choice paintings of wise men I hung
  The royal dais round.

  For there was Milton like a seraph strong,
  Beside him Shakespeare bland and mild;
  And there the world-worn Dante grasp'd his song,
  And somewhat grimly smiled. [27]

  And there the Ionian father of the rest; [28]
  A million wrinkles carved his skin;
  A hundred winters snow'd upon his breast,
  From cheek and throat and chin. [29]

  Above, the fair hall-ceiling stately set
  Many an arch high up did lift,
  And angels rising and descending met
  With interchange of gift. [29]

  Below was all mosaic choicely plann'd
  With cycles of the human tale
  Of this wide world, the times of every land
  So wrought, they will not fail. [29]

  The people here, a beast of burden slow,
  Toil'd onward, prick'd with goads and stings;
  Here play'd, a tiger, rolling to and fro
  The heads and crowns of kings; [29]

  Here rose, an athlete, strong to break or bind
  All force in bonds that might endure,
  And here once more like some sick man declined,
  And trusted any cure. [29]

  But over these she trod: and those great bells
  Began to chime. She took her throne:
  She sat betwixt the shining Oriels,
  To sing her songs alone. [29]

  And thro' the topmost Oriels' colour'd flame
  Two godlike faces gazed below;
  Plato the wise, and large-brow'd Verulam,
  The first of those who know. [29]

  And all those names, that in their motion were
  Full-welling fountain-heads of change,
  Betwixt the slender shafts were blazon'd fair
  In diverse raiment strange: [30]

  Thro' which the lights, rose, amber, emerald, blue,
  Flush'd in her temples and her eyes,
  And from her lips, as morn from Memnon, [31] drew
  Rivers of melodies.

  No nightingale delighteth to prolong
  Her low preamble all alone,
  More than my soul to hear her echo'd song
  Throb thro' the ribbed stone;

  Singing and murmuring in her feastful mirth,
  Joying to feel herself alive,
  Lord over Nature, Lord of [32] the visible earth,
  Lord of the senses five;

  Communing with herself: "All these are mine,
  And let the world have peace or wars,
  Tis one to me". She--when young night divine
  Crown'd dying day with stars,

  Making sweet close of his delicious toils--
  Lit light in wreaths and anadems,
  And pure quintessences of precious oils
  In hollow'd moons of gems,

  To mimic heaven; and clapt her hands and cried,
  "I marvel if my still delight
  In this great house so royal-rich, and wide,
  Be flatter'd to the height. [33]

  "O all things fair to sate my various eyes!
  O shapes and hues that please me well!
  O silent faces of the Great and Wise,
  My Gods, with whom I dwell! [34]

  "O God-like isolation which art mine,
  I can but count thee perfect gain,
  What time I watch the darkening droves of swine
  That range on yonder plain. [34]

  "In filthy sloughs they roll a prurient skin,
  They graze and wallow, breed and sleep;
  And oft some brainless devil enters in,
  And drives them to the deep." [34]

  Then of the moral instinct would she prate,
  And of the rising from the dead,
  As hers by right of full-accomplish'd Fate;
  And at the last she said:

  "I take possession of man's mind and deed.
  I care not what the sects may brawl,
  I sit as God holding no form of creed,
  But contemplating all." [35]

      *          *          *

  Full oft [36] the riddle of the painful earth
  Flash'd thro' her as she sat alone,
  Yet not the less held she her solemn mirth,
  And intellectual throne.

  And so she throve and prosper'd: so three years
  She prosper'd: on the fourth she fell, [37]
  Like Herod, [38] when the shout was in his ears,
  Struck thro' with pangs of hell.

  Lest she should fail and perish utterly,
  God, before whom ever lie bare
  The abysmal deeps of Personality, [39]
  Plagued her with sore despair.

  When she would think, where'er she turn'd her sight,
  The airy hand confusion wrought,
  Wrote "Mene, mene," and divided quite
  The kingdom of her thought. [40]

  Deep dread and loathing of her solitude
  Fell on her, from which mood was born
  Scorn of herself; again, from out that mood
  Laughter at her self-scorn. [41]

  "What! is not this my place of strength," she said,
  "My spacious mansion built for me,
  Whereof the strong foundation-stones were laid
  Since my first memory?"

  But in dark corners of her palace stood
  Uncertain shapes; and unawares
  On white-eyed phantasms weeping tears of blood,
  And horrible nightmares,

  And hollow shades enclosing hearts of flame,
  And, with dim fretted foreheads all,
  On corpses three-months-old at noon she came,
  That stood against the wall.

  A spot of dull stagnation, without light
  Or power of movement, seem'd my soul,
  'Mid onward-sloping [42] motions infinite
  Making for one sure goal.

  A still salt pool, lock'd in with bars of sand;
  Left on the shore; that hears all night
  The plunging seas draw backward from the land
  Their moon-led waters white.

  A star that with the choral starry dance
  Join'd not, but stood, and standing saw
  The hollow orb of moving Circumstance
  Roll'd round by one fix'd law.

  Back on herself her serpent pride had curl'd.
  "No voice," she shriek'd in that lone hall,
  "No voice breaks thro' the stillness of this world:
  One deep, deep silence all!"

  She, mouldering with the dull earth's mouldering sod,
  Inwrapt tenfold in slothful shame,
  Lay there exiled from eternal God,
  Lost to her place and name;

  And death and life she hated equally,
  And nothing saw, for her despair,
  But dreadful time, dreadful eternity,
  No comfort anywhere;

  Remaining utterly confused with fears,
  And ever worse with growing time,
  And ever unrelieved by dismal tears,
  And all alone in crime:

  Shut up as in a crumbling tomb, girt round
  With blackness as a solid wall,
  Far off she seem'd to hear the dully sound
  Of human footsteps fall.

  As in strange lands a traveller walking slow,
  In doubt and great perplexity,
  A little before moon-rise hears the low
  Moan of an unknown sea;

  And knows not if it be thunder or a sound
  Of rocks [43] thrown down, or one deep cry
  Of great wild beasts; then thinketh, "I have found
  A new land, but I die".

  She howl'd aloud, "I am on fire within.
  There comes no murmur of reply.
  What is it that will take away my sin,
  And save me lest I die?"

  So when four years were wholly finished,
  She threw her royal robes away.
  "Make me a cottage in the vale," she said,
  "Where I may mourn and pray. [44]

  "Yet pull not down my palace towers, that are
  So lightly, beautifully built:
  Perchance I may return with others there
  When I have purged my guilt." [45]



[Footnote 1: 1833.

  I chose, whose ranged ramparts bright
  From great broad meadow bases of deep grass.]


[Footnote 2: 1833. "While the great world."]

[Footnote 3: "The shadow of Saturn thrown upon the bright ring that
surrounds the planet appears motionless, though the body of the planet
revolves. Saturn rotates on its axis in the short period of ten and a
half hours, but the shadow of this swiftly whirling mass shows no more
motion than is seen in the shadow of a top spinning so rapidly that it
seems to be standing still." Rowe and Webb's note, which I gladly
borrow.]

[Footnote 4: 1833 and 1842. Steadfast.]

[Footnote 5: After this stanza in 1833 this, deleted in 1842:--

  "And richly feast within thy palace hall,
  Like to the dainty bird that sups,
  Lodged in the lustrous crown-imperial,
  Draining the honey cups."]


[Footnote 6: In 1833 these eight stanzas were inserted after the stanza
beginning, "I take possession of men's minds and deeds"; in 1842 they
were transferred, greatly altered, to their present position. For the
alterations on them see 'infra.']

[Footnote 7: 1833.

  Gloom,
  Roofed with thick plates of green and orange glass
  Ending in stately rooms.]


[Footnote 8: 1833.

  All various, all beautiful,
  Looking all ways, fitted to every mood.]


[Footnote 9: Here in 1833 was inserted the stanza, "One showed an
English home," afterwards transferred to its present position 85-88.]

[Footnote 10: 1833.

  Some were all dark and red, a glimmering land
  Lit with a low round moon,
  Among brown rocks a man upon the sand
  Went weeping all alone.]


[Footnote 11: These three stanzas were added in 1842.]

[Footnote 12: Thus in 1833:--

  One seemed a foreground black with stones and slags,
  Below sun-smitten icy spires
  Rose striped with long white cloud the scornful crags,
  Deep trenched with thunder fires.]


[Footnote 13: Not inserted here in 1833, but the following in its
place:--

  Some showed far-off thick woods mounted with towers,
  Nearer, a flood of mild sunshine
  Poured on long walks and lawns and beds and bowers
  Trellised with bunchy vine.]

[Footnote 14: Inserted in 1842.]


[Footnote 15: Thus in 1833, followed by the note:--

  Or the maid-mother by a crucifix,
  In yellow pastures sunny-warm,
  Beneath branch-work of costly sardonyx,
  Sat smiling, babe in arm.


When I first conceived the plan of the Palace of Art, I intended to
have introduced both sculptures and paintings into it; but it is the
most difficult of all things to 'devise' a statue in verse. Judge
whether I have succeeded in the statues of Elijah and Olympias.


  One was the Tishbite whom the raven fed,
  As when he stood on Carmel steeps,
  With one arm stretched out bare, and mocked and said,
  "Come cry aloud-he sleeps".

  Tall, eager, lean and strong, his cloak wind-borne
  Behind, his forehead heavenly bright
  From the clear marble pouring glorious scorn,
  Lit as with inner light.

  One, was Olympias: the floating snake
  Rolled round her ancles, round her waist
  Knotted, and folded once about her neck,
  Her perfect lips to taste.

  Round by the shoulder moved: she seeming blythe
  Declined her head: on every side
  The dragon's curves melted and mingled with
  The woman's youthful pride
  Of rounded limbs.

  Or Venus in a snowy shell alone,
  Deep-shadowed in the glassy brine,
  Moonlike glowed double on the blue, and shone
  A naked shape divine.]


[Footnote 16: Inserted in 1842.]

[Footnote 17: Thus in 1833:--

  Or that deep-wounded child of Pendragon
  Mid misty woods on sloping greens
  Dozed in the valley of Avilion,
  Tended by crowned queens.

The present reading is that of 1842. The reference is, of course, to
King Arthur, the supposed son of Uther Pendragon.

In 1833 the following stanza, excised in 1842, followed:--

  Or blue-eyed Kriemhilt from a craggy hold,
  Athwart the light-green rows of vine,
  Poured blazing hoards of Nibelungen gold,
  Down to the gulfy Rhine.]


[Footnote 18: Inserted in 1842 thus:--

  Or hollowing one hand against his ear,
  To listen for a footfall, ere he saw
  The wood-nymph, stay'd the Tuscan king to hear
  Of wisdom and of law.

List a footfall, 1843. Ausonian for Tuscan, 1850. The reference is to
Egeria and Numa Pompilius. 'Cf.' Juvenal, iii., 11-18:--

  Hic ubi nocturn
  Numa constituebat amic
  ...
  In vallem geriae descendimus et speluneas
  Dissimiles veris.

and the beautiful passage in Byron's 'Childe Harold', iv., st.
cxv.-cxix.]


[Footnote 19: This is Camadev or Camadeo, the Cupid or God of Love of the
Hindu mythology.]

[Footnote 20: This picture of Europa seems to have been suggested by
Moschus, 'Idyll', ii., 121-5:--

  [Greek: Hae d' ar ephezomenae Zaenos Boeois epi n_otois tae men echen
  taurou dolichon keras, en cheri d' allae eirue porphyreas kolpou
  ptuchas.]

  "Then, seated on the back of the divine bull, with one hand did she
  grasp the bull's long horn and with the other she was catching up the
  purple folds of her garment, and the robe on her shoulders was swelled
  out."

See, too, the beautiful picture of the same scene in Achilles
Tatius, 'Clitophon and Leucippe', lib. i., 'ad init.;' and in Politian's
finely picturesque poem.]


[Footnote 21: In 1833 thus:--

  Europa's scarf blew in an arch, unclasped,
  From her bare shoulder backward borne.

Off inserted in 1842. Here in 1833 follows a stanza, excised in 1842:--

  He thro' the streaming crystal swam, and rolled
  Ambrosial breaths that seemed to float
  In light-wreathed curls. She from the ripple cold
  Updrew her sandalled foot.]


[Footnote 22: 1833. Over.]

[Footnote 23: 1833. Not.]

[Footnote 24: 1833. Many a.]

[Footnote 25: The Caucasian range forms the north-west margin of the
great tableland of Western Asia, and as it was the home of those races
who afterwards peopled Europe and Western Asia and so became the fathers
of civilisation and culture, the "Supreme Caucasian mind" is a
historically correct but certainly recondite expression for the
intellectual flower of the human race, for the perfection of human
ability.]


[Footnote 26: 1833. Broidered in screen and blind.

In the edition of 1833 appear the following stanzas, excised in 1842:--

  So that my soul beholding in her pride
  All these, from room to room did pass;
  And all things that she saw, she multiplied,
  A many-faced glass.

  And, being both the sower and the seed,
  Remaining in herself became
  All that she saw, Madonna, Ganymede,
  Or the Asiatic dame--

  Still changing, as a lighthouse in the night
  Changeth athwart the gleaming main,
  From red to yellow, yellow to pale white,
  Then back to red again.

  "From change to change four times within the womb
  The brain is moulded," she began,
  "So thro' all phases of all thought I come
  Into the perfect man.

  "All nature widens upward: evermore
  The simpler essence lower lies,
  More complex is more perfect, owning more
  Discourse, more widely wise.

  "I take possession of men's minds and deeds.
  I live in all things great and small.
  I dwell apart, holding no forms of creeds,
  But contemplating all."

  Four ample courts there were, East, West, South, North,
  In each a squard lawn where from
  A golden-gorged dragon spouted forth
  The fountain's diamond foam.

  All round the cool green courts there ran a row
  Of cloisters, branched like mighty woods,
  Echoing all night to that sonorous flow
  Of spouted fountain floods.

  From those four jets four currents in one swell
  Over the black rock streamed below
  In steamy folds, that, floating as they fell,
  Lit up a torrent bow.

  And round the roofs ran gilded galleries
  That gave large view to distant lands,
  Tall towns and mounds, and close beneath the skies
  Long lines of amber sands.

  Huge incense-urns along the balustrade,
  Hollowed of solid amethyst,
  Each with a different odour fuming, made
  The air a silver mist.

  Far-off 'twas wonderful to look upon
  Those sumptuous towers between the gleam
  Of that great foam-bow trembling in the sun,
  And the argent incense-steam;

  And round the terraces and round the walls,
  While day sank lower or rose higher,
  To see those rails with all their knobs and balls,
  Burn like a fringe of fire.

  Likewise the deepset windows, stained and traced.
  Burned, like slow-flaming crimson fires,
  From shadowed grots of arches interlaced,
  And topped with frostlike spires.]


[Footnote 27: 1833.

  There deep-haired Milton like an angel tall
  Stood limnd, Shakspeare bland and mild,
  Grim Dante pressed his lips, and from the wall
  The bald blind Homer smiled.

Recast in its present form in
1842. After this stanza in 1833 appear the following stanzas, excised in
1842:--

  And underneath fresh carved in cedar wood,
  Somewhat alike in form and face,
  The Genii of every climate stood,
  All brothers of one race:

  Angels who sway the seasons by their art,
  And mould all shapes in earth and sea;
  And with great effort build the human heart
  From earliest infancy.

  And in the sun-pierced Oriels' coloured flame
  Immortal Michl Angelo
  Looked down, bold Luther, large-browed Verulam,
  The King of those who know. [A]

  Cervantes, the bright face of Calderon,
  Robed David touching holy strings,
  The Halicarnassean, and alone,
  Alfred the flower of kings.

  Isaiah with fierce Ezekiel,
  Swarth Moses by the Coptic sea,
  Plato, Petrarca, Livy, and Raphael,
  And eastern Confutzer.

    [Sub-Footnote A: Il mastro di color chi sanno.--Dante, 'Inf.',
    iii.]]


[Footnote 28: Homer. 'Cf.' Pope's 'Temple of Fame', 183-7:--

  Father of verse in holy fillets dress'd,
  His silver beard wav'd gently o'er his breast,
  Though blind a boldness in his looks appears,
  In years he seem'd but not impaired by years.]


[Footnote 29: All these stanzas were added in 1842. In 1833 appear the
following stanzas, excised in 1842:--

  As some rich tropic mountain, that infolds
  All change, from flats of scattered palms
  Sloping thro' five great zones of climate, holds
  His head in snows and calms--

  Full of her own delight and nothing else,
  My vain-glorious, gorgeous soul
  Sat throned between the shining oriels,
  In pomp beyond control;

  With piles of flavorous fruits in basket-twine
  Of gold, upheaped, crushing down
  Musk-scented blooms--all taste--grape, gourd or pine--
  In bunch, or single grown--

  Our growths, and such as brooding Indian heats
  Make out of crimson blossoms deep,
  Ambrosial pulps and juices, sweets from sweets
  Sun-changed, when sea-winds sleep.

  With graceful chalices of curious wine,
  Wonders of art--and costly jars,
  And bossed salvers. Ere young night divine
  Crowned dying day with stars,

  Making sweet close of his delicious toils,
  She lit white streams of dazzling gas,
  And soft and fragrant flames of precious oils
  In moons of purple glass

  Ranged on the fretted woodwork to the ground.
  Thus her intense untold delight,
  In deep or vivid colour, smell and sound,
  Was nattered day and night. [A]

    [Sub-Footnote A: If the poem were not already too long, I should
    have inserted in the text the following stanzas, expressive of the
    joy wherewith the soul contemplated the results of astronomical
    experiment. In the centre of the four quadrangles rose an immense
    tower.

    Hither, when all the deep unsounded skies
    Shuddered with silent stars she clomb,
    And as with optic glasses her keen eyes
    Pierced thro' the mystic dome,

    Regions of lucid matter taking forms,
    Brushes of fire, hazy gleams,
    Clusters and beds of worlds, and bee-like swarms
    Of suns, and starry streams.

    She saw the snowy poles of moonless Mars,
    That marvellous round of milky light
    Below Orion, and those double stars
    Whereof the one more bright

    Is circled by the other, etc.]



[Footnote 30: Thus in 1833:--

  And many more, that in their lifetime were
  Full-welling fountain heads of change,
  Between the stone shafts glimmered, blazoned fair
  In divers raiment strange.]

[Footnote 31: The statue of Memnon near Thebes in Egypt when first
struck by the rays of the rising sun is said to have become vocal, to
have emitted responsive sounds. See for an account of this 'Pausanias',
i., 42; Tacitus, 'Annals', ii., 61; and Juvenal, 'Sat.', xv., 5:

  "Dimidio magicae resonant ubi Memnone Chordae,"

and compare Akenside's verses,
'Plea. of Imag.', i., 109-113:--

  Old Memnon's image, long renown'd
  By fabling Nilus: to the quivering touch
  Of Titan's ray, with each repulsive string
  Consenting, sounded thro' the warbling air
  Unbidden strains.]


[Footnote 32: 1833. O'.]

[Footnote 33: Here added in 1842 and remaining till 1851 when they were
excised are two stanzas:--

  "From shape to shape at first within the womb
  The brain is modell'd," she began,
  "And thro' all phases of all thought I come
  Into the perfect man.

  "All nature widens upward. Evermore
  The simpler essence lower lies:
  More complex is more perfect, owning more
  Discourse, more widely wise."]


[Footnote 34: These stanzas were added in 1851.]

[Footnote 35: Added in
1842, with the following variants which remained till 1851, when the
present text was substituted:--

  "I take possession of men's minds and deeds.
  I live in all things great and small.
  I sit apart holding no forms of creeds,
  But contemplating all."]


[Footnote 36: 1833. Sometimes.]

[Footnote 37:

  And intellectual throne
  Of full-sphered contemplation. So three years
  She throve, but on the fourth she fell.

And so the text remained till 1850, when the present
reading was substituted.]


[Footnote 38: For the reference to Herod see
'Acts' xii. 21-23.]

[Footnote 39: Cf. Hallam's 'Remains', p.
132: "That, i.e. Redemption," is in the power of God's election with
whom alone rest 'the abysmal secrets of personality'.]

[Footnote 40:
See 'Daniel' v. 24-27.]

[Footnote 41: In 1833 the following stanza,
excised in 1842:--

  "Who hath drawn dry the fountains of delight,
  That from my deep heart everywhere
  Moved in my blood and dwelt, as power and might
  Abode in Sampson's hair?"]


[Footnote 42: 1833. Downward-sloping.]

[Footnote 43: 1833.

  Or the sound
  Of stones.

So till 1851, when "a sound of rocks" was substituted.]


[Footnote 44: 1833. "Dying the death I die?" Present reading substituted
in 1842.]

[Footnote 45: Because intellectual and aesthetic pleasures are
'abused' and their purpose and scope mistaken, there is no reason
why they should not be enjoyed. See the allegory in 'In Memoriam',
ciii., stanzas 12-13.]









LADY CLARA VERE DE VERE

Though this is placed among the poems published in 1833 it first
appeared in print in 1842. The subsequent alterations were very slight,
and after 1848 none at all were made.

  Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  Of me you shall not win renown:
  You thought to break a country heart
  For pastime, ere you went to town.
  At me you smiled, but unbeguiled
  I saw the snare, and I retired:
  The daughter of a hundred Earls,
  You are not one to be desired.

  Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  I know you proud to bear your name,
  Your pride is yet no mate for mine,
  Too proud to care from whence I came.
  Nor would I break for your sweet sake
  A heart that doats on truer charms.
  A simple maiden in her flower
  Is worth a hundred coats-of-arms.

  Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  Some meeker pupil you must find,
  For were you queen of all that is,
  I could not stoop to such a mind.
  You sought to prove how I could love,
  And my disdain is my reply.
  The lion on your old stone gates
  Is not more cold to you than I.

  Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  You put strange memories in my head.
  Not thrice your branching limes have blown
  Since I beheld young Laurence dead.
  Oh your sweet eyes, your low replies:
  A great enchantress you may be;
  But there was that across his throat
  Which you hardly cared to see.

  Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  When thus he met his mother's view,
  She had the passions of her kind,
  She spake some certain truths of you.

  Indeed I heard one bitter word
  That scarce is fit for you to hear;
  Her manners had not that repose
  Which stamps the caste of Vere de Vere.

  Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  There stands a spectre in your hall:
  The guilt of blood is at your door:
  You changed a wholesome heart to gall.
  You held your course without remorse,
  To make him trust his modest worth,
  And, last, you fix'd a vacant stare,
  And slew him with your noble birth.

  Trust me, Clara Vere de Vere,
  From yon blue heavens above us bent
  The grand old gardener and his wife [1]
  Smile at the claims of long descent.
  Howe'er it be, it seems to me,
  'Tis only noble to be good.
  Kind hearts are more than coronets,
  And simple faith than Norman blood.

  I know you, Clara Vere de Vere:
  You pine among your halls and towers:
  The languid light of your proud eyes
  Is wearied of the rolling hours.
  In glowing health, with boundless wealth,
  But sickening of a vague disease,
  You know so ill to deal with time,
  You needs must play such pranks as these.

  Clara, Clara Vere de Vere,
  If Time be heavy on your hands,
  Are there no beggars at your gate,
  Nor any poor about your lands?
  Oh! teach the orphan-boy to read,
  Or teach the orphan-girl to sew,
  Pray Heaven for a human heart,
  And let the foolish yoeman go.


[Footnote 1: 1842 and 1843. "The gardener Adam and his wife." In 1845 it
was altered to the present text.]






THE MAY QUEEN

The first two parts were first published in 1833.

The scenery is typical of Lincolnshire; in Fitzgerald's phrase, it is
all Lincolnshire inland, as 'Locksley Hall' is seaboard.

  You must wake and call me early, call me early, mother dear;
  To-morrow 'ill be the happiest time of all the glad [1] New-year;
  Of all the glad New-year, mother, the maddest merriest day;
  For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  There's many a black, black eye, they say, but none so bright as mine;
  There's Margaret and Mary, there's Kate and Caroline:
  But none so fair as little Alice in all the land they say,
  So I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  I sleep so sound all night, mother, that I shall never wake,
  If you [2] do not call me loud when the day begins to break:
  But I must gather knots of flowers, and buds and garlands gay,
  For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  As I came up the valley whom think ye should I see,
  But Robin [3] leaning on the bridge beneath the hazel-tree?
  He thought of that sharp look, mother, I gave him yesterday,--
  But I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  He thought I was a ghost, mother, for I was all in white,
  And I ran by him without speaking, like a flash of light.
  They call me cruel-hearted, but I care not what they say,
  For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  They say he's dying all for love, but that can never be:
  They say his heart is breaking, mother--what is that to me?
  There's many a bolder lad 'ill woo me any summer day,
  And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  Little Effie shall go with me to-morrow to the green,
  And you'll be there, too, mother, to see me made the Queen;
  For the shepherd lads on every side 'ill come from far away,
  And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  The honeysuckle round the porch has wov'n its wavy bowers,
  And by the meadow-trenches blow the faint sweet cuckoo-flowers;
  And the wild marsh-marigold shines like fire in swamps and hollows gray,
  And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  The night-winds come and go, mother, upon the meadow-grass,
  And the happy stars above them seem to brighten as they pass;
  There will not be a drop of rain the whole of the live-long day,
  And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  All the valley, mother, 'ill be fresh and green and still,
  And the cowslip and the crowfoot are over all the hill,
  And the rivulet in the flowery dale 'ill merrily glance and play,
  For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

  So you must wake and call me early, call me early, mother dear,
  To-morrow 'ill be the happiest time of all the glad New-year:
  To-morrow 'ill be of all the year the maddest merriest day,
  For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.


[Footnote 1: 1833. "Blythe" for "glad".]

[Footnote 2: 1883. Ye.]

[Footnote 3: 1842. Robert. This is a curious illustration of Tennyson's
scrupulousness about trifles: in 1833 it was "Robin," in 1842 "Robert,"
then in 1843 and afterwards he returned to "Robin".]





NEW-YEAR'S EVE

  If you're waking call me early, call me early, mother dear,
  For I would see the sun rise upon the glad New-year.
  It is the last New-year that I shall ever see,
  Then you may lay me low i' the mould and think no more of me.

  To-night I saw the sun set: he set and left behind
  The good old year, the dear old time, and all my peace of mind;
  And the New-year's coming up, mother, but I shall never see
  The blossom on [1] the blackthorn, the leaf upon the tree.

  Last May we made a crown of flowers: we had a merry day;
  Beneath the hawthorn on the green they made me Queen of May;
  And we danced about the may-pole and in the hazel copse,
  Till Charles's Wain came out above the tall white chimney-tops.

  There's not a flower on all the hills: the frost is on the pane:
  I only wish to live till the snowdrops come again:
  I wish the snow would melt and the sun come out on high:
  I long to see a flower so before the day I die.

  The building rook'll caw from the windy tall elm-tree,
  And the tufted plover pipe along the fallow lea,
  And the swallow'll come back again with summer o'er the wave.
  But I shall lie alone, mother, within the mouldering grave.

  Upon the chancel-casement, and upon that grave of mine,
  In the early, early morning the summer sun'll shine,
  Before the red cock crows from the farm upon the hill,
  When you are warm-asleep, mother, and all the world is still.

  When the flowers come again, mother, beneath the waning light
  You'll never see me more in the long gray fields at night;
  When from the dry dark wold the summer airs blow cool
  On the oat-grass and the sword-grass, and the bulrush in the pool.

  You'll bury me, [2] my mother, just beneath the hawthorn shade,
  And you'll come [3] sometimes and see me where I am lowly laid.
  I shall not forget you, mother, I shall hear you when you pass,[4]
  With your feet above my head in the long and pleasant grass.

  I have been wild and wayward, but you'll forgive [5] me now;
  You'll kiss me, my own mother, and forgive me ere I go; [6]
  Nay, nay, you must not weep, [7] nor let your grief be wild,
  You should not fret for me, mother, you [8] have another child.

  If I can I'll come again, mother, from out my resting-place;
  Tho' you'll [9] not see me, mother, I shall look upon your face;
  Tho' I cannot speak a word, 1 shall harken what you [10] say,
  And be often, often with you when you think [11] I'm far away.

  Good-night, good-night, when I have said good-night for evermore,
  And you [12] see me carried out from the threshold of the door;
  Don't let Effie come to see me till my grave be growing green:
  She'll be a better child to you than ever I have been.

  She'll find my garden-tools upon the granary floor:
  Let her take 'em: they are hers: I shall never garden more:
  But tell her, when I'm gone, to train the rose-bush that I set
  About the parlour-window and the box of mignonette.

  Good-night, sweet mother: call me before the day is born. [13]
  All night I lie awake, but I fall asleep at morn;
  But I would see the sun rise upon the glad New-year,
  So, if your waking, call me, call me early, mother dear.


[Footnote 1: 1833. The may upon.]

[Footnote 2: 1833. Ye'll bury me.]

[Footnote 3: 1833. And ye'll come.]

[Footnote 4: 1833. I shall not forget ye, mother, I shall hear ye when
ye pass.]

[Footnote 5: 1833. But ye'll forgive.]

[Footnote 6: 1833. Ye'll kiss me, my own mother, upon my cheek and brow.
1850. And foregive me ere I go.]

[Footnote 7: 1833. Ye must not weep.]

[Footnote 8: 1833. Ye ... ye.]

[Footnote 9: 1833. Ye'll.]

[Footnote 10: 1833. Ye.]

[Footnote 11: 1833. Ye when ye think.]

[Footnote 12: 1833. Ye.]

[Footnote 13: 1833. Call me when it begins to dawn. 1842. Before the day
is born.]




CONCLUSION

Added in 1842.

  I thought to pass away before, and yet alive I am;
  And in the fields all round I hear the bleating of the lamb.
  How sadly, I remember, rose the morning of the year!
  To die before the snowdrop came, and now the violet's here.

  O sweet is the new violet, that comes beneath the skies,
  And sweeter is the young lamb's voice to me that cannot rise,
  And sweet is all the land about, and all the flowers that blow,
  And sweeter far is death than life to me that long to go.

  It seem'd so hard at first, mother, to leave the blessed sun,
  And now it seems as hard to stay, and yet His will be done!
  But still I think it can't be long before I find release;
  And that good man, the clergyman, has told me words of peace. [1]

  O blessings on his kindly voice and on his silver hair!
  And blessings on his whole life long, until he meet me there!
  O blessings on his kindly heart and on his silver head!
  A thousand times I blest him, as he knelt beside my bed.

  He taught me all the mercy, for he show'd [2] me all the sin.
  Now, tho' my lamp was lighted late, there's One will let me in:
  Nor would I now be well, mother, again, if that could be,
  For my desire is but to pass to Him that died for me.

  I did not hear the dog howl, mother, or the death-watch beat,
  There came a sweeter token when the night and morning meet:
  But sit beside my bed, mother, and put your hand in mine,
  And Effie on the other side, and I will tell the sign.

  All in the wild March-morning I heard the angels call;
  It was when the moon was setting, and the dark was over all;
  The trees began to whisper, and the wind began to roll,
  And in the wild March-morning I heard them call my soul.

  For lying broad awake I thought of you and Effie dear;
  I saw you sitting in the house, and I no longer here;
  With all my strength I pray'd for both, and so I felt resign'd,
  And up the valley came a swell of music on the wind.

  I thought that it was fancy, and I listen'd in my bed,
  And then did something speak to me--I know not what was said;
  For great delight and shuddering took hold of all my mind,
  And up the valley came again the music on the wind.

  But you were sleeping; and I said, "It's not for them: it's mine".
  And if it comes [3] three times, I thought, I take it for a sign.
  And once again it came, and close beside the window-bars,
  Then seem'd to go right up to Heaven and die among the stars.

  So now I think my time is near. I trust it is. I know
  The blessed music went that way my soul will have to go.
  And for myself, indeed, I care not if I go to-day.
  But, Effie, you must comfort _her_ when I am past away.

  And say to Robin [4] a kind word, and tell him not to fret;
  There's many worthier than I, would make him happy yet.
  If I had lived--I cannot tell--I might have been his wife;
  But all these things have ceased to be, with my desire of life.

  O look! the sun begins to rise, the heavens are in a glow;
  He shines upon a hundred fields, and all of them I know.
  And there I move no longer now, and there his light may shine--
  Wild flowers in the valley for other hands than mine.

  O sweet and strange it seems to me, that ere this day is done
  The voice, that now is speaking, may be beyond the sun--
  For ever and for ever with those just souls and true--
  And what is life, that we should moan? why make we such ado?

  For ever and for ever, all in a blessed home--
  And there to wait a little while till you and Effie come--
  To lie within the light of God, as I lie upon your breast--
  And the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.



[Footnote 1: 1842.

  But still it can't be long, mother, before I find release;
  And that good man, the clergyman, he preaches words of peace.

Present reading 1843.]


[Footnote 2: 1842-1848.

  He show'd me all the mercy, for he taught me all the sin.
  Now, though, etc.

1850. For show'd he me all the sin.]


[Footnote 3: 1889. Come.]

[Footnote 4: 1842. Robert. 1843. Robin restored.]






THE LOTOS-EATERS

First published in 1833, but when republished in 1842 the alterations in
the way of excision, alteration, and addition were very extensive. The
text of 1842 is practically the final text. This charming poem is
founded on 'Odyssey', ix., 82 'seq.'

  "On the tenth day we set foot on the land of the lotos-eaters who eat
  a flowery food. So we stepped ashore and drew water... When we had
  tasted meat and drink I sent forth certain of my company to go and
  make search what manner of men they were who here live upon the earth
  by bread... Then straightway they went and mixed with the men of the
  lotos-eaters, and so it was that the lotos-eaters devised not death
  for our fellows but gave them of the lotos to taste. Now whosoever of
  them did eat the honey-sweet fruit of the lotos had no more wish to
  bring tidings nor to come back, but there he chose to abide with the
  lotos-eating men ever feeding on the lotos and forgetful of his
  homeward way. Therefore I led them back to the ships weeping and sore
  against their will ... lest haply any should eat of the lotos and be
  forgetful of returning."

  (Lang and Butcher's translation.)

But in the details of his poem Tennyson has laid many other poets under
contribution, notably Moschus, 'Idyll', v.; Bion, 'Idyll', v.; Spenser,
'Faerie Queen', II. vi. (description of the 'Idle Lake'), and Thomson's
'Castle of Indolence'.


  "Courage!" he said, and pointed toward the land,
  "This mounting wave will roll us shoreward soon."
  In the afternoon they came unto a land,
  In which it seemed always afternoon.
  All round the coast the languid air did swoon,
  Breathing like one that hath a weary dream.
  Full-faced above the valley stood the moon; [1]
  And like a downward smoke, the slender stream
  Along the cliff to fall and pause and fall did seem.

  A land of streams! some, like a downward smoke,
  Slow-dropping veils of thinnest lawn, did go;
  And some thro' wavering lights and shadows broke,
  Rolling a slumbrous sheet of foam below.
  They saw the gleaming river seaward flow [2]
  From the inner land: far off, three mountain-tops,
  Three silent pinnacles of aged snow, [3]
  Stood sunset-flush'd: and, dew'd with showery drops,
  Up-clomb the shadowy pine above the woven copse.

  The charmed sunset linger'd low adown
  In the red West: thro' mountain clefts the dale
  Was seen far inland, and the yellow down
  Border'd with palm, and many a winding vale
  And meadow, set with slender galingale;
  A land where all things always seem'd the same!
  And round about the keel with faces pale,
  Dark faces pale against that rosy flame,
  The mild-eyed melancholy Lotos-eaters came.

  Branches they bore of that enchanted stem,
  Laden with flower and fruit, whereof they gave
  To each, but whoso did receive of them,
  And taste, to him the gushing of the wave
  Far far away did seem to mourn and rave
  On alien shores; and if his fellow spake,
  His voice was thin, as voices from the grave;
  And deep-asleep he seem'd, yet all awake,
  And music in his ears his beating heart did make.

  They sat them down upon the yellow sand,
  Between the sun and moon upon the shore;
  And sweet it was to dream of Father-land,
  Of child, and wife, and slave; but evermore
  Most weary seem'd the sea, weary the oar,
  Weary the wandering fields of barren foam.
  Then some one said, "We will return no more";
  And all at once they sang, "Our island home
  Is far beyond the wave; we will no longer roam".


[Footnote 1: 1883. Above the valley burned the golden moon.]

[Footnote 2: 1883. River's seaward flow.]

[Footnote 3: 1833. Three thunder-cloven thrones of oldest snow.]



  CHORIC SONG

  1

    There is sweet music here that softer falls
    Than petals from blown roses on the grass,
    Or night-dews on still waters between walls
    Of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass;
    Music that gentlier on the spirit lies,
    Than tir'd eyelids upon tir'd eyes;
    Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissful skies.
    Here are cool mosses deep,
    And thro' the moss the ivies creep,
    And in the stream the long-leaved flowers weep,
    And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep.


  2

    Why are we weigh'd upon with heaviness,
    And utterly consumed with sharp distress,
    While all things else have rest from weariness?
    All things have rest: why should we toil alone,
    We only toil, who are the first of things,
    And make perpetual moan,
    Still from one sorrow to another thrown:
    Nor ever fold our wings,
    And cease from wanderings,
    Nor steep our brows in slumber's holy balm;
    Nor harken what the inner spirit sings,
    "There is no joy but calm!"
    Why should we only toil, the roof and crown of things?


  3

    Lo! in the middle of the wood,
    The folded leaf is woo'd from out the bud
    With winds upon the branch, and there
    Grows green and broad, and takes no care,
    Sun-steep'd at noon, and in the moon
    Nightly dew-fed; and turning yellow
    Falls, and floats adown the air.
    Lo! sweeten'd with the summer light,
    The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
    Drops in a silent autumn night.
    All its allotted length of days,
    The flower ripens in its place,
    Ripens and fades, and falls, and hath no toil,
    Fast-rooted in the fruitful soil.


  4

    Hateful is the dark-blue sky,
    Vaulted o'er the dark-blue sea. [1]
    Death is the end of life; ah, why
    Should life all labour be?
    Let us alone.
    Time driveth onward fast,
    And in a little while our lips are dumb.
    Let us alone.
    What is it that will last?
    All things are taken from us, and become
    Portions and parcels of the dreadful Past.
    Let us alone.
    What pleasure can we have
    To war with evil? Is there any peace
    In ever climbing up the climbing wave? [2]
    All things have rest, and ripen toward the grave [3]
    In silence; ripen, fall and cease:
    Give us long rest or death, dark death, or dreamful ease.


  5

    How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream,
    With half-shut eyes ever to seem
    Falling asleep in a half-dream!
    To dream and dream, like yonder amber light,
    Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height;
    To hear each other's whisper'd speech:
    Eating the Lotos day by day,
    To watch the crisping ripples on the beach,
    And tender curving lines of creamy spray;
    To lend our hearts and spirits wholly
    To the influence of mild-minded melancholy;
    To muse and brood and live again in memory,
    With those [4] old faces of our infancy
    Heap'd over with a mound of grass,
    Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass!


  6

    Dear is the memory of our wedded lives,
    And dear the last embraces of our wives
    And their warm tears: but all hath suffer'd change;
    For surely now our household hearths are cold:
    Our sons inherit us: our looks are strange:
    And we should come like ghosts to trouble joy.
    Or else the island princes over-bold
    Have eat our substance, and the minstrel sings
    Before them of the ten-years' war in Troy,
    And our great deeds, as half-forgotten things.
    Is there confusion in the little isle? [5]
    Let what is broken so remain.
    The Gods are hard to reconcile:
    'Tis hard to settle order once again.
    There 'is' confusion worse than death,
    Trouble on trouble, pain on pain,
    Long labour unto aged breath,
    Sore task to hearts worn out with [6] many wars
    And eyes grow dim with gazing on the pilot-stars.[7]


  7

    But, propt on beds [8] of amaranth and moly,
    How sweet (while warm airs lull us, blowing lowly)
    With half-dropt eyelids still,
    Beneath a heaven dark and holy,
    To watch the long bright river drawing slowly
    His waters from the purple hill--
    To hear the dewy echoes calling
    From cave to cave thro' the thick-twined vine--
    To watch [9] the emerald-colour'd water falling
    Thro' many a wov'n acanthus-wreath divine!
    Only to hear and see the far-off sparkling brine,
    Only to hear were sweet, stretch'd out beneath the pine.


  8

    The Lotos blooms below the barren peak: [9]
    The Lotos blows by every winding creek:
    All day the wind breathes low with mellower tone:
    Thro' every hollow cave and alley lone
    Round and round the spicy downs the yellow Lotos-dust is blown.
    We have had enough of action, and of motion we,
    Roll'd to starboard, roll'd to larboard, when the surge was seething
      free,
    Where the wallowing monster spouted his foam-fountains in the sea.
    Let us swear an oath, and keep it with an equal mind,
    In the hollow Lotos-land to live and lie reclined
    On the hills like Gods together, careless of mankind.
    For they lie beside their nectar, and the bolts are hurl'd
    Far below them in the valleys, and the clouds are lightly curl'd
    Round their golden houses, girdled with the gleaming world:
    Where they smile in secret, looking over wasted lands,
    Blight and famine, plague and earthquake, roaring deeps and fiery
      sands,
    Clanging fights, and flaming towns, and sinking ships and praying
      hands.
    But they smile, they find a music centred in a doleful song
    Steaming up, a lamentation and an ancient tale of wrong,
    Like a tale of little meaning tho' the words are strong;
    Chanted from an ill-used race of men that cleave the soil,
    Sow the seed, and reap the harvest with enduring toil,
    Storing yearly little dues of wheat, and wine and oil;
    Till they perish and they suffer--some,'tis whisper'd--down in hell
    Suffer endless anguish, others in Elysian valleys dwell,
    Resting weary limbs at last on beds of asphodel.
    Surely, surely, slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore
    Than labour in the deep mid-ocean, wind and wave and oar;
    Oh rest ye, brother mariners, we will not wander more. [10]



[Footnote 1: 'Cf.' Virgil, AEn., iv., 451:--

  Tdet cli convexa tueri.

Paraphrased from Moschus, 'Idyll', v., 11-15.]


[Footnote 2: For climbing up the wave 'cf.' Virgil, 'AEn.',
i., 381: "Conscendi navilus quor," and 'cf.' generally Bion,
'Idyll', v., 11-15.]

[Footnote 3: From Moschus, 'Idyll', v.,'passim'.

[Footnote 4: 1833. The.]

[Footnote 5: The little isle, 'i. e.', Ithaca.]

[Footnote 6: 1863 By.]

[Footnote 7: Added in 1842.]

[Footnote 8: 1833. Or, propt on lavish beds.]

[Footnote 9: 1833 to 1850 inclusive. Hear.]

[Footnote 10: 1833 to 1850 inclusive. Flowery peak.]

[Footnote 11: In 1833 we have the following, which in 1842 was excised
and the present text substituted:--

  We have had enough of motion,
  Weariness and wild alarm,
  Tossing on the tossing ocean,
  Where the tusked sea-horse walloweth
  In a stripe of grass-green calm,
  At noontide beneath the lee;
  And the monstrous narwhale swalloweth
  His foam-fountains in the sea.
  Long enough the wine-dark wave our weary bark did carry.
  This is lovelier and sweeter,
  Men of Ithaca, this is meeter,
  In the hollow rosy vale to tarry,
  Like a dreamy Lotos-eater, a delirious Lotos-eater!
  We will eat the Lotos, sweet
  As the yellow honeycomb,
  In the valley some, and some
  On the ancient heights divine;
  And no more roam,
  On the loud hoar foam,
  To the melancholy home
  At the limit of the brine,
  The little isle of Ithaca, beneath the day's decline.
  We'll lift no more the shattered oar,
  No more unfurl the straining sail;
  With the blissful Lotos-eaters pale
  We will abide in the golden vale
  Of the Lotos-land till the Lotos fail;
  We will not wander more.
  Hark! how sweet the horned ewes bleat
  On the solitary steeps,
  And the merry lizard leaps,
  And the foam-white waters pour;
  And the dark pine weeps,
  And the lithe vine creeps,
  And the heavy melon sleeps
  On the level of the shore:
  Oh! islanders of Ithaca, we will not wander more,
  Surely, surely slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore
  Than labour in the ocean, and rowing with the oar,
  Oh! islanders of Ithaca, we will return no more.

The fine picture in the text of the gods of Epicurus was no doubt
immediately suggested by 'Lucretius', iii., 15 'seq.', while the
'Icaromenippus' of Lucian furnishes an excellent commentary on
Tennyson's picture of those gods and what they see. 'Cf.' too the Song
of the Parcae in Goethe's 'Iphigenie auf Tauris', iv., 5.]






A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN

First published in 1833 but very extensively altered on its
republication in 1842. It had been written by June, 1832, and appears to
have been originally entitled 'Legend of Fair Women' (see Spedding's
letter dated 21st June, 1832, 'Life', i., 116). In nearly every edition
between 1833 and 1853 it was revised, and perhaps no poem proves more
strikingly the scrupulous care which Tennyson took to improve what he
thought susceptible of improvement. The work which inspired it,
Chaucer's 'Legend of Good Women', was written about 1384, thus
"preluding" by nearly two hundred years the "spacious times of great
Elizabeth". There is no resemblance between the poems beyond the fact
that both are visions and both have as their heroines illustrious women
who have been unfortunate. Cleopatra is the only one common to the two
poems. Tennyson's is an exquisite work of art--the transition from the
anarchy of dreams to the dreamland landscape and to the sharply denned
figures--the skill with which the heroines (what could be more perfect
that Cleopatra and Jephtha's daughter?) are chosen and contrasted--the
wonderful way in which the Iphigenia of Euripides and Lucretius and the
Cleopatra of Shakespeare are realised are alike admirable. The poem
opened in 1833 with the following strangely irrelevant verses, excised
in 1842, which as Fitzgerald observed "make a perfect poem by themselves
without affecting the 'dream '":--

    As when a man, that sails in a balloon,
    Downlooking sees the solid shining ground
    Stream from beneath him in the broad blue noon,
    Tilth, hamlet, mead and mound:

    And takes his flags and waves them to the mob,
    That shout below, all faces turned to where
    Glows ruby-like the far up crimson globe,
    Filled with a finer air:

    So lifted high, the Poet at his will
    Lets the great world flit from him, seeing all,
    Higher thro' secret splendours mounting still,
    Self-poised, nor fears to fall.



  Hearing apart the echoes of his fame.
  While I spoke thus, the seedsman, memory,
  Sowed my deepfurrowed thought with many a name,
  Whose glory will not die.

  I read, before my eyelids dropt their shade,
  "The Legend of Good Women," long ago
  Sung by the morning star [1] of song, who made
  His music heard below;

  Dan Chaucer, the first warbler, whose sweet breath
  Preluded those melodious bursts, that fill
  The spacious times of great Elizabeth
  With sounds that echo still.

  And, for a while, the knowledge of his art
  Held me above the subject, as strong gales
  Hold swollen clouds from raining, tho' my heart,
  Brimful of those wild tales,

  Charged both mine eyes with tears.
  In every land I saw, wherever light illumineth,
  Beauty and anguish walking hand in hand
  The downward slope to death. [2]

  Those far-renowned brides of ancient song
  Peopled the hollow dark, like burning stars,
  And I heard sounds of insult, shame, and wrong,
  And trumpets blown for wars;

  And clattering flints batter'd with clanging hoofs:
  And I saw crowds in column'd sanctuaries;
  And forms that pass'd [3] at windows and on roofs
  Of marble palaces;

  Corpses across the threshold; heroes tall
  Dislodging pinnacle and parapet
  Upon the tortoise creeping to the wall; [4]
  Lances in ambush set;

  And high shrine-doors burst thro' with heated blasts
  That run before the fluttering tongues of fire;
  White surf wind-scatter'd over sails and masts,
  And ever climbing higher;

  Squadrons and squares of men in brazen plates,
  Scaffolds, still sheets of water, divers woes,
  Ranges of glimmering vaults with iron grates,
  And hush'd seraglios.

  So shape chased shape as swift as, when to land
  Bluster the winds and tides the self-same way,
  Crisp foam-flakes scud along the level sand,
  Torn from the fringe of spray.

  I started once, or seem'd to start in pain,
  Resolved on noble things, and strove to speak,
  As when a great thought strikes along the brain,
  And flushes all the cheek.

  And once my arm was lifted to hew down,
  A cavalier from off his saddle-bow,
  That bore a lady from a leaguer'd town;
  And then, I know not how,

  All those sharp fancies, by down-lapsing thought
  Stream'd onward, lost their edges, and did creep
  Roll'd on each other, rounded, smooth'd and brought
  Into the gulfs of sleep.

  At last methought that I had wander'd far
  In an old wood: fresh-wash'd in coolest dew,
  The maiden splendours of the morning star
  Shook in the steadfast [5] blue.

  Enormous elmtree-boles did stoop and lean
  Upon the dusky brushwood underneath
  Their broad curved branches, fledged with clearest green,
  New from its silken sheath.

  The dim red morn had died, her journey done,
  And with dead lips smiled at the twilight plain,
  Half-fall'n across the threshold of the sun,
  Never to rise again.

  There was no motion in the dumb dead air,
  Not any song of bird or sound of rill;
  Gross darkness of the inner sepulchre
  Is not so deadly still

  As that wide forest.
  Growths of jasmine turn'd
  Their humid arms festooning tree to tree, [6]
  And at the root thro' lush green grasses burn'd
  The red anemone.

  I knew the flowers, I knew the leaves, I knew
  The tearful glimmer of the languid dawn
  On those long, rank, dark wood-walks, drench'd in dew,
  Leading from lawn to lawn.

  The smell of violets, hidden in the green,
  Pour'd back into my empty soul and frame
  The times when I remember to have been
  Joyful and free from blame.

  And from within me a clear under-tone
  Thrill'd thro' mine ears in that unblissful clime
  "Pass freely thro': the wood is all thine own,
  Until the end of time".

  At length I saw a lady [7] within call,
  Stiller than chisell'd marble, standing there;
  A daughter of the gods, divinely tall, [8]
  And most divinely fair.

  Her loveliness with shame and with surprise
  Froze my swift speech: she turning on my face
  The star-like sorrows of immortal eyes,
  Spoke slowly in her place.

  "I had great beauty: ask thou not my name:
  No one can be more wise than destiny.
  Many drew swords and died.
  Where'er I came I brought calamity."

  "No marvel, sovereign lady [9]: in fair field
  Myself for such a face had boldly died," [10]
  I answer'd free; and turning I appeal'd
  To one [11] that stood beside.

  But she, with sick and scornful looks averse,
  To her full height her stately stature draws;
  "My youth," she said, "was blasted with a curse:
  This woman was the cause.

  "I was cut off from hope in that sad place, [12]
  Which yet to name my spirit loathes and fears: [13]
  My father held his hand upon his face;
  I, blinded with my tears,

  "Still strove to speak: my voice was thick with sighs
  As in a dream. Dimly I could descry
  The stern black-bearded kings with wolfish eyes,
  Waiting to see me die.

  "The high masts flicker'd as they lay afloat;
  The crowds, the temples, waver'd, and the shore;
  The bright death quiver'd at the victim's throat;
  Touch'd; and I knew no more." [14]

  Whereto the other with a downward brow:
  "I would the white cold heavy-plunging foam, [15]
  Whirl'd by the wind, had roll'd me deep below,
  Then when I left my home."

  Her slow full words sank thro' the silence drear,
  As thunder-drops fall on a sleeping sea:
  Sudden I heard a voice that cried, "Come here,
  That I may look on thee".

  I turning saw, throned on a flowery rise,
  One sitting on a crimson scarf unroll'd;
  A queen, with swarthy cheeks [16] and bold black eyes,
  Brow-bound with burning gold.

  She, flashing forth a haughty smile, began:
  "I govern'd men by change, and so I sway'd
  All moods. Tis long since I have seen a man.
  Once, like the moon, I made

  "The ever-shifting currents of the blood
  According to my humour ebb and flow.
  I have no men to govern in this wood:
  That makes my only woe.

  "Nay--yet it chafes me that I could not bend
  One will; nor tame and tutor with mine eye
  That dull cold-blooded Caesar. Prythee, friend,
  Where is Mark Antony? [17]

  "The man, my lover, with whom I rode sublime
  On Fortune's neck: we sat as God by God:
  The Nilus would have risen before his time
  And flooded at our nod. [18]

  "We drank the Libyan [19] Sun to sleep, and lit
  Lamps which outburn'd Canopus. O my life In Egypt!
  O the dalliance and the wit,
  The flattery and the strife, [20]

  "And the wild kiss, when fresh from war's alarms, [21]
  My Hercules, my Roman Antony,
  My maild Bacchus leapt into my arms,
  Contented there to die!

  "And there he died: and when I heard my name
  Sigh'd forth with life, I would not brook my fear [22]
  Of the other: with a worm I balk'd his fame.
  What else was left? look here!"

  (With that she tore her robe apart, and half
  The polish'd argent of her breast to sight
  Laid bare. Thereto she pointed with a laugh,
  Showing the aspick's bite.)

  "I died a Queen. The Roman soldier found [23]
  Me lying dead, my crown about my brows,
  A name for ever!--lying robed and crown'd,
  Worthy a Roman spouse."

  Her warbling voice, a lyre of widest range
  Struck [24] by all passion, did fall down and glance
  From tone to tone, and glided thro' all change
  Of liveliest utterance.

  When she made pause I knew not for delight;
  Because with sudden motion from the ground
  She raised her piercing orbs, and fill'd with light
  The interval of sound.

  Still with their fires Love tipt his keenest darts;
  As once they drew into two burning rings
  All beams of Love, melting the mighty hearts
  Of captains and of kings.

  Slowly my sense undazzled. Then I heard
  A noise of some one coming thro' the lawn,
  And singing clearer than the crested bird,
  That claps his wings at dawn.

  "The torrent brooks of hallow'd Israel
  From craggy hollows pouring, late and soon,
  Sound all night long, in falling thro' the dell,
  Far-heard beneath the moon.

  "The balmy moon of blessed Israel
  Floods all the deep-blue gloom with beams divine:
  All night the splinter'd crags that wall the dell
  With spires of silver shine."

  As one that museth where broad sunshine laves
  The lawn by some cathedral, thro' the door
  Hearing the holy organ rolling waves
  Of sound on roof and floor,

  Within, and anthem sung, is charm'd and tied
  To where he stands,--so stood I, when that flow
  Of music left the lips of her that died
  To save her father's vow;

  The daughter of the warrior Gileadite, [25]
  A maiden pure; as when she went along
  From Mizpeh's tower'd gate with welcome light,
  With timbrel and with song.

  My words leapt forth: "Heaven heads the count of crimes
  With that wild oath". She render'd answer high:
  "Not so, nor once alone; a thousand times
  I would be born and die.

  "Single I grew, like some green plant, whose root
  Creeps to the garden water-pipes beneath,
  Feeding the flower; but ere my flower to fruit
  Changed, I was ripe for death.

  "My God, my land, my father--these did move
  Me from my bliss of life, that Nature gave,
  Lower'd softly with a threefold cord of love
  Down to a silent grave.

  "And I went mourning, 'No fair Hebrew boy
  Shall smile away my maiden blame among
  The Hebrew mothers'--emptied of all joy,
  Leaving the dance and song,

  "Leaving the olive-gardens far below,
  Leaving the promise of my bridal bower,
  The valleys of grape-loaded vines that glow
  Beneath the battled tower

  "The light white cloud swam over us. Anon
  We heard the lion roaring from his den; [26]
  We saw the large white stars rise one by one,
  Or, from the darken'd glen,

  "Saw God divide the night with flying flame,
  And thunder on the everlasting hills.
  I heard Him, for He spake, and grief became
  A solemn scorn of ills.

  "When the next moon was roll'd into the sky,
  Strength came to me that equall'd my desire.
  How beautiful a thing it was to die
  For God and for my sire!

  "It comforts me in this one thought to dwell,
  That I subdued me to my father's will;
  Because the kiss he gave me, ere I fell,
  Sweetens the spirit still.

  "Moreover it is written that my race
  Hew'd Ammon, hip and thigh, from Aroer [27]
  On Arnon unto Minneth." Here her face
  Glow'd, as I look'd at her.

  She lock'd her lips: she left me where I stood:
  "Glory to God," she sang, and past afar,
  Thridding the sombre boskage of the wood,
  Toward the morning-star.

  Losing her carol I stood pensively,
  As one that from a casement leans his head,
  When midnight bells cease ringing suddenly,
  And the old year is dead.

  "Alas! alas!" a low voice, full of care,
  Murmur'd beside me: "Turn and look on me:
  I am that Rosamond, whom men call fair,
  If what I was I be.

  "Would I had been some maiden coarse and poor!
  O me, that I should ever see the light!
  Those dragon eyes of anger'd Eleanor
  Do haunt me, day and night."

  She ceased in tears, fallen from hope and trust:
  To whom the Egyptian: "O, you tamely died!
  You should have clung to Fulvia's waist, and thrust
  The dagger thro' her side".

  With that sharp sound the white dawn's creeping beams,
  Stol'n to my brain, dissolved the mystery
  Of folded sleep. The captain of my dreams
  Ruled in the eastern sky.

  Morn broaden'd on the borders of the dark,
  Ere I saw her, who clasp'd in her last trance
  Her murder'd father's head, or Joan of Arc, [28]
  A light of ancient France;

  Or her, who knew that Love can vanquish Death,
  Who kneeling, with one arm about her king,
  Drew forth the poison with her balmy breath, [29]
  Sweet as new buds in Spring.

  No memory labours longer from the deep
  Gold-mines of thought to lift the hidden ore
  That glimpses, moving up, than I from sleep
  To gather and tell o'er

  Each little sound and sight. With what dull pain
  Compass'd, how eagerly I sought to strike
  Into that wondrous track of dreams again!
  But no two dreams are like.

  As when a soul laments, which hath been blest,
  Desiring what is mingled with past years,
  In yearnings that can never be exprest
  By sighs or groans or tears;

  Because all words, tho' cull'd [30] with choicest art,
  Failing to give the bitter of the sweet,
  Wither beneath the palate, and the heart
  Faints, faded by its heat.




[Footnote 1: Suggested apparently by Denham, 'Verses on Cowley's
Death':--

  Old Chaucer, like the morning star
  To us discovers
  Day from far.]


[Footnote 2: Here follow in 1833 two stanzas excised in 1842:--

  In every land I thought that, more or less,
  The stronger sterner nature overbore
  The softer, uncontrolled by gentleness
  And selfish evermore:

  And whether there were any means whereby,
  In some far aftertime, the gentler mind
  Might reassume its just and full degree
  Of rule among mankind.]


[Footnote 3: 1833. Screamed.]

[Footnote 4: The Latin 'testudo' formed of the shields of soldiers
held over their heads.]

[Footnote 5: 1883 to 1848 inclusive. Stedfast.]

[Footnote 6: 1833.

  Clasping jasmine turned
  Its twined arms festooning tree to tree.

Altered to present reading, 1842.]


[Footnote 7: A lady, i.e., Helen.]

[Footnote 8: Tennyson has here noticed what is so often emphasised by
Greek writers, that tallness was a great beauty in women. See Aristotle,
'Ethics', iv., 3, and Homer, 'passim, Odyssey', viii., 416;
xviii., 190 and 248; xxi., 6. So Xenophon in describing Panthea
emphasises her tallness, 'Cyroped.', v.]

[Footnote 9: 1883. Sovran lady.]

[Footnote 10: As the old men say, 'Iliad', iii., 156-8.]

[Footnote 11: The one is Iphigenia.]

[Footnote 12: Aulis.]

[Footnote 13: It was not till 1884 that this line was altered to the
reading of the final edition, 'i.e.', "Which men called Aulis in
those iron years". For the "iron years" of that reading 'cf.'
Thomson, 'Spring', 384, "'iron' times".]

[Footnote 14: From 1833 till 1853 this stanza ran:--

  "The tall masts quivered as they lay afloat,
  The temples and the people and the shore,
  One drew a sharp knife thro' my tender throat
  Slowly,--and nothing more".

It is curious that Tennyson should have allowed the last line to stand
so long; possibly it may have been to defy Lockhart's sarcastic
commentary: "What touching simplicity, what pathetic resignation--he cut
my throat, nothing more!" With Tennyson's picture should be compared
schylus, 'Agamem.', 225-49, and Lucretius, i., 85-100. For the bold and
picturesque substitution of the effect for the cause in the "bright
death quiver'd" 'cf.' Sophocles, 'Electra', 1395,

  [Greek: 'neakonaeton aima cheiroin ech_on,']

"with the newly-whetted blood on his hands". So "vulnus" is frequently
used by Virgil, and 'cf.' Silius Italicus, 'Punica', ix.,
368-9:--

  Per pectora 'svas'
  Exceptat 'mortes'.]



[Footnote 15: She expresses the same wish in 'Iliad', iii., 73-4.]

[Footnote 16: Cleopatra. The skill with which Tennyson has here given us,
in quintessence as it were, Shakespeare's superb creation needs no
commentary, but it is somewhat surprising to find an accurate scholar
like Tennyson guilty of the absurdity of representing Cleopatra as of
gipsy complexion. The daughter of Ptolemy Aulates and a lady of Pontus,
she was of Greek descent, and had no taint at all of African
intermixtures. See Peacock's remarks in 'Gryll Grange', p. 206, 7th
edit., 1861.]

[Footnote 17: After this in 1833 and in 1842 are the following stanzas,
afterwards excised:--

  "By him great Pompey dwarfs and suffers pain,
  A mortal man before immortal Mars;
  The glories of great Julius lapse and wane,
  And shrink from suns to stars.

  "That man of all the men I ever knew
  Most touched my fancy.
  O! what days and nights
  We had in Egypt, ever reaping new
  Harvest of ripe delights.

  "Realm-draining revels! Life was one long feast,
  What wit! what words! what sweet words, only made
  Less sweet by the kiss that broke 'em, liking best
  To be so richly stayed!

  "What dainty strifes, when fresh from war's alarms,
  My Hercules, my gallant Antony,
  My mailed captain leapt into my arms,
  Contented there to die!

  "And in those arms he died: I heard my name
  Sighed forth with life: then I shook off all fear:
  Oh, what a little snake stole Caesar's fame!
  What else was left? look here!"

  "With that she tore her robe apart," etc.]


[Footnote l8: This stanza was added in 1843.]

[Footnote 19: 1845-1848. Lybian.]

[Footnote 20: Added in 1845 as a substitute for

"What nights we had in Egypt! I could hit
His humours while I crossed them:
O the life I led him, and the dalliance and the wit,
The flattery and the strife,

which is the reading of 1843. Canopus is a star in Argo, not visible in
the West, but a conspicuous feature in the sky when seen from Egypt, as
Pliny notices, 'Hist. Nat.', vi., xxiv. "Fatentes Canopum noctibus
sidus ingens et clarum". 'Cf.' Manilius, 'Astron.', i.,
216-17, "Nusquam invenies fulgere Canopum donec Niliacas per pontum
veneris oras," and Lucan, 'Pharsal.', viii., 181-3.]

[Footnote 21: Substituted in 1843 for the reading of 1833 and 1842.]

[Footnote 22: Substituted in 1845 for
the reading of 1833, 1842, 1843, which ran as recorded 'supra'.
1845 to 1848. Lybian. And for the reading of 1843

  Sigh'd forth with life I had no further fear,
  O what a little worm stole Caesar's fame!]

[Footnote 23: A splendid transfusion of Horace's lines about her, Ode I.,
xxxvii.

  Invidens Privata deduci superto
  Non humilis mulier triumpho.]


[Footnote 24: 1833 and 1842. Touched.]

[Footnote 25: For the story of Jephtha's daughter see Judges, chap. xi.]

[Footnote 26: All editions up to and including 1851. In his den.]

[Footnote 27: For reference see Judges xi, 33.]

[Footnote 28: 1833.

Ere I saw her, that in her latest trance
Clasped her dead father's heart, or Joan of Arc.

The reference is, of course, to the well-known story of Margaret Roper,
the daughter of Sir Thomas More, who is said to have taken his head when
he was executed and preserved it till her death.]

[Footnote 29: Eleanor, the wife of Edward I., is said to have thus saved
his life when he was stabbed at Acre with a poisoned dagger.]

[Footnote 30: The earliest and latest editions, 'i.e.', 1833 and
1853, have "tho'," and all the editions between "though". "Though
culled," etc.]






MARGARET

First printed in 1833.

Another of Tennyson's delicious fancy portraits, the twin sister to
Adeline.


  1

  O sweet pale Margaret,
  O rare pale Margaret,
  What lit your eyes with tearful power,
  Like moonlight on a falling shower?
  Who lent you, love, your mortal dower
  Of pensive thought and aspect pale,
  Your melancholy sweet and frail
  As perfume of the cuckoo-flower?
  From the westward-winding flood,
  From the evening-lighted wood,
  From all things outward you have won
  A tearful grace, as tho' [1] you stood
  Between the rainbow and the sun.
  The very smile before you speak,
  That dimples your transparent cheek,
  Encircles all the heart, and feedeth
  The senses with a still delight
  Of dainty sorrow without sound,
  Like the tender amber round,
  Which the moon about her spreadeth,
  Moving thro' a fleecy night.


  2

  You love, remaining peacefully,
  To hear the murmur of the strife,
  But enter not the toil of life.
  Your spirit is the calmed sea,
  Laid by the tumult of the fight.
  You are the evening star, alway
  Remaining betwixt dark and bright:
  Lull'd echoes of laborious day
  Come to you, gleams of mellow light
  Float by you on the verge of night.


  3

  What can it matter, Margaret,
  What songs below the waning stars
  The lion-heart, Plantagenet, [2]
  Sang looking thro' his prison bars?
  Exquisite Margaret, who can tell
  The last wild thought of Chatelet, [3]
  Just ere the falling axe did part
  The burning brain from the true heart,
  Even in her sight he loved so well?


  4

  A fairy shield your Genius made
  And gave you on your natal day.
  Your sorrow, only sorrow's shade,
  Keeps real sorrow far away.
  You move not in such solitudes,
  You are not less divine,
  But more human in your moods,
  Than your twin-sister, Adeline.
  Your hair is darker, and your eyes
  Touch'd with a somewhat darker hue,
  And less aerially blue,
  But ever trembling thro' the dew [4]
  Of dainty-woeful sympathies.


  5

  O sweet pale Margaret,
  O rare pale Margaret,
  Come down, come down, and hear me speak:
  Tie up the ringlets on your cheek:
  The sun is just about to set.
  The arching lines are tall and shady,
  And faint, rainy lights are seen,
  Moving in the leavy beech.
  Rise from the feast of sorrow, lady,
  Where all day long you sit between
  Joy and woe, and whisper each.
  Or only look across the lawn,
  Look out below your bower-eaves,
  Look down, and let your blue eyes dawn
  Upon me thro' the jasmine-leaves. [5]


[Footnote 1: All editions except 1833 and 1853. Though.]

[Footnote 2: 1833. Lion-souled Plantagenet. For songs supposed to have
been composed by Richard I. during the time of his captivity see
Sismondi, 'Littrature du Midi de l'Europe', vol. i., p. 149, and
'La Tour Tnbreuse' (1705), which contains a poem said to have
been written by Richard and Blondel in mixed Romance and Provenal, and
a love-song in Norman French, which have frequently been reprinted. See,
too, Barney's 'Hist. of Music', vol. ii., p. 238, and Walpole's
'Royal and Noble Authors', sub.-tit. "Richard I.," and the fourth
volume of Reynouard's 'Choix des Posies des Troubadours'. All
these poems are probably spurious.]

[Footnote 3: Chatelet was a poet-squire in the suite of the Marshal
Damville, who was executed for a supposed intrigue with Mary Queen of
Scots. See Tytler, 'History of Scotland', vi., p. 319, and Mr.
Swinburne's tragedy.]

[Footnote 4: 1833.

And more aerially blue,
And ever trembling thro' the dew.]


[Footnote 5: 1833. Jasmin-leaves.]







THE BLACKBIRD.

Not in 1833.

This is another poem placed among the poems of 1833, but not printed
till 1842.

O blackbird! sing me something well:
While all the neighbours shoot thee round,
I keep smooth plats of fruitful ground,
Where thou may'st warble, eat and dwell.

  The espaliers and the standards all
  Are thine; the range of lawn and park:
  The unnetted black-hearts ripen dark,
  All thine, against the garden wall.

  Yet, tho' I spared thee all the spring, [1]
  Thy sole delight is, sitting still,
  With that gold dagger of thy bill
  To fret the summer jenneting. [2]

  A golden bill! the silver tongue,
  Cold February loved, is dry:
  Plenty corrupts the melody
  That made thee famous once, when young:

  And in the sultry garden-squares, [3]
  Now thy flute-notes are changed to coarse,
  I hear thee not at all, [4] or hoarse
  As when a hawker hawks his wares.

  Take warning! he that will not sing
  While yon sun prospers in the blue,
  Shall sing for want, ere leaves are new,
  Caught in the frozen palms of Spring.


[Footnote 1: 1842. Yet, though I spared thee kith and kin. And so till
1853, when it was altered to the present reading.]

[Footnote 2: 1842 to 1851. Jennetin, altered in 1853 to present
reading.]

[Footnote 3: 1842. I better brook the drawling stares. Altered, 1843.]

[Footnote 4: 1842. Not hearing thee at all. Altered, 1843.]




THE DEATH OF THE OLD YEAR

First printed in 1833.

Only one alteration has been made in this poem, in line 41, where in
1842 "one' was altered to" twelve ".

  Full knee-deep lies the winter snow,
  And the winter winds are wearily sighing:
  Toll ye the church-bell sad and slow,
  And tread softly and speak low,
  For the old year lies a-dying.
  Old year, you must not die;
  You came to us so readily,
  You lived with us so steadily,
  Old year, you shall not die.

  He lieth still: he doth not move:
  He will not see the dawn of day.
  He hath no other life above.
  He gave me a friend, and a true, true-love,
  And the New-year will take 'em away.
  Old year, you must not go;
  So long as you have been with us,
  Such joy as you have seen with us,
  Old year, you shall not go.

  He froth'd his bumpers to the brim;
  A jollier year we shall not see.
  But tho' his eyes are waxing dim,
  And tho' his foes speak ill of him,
  He was a friend to me.
  Old year, you shall not die;
  We did so laugh and cry with you,
  I've half a mind to die with you,
  Old year, if you must die.

  He was full of joke and jest,
  But all his merry quips are o'er.
  To see him die, across the waste
  His son and heir doth ride post-haste,
  But he'll be dead before.
  Every one for his own.
  The night is starry and cold, my friend,
  And the New-year blithe and bold, my friend,
  Comes up to take his own.

  How hard he breathes! over the snow
  I heard just now the crowing cock.
  The shadows flicker to and fro:
  The cricket chirps: the light burns low:
  'Tis nearly twelve [1] o'clock.
  Shake hands, before you die.
  Old year, we'll dearly rue for you:
  What is it we can do for you?
  Speak out before you die.

  His face is growing sharp and thin.
  Alack! our friend is gone.
  Close up his eyes: tie up his chin:
  Step from the corpse, and let him in
  That standeth there alone,
  And waiteth at the door.
  There's a new foot on the floor, my friend,
  And a new face at the door, my friend,
  A new face at the door.


[Footnote 1: 1833. One.]





TO J. S.

First published in 1833.

This beautiful poem was addressed to James Spedding on the death of his
brother Edward.

  The wind, that beats the mountain, blows
  More softly round the open wold, [1]
  And gently comes the world to those
  That are cast in gentle mould.

  And me this knowledge bolder made,
  Or else I had not dared to flow [2]
  In these words toward you, and invade
  Even with a verse your holy woe.

  'Tis strange that those we lean on most,
  Those in whose laps our limbs are nursed,
  Fall into shadow, soonest lost:
  Those we love first are taken first.

  God gives us love. Something to love
  He lends us; but, when love is grown
  To ripeness, that on which it throve
  Falls off, and love is left alone.

  This is the curse of time. Alas!
  In grief I am not all unlearn'd;
  Once thro' mine own doors Death did pass; [3]
  One went, who never hath return'd.

  He will not smile--nor speak to me
  Once more. Two years his chair is seen
  Empty before us. That was he
  Without whose life I had not been.

  Your loss is rarer; for this star
  Rose with you thro' a little arc
  Of heaven, nor having wander'd far
  Shot on the sudden into dark.

  I knew your brother: his mute dust
  I honour and his living worth:
  A man more pure and bold [4] and just
  Was never born into the earth.

  I have not look'd upon you nigh,
  Since that dear soul hath fall'n asleep.
  Great Nature is more wise than I:
  I will not tell you not to weep.

  And tho' mine own eyes fill with dew,
  Drawn from the spirit thro' the brain, [5]
  I will not even preach to you,
  "Weep, weeping dulls the inward pain".

  Let Grief be her own mistress still.
  She loveth her own anguish deep
  More than much pleasure. Let her will
  Be done--to weep or not to weep.

  I will not say "God's ordinance
  Of Death is blown in every wind";
  For that is not a common chance
  That takes away a noble mind.

  His memory long will live alone
  In all our hearts, as mournful light
  That broods above the fallen sun, [6]
  And dwells in heaven half the night.

  Vain solace! Memory standing near
  Cast down her eyes, and in her throat
  Her voice seem'd distant, and a tear
  Dropt on the letters [7] as I wrote.

  I wrote I know not what. In truth,
  How _should_ I soothe you anyway,
  Who miss the brother of your youth?
  Yet something I did wish to say:

  For he too was a friend to me:
  Both are my friends, and my true breast
  Bleedeth for both; yet it may be
  That only [8] silence suiteth best.

  Words weaker than your grief would make
  Grief more. 'Twere better I should cease;
  Although myself could almost take [9]
  The place of him that sleeps in peace.

  Sleep sweetly, tender heart, in peace:
  Sleep, holy spirit, blessed soul,
  While the stars burn, the moons increase,
  And the great ages onward roll.

  Sleep till the end, true soul and sweet.
  Nothing comes to thee new or strange.
  Sleep full of rest from head to feet;
  Lie still, dry dust, secure of change.


[Footnote 1: Possibly suggested by Tasso, 'Gerus.', lib. xx., st.
lviii.:--

  Qual vento a cui s'oppone o selva o colle
  Doppa nella contesa i soffi e l' ira;
  Ma con fiato piu placido e pi molle
  Per le compagne libere poi spira.]


[Footnote 2: 1833.

  My heart this knowledge bolder made,
  Or else it had not dared to flow.

Altered in 1842.]


[Footnote 3: Tennyson's father died in March, 1831.]

[Footnote 4: 1833. Mild.]

[Footnote 5: 'Cf.' Gray's Alcaic stanza on West's death:--

  O lacrymarum fons tenero sacros
  'Ducentium ortus ex animo'.]


[Footnote 6: 1833. Sunken sun. Altered to present reading, 1842. The
image may have been suggested by Henry Vaughan, 'Beyond the Veil':--

  Their very memory is fair and bright,
  ...
  It glows and glitters in my cloudy breast Like stars
  ...
  Or those faint beams in which the hill is drest
  After the sun's remove.]


[Footnote 7: 1833, 1842, 1843. My tablets. This affected phrase was
altered to the present reading in 1845.]

[Footnote 8: 1833. Holy. Altered to "only," 1842.]

[Footnote 9: 1833. Altho' to calm you I would take. Altered to present
reading, 1842.]





"YOU ASK ME WHY, THO' ILL AT EASE..."

This is another poem which, though included among those belonging to
1833, was not published till 1842. It is an interesting illustration,
like the next poem but one, of Tennyson's political opinions; he was, he
said, "of the same politics as Shakespeare, Bacon and every sane man".
He was either ignorant of the politics of Shakespeare and Bacon or did
himself great injustice by the remark. It would have been more true to
say--for all his works illustrate it--that he was of the same politics
as Burke. He is here, and in all his poems, a Liberal-Conservative in
the proper sense of the term. At the time this trio of poems was written
England was passing through the throes which preceded, accompanied and
followed the Reform Bill, and the lessons which Tennyson preaches in
them were particularly appropriate. He belonged to the Liberal Party
rather in relation to social and religious than to political questions.
Thus he ardently supported the Anti-slavery Convention and advocated the
measure for abolishing subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles, but he
was, as a politician, on the side of Canning, Peel and the Duke of
Wellington, regarding as they did the new-born democracy with mingled
feelings of apprehension and perplexity. His exact attitude is indicated
by some verses written about this time published by his son ('Life', i.,
69-70). If Mr. Aubrey de Vere is correct this and the following poem
were occasioned by some popular demonstrations connected with the Reform
Bill and its rejection by the House of Lords. See 'Life of Tennyson',
vol. i., appendix.

  You ask me, why, tho' [1] ill at ease,
  Within this region I subsist,
  Whose spirits falter in the mist, [2]
  And languish for the purple seas?

  It is the land that freemen till,
  That sober-suited Freedom chose,
  The land, where girt with friends or foes
  A man may speak the thing he will;

  A land of settled government,
  A land of just and old renown,
  Where Freedom broadens slowly down
  From precedent to precedent:

  Where faction seldom gathers head,
  But by degrees to fulness wrought,
  The strength of some diffusive thought
  Hath time and space to work and spread.

  Should banded unions persecute
  Opinion, and induce a time
  When single thought is civil crime,
  And individual freedom mute;

  Tho' Power should make from land to land [3]
  The name of Britain trebly great--
  Tho' every channel [4] of the State
  Should almost choke with golden sand--

  Yet waft me from the harbour-mouth,
  Wild wind! I seek a warmer sky,
  And I will see before I die
  The palms and temples of the South.


[Footnote 1: 1842 and 1851. Though.]

[Footnote 2: 1842 to 1843. Whose spirits fail within the mist. Altered
to present reading in 1845.]

[Footnote 3: All editions up to and including 1851. Though Power, etc.]

[Footnote 4: 1842-1850. Though every channel.]







"OF OLD SAT FREEDOM ON THE HEIGHTS..."


First published in 1842, but it seems to have been written in 1834. The
fourth and fifth stanzas are given in a postscript of a letter from
Tennyson to James Spedding, dated 1834.

  Of old sat Freedom on the heights,
  The thunders breaking at her feet:
  Above her shook the starry lights:
  She heard the torrents meet.

  There in her place [1] she did rejoice,
  Self-gather'd in her prophet-mind,
  But fragments of her mighty voice
  Came rolling on the wind.

  Then stept she down thro' town and field
  To mingle with the human race,
  And part by part to men reveal'd
  The fullness of her face--

  Grave mother of majestic works,
  From her isle-altar gazing down,
  Who, God-like, grasps the triple forks, [2]
  And, King-like, wears the crown:

  Her open eyes desire the truth.
  The wisdom of a thousand years
  Is in them. May perpetual youth
  Keep dry their light from tears;

  That her fair form may stand and shine,
  Make bright our days and light our dreams,
  Turning to scorn with lips divine
  The falsehood of extremes!



[Footnote 1: 1842 to 1850 inclusive. Within her place. Altered to
present reading, 1850.]

[Footnote 2: The "trisulci ignes" or "trisulca tela" of the Roman
poets.]




"LOVE THOU THY LAND, WITH LOVE FAR-BROUGHT..."

First published in 1842.

This poem had been written by 1834, for Tennyson sends it in a letter
dated that year to James Spedding (see 'Life',, i., 173).

  Love thou thy land, with love far-brought
  From out the storied Past, and used
  Within the Present, but transfused
  Thro' future time by power of thought.

  True love turn'd round on fixed poles,
  Love, that endures not sordid ends,
  For English natures, freemen, friends,
  Thy brothers and immortal souls.

  But pamper not a hasty time,
  Nor feed with crude imaginings
  The herd, wild hearts and feeble wings,
  That every sophister can lime.

  Deliver not the tasks of might
  To weakness, neither hide the ray
  From those, not blind, who wait for day,
  Tho' [1] sitting girt with doubtful light.

  Make knowledge [2] circle with the winds;
  But let her herald, Reverence, fly
  Before her to whatever sky
  Bear seed of men and growth [3] of minds.

  Watch what main-currents draw the years:
  Cut Prejudice against the grain:
  But gentle words are always gain:
  Regard the weakness of thy peers:

  Nor toil for title, place, or touch
  Of pension, neither count on praise:
  It grows to guerdon after-days:
  Nor deal in watch-words overmuch;

  Not clinging to some ancient saw;
  Not master'd by some modern term;
  Not swift nor slow to change, but firm:
  And in its season bring the law;

  That from Discussion's lip may fall
  With Life, that, working strongly, binds--
  Set in all lights by many minds,
  To close the interests of all.

  For Nature also, cold and warm,
  And moist and dry, devising long,
  Thro' many agents making strong,
  Matures the individual form.

  Meet is it changes should control
  Our being, lest we rust in ease.
  We all are changed by still degrees,
  All but the basis of the soul.

  So let the change which comes be free
  To ingroove itself with that, which flies,
  And work, a joint of state, that plies
  Its office, moved with sympathy.

  A saying, hard to shape an act;
  For all the past of Time reveals
  A bridal dawn of thunder-peals,
  Wherever Thought hath wedded Fact.

  Ev'n now we hear with inward strife
  A motion toiling in the gloom--
  The Spirit of the years to come
  Yearning to mix himself with Life.

  A slow-develop'd strength awaits
  Completion in a painful school;
  Phantoms of other forms of rule,
  New Majesties of mighty States--

  The warders of the growing hour,
  But vague in vapour, hard to mark;
  And round them sea and air are dark
  With great contrivances of Power.

  Of many changes, aptly join'd,
  Is bodied forth the second whole,
  Regard gradation, lest the soul
  Of Discord race the rising wind;

  A wind to puff your idol-fires,
  And heap their ashes on the head;
  To shame the boast so often made, [4]
  That we are wiser than our sires.

  Oh, yet, if Nature's evil star
  Drive men in manhood, as in youth,
  To follow flying steps of Truth
  Across the brazen bridge of war--[5]

  If New and Old, disastrous feud,
  Must ever shock, like armed foes,
  And this be true, till Time shall close,
  That Principles are rain'd in blood;

  Not yet the wise of heart would cease
  To hold his hope thro' shame and guilt,
  But with his hand against the hilt,
  Would pace the troubled land, like Peace;

  Not less, tho' dogs of Faction bay, [6]
  Would serve his kind in deed and word,
  Certain, if knowledge bring the sword,
  That knowledge takes the sword away--

  Would love the gleams of good that broke
  From either side, nor veil his eyes;
  And if some dreadful need should rise
  Would strike, and firmly, and one stroke:

  To-morrow yet would reap to-day,
  As we bear blossom of the dead;
  Earn well the thrifty months, nor wed
  Raw haste, half-sister to Delay.


[Footnote 1: 1842 and so till 1851. Though.]

[Footnote 2: 1842. Knowledge is spelt with a capital K.]

[Footnote 3: 1842. Or growth.]

[Footnote 4: 1842. The boasting words we said.]

[Footnote 5: Possibly suggested by Homer's expression, [Greek: ana
ptolemoio gephuras], 'Il'., viii., 549, and elsewhere; but Homer's
and Tennyson's meaning can hardly be the same. In Homer the "bridges of
war" seem to mean the spaces between the lines of tents in a bivouac: in
Tennyson the meaning is probably the obvious one.]

[Footnote 6: All up to and including 1851. Not less, though dogs of
Faction bay.]





THE GOOSE

This was first published in 1842. No alteration has since been made in
it.

This poem, which was written at the time of the Reform Bill agitation,
is a political allegory showing how illusory were the supposed
advantages held out by the Radicals to the poor and labouring classes.
The old woman typifies these classes, the stranger the Radicals, the
goose the Radical programme, Free Trade and the like, the eggs such
advantages as the proposed Radical measures might for a time seem to
confer, the cluttering goose, the storm and whirlwind the heavy price
which would have to be paid for them in the social anarchy resulting
from triumphant Radicalism. The allegory may be narrowed to the Free
Trade question.


  I knew an old wife lean and poor,
  Her rags scarce held together;
  There strode a stranger to the door,
  And it was windy weather.

  He held a goose upon his arm,
  He utter'd rhyme and reason,
  "Here, take the goose, and keep you warm,
  It is a stormy season".

  She caught the white goose by the leg,
  A goose--'twas no great matter.
  The goose let fall a golden egg
  With cackle and with clatter.

  She dropt the goose, and caught the pelf,
  And ran to tell her neighbours;
  And bless'd herself, and cursed herself,
  And rested from her labours.

  And feeding high, and living soft,
  Grew plump and able-bodied;
  Until the grave churchwarden doff'd,
  The parson smirk'd and nodded.

  So sitting, served by man and maid,
  She felt her heart grow prouder:
  But, ah! the more the white goose laid
  It clack'd and cackled louder.

  It clutter'd here, it chuckled there;
  It stirr'd the old wife's mettle:
  She shifted in her elbow-chair,
  And hurl'd the pan and kettle.

  "A quinsy choke thy cursed note!"
  Then wax'd her anger stronger:
  "Go, take the goose, and wring her throat,
  I will not bear it longer".

  Then yelp'd the cur, and yawl'd the cat;
  Ran Gaffer, stumbled Gammer.
  The goose flew this way and flew that,
  And fill'd the house with clamour.

  As head and heels upon the floor
  They flounder'd all together,
  There strode a stranger to the door,
  And it was windy weather:

  He took the goose upon his arm,
  He utter'd words of scorning;
  "So keep you cold, or keep you warm,
  It is a stormy morning".

  The wild wind rang from park and plain,
  And round the attics rumbled,
  Till all the tables danced again,
  And half the chimneys tumbled.

  The glass blew in, the fire blew out,
  The blast was hard and harder.
  Her cap blew off, her gown blew up,
  And a whirlwind clear'd the larder;

  And while on all sides breaking loose
  Her household fled the danger,
  Quoth she, "The Devil take the goose,
  And God forget the stranger!"





THE EPIC

First published in 1842; "tho'" for "though" in line 44 has been the
only alteration made since 1850.

This Prologue was written, like the Epilogue, after "The Epic" had been
composed, being added, Fitzgerald says, to anticipate or excuse "the
faint Homeric echoes," to give a reason for telling an old-world tale.
The poet "mouthing out his hollow oes and aes" is, we are told, a good
description of Tennyson's tone and manner of reading.


  At Francis Allen's on the Christmas-eve,--
  The game of forfeits done--the girls all kiss'd
  Beneath the sacred bush and past away--
  The parson Holmes, the poet Everard Hall,
  The host, and I sat round the wassail-bowl,
  Then half-way ebb'd: and there we held a talk,
  How all the old honour had from Christmas gone,
  Or gone, or dwindled down to some odd games
  In some odd nooks like this; till I, tired out
  With cutting eights that day upon the pond,
  Where, three times slipping from the outer edge,
  I bump'd the ice into three several stars,
  Fell in a doze; and half-awake I heard
  The parson taking wide and wider sweeps,
  Now harping on the church-commissioners, [1]
  Now hawking at Geology and schism;
  Until I woke, and found him settled down
  Upon the general decay of faith
  Right thro' the world, "at home was little left,
  And none abroad: there was no anchor, none,
  To hold by". Francis, laughing, clapt his hand
  On Everard's shoulder, with "I hold by him".
  "And I," quoth Everard, "by the wassail-bowl."
  "Why, yes," I said, "we knew your gift that way
  At college: but another which you had,
  I mean of verse (for so we held it then),
  What came of that?"  "You know," said Frank, "he burnt
  His epic, his King Arthur, some twelve books "--[2]
  And then to me demanding why? "Oh, sir,
  He thought that nothing new was said, or else
  Something so said 'twas nothing--that a truth
  Looks freshest in the fashion of the day:
  God knows: he has a mint of reasons: ask.
  It pleased _me_ well enough." "Nay, nay," said Hall,
  "Why take the style of those heroic times?
  For nature brings not back the Mastodon,
  Nor we those times; and why should any man
  Remodel models? these twelve books of mine [3]
  Were faint Homeric echoes, nothing-worth,
  Mere chaff and draff, much better burnt."
  "But I," Said Francis, "pick'd the eleventh from this hearth,
  And have it: keep a thing its use will come.
  I hoard it as a sugar-plum for Holmes."
  He laugh'd, and I, though sleepy, like a horse
  That hears the corn-bin open, prick'd my ears;
  For I remember'd Everard's college fame
  When we were Freshmen: then at my request
  He brought it; and the poet little urged,
  But with some prelude of disparagement,
  Read, mouthing out his hollow oes and aes,
  Deep-chested music, and to this result.


[Footnote 1: A burning topic with the clergy in and about 1833.]

[Footnote 2:  1842 to 1844. "You know," said Frank, "he flung His epic
of King Arthur in the fire!" The present reading, 1850.]

[Footnote 3: 1842, 1843.

  Remodel models rather than the life?
  And these twelve books of mine (to speak the truth).

Present reading, 1845.]




MORTE D'ARTHUR

This is Tennyson's first study from Malory's 'Morte d'Arthur'. We learn
from Fitzgerald that it was written as early as the spring of 1835, for
in that year Tennyson read it to Fitzgerald and Spedding, "out of a MS.
in a little red book," and again we learn that he repeated some lines of
it at the end of May, 1835, one calm day on Windermere, adding "Not bad
that, Fitz., is it?" ('Life', i., 184). It is here represented as the
eleventh book of an Epic, the rest of which had been destroyed, though
Tennyson afterwards incorporated it, adding introductory lines, with
what was virtually to prove an Epic in twelve books, 'The Idylls of the
King'. The substance of the poem is drawn from the third, fourth and
fifth chapters of the twenty-first book of Malory's 'Romance', which is
followed very closely. It is called "an Homeric echo," but the diction
bears a much closer resemblance to that of Virgil than to that of Homer,
though the rhythm is perhaps more Homeric than Virgilian. It is
Tennyson's masterpiece in "the grand style," and is indeed as near
perfection as any work of this kind could be. In spite of its singular
mixture of simplicity, purely Homeric, and artificiality, at times
ultra-Virgilian, the incongruity never shocks, so noble and impressive
is the general effect. The text of 1842 was never subsequently altered
except in the spelling of "mere" and "though" in lines 37, 77, 147, 155,
162, 272, and in the insertion in 1853 of the line:--

    "Across the ridge and pac'd beside the mere."



  So all day long the noise of battle roll'd
  Among the mountains by the winter sea;
  Until King Arthur's table, man by man,
  Had fall'n in Lyonness about their Lord,
  King Arthur: then, because his wound was deep,
  The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him,
  Sir Bedivere, the last of all his knights,
  And bore him to a chapel nigh the field, [1]
  A broken chancel with a broken cross,
  That stood on a dark strait of barren land.
  On one side lay the Ocean, and on one
  Lay a great water, and the moon was full.
  Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  "The sequel of to-day unsolders all
  The goodliest fellowship of famous knights
  Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep
  They sleep--the men I loved. I think that we
  Shall never more, at any future time,
  Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds,
  Walking about the gardens and the halls
  Of Camelot, as in the days that were.
  I perish by this people which I made,--
  Tho' Merlin sware that I should come again
  To rule once more--but let what will be, be,
  I am so deeply smitten thro' the helm
  That without help I cannot last till morn.
  Thou therefore take my brand [2] Excalibur,
  Which was my pride: for thou rememberest how
  In those old days, one summer noon, an arm
  Rose up from out the bosom of the lake,
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  Holding the sword--and how I row'd across
  And took it, and have worn it, like a king:
  And, wheresoever I am sung or told
  In aftertime, this also shall be known:
  But now delay not: take Excalibur,
  And fling him far into the middle mere:
  Watch what thou sest, and lightly bring me word."
  To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere:
  "It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus,
  Aidless, alone, and smitten thro' the helm.
  A little thing may harm a wounded man.
  Yet I thy hest will all perform at full,
  Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word."
  So saying, from the ruin'd shrine he stept
  And in the moon athwart the place of tombs,
  Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men,
  Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang
  Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down
  By zig-zag paths, and juts of pointed rock,
  Came on the shining levels of the lake.
  There drew he forth the brand Excalibur,
  And o'er him, drawing it, the winter moon,
  Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth
  And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt:
  For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks, [3]
  Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work
  Of subtlest jewellery. He gazed so long
  That both his eyes were dazzled, as he stood,
  This way and that dividing the swift mind, [4]
  In act to throw: but at the last it seem'd
  Better to leave Excalibur conceal'd
  There in the many-knotted waterflags,
  That whistled stiff and dry about the marge.
  So strode he back slow to the wounded king.
  Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  "Hast thou perform'd my mission which I gave?
  What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?"
  And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  "I heard the ripple washing in the reeds, [5]
  And the wild water lapping on the crag."
  To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale:
  "Thou hast betray'd thy nature and thy name,
  Not rendering true answer, as beseem'd
  Thy falty, nor like a noble knight:
  For surer sign had follow'd, either hand,
  Or voice, or else a motion of the mere.
  This is a shameful thing for men to lie.
  Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again [6]
  As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing
  I bade thee, watch, and lightly bring me word."
  Then went Sir Bedivere the second time
  Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere, [7]
  Counting the dewy pebbles, fix'd in thought;
  But when he saw the wonder of the hilt,
  How curiously and strangely chased, he smote
  His palms together, and he cried aloud,
  "And if indeed I cast the brand away,
  Surely a precious thing, one worthy note,
  Should thus be lost for ever from the earth,
  Which might have pleased the eyes of many men.
  What good should follow this, if this were done?
  What harm, undone? deep harm to disobey,
  Seeing obedience is the bond of rule,
  Were it well to obey then, if a king demand
  An act unprofitable against himself?
  The king is sick, and knows not what he does.
  What record, or what relic of my lord
  Should be to aftertime, but empty breath
  And rumours of a doubt? but were this kept,
  Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings,
  Some one might show it at a joust of arms,
  Saying, 'King Arthur's sword, Excalibur,
  Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake.
  Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps
  Upon the hidden bases of the hills."
  So might some old man speak in the aftertime
  To all the people, winning reverence.
  But now much honour and much fame were lost."
  So spake he, clouded with his own conceit,
  And hid Excalibur the second time,
  And so strode back slow to the wounded King.
  Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily:
  "What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?"
  And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  "I heard the water lapping on the crag,
  And the long ripple washing in the reeds."
  To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath:
  "Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue, [8]
  Unknightly, traitor-hearted! Woe is me!
  Authority forgets a dying king, [9]
  Laid widow'd of the power in his eye
  That bow'd the will. I see thee what thou art,
  For thou, the latest-left of all my knights,
  In whom should meet the offices of all,
  Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt;
  Either from lust of gold, or like a girl
  Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes.
  Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice,
  And the third time may prosper, get thee hence:
  But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur,
  I will arise and slay thee with my hands."
  Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran, [10]
  And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged
  Among the bulrush-beds, and clutch'd the sword,
  And strongly wheel'd and threw it. The great brand
  Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,
  And flashing round and round, and whirl'd in an arch,
  Shot like a streamer of the northern morn,
  Seen where the moving isles of winter shock
  By night, with noises of the northern sea.
  So flash'd and fell the brand Excalibur:
  But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  And caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him
  Three times, and drew him under in the mere.
  And lightly went the other to the King.
  Then spoke King Arthur, drawing thicker breath:
  "Now see I by thine eyes that this is done.
  Speak out: what is it thou hast heard, or seen?"
  And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  "Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems
  Should blind my purpose, for I never saw,
  Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die,
  Not tho' I live three lives of mortal men,
  So great a miracle as yonder hilt.
  Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him;
  But when I look'd again, behold an arm,
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  That caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him
  Three times, and drew him under in the mere."
  And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard:
  "My end draws nigh;'tis time that I were gone.
  Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight,
  And bear me to the margin; yet I fear [11]
  My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die."
  So saying, from the pavement he hath rose,
  Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm,
  And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes
  As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere
  Remorsefully regarded thro' his tears,
  And would have spoken, but he found not words,
  Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee,
  O'er both his shoulders drew the languid hands,
  And rising bore him thro' the place of tombs.
  But, as he walk'd, King Arthur panted hard,
  Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed
  When all the house is mute. So sigh'd the King,
  Muttering and murmuring at his ear"
  Quick, quick! I fear it is too late, and I shall die ".
  But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge,
  Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walk'd,
  Larger than human on the frozen hills.
  He heard the deep behind him, and a cry
  Before. His own thought drove him like a goad.
  Dry clash'd his harness in the icy caves
  And barren chasms, and all to left and right
  The bare black cliff clang'd round him, as he based
  His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
  Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels--
  And on a sudden, lo! the level lake,
  And the long glories of the winter moon.
  Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge, [12]
  Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,
  Beneath them; and descending they were ware
  That all the decks were dense with stately forms
  Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream--by these
  Three Queens with crowns of gold--and from them rose
  A cry that shiver'd to the tingling stars,
  And, as it were one voice, an agony
  Of lamentation, like a wind, that shrills
  All night in a waste land, where no one comes,
  Or hath come, since the making of the world.
  Then murmur'd Arthur, "Place me in the barge,"
  And to the barge they came. There those three Queens
  Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept.
  But she, that rose the tallest of them all
  And fairest, laid his head upon her lap,
  And loosed the shatter'd casque, and chafed his hands,
  And call'd him by his name, complaining loud,
  And dropping bitter tears against his brow
  Striped with dark blood: for all his face was white
  And colourless, and like the wither'd moon
  Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east;
  And all his greaves and cuisses dash'd with drops
  Of onset; and the light and lustrous curls--
  That made his forehead like a rising sun
  High from the dis-throne--were parch'd with dust;
  Or, clotted into points and hanging loose,
  Mix'd with the knightly growth that fringed his lips.
  So like a shatter'd column lay the King;
  Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest,
  From spur to plume a star of tournament,
  Shot thro' the lists at Camelot, and charged
  Before the eyes of ladies and of kings.
  Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere, [13]
  "Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go?
  Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes?
  For now I see the true old times are dead,
  When every morning brought a noble chance,
  And every chance brought out a noble knight.
  Such times have been not since the light that led
  The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh.
  But now the whole ROUND TABLE is dissolved
  Which was an image of the mighty world;
  And I, the last, go forth companionless.
  And the days darken round me, and the years,
  Among new men, strange faces, other minds."
  And slowly answer'd Arthur from the barge:
  "The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
  And God fulfils Himself in many ways, [14]
  Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.
  Comfort thyself: what comfort is in me?
  I have lived my life, and that which I have done
  May He within Himself make pure! but thou,
  If thou shouldst never see my face again,
  Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer
  Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice
  Rise like a fountain for me night and day.
  For what are men better than sheep or goats
  That nourish a blind life within the brain,
  If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
  Both for themselves and those who call them friend?
  For so the whole round earth is every way
  Bound by gold chains [15] about the feet of God.
  But now farewell. I am going a long way
  With these thou sest--if indeed I go--
  (For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)
  To the island-valley of Avilion;
  Where falls not hail, or rain, [16] or any snow,
  Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
  Deep-meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard-lawns
  And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea, [17]
  Where I will heal me of my grievous wound."
  So said he, and the barge with oar and sail
  Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan
  That, fluting a wild carol ere her death,
  Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood
  With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere
  Revolving many memories, till the hull
  Look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn.
  And on the mere the wailing died away.

  Here ended Hall, and our last light, that long
  Had wink'd and threaten'd darkness, flared and fell:
  At which the Parson, sent to sleep with sound,
  And waked with silence, grunted "Good!" but we
  Sat rapt: It was the tone with which he read--
  Perhaps some modern touches here and there
  Redeem'd it from the charge of nothingness--
  Or else we loved the man, and prized his work;
  I know not: but we sitting, as I said,
  The cock crew loud; as at that time of year
  The lusty bird takes every hour for dawn:
  Then Francis, muttering, like a man ill-used,
  "There now--that's nothing!" drew a little back,
  And drove his heel into the smoulder'd log,
  That sent a blast of sparkles up the flue;
  And so to bed; where yet in sleep I seem'd
  To sail with Arthur under looming shores.
  Point after point; till on to dawn, when dreams
  Begin to feel the truth and stir of day,
  To me, methought, who waited with a crowd,
  There came a bark that, blowing forward, bore,
  King Arthur, like a modern gentleman
  Of stateliest port; and all the people cried,
  "Arthur is come again: he cannot die".
  Then those that stood upon the hills behind
  Repeated--"Come again, and thrice as fair";
  And, further inland, voices echoed--
  "Come With all good things, and war shall be no more".
  At this a hundred bells began to peal,
  That with the sound I woke, and heard indeed
  The clear church-bells ring in the Christmas morn.


[Footnote 1: 'Cf. Morte d'Arthur', xxxi., iv.: "They led him betwixt
them to a little chapel from the not far seaside".]

[Footnote 2: 'Cf. Id.', v.:

  "'Therefore,' said Arthur, 'take thou my good sword Excalibur and go
  with it to yonder waterside. And when thou comest there I charge thee
  throw my sword on that water and come again and tell me what thou
  there seest.'

  'My lord,' said Bedivere, 'your commandment shall be done and lightly
  will I bring thee word again.'

  So Sir Bedivere departed and by the way he beheld that noble sword,
  that the pommel and the haft were all of precious stones, and then he
  said to himself, 'If I throw this rich sword in the water, thereof
  shall never come to good but harm and loss'. And then Sir Bedivere hid
  Excalibur under a tree."]


[Footnote 3: 1842-1853. Studs.]

[Footnote 4: Literally from Virgil ('n.', iv., 285).

  "Atque animum nunc huc celerem nunc dividit illuc."]


[Footnote 5: 'Cf. Romance, Id.', v.:

  "'I saw nothing but the waters wap and the waves wan.'"]


[Footnote 6: 'Romance, Id.', v.:

  "'That is untruly said of thee,' said the king, 'therefore go thou
  lightly again and do my command as thou to me art lief and dear; spare
  not, but throw in.'

  Then Sir Bedivere returned again and took the sword in his hand, and
  then him thought sin and shame to throw away that noble sword, and so
  eft he hid the sword and returned again, and told the king that he had
  been to the water and done his commandment."]


[Footnote 7: This line was not inserted till 1853.]

[Footnote 8: 'Romance, Id.', v.:

  "'Ah, traitor untrue!' said King Arthur, 'now thou hast betrayed me
  twice. Who would have weened that thou that hast been so lief and
  dear, and thou that art named a noble knight, would betray me for the
  riches of the sword. But now go again lightly.... And but if thou do
  not now as I bid thee, if ever I may see thee I shall slay thee with
  mine own hands."']


[Footnote 9: There is a curious illustration of this in an anecdote told
of Queen Elizabeth. "Cecil intimated that she must go to bed, if it were
only to satisfy her people.

  'Must!' she exclaimed; 'is must a word to be addressed to princes?
  Little man, little man, thy father if he had been alive durst not have
  used that word, but thou hast grown presumptuous because thou knowest
  that I shall die.'"

Lingard, 'Hist'., vol. vi., p. 316.]


[Footnote 10: 'Romance, Id'., v.:

  "Then Sir Bedivere departed and went to the sword and lightly took it
  up and went to the waterside, and then he bound the girdle about the
  hilt and then he threw the sword as far into the water as he might,
  and then came an arm and a hand above the water, and met it and caught
  it and so shook it thrice and brandished it, and then vanished away
  the hand with the sword in the water."]


[Footnote 11: 'Romance, Id.', v.:

  "'Alas,' said the king, 'help me hence for I dread me I have tarried
  over long'.

  Then Sir Bedivere took the king upon his back and so went with him to
  that water."]


[Footnote 12: 'Romance, Id'., v.:

  "And when they were at the waterside even fast by the bank hoved a
  little barge and many fair ladies in it, and among them all was a
  queen and all they had black hoods and all they wept and shrieked when
  they saw King Arthur. 'Now put me into the barge,' said the king, and
  so they did softly. And there received him three queens with great
  mourning, and so they set him down and in one of their laps King
  Arthur laid his head; and then that queen said: 'Ah, dear brother, why
  have ye tarried so long from me?'"]


[Footnote 13: 'Romance, Id'., v.:

  "Then Sir Bedivere cried: 'Ah, my Lord Arthur, what shall become of me
  now ye go from me and leave me here alone among mine enemies?'

  'Comfort thyself,' said the king, 'and do as well as thou mayest, for
  in me is no trust to trust in. For I will unto the vale of Avilion to
  heal me of my grievous wound. And if thou never hear more of me, pray
  for my soul.'"]


[Footnote 14: With this 'cf>/i>. Greene, 'James IV'., v., 4:--

  "Should all things still remain in one estate
  Should not in greatest arts some scars be found
  Were all upright nor chang'd what world were this?
  A chaos made of quiet, yet no world."

  And 'cf'. Shakespeare, 'Coriolanus', ii., iii.:--

  What custom wills in all things should we do it,
  The dust on antique Time would be unswept,
  And mountainous error too highly heaped
  For Truth to overpeer.]


[Footnote 15: 'Cf.' Archdeacon Hare's "Sermon on the Law of
Self-Sacrifice".

  "This is the golden chain of love whereby the whole creation is bound
  to the throne of the Creator."

For further illustrations see 'Illust. of Tennyson', p. 158.]


[Footnote 16: Paraphrased from 'Odyssey', vi., 42-5, or 'Lucretius',
iii., 18-22.]

[Footnote 17: The expression "'crowned' with summer 'sea'" from
'Odyssey', x., 195: [Greek: naeson taen peri pontos apeiritos
estaphan_otai.]]





THE GARDENER'S DAUGHTER; OR, THE PICTURES

First published in 1842.


In the 'Gardener's Daughter' we have the first of that delightful series
of poems dealing with scenes and characters from ordinary English life,
and named appropriately 'English Idylls'. The originator of this species
of poetry in England was Southey, in his 'English Eclogues', written
before 1799. In the preface to these eclogues, which are in blank verse,
Southey says: "The following eclogues, I believe, bear no resemblance to
any poems in our language. This species of composition has become
popular in Germany, and I was induced to attempt it by an account of the
German idylls given me in conversation." Southey's eclogues are eight in
number: 'The Old Mansion House', 'The Grandmother's Tale', 'Hannah',
'The Sailor's Mother', 'The Witch', 'The Ruined Cottage', 'The Last of
the Family' and 'The Alderman's Funeral'. Southey was followed by
Wordsworth in 'The Brothers' and 'Michael'. Southey has nothing of the
charm, grace and classical finish of his disciple, but how nearly
Tennyson follows him, as copy and model, may be seen by anyone who
compares Tennyson's studies with 'The Ruined Cottage'. But Tennyson's
real master was Theocritus, whose influence pervades these poems not so
much directly in definite imitation as indirectly in colour and tone.

'The Gardener's Daughter' was written as early as 1835, as it was read
to Fitzgerald in that year ('Life of Tennyson', i., 182). Tennyson
originally intended to insert a prologue to be entitled 'The
Antechamber', which contained an elaborate picture of himself, but he
afterwards suppressed it. It is given in the 'Life', i., 233-4. This
poem stands alone among the Idylls in being somewhat overloaded with
ornament. The text of 1842 remained unaltered through all the subsequent
editions except in line 235. After 1851 the form "tho'" is substituted
for "though".


  This morning is the morning of the day,
  When I and Eustace from the city went
  To see the Gardener's Daughter; I and he,
  Brothers in Art; a friendship so complete
  Portion'd in halves between us, that we grew
  The fable of the city where we dwelt.
  My Eustace might have sat for Hercules;
  So muscular he spread, so broad of breast.
  He, by some law that holds in love, and draws
  The greater to the lesser, long desired
  A certain miracle of symmetry,
  A miniature of loveliness, all grace
  Summ'd up and closed in little;--Juliet, she [1]
  So light of foot, so light of spirit--oh, she
  To me myself, for some three careless moons,
  The summer pilot of an empty heart
  Unto the shores of nothing! Know you not
  Such touches are but embassies of love,
  To tamper with the feelings, ere he found
  Empire for life? but Eustace painted her,
  And said to me, she sitting with us then,
  "When will _you_ paint like this?" and I replied,
  (My words were half in earnest, half in jest),
  "'Tis not your work, but Love's. Love, unperceived,
  A more ideal Artist he than all,
  Came, drew your pencil from you, made those eyes
  Darker than darkest pansies, and that hair
  More black than ashbuds in the front of March."
  And Juliet answer'd laughing, "Go and see
  The Gardener's daughter: trust me, after that,
  You scarce can fail to match his masterpiece ".
  And up we rose, and on the spur we went.
  Not wholly in the busy world, nor quite
  Beyond it, blooms the garden that I love.
  News from the humming city comes to it
  In sound of funeral or of marriage bells;
  And, sitting muffled in dark leaves, you hear
  The windy clanging of the minster clock;
  Although between it and the garden lies
  A league of grass, wash'd by a slow broad stream,
  That, stirr'd with languid pulses of the oar,
  Waves all its lazy lilies, and creeps on,
  Barge-laden, to three arches of a bridge
  Crown'd with the minster-towers.

                                  The fields between
  Are dewy-fresh, browsed by deep-udder'd kine,
  And all about the large lime feathers low,
  The lime a summer home of murmurous wings. [2]
  In that still place she, hoarded in herself,
  Grew, seldom seen: not less among us lived
  Her fame from lip to lip. Who had not heard
  Of Rose, the Gardener's daughter? Where was he,
  So blunt in memory, so old at heart,
  At such a distance from his youth in grief,
  That, having seen, forgot? The common mouth,
  So gross to express delight, in praise of her
  Grew oratory. Such a lord is Love,
  And Beauty such a mistress of the world.
  And if I said that Fancy, led by Love,
  Would play with flying forms and images,
  Yet this is also true, that, long before
  I look'd upon her, when I heard her name
  My heart was like a prophet to my heart,
  And told me I should love. A crowd of hopes,
  That sought to sow themselves like winged seeds,
  Born out of everything I heard and saw,
  Flutter'd about my senses and my soul;
  And vague desires, like fitful blasts of balm
  To one that travels quickly, made the air
  Of Life delicious, and all kinds of thought,
  That verged upon them sweeter than the dream
  Dream'd by a happy man, when the dark East,
  Unseen, is brightening to his bridal morn.
  And sure this orbit of the memory folds
  For ever in itself the day we went
  To see her. All the land in flowery squares,
  Beneath a broad and equal-blowing wind,
  Smelt of the coming summer, as one large cloud [3]
  Drew downward: but all else of heaven was pure
  Up to the Sun, and May from verge to verge,
  And May with me from head to heel. And now,
  As tho' 'twere yesterday, as tho' it were
  The hour just flown, that morn with all its sound
  (For those old Mays had thrice the life of these),
  Rings in mine ears. The steer forgot to graze,
  And, where the hedge-row cuts the pathway, stood,
  Leaning his horns into the neighbour field,
  And lowing to his fellows. From the woods
  Came voices of the well-contented doves.
  The lark could scarce get out his notes for joy,
  But shook his song together as he near'd
  His happy home, the ground. To left and right,
  The cuckoo told his name to all the hills;
  The mellow ouzel fluted in the elm;
  The redcap [4] whistled; [5] and the nightingale
  Sang loud, as tho' he were the bird of day.
  And Eustace turn'd, and smiling said to me,
  "Hear how the bushes echo! by my life,
  These birds have joyful thoughts. Think you they sing
  Like poets, from the vanity of song?
  Or have they any sense of why they sing?
  And would they praise the heavens for what they have?"
  And I made answer, "Were there nothing else
  For which to praise the heavens but only love,
  That only love were cause enough for praise".
  Lightly he laugh'd, as one that read my thought,
  And on we went; but ere an hour had pass'd,
  We reach'd a meadow slanting to the North;
  Down which a well-worn pathway courted us
  To one green wicket in a privet hedge;
  This, yielding, gave into a grassy walk
  Thro' crowded lilac-ambush trimly pruned;
  And one warm gust, full-fed with perfume, blew
  Beyond us, as we enter'd in the cool.
  The garden stretches southward. In the midst
  A cedar spread his dark-green layers of shade.
  The garden-glasses shone, and momently
  The twinkling laurel scatter'd silver lights.
  "Eustace," I said, "This wonder keeps the house."
  He nodded, but a moment afterwards
  He cried, "Look! look!" Before he ceased I turn'd,
  And, ere a star can wink, beheld her there.
  For up the porch there grew an Eastern rose,
  That, flowering high, the last night's gale had caught,
  And blown across the walk. One arm aloft--
  Gown'd in pure white, that fitted to the shape--
  Holding the bush, to fix it back, she stood.
  A single stream of all her soft brown hair
  Pour'd on one side: the shadow of the flowers
  Stole all the golden gloss, and, wavering
  Lovingly lower, trembled on her waist--
  Ah, happy shade--and still went wavering down,
  But, ere it touch'd a foot, that might have danced
  The greensward into greener circles, dipt,
  And mix'd with shadows of the common ground!
  But the full day dwelt on her brows, and sunn'd
  Her violet eyes, and all her Hebe-bloom,
  And doubled his own warmth against her lips,
  And on the bounteous wave of such a breast
  As never pencil drew. Half light, half shade,
  She stood, a sight to make an old man young.
  So rapt, we near'd the house; but she, a Rose
  In roses, mingled with her fragrant toil,
  Nor heard us come, nor from her tendance turn'd
  Into the world without; till close at hand,
  And almost ere I knew mine own intent,
  This murmur broke the stillness of that air
  Which brooded round about her: "Ah, one rose,
  One rose, but one, by those fair fingers cull'd,
  Were worth a hundred kisses press'd on lips
  Less exquisite than thine." She look'd: but all
  Suffused with blushes--neither self-possess'd
  Nor startled, but betwixt this mood and that,
  Divided in a graceful quiet--paused,
  And dropt the branch she held, and turning, wound
  Her looser hair in braid, and stirr'd her lips
  For some sweet answer, tho' no answer came,
  Nor yet refused the rose, but granted it,
  And moved away, and left me, statue-like,
  In act to render thanks. I, that whole day,
  Saw her no more, altho' I linger'd there
  Till every daisy slept, and Love's white star
  Beam'd thro' the thicken'd cedar in the dusk.
  So home we went, and all the livelong way
  With solemn gibe did Eustace banter me.
  "Now," said he, "will you climb the top of Art;
  You cannot fail but work in hues to dim
  The Titianic Flora. Will you match
  My Juliet? you, not you,--the Master,
  Love, A more ideal Artist he than all."

  So home I went, but could not sleep for joy,
  Reading her perfect features in the gloom,
  Kissing the rose she gave me o'er and o'er,
  And shaping faithful record of the glance
  That graced the giving--such a noise of life
  Swarm'd in the golden present, such a voice
  Call'd to me from the years to come, and such
  A length of bright horizon rimm'd the dark.
  And all that night I heard the watchmen peal
  The sliding season: all that night I heard
  The heavy clocks knolling the drowsy hours.
  The drowsy hours, dispensers of all good,
  O'er the mute city stole with folded wings,
  Distilling odours on me as they went
  To greet their fairer sisters of the East.

  Love at first sight, first-born, and heir to all,
  Made this night thus. Henceforward squall nor storm
  Could keep me from that Eden where she dwelt.
  Light pretexts drew me: sometimes a
  Dutch love For tulips; then for roses, moss or musk,
  To grace my city-rooms; or fruits and cream
  Served in the weeping elm; and more and more
  A word could bring the colour to my cheek;
  A thought would fill my eyes with happy dew;
  Love trebled life within me, and with each
  The year increased. The daughters of the year,
  One after one, thro' that still garden pass'd:
  Each garlanded with her peculiar flower
  Danced into light, and died into the shade;
  And each in passing touch'd with some new grace
  Or seem'd to touch her, so that day by day,
  Like one that never can be wholly known, [6]
  Her beauty grew; till Autumn brought an hour
  For Eustace, when I heard his deep "I will,"
  Breathed, like the covenant of a God, to hold
  From thence thro' all the worlds: but I rose up
  Full of his bliss, and following her dark eyes
  Felt earth as air beneath me, [7] till I reach'd
  The wicket-gate, and found her standing there.
  There sat we down upon a garden mound,
  Two mutually enfolded; Love, the third,
  Between us, in the circle of his arms
  Enwound us both; and over many a range
  Of waning lime the gray cathedral towers,
  Across a hazy glimmer of the west,
  Reveal'd their shining windows: from them clash'd
  The bells; we listen'd; with the time we play'd;
  We spoke of other things; we coursed about
  The subject most at heart, more near and near,
  Like doves about a dovecote, wheeling round
  The central wish, until we settled there. [8]
  Then, in that time and place, I spoke to her,
  Requiring, tho' I knew it was mine own,
  Yet for the pleasure that I took to hear,
  Requiring at her hand the greatest gift,
  A woman's heart, the heart of her I loved;
  And in that time and place she answer'd me,
  And in the compass of three little words,
  More musical than ever came in one,
  The silver fragments of a broken voice,
  Made me most happy, faltering [9] "I am thine".
  Shall I cease here? Is this enough to say
  That my desire, like all strongest hopes,
  By its own energy fulfilled itself,
  Merged in completion? Would you learn at full
  How passion rose thro' circumstantial grades
  Beyond all grades develop'd? and indeed
  I had not staid so long to tell you all,
  But while I mused came Memory with sad eyes,
  Holding the folded annals of my youth;
  And while I mused, Love with knit brows went by,
  And with a flying finger swept my lips,
  And spake, "Be wise: not easily forgiven
  Are those, who setting wide the doors, that bar
  The secret bridal chambers of the heart.
  Let in the day". Here, then, my words have end.
  Yet might I tell of meetings, of farewells--
  Of that which came between, more sweet than each,
  In whispers, like the whispers of the leaves
  That tremble round a nightingale--in sighs
  Which perfect Joy, perplex'd for utterance,
  Stole from her [10] sister Sorrow. Might I not tell
  Of difference, reconcilement, pledges given,
  And vows, where there was never need of vows,
  And kisses, where the heart on one wild leap
  Hung tranced from all pulsation, as above
  The heavens between their fairy fleeces pale
  Sow'd all their mystic gulfs with fleeting stars;
  Or while the balmy glooming, crescent-lit,
  Spread the light haze along the river-shores,
  And in the hollows; or as once we met
  Unheedful, tho' beneath a whispering rain
  Night slid down one long stream of sighing wind,
  And in her bosom bore the baby, Sleep.
  But this whole hour your eyes have been intent
  On that veil'd picture--veil'd, for what it holds
  May not be dwelt on by the common day.
  This prelude has prepared thee. Raise thy soul;
  Make thine heart ready with thine eyes: the time
  Is come to raise the veil. Behold her there,
  As I beheld her ere she knew my heart,
  My first, last love; the idol of my youth,
  The darling of my manhood, and, alas!
  Now the most blessed memory of mine age.


[Footnote 1: 'Cf. Romeo and Juliet', ii., vi.:--

  O so light a foot
  Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.]


[Footnote 2: 'Cf.' Keats, 'Ode to Nightingale':--

  The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.]


[Footnote 3: 'Cf'. Theocritus, 'Id'., vii., 143:--

  [Greek: pant' _osden thereos mala pionos.]]


[Footnote 4: Provincial name for the goldfinch. See Tennyson's letter to
the Duke of Argyll, 'Life', ii., 221.]

[Footnote 5: This passage is imitated from Theocritus, vii., 143
'seqq'.]

[Footnote 6: This passage originally ran:--$

  Her beauty grew till drawn in narrowing arcs
  The southing autumn touch'd with sallower gleams
  The granges on the fallows. At that time,
  Tir'd of the noisy town I wander'd there.
  The bell toll'd four, and by the time I reach'd
  The wicket-gate I found her by herself.

But Fitzgerald pointing out that the autumn landscape was taken from the
background of Titian (Lord Ellesmere's 'Ages of Man') Tennyson struck
out the passage. If this was the reason he must have been in an
unusually scrupulous mood. See his 'Life', i., 232.]

[Footnote 7: So Massinger, 'City Madam', iii., 3:--

I am sublim'd.
Gross earth
Supports me not.
'I walk on air'.]


[Footnote 8: Cf. Dante, 'Inferno', v., 81-83:--

Quali columbe dal desio chiamat,
Con 1' ali aperte e ferme, al dolce nido Volan.]


[Footnote 9: 1842-1850. Lisping.]

[Footnote 10: In privately printed volume 1842. His.]






DORA

First published in 1842.

This poem had been written as early as 1835, when it was read to
Fitzgerald and Spedding ('Life', i., 182). No alterations were made in
the text after 1853. The story in this poem was taken even to the
minutest details from a prosestory of Miss Mitford's, namely, 'The Tale
of Dora Creswell' ('Our Village', vol. in., 242-53), the only
alterations being in the names, Farmer Cresswell, Dora Creswell, Walter
Cresswell, and Mary Hay becoming respectively Allan, Dora, William, and
Mary Morrison. How carefully the poet has preserved the picturesque
touches of the original may be seen by comparing the following two
passages:--

    And Dora took the child, and went her way
    Across the wheat, and sat upon a mound
    That was unsown, where many poppies grew.
    ...
    She rose and took
    The child once more, and sat upon the mound;
    And made a little wreath of all the flowers
    That grew about, and tied it round his hat.

    "A beautiful child lay on the ground at some distance, whilst a
    young girl, resting from the labour of reaping, was twisting a
    rustic wreath of enamelled cornflowers, brilliant poppies ... round
    its hat."

The style is evidently modelled closely on that of the 'Odyssey'.


  With farmer Allan at the farm abode
  William and Dora. William was his son,
  And she his niece. He often look'd at them,
  And often thought "I'll make them man and wife".
  Now Dora felt her uncle's will in all,
  And yearn'd towards William; but the youth, because
  He had been always with her in the house,
  Thought not of Dora. Then there came a day
  When Allan call'd his son, and said,
  "My son: I married late, but I would wish to see
  My grandchild on my knees before I die:
  And I have set my heart upon a match.
  Now therefore look to Dora; she is well
  To look to; thrifty too beyond her age.
  She is my brother's daughter: he and I
  Had once hard words, and parted, and he died
  In foreign lands; but for his sake I bred
  His daughter Dora: take her for your wife;
  For I have wish'd this marriage, night and day,
  For many years." But William answer'd short;
  "I cannot marry Dora; by my life,
  I will not marry Dora". Then the old man
  Was wroth, and doubled up his hands, and said:
  "You will not, boy! you dare to answer thus!
  But in my time a father's word was law,
  And so it shall be now for me. Look to it;
  Consider, William: take a month to think,
  And let me have an answer to my wish;
  Or, by the Lord that made me, you shall pack,
  And never more darken my doors again."
  But William answer'd madly; bit his lips,
  And broke away. [1] The more he look'd at her
  The less he liked her; and his ways were harsh;
  But Dora bore them meekly. Then before
  The month was out he left his father's house,
  And hired himself to work within the fields;
  And half in love, half spite, he woo'd and wed
  A labourer's daughter, Mary Morrison.

  Then, when the bells were ringing,
  Allan call'd His niece and said: "My girl, I love you well;
  But if you speak with him that was my son,
  Or change a word with her he calls his wife,
  My home is none of yours. My will is law."
  And Dora promised, being meek. She thought,
  "It cannot be: my uncle's mind will change!"

  And days went on, and there was born a boy
  To William; then distresses came on him;
  And day by day he pass'd his father's gate,
  Heart-broken, and his father helped him not.
  But Dora stored what little she could save,
  And sent it them by stealth, nor did they know
  Who sent it; till at last a fever seized
  On William, and in harvest time he died.

  Then Dora went to Mary. Mary sat
  And look'd with tears upon her boy, and thought
  Hard things of Dora. Dora came and said:
  "I have obey'd my uncle until now,
  And I have sinn'd, for it was all thro' me
  This evil came on William at the first.
  But, Mary, for the sake of him that's gone,
  And for your sake, the woman that he chose,
  And for this orphan, I am come to you:
  You know there has not been for these five years
  So full a harvest, let me take the boy,
  And I will set him in my uncle's eye
  Among the wheat; that when his heart is glad
  Of the full harvest, he may see the boy,
  And bless him for the sake of him that's gone."
  And Dora took the child, and went her way
  Across the wheat, and sat upon a mound
  That was unsown, where many poppies grew.
  Far off the farmer came into the field
  And spied her not; for none of all his men
  Dare tell him Dora waited with the child;
  And Dora would have risen and gone to him,
  But her heart fail'd her; and the reapers reap'd
  And the sun fell, and all the land was dark.
  But when the morrow came, she rose and took
  The child once more, and sat upon the mound;
  And made a little wreath of all the flowers
  That grew about, and tied it round his hat
  To make him pleasing in her uncle's eye.
  Then when the farmer passed into the field
  He spied her, and he left his men at work,
  And came and said: "Where were you yesterday?
  Whose child is that? What are you doing here?"
  So Dora cast her eyes upon the ground,
  And answer'd softly, "This is William's child?"
  "And did I not," said Allan, "did I not
  Forbid you, Dora?" Dora said again:
  "Do with me as you will, but take the child
  And bless him for the sake of him that's gone!"
  And Allan said: "I see it is a trick
  Got up betwixt you and the woman there.
  I must be taught my duty, and by you!
  You knew my word was law, and yet you dared
  To slight it. Well--for I will take the boy;
  But go you hence, and never see me more."
  So saying, he took the boy, that cried aloud
  And struggled hard. The wreath of flowers fell
  At Dora's feet. She bow'd upon her hands,
  And the boy's cry came to her from the field,
  More and more distant. She bow'd down her head,
  Remembering the day when first she came,
  And all the things that had been. She bow'd down
  And wept in secret; and the reapers reap'd,
  And the sun fell, and all the land was dark.
  Then Dora went to Mary's house, and stood
  Upon the threshold. Mary saw the boy
  Was not with Dora. She broke out in praise
  To God, that help'd her in her widowhood.
  And Dora said, "My uncle took the boy;
  But, Mary, let me live and work with you:
  He says that he will never see me more".
  Then answer'd Mary, "This shall never be,
  That thou shouldst take my trouble on thyself:
  And, now, I think, he shall not have the boy,
  For he will teach him hardness, and to slight
  His mother; therefore thou and I will go,
  And I will have my boy, and bring him home;
  And I will beg of him to take thee back;
  But if he will not take thee back again,
  Then thou and I will live within one house,
  And work for William's child until he grows
  Of age to help us." So the women kiss'd
  Each other, and set out, and reach'd the farm.
  The door was off the latch: they peep'd, and saw
  The boy set up betwixt his grandsire's knees,
  Who thrust him in the hollows of his arm,
  And clapt him on the hands and on the cheeks,
  Like one that loved him; and the lad stretch'd out
  And babbled for the golden seal, that hung
  From Allan's watch, and sparkled by the fire.
  Then they came in: but when the boy beheld
  His mother, he cried out to come to her:
  And Allan set him down, and Mary said:
  "O Father!--if you let me call you so--
  I never came a-begging for myself,
  Or William, or this child; but now I come
  For Dora: take her back; she loves you well.
  O Sir, when William died, he died at peace
  With all men; for I ask'd him, and he said,
  He could not ever rue his marrying me--
  I have been a patient wife: but, Sir, he said
  That he was wrong to cross his father thus:
  'God bless him!' he said, 'and may he never know
  The troubles I have gone thro'!' Then he turn'd
  His face and pass'd--unhappy that I am!
  But now, Sir, let me have my boy, for you
  Will make him hard, and he will learn to slight
  His father's memory; and take Dora back,
  And let all this be as it was before."
  So Mary said, and Dora hid her face
  By Mary. There was silence in the room;
  And all at once the old man burst in sobs:
  "I have been to blame--to blame. I have kill'd my son.
  I have kill'd him--but I loved him--my dear son.
  May God forgive me!--I have been to blame.
  Kiss me, my children."  Then they clung about
  The old man's neck, and kiss'd him many times.
  And all the man was broken with remorse;
  And all his love came back a hundredfold;
  And for three hours he sobb'd o'er William's child,
  Thinking of William. So those four abode
  Within one house together; and as years
  Went forward, Mary took another mate;
  But Dora lived unmarried till her death.


[Footnote 1: In 1842 thus:--

  "Look to't,
  Consider: take a month to think, and give
  An answer to my wish; or by the Lord
  That made me, you shall pack, and nevermore
  Darken my doors again." And William heard,
  And answered something madly; bit his lips,
  And broke away.

All editions previous to 1853 have

  "Look to't.]







AUDLEY COURT

First published in 1842.

Only four alterations were made in the text after 1842, all of which are
duly noted. Tennyson told his son that the poem was partially suggested
by Abbey Park at Torquay where it was written, and that the last lines
described the scene from the hill looking over the bay. He saw he said
"a star of phosphorescence made by the buoy appearing and disappearing
in the dark sea," but it is curious that the line describing that was
not inserted till long after the poem had been published. The poem,
though a trifle, is a triumph of felicitous description and expression,
whether we regard the pie or the moonlit bay.


  "The Bull, the Fleece are cramm'd, and not a room
  For love or money. Let us picnic there
  At Audley Court." I spoke, while Audley feast
  Humm'd like a hive all round the narrow quay,
  To Francis, with a basket on his arm,
  To Francis just alighted from the boat,
  And breathing of the sea. "With all my heart,"
  Said Francis. Then we shoulder'd thro' [1] the swarm,
  And rounded by the stillness of the beach
  To where the bay runs up its latest horn.
  We left the dying ebb that faintly lipp'd
  The flat red granite; so by many a sweep
  Of meadow smooth from aftermath we reach'd
  The griffin-guarded gates and pass'd thro' all
  The pillar'd dusk [2] of sounding sycamores
  And cross'd the garden to the gardener's lodge,
  With all its casements bedded, and its walls
  And chimneys muffled in the leafy vine.
  There, on a slope of orchard, Francis laid
  A damask napkin wrought with horse and hound,
  Brought out a dusky loaf that smelt of home,
  And, half-cut-down, a pasty costly-made,
  Where quail and pigeon, lark and leveret lay,
  Like fossils of the rock, with golden yolks [3]
  Imbedded and injellied; last with these,
  A flask of cider from his father's vats,
  Prime, which I knew; and so we sat and eat
  And talk'd old matters over; who was dead,
  Who married, who was like to be, and how
  The races went, and who would rent the hall:
  Then touch'd upon the game, how scarce it was
  This season; glancing thence, discuss'd the farm,
  The fourfield system, and the price of grain; [4]
  And struck upon the corn-laws, where we split,
  And came again together on the king
  With heated faces; till he laugh'd aloud;
  And, while the blackbird on the pippin hung
  To hear him, clapt his hand in mine and sang--
  "Oh! who would fight and march and counter-march,
  Be shot for sixpence in a battle-field,
  And shovell'd up into a [5] bloody trench
  Where no one knows? but let me live my life.
  "Oh! who would cast and balance at a desk,
  Perch'd like a crow upon a three-legg'd stool,
  Till all his juice is dried, and all his joints
  Are full of chalk? but let me live my life.
  "Who'd serve the state? for if I carved my name
  Upon the cliffs that guard my native land,
  I might as well have traced it in the sands;
  The sea wastes all: but let me live my life.
  "Oh! who would love? I wooed a woman once,
  But she was sharper than an eastern wind,
  And all my heart turn'd from her, as a thorn
  Turns from the sea: but let me live my life."
  He sang his song, and I replied with mine:
  I found it in a volume, all of songs,
  Knock'd down to me, when old Sir Robert's pride,
  His books--the more the pity, so I said--
  Came to the hammer here in March--and this--
  I set the words, and added names I knew.
  "Sleep, Ellen Aubrey, sleep and dream of me:
  Sleep, Ellen, folded in thy sister's arm,
  And sleeping, haply dream her arm is mine.
  "Sleep, Ellen, folded in Emilia's arm;
  Emilia, fairer than all else but thou,
  For thou art fairer than all else that is.
  "Sleep, breathing health and peace upon her breast:
  Sleep, breathing love and trust against her lip:
  I go to-night: I come to-morrow morn.
  "I go, but I return: I would I were
  The pilot of the darkness and the dream.
  Sleep, Ellen Aubrey, love, and dream of me."
  So sang we each to either, Francis Hale,
  The farmer's son who lived across the bay,
  My friend; and I, that having wherewithal,
  And in the fallow leisure of my life
  A rolling stone of here and everywhere, [6]
  Did what I would; but ere the night we rose
  And saunter'd home beneath a moon that, just
  In crescent, dimly rain'd about the leaf
  Twilights of airy silver, till we reach'd
  The limit of the hills; and as we sank
  From rock to rock upon the gloomy quay,
  The town was hush'd beneath us: lower down
  The bay was oily-calm: the harbour buoy
  With one green sparkle ever and anon [7]
  Dipt by itself, and we were glad at heart. [8]


[Footnote 1: 1842 to 1850. Through.]

[Footnote 2: 'cf'. Milton, 'Paradise Lost', ix., 1106-7:--

  A pillar'd shade
  High overarch'd.]


[Footnote 3: 1842. Golden yokes.]

[Footnote 4: That is planting turnips, barley, clover and wheat, by
which land is kept constantly fresh and vigorous.]

[Footnote 5: 1872. Some.]

[Footnote 6: Inserted in 1857.]

[Footnote 7: Here was inserted, in 1872, the line--Sole star of
phosphorescence in the calm.]

[Footnote 8: Like the shepherd in Homer at the moonlit landscape,
'gegaethe de te phrena poimaen', 'Il'., viii., 559.]






WALKING TO THE MAIL

First published in 1842. Not altered in any respect after 1853.


'John'.  I'm glad I walk'd.
         How fresh the meadows look
         Above the river, and, but a month ago,
         The whole hill-side was redder than a fox.
         Is yon plantation where this byway joins
         The turnpike? [1]

'James'. Yes.

'John'.  And when does this come by?

'James'. The mail? At one o'clock.

'John'.  What is it now?

James'.  A quarter to.

'John'.  Whose house is that I see? [2]
         No, not the County Member's with the vane:
         Up higher with the yewtree by it, and half
         A score of gables.

'James'. That? Sir Edward Head's:
         But he's abroad: the place is to be sold.

'John'.  Oh, his. He was not broken?

'James'. No, sir, he,
         Vex'd with a morbid devil in his blood
         That veil'd the world with jaundice, hid his face
         From all men, and commercing with himself,
         He lost the sense that handles daily life--
         That keeps us all in order more or less--
         And sick of home went overseas for change.

'John'.  And whither?

'James'. Nay, who knows? he's here and there.
         But let him go; his devil goes with him,
         As well as with his tenant, Jockey Dawes.

'John'.  What's that?

'James-. You saw the man--on Monday, was it?--[3]
         There by the hump-back'd willow; half stands up
         And bristles; half has fall'n and made a bridge;
         And there he caught the younker tickling trout--
         Caught in 'flagrante'--what's the Latin word?--
         'Delicto'; but his house, for so they say,
         Was haunted with a jolly ghost, that shook
         The curtains, whined in lobbies, tapt at doors,
         And rummaged like a rat: no servant stay'd:
         The farmer vext packs up his beds and chairs,
         And all his household stuff; and with his boy
         Betwixt his knees, his wife upon the tilt,
         Sets out, [4] and meets a friend who hails him,
         "What! You're flitting!" "Yes, we're flitting," says the ghost
         (For they had pack'd the thing among the beds).
         "Oh, well," says he, "you flitting with us too--
         Jack, turn the horses' heads and home again". [5]

'John'.  He left 'his' wife behind; for so I heard.

'James'. He left her, yes. I met my lady once:
         A woman like a butt, and harsh as crabs.

'John'.  Oh, yet, but I remember, ten years back--
         'Tis now at least ten years--and then she was--
         You could not light upon a sweeter thing:
         A body slight and round and like a pear
         In growing, modest eyes, a hand a foot
         Lessening in perfect cadence, and a skin
         As clean and white as privet when it flowers.

'James'. Ay, ay, the blossom fades and they that loved
         At first like dove and dove were cat and dog.
         She was the daughter of a cottager,
         Out of her sphere. What betwixt shame and pride,
         New things and old, himself and her, she sour'd
         To what she is: a nature never kind!
         Like men, like manners: like breeds like, they say.
         Kind nature is the best: those manners next
         That fit us like a nature second-hand;
         Which are indeed the manners of the great.

'John'.  But I had heard it was this bill that past,
         And fear of change at home, that drove him hence.

'James'. That was the last drop in the cup of gall.
         I once was near him, when his bailiff brought
         A Chartist pike. You should have seen him wince
         As from a venomous thing: he thought himself
         A mark for all, and shudder'd, lest a cry
         Should break his sleep by night, and his nice eyes
         Should see the raw mechanic's bloody thumbs
         Sweat on his blazon'd chairs; but, sir, you know
         That these two parties still divide the world--
         Of those that want, and those that have: and still
         The same old sore breaks out from age to age
         With much the same result. Now I myself, [6]
         A Tory to the quick, was as a boy
         Destructive, when I had not what I would.
         I was at school--a college in the South:
         There lived a flayflint near; we stole his fruit,
         His hens, his eggs; but there was law for 'us';
         We paid in person. He had a sow, sir. She,
         With meditative grunts of much content, [7]
         Lay great with pig, wallowing in sun and mud.
         By night we dragg'd her to the college tower
         From her warm bed, and up the corkscrew stair
         With hand and rope we haled the groaning sow,
         And on the leads we kept her till she pigg'd.
         Large range of prospect had the mother sow,
         And but for daily loss of one she loved,
         As one by one we took them--but for this--
         As never sow was higher in this world--
         Might have been happy: but what lot is pure!
         We took them all, till she was left alone
         Upon her tower, the Niobe of swine,
         And so return'd unfarrowed to her sty.

'John.'  They found you out?

'James.' Not they.

'John.'  Well--after all--What know we of the secret of a man?
         His nerves were wrong. What ails us, who are sound,
         That we should mimic this raw fool the world,
         Which charts us all in its coarse blacks or whites,
         As ruthless as a baby with a worm,
         As cruel as a schoolboy ere he grows
         To Pity--more from ignorance than will,
         But put your best foot forward, or I fear
         That we shall miss the mail: and here it comes
         With five at top: as quaint a four-in-hand
         As you shall see--three pyebalds and a roan.



[Footnote 1: 1842.

'John'.  I'm glad I walk'd. How fresh the country looks!
         Is yonder planting where this byway joins
         The turnpike?]


[Footnote 2: Thus 1843 to 1850:--

'John'.  Whose house is that I see
         Beyond the watermills?

'James'. Sir Edward Head's: But he's abroad, etc.]


[Footnote 3: Thus 1842 to 1851:--

'James'. You saw the man but yesterday:
         He pick'd the pebble from your horse's foot.
         His house was haunted by a jolly ghost
         That rummaged like a rat.]


[Footnote 4: 1842. Sets forth. Added in 1853.]

[Footnote 5: This is a folk-lore story which has its variants, Mr.
Alfred Nutt tells me, in almost every country in Europe. The
Lincolnshire version of it is given in Miss Peacock's MS. collection of
Lincolnshire folk-lore, of which she has most kindly sent me a copy, and
it runs thus:--"There is a house in East Halton which is haunted by a
hob-thrush.... Some years ago, it is said, a family who had lived in the
house for more than a hundred years were much annoyed by it, and
determined to quit the dwelling. They had placed their goods on a
waggon, and were just on the point of starting when a neighbour asked
the farmer whether he was leaving. On this the hobthrush put his head
out of the splash-churn, which was amongst the household stuff, and
said, 'Ay, we're flitting'. Whereupon the farmer decided to give up the
attempt to escape from it and remain where he was." The same story is
told of a Cluricaune in Croker's 'Fairy Legends and Traditions' in the
South of Ireland. See 'The Haunted Cellar' in p. 81 of the edition of
1862, and as Tennyson has elsewhere in 'Guinevere' borrowed a passage
from the same story (see 'Illustrations of Tennyson', p. 152) it is
probable that that was the source of the story here, though there the
Cluricaune uses the expression, "Here we go altogether".]

[Footnote 6: 1842 and 1843. I that am. Now, I that am.]

[Footnote 7: 1842.

         scored upon the part
         Which cherubs want.]







THE EARLY POEMS OF

EDWIN MORRIS;

OR, THE LAKE

This poem first appeared in the seventh edition of the Poems, 1851. It
was written at Llanberis. Several alterations were made in the eighth
edition of 1853, since then none, with the exception of "breath" for
"breaths" in line 66.


  O Me, my pleasant rambles by the lake,
  My sweet, wild, fresh three-quarters of a year,
  My one Oasis in the dust and drouth
  Of city life! I was a sketcher then:
  See here, my doing: curves of mountain, bridge,
  Boat, island, ruins of a castle, built
  When men knew how to build, upon a rock,
  With turrets lichen-gilded like a rock:
  And here, new-comers in an ancient hold,
  New-comers from the Mersey, millionaires,
  Here lived the Hills--a Tudor-chimnied bulk
  Of mellow brickwork on an isle of bowers.
  O me, my pleasant rambles by the lake
  With Edwin Morris and with Edward Bull
  The curate; he was fatter than his cure.

  But Edwin Morris, he that knew the names,
  Long-learned names of agaric, moss and fern, [1]
  Who forged a thousand theories of the rocks,
  Who taught me how to skate, to row, to swim,
  Who read me rhymes elaborately good,
  His own--I call'd him Crichton, for he seem'd
  All-perfect, finish'd to the finger nail.[2]
  And once I ask'd him of his early life,
  And his first passion; and he answer'd me;
  And well his words became him: was he not
  A full-cell'd honeycomb of eloquence
  Stored from all flowers? Poet-like he spoke.

  "My love for Nature is as old as I;
  But thirty moons, one honeymoon to that,
  And three rich sennights more, my love for her.
  My love for Nature and my love for her,
  Of different ages, like twin-sisters grew, [3]
  Twin-sisters differently beautiful.
  To some full music rose and sank the sun,
  And some full music seem'd to move and change
  With all the varied changes of the dark,
  And either twilight and the day between;
  For daily hope fulfill'd, to rise again
  Revolving toward fulfilment, made it sweet
  To walk, to sit, to sleep, to wake, to breathe." [4]

  Or this or something like to this he spoke.
  Then said the fat-faced curate Edward Bull,
  "I take it, God made the woman for the man,
  And for the good and increase of the world,
  A pretty face is well, and this is well,
  To have a dame indoors, that trims us up,
  And keeps us tight; but these unreal ways
  Seem but the theme of writers, and indeed
  Worn threadbare. Man is made of solid stuff.
  I say, God made the woman for the man,
  And for the good and increase of the world."

  "Parson," said I, "you pitch the pipe too low:
  But I have sudden touches, and can run
  My faith beyond my practice into his:
  Tho' if, in dancing after Letty Hill,
  I do not hear the bells upon my cap,
  I scarce hear [5] other music: yet say on.
  What should one give to light on such a dream?"
  I ask'd him half-sardonically.
  "Give? Give all thou art," he answer'd, and a light
  Of laughter dimpled in his swarthy cheek;
  "I would have hid her needle in my heart,
  To save her little finger from a scratch
  No deeper than the skin: my ears could hear
  Her lightest breaths: her least remark was worth
  The experience of the wise. I went and came;
  Her voice fled always thro' the summer land;
  I spoke her name alone. Thrice-happy days!
  The flower of each, those moments when we met,
  The crown of all, we met to part no more."

  Were not his words delicious, I a beast
  To take them as I did? but something jarr'd;
  Whether he spoke too largely; that there seem'd
  A touch of something false, some self-conceit,
  Or over-smoothness: howsoe'er it was,
  He scarcely hit my humour, and I said:--

  "Friend Edwin, do not think yourself alone
  Of all men happy. Shall not Love to me,
  As in the Latin song I learnt at school,
  Sneeze out a full God-bless-you right and left? [6]
  But you can talk: yours is a kindly vein:
  I have I think--Heaven knows--as much within;
  Have or should have, but for a thought or two,
  That like a purple beech [7] among the greens
  Looks out of place: 'tis from no want in her:
  It is my shyness, or my self-distrust,
  Or something of a wayward modern mind
  Dissecting passion. Time will set me right."

  So spoke I knowing not the things that were.
  Then said the fat-faced curate, Edward Bull:
  "God made the woman for the use of man,
  And for the good and increase of the world".
  And I and Edwin laugh'd; and now we paused
  About the windings of the marge to hear
  The soft wind blowing over meadowy holms
  And alders, garden-isles [8]; and now we left
  The clerk behind us, I and he, and ran
  By ripply shallows of the lisping lake,
  Delighted with the freshness and the sound.
  But, when the bracken rusted on their crags,
  My suit had wither'd, nipt to death by him
  That was a God, and is a lawyer's clerk,
  The rentroll Cupid of our rainy isles. [9]

  'Tis true, we met; one hour I had, no more:
  She sent a note, the seal an _Elle vous suit_, [10]
  The close "Your Letty, only yours"; and this
  Thrice underscored. The friendly mist of morn
  Clung to the lake. I boated over, ran
  My craft aground, and heard with beating heart
  The Sweet-Gale rustle round the shelving keel;
  And out I stept, and up I crept: she moved,
  Like Proserpine in Enna, gathering flowers: [11]
  Then low and sweet I whistled thrice; and she,
  She turn'd, we closed, we kiss'd, swore faith, I breathed
  In some new planet: a silent cousin stole
  Upon us and departed: "Leave," she cried,
  "O leave me!" "Never, dearest, never: here
  I brave the worst:" and while we stood like fools
  Embracing, all at once a score of pugs
  And poodles yell'd within, and out they came
  Trustees and Aunts and Uncles. "What, with him!
  "Go" (shrill'd the cottonspinning chorus) "him!"
  I choked. Again they shriek'd the burthen "Him!"
  Again with hands of wild rejection "Go!--
  Girl, get you in!" She went--and in one month [12]
  They wedded her to sixty thousand pounds,
  To lands in Kent and messuages in York,
  And slight Sir Robert with his watery smile
  And educated whisker. But for me,
  They set an ancient creditor to work:
  It seems I broke a close with force and arms:
  There came a mystic token from the king
  To greet the sheriff, needless courtesy!
  I read, and fled by night, and flying turn'd:
  Her taper glimmer'd in the lake below:
  I turn'd once more, close-button'd to the storm;
  So left the place, [13] left Edwin, nor have seen
  Him since, nor heard of her, nor cared to hear.
  Nor cared to hear? perhaps; yet long ago
  I have pardon'd little Letty; not indeed,
  It may be, for her own dear sake but this,
  She seems a part of those fresh days to me;
  For in the dust and drouth of London life
  She moves among my visions of the lake,
  While the prime swallow dips his wing, or then
  While the gold-lily blows, and overhead
  The light cloud smoulders on the summer crag.


[Footnote 1: Agaric (some varieties are deadly) is properly the fungus
on the larch; it then came to mean fungus generally. Minshew calls it "a
white soft mushroom". See Halliwell, 'Dict. of Archaic and Provincial
Words, sub vocent'.]

[Footnote 2: The Latin factus 'ad unguem'. For Crichton, a half-mythical
figure, see Tytler's 'Life' of him.]

[Footnote 3: 1851. Of different ages, like twin-sisters throve.]

[Footnote 4: 1853. To breathe, to wake.]

[Footnote 5: 1872. Have.]

[Footnote 6: The reference is to the 'Acme' and 'Septimius' of Catullus,
xliv.--

  Hoc ut dixit,
  Amor, sinistram, ut ante,
  Dextram sternuit approbationem.]


[Footnote 7: 1851. That like a copper beech.]

[Footnote 8: 1851.

  garden-isles; and now we ran
  By ripply shallows.]


[Footnote 9: 1851. The rainy isles.]

[Footnote 10: Cf. Byron, 'Don Juan', i., xcvii.:--

  The seal a sunflower--'elle vous suit partout'.]


[Footnote 11: 'Cf'. Milton, 'Par. Lost', iv., 268-9:--

  Not that fair field
  Of Enna where Proserpine gathering flowers
  ...
  Was gather'd.]


[Footnote 12: 1851.

  "Go Sir!" Again they shrieked the burthen "Him!"
  Again with hands of wild rejection "Go!
  Girl, get you in" to her--and in one month, etc.]


[Footnote 13: 1851.

  I read and wish'd to crush the race of man,
  And fled by night; turn'd once upon the hills;
  Her taper glimmer'd in the lake; and then
  I left the place, etc.]




ST. SIMEON STYLITES

First published in 1842, reprinted in all the subsequent editions of the
poems but with no alterations in the text, except that in eighth line
from the end "my" was substituted for "mine" in 1846. Tennyson informed
a friend that it was not from the 'Acta Sanctorum', but from Hone's
'Every-Day Book', vol. i., pp. 35-36, that he got the material for this
poem, and a comparison with the narrative in Hone and the poem seems to
show that this was the case.

It is not easy to identify the St. Simeon Stylites of Hone's narrative
and Tennyson's poem, whether he is to be identified with St. Simeon the
Elder, of whom there are three memoirs given in the 'Acta Sanctorum',
tom. i., 5th January, 261-286, or with St. Simeon Stylites, Junior, of
whom there is an elaborate biography in Greek by Nicephorus printed with
a Latin translation and notes in the 'Acta Sanctorum', tom. v., 24th
May, 298-401. It seems clear that whoever compiled the account
popularised by Hone had read both and amalgamated them. The main lines
in the story of both saints are exactly the same. Both stood on columns,
both tortured themselves in the same ways, both wrought miracles, and
both died at their posts of penance. St. Simeon the Elder was born at
Sisan in Syria about A.D. 390, and was buried at Antioch in A.D. 459 or
460. The Simeon the Younger was born at Antioch A. D. 521 and died in
A.D. 592. His life, which is of singular interest, is much more
elaborately related.

This poem is not simply a dramatic study. It bears very directly on
Tennyson's philosophy of life. In these early poems he has given us four
studies in the morbid anatomy of character: 'The Palace of Art', which
illustrates the abuse of aesthetic and intellectual enjoyment of self;
'The Vision of Sin', which illustrates the effects of similar indulgence
in the grosser pleasures of the senses; 'The Two Voices', which
illustrates the mischief of despondent self-absorption, while the
present poem illustrates the equally pernicious indulgence in an
opposite extreme, asceticism affected for the mere gratification of
personal vanity.


  Altho' I be the basest of mankind,
  From scalp to sole one slough and crust of sin,
  Unfit for earth, unfit for heaven, scarce meet
  For troops of devils, mad with blasphemy,
  I will not cease to grasp the hope I hold
  Of saintdom, and to clamour, morn and sob,
  Battering the gates of heaven with storms of prayer,
  Have mercy, Lord, and take away my sin.
  Let this avail, just, dreadful, mighty God,
  This not be all in vain that thrice ten years,
  Thrice multiplied by superhuman pangs,
  In hungers and in thirsts, fevers and cold,
  In coughs, aches, stitches, ulcerous throes and cramps,
  A sign betwixt the meadow and the cloud,
  Patient on this tall pillar I have borne
  Rain, wind, frost, heat, hail, damp, and sleet, and snow;
  And I had hoped that ere this period closed
  Thou wouldst have caught me up into Thy rest,
  Denying not these weather-beaten limbs
  The meed of saints, the white robe and the palm.
  O take the meaning, Lord: I do not breathe,
  Not whisper, any murmur of complaint.
  Pain heap'd ten-hundred-fold to this, were still
  Less burthen, by ten-hundred-fold, to bear,
  Than were those lead-like tons of sin, that crush'd
  My spirit flat before thee. O Lord, Lord,
  Thou knowest I bore this better at the first,
  For I was strong and hale of body then;
  And tho' my teeth, which now are dropt away,
  Would chatter with the cold, and all my beard
  Was tagg'd with icy fringes in the moon,
  I drown'd the whoopings of the owl with sound
  Of pious hymns and psalms, and sometimes saw
  An angel stand and watch me, as I sang.
  Now am I feeble grown; my end draws nigh;
  I hope my end draws nigh: half deaf I am,
  So that I scarce can hear the people hum
  About the column's base, and almost blind,
  And scarce can recognise the fields I know;
  And both my thighs are rotted with the dew;
  Yet cease I not to clamour and to cry,
  While my stiff spine can hold my weary head,
  Till all my limbs drop piecemeal from the stone,
  Have mercy, mercy: take away my sin.
  O Jesus, if thou wilt not save my soul,
  Who may be saved? who is it may be saved?
  Who may be made a saint, if I fail here?
  Show me the man hath suffered more than I.
  For did not all thy martyrs die one death?
  For either they were stoned, or crucified,
  Or burn'd in fire, or boil'd in oil, or sawn
  In twain beneath the ribs; but I die here
  To-day, and whole years long, a life of death.
  Bear witness, if I could have found a way
  (And heedfully I sifted all my thought)
  More slowly-painful to subdue this home
  Of sin, my flesh, which I despise and hate,
  I had not stinted practice, O my God.
  For not alone this pillar-punishment, [1]
  Not this alone I bore: but while I lived
  In the white convent down the valley there,
  For many weeks about my loins I wore
  The rope that haled the buckets from the well,
  Twisted as tight as I could knot the noose;
  And spake not of it to a single soul,
  Until the ulcer, eating thro' my skin,
  Betray'd my secret penance, so that all
  My brethren marvell'd greatly. More than this
  I bore, whereof, O God, thou knowest all.[2]
  Three winters, that my soul might grow to thee,
  I lived up there on yonder mountain side.
  My right leg chain'd into the crag, I lay
  Pent in a roofless close of ragged stones;
  Inswathed sometimes in wandering mist, and twice
  Black'd with thy branding thunder, and sometimes
  Sucking the damps for drink, and eating not,
  Except the spare chance-gift of those that came
  To touch my body and be heal'd, and live:
  And they say then that I work'd miracles,
  Whereof my fame is loud amongst mankind,
  Cured lameness, palsies, cancers. Thou, O God,
  Knowest alone whether this was or no.
  Have mercy, mercy; cover all my sin.

  Then, that I might be more alone with thee, [3]
  Three years I lived upon a pillar, high
  Six cubits, and three years on one of twelve;
  And twice three years I crouch'd on one that rose
  Twenty by measure; last of all, I grew
  Twice ten long weary weary years to this,
  That numbers forty cubits from the soil.
  I think that I have borne as much as this--
  Or else I dream--and for so long a time,
  If I may measure time by yon slow light,
  And this high dial, which my sorrow crowns--
  So much--even so. And yet I know not well,
  For that the evil ones comes here, and say,
  "Fall down, O Simeon: thou hast suffer'd long
  For ages and for ages!" then they prate
  Of penances I cannot have gone thro',
  Perplexing me with lies; and oft I fall,
  Maybe for months, in such blind lethargies,
  That Heaven, and Earth, and Time are choked. But yet
  Bethink thee, Lord, while thou and all the saints
  Enjoy themselves in Heaven, and men on earth
  House in the shade of comfortable roofs,
  Sit with their wives by fires, eat wholesome food,
  And wear warm clothes, and even beasts have stalls,
  I, 'tween the spring and downfall of the light,
  Bow down one thousand and two hundred times,
  To Christ, the Virgin Mother, and the Saints;
  Or in the night, after a little sleep,
  I wake: the chill stars sparkle; I am wet
  With drenching dews, or stiff with crackling frost.
  I wear an undress'd goatskin on my back;
  A grazing iron collar grinds my neck;
  And in my weak, lean arms I lift the cross,
  And strive and wrestle with thee till I die:
  O mercy, mercy! wash away my sin.
  O Lord, thou knowest what a man I am;
  A sinful man, conceived and born in sin:
  'Tis their own doing; this is none of mine;
  Lay it not to me. Am I to blame for this,
  That here come those that worship me? Ha! ha!
  They think that I am somewhat. What am I?
  The silly people take me for a saint,
  And bring me offerings of fruit and flowers:
  And I, in truth (thou wilt bear witness here)
  Have all in all endured as much, and more
  Than many just and holy men, whose names
  Are register'd and calendar'd for saints.
  Good people, you do ill to kneel to me.
  What is it I can have done to merit this?
  I am a sinner viler than you all.
  It may be I have wrought some miracles, [4]
  And cured some halt and maim'd; but what of that?
  It may be, no one, even among the saints,
  May match his pains with mine; but what of that?
  Yet do not rise: for you may look on me,
  And in your looking you may kneel to God.
  Speak! is there any of you halt or maim'd?
  I think you know I have some power with Heaven
  From my long penance: let him speak his wish.
  Yes, I can heal. Power goes forth from me.
  They say that they are heal'd. Ah, hark! they shout
  "St. Simeon Stylites". Why, if so,
  God reaps a harvest in me. O my soul,
  God reaps a harvest in thee. If this be,
  Can I work miracles and not be saved?
  This is not told of any. They were saints.
  It cannot be but that I shall be saved;
  Yea, crown'd a saint. They shout, "Behold a saint!"
  And lower voices saint me from above.
  Courage, St. Simeon! This dull chrysalis
  Cracks into shining wings, and hope ere death
  Spreads more and more and more, that God hath now
  Sponged and made blank of crimeful record all
  My mortal archives. O my sons, my sons,
  I, Simeon of the pillar, by surname Stylites, among men;
  I, Simeon, The watcher on the column till the end;
  I, Simeon, whose brain the sunshine bakes;
  I, whose bald brows in silent hours become
  Unnaturally hoar with rime, do now
  From my high nest of penance here proclaim
  That Pontius and Iscariot by my side
  Show'd like fair seraphs. On the coals I lay,
  A vessel full of sin: all hell beneath
  Made me boil over. Devils pluck'd my sleeve; [5]
  Abaddon and Asmodeus caught at me.
  I smote them with the cross; they swarm'd again.
  In bed like monstrous apes they crush'd my chest:
  They flapp'd my light out as I read: I saw
  Their faces grow between me and my book:
  With colt-like whinny and with hoggish whine
  They burst my prayer. Yet this way was left,
  And by this way I'scaped them. Mortify
  Your flesh, like me, with scourges and with thorns;
  Smite, shrink not, spare not. If it may be, fast
  Whole Lents, and pray. I hardly, with slow steps,
  With slow, faint steps, and much exceeding pain,
  Have scrambled past those pits of fire, that still
  Sing in mine ears. But yield not me the praise:
  God only thro' his bounty hath thought fit,
  Among the powers and princes of this world,
  To make me an example to mankind,
  Which few can reach to. Yet I do not say
  But that a time may come--yea, even now,
  Now, now, his footsteps smite the threshold stairs
  Of life--I say, that time is at the doors
  When you may worship me without reproach;
  For I will leave my relics in your land,
  And you may carve a shrine about my dust,
  And burn a fragrant lamp before my bones,
  When I am gather'd to the glorious saints.
  While I spake then, a sting of shrewdest pain
  Ran shrivelling thro' me, and a cloudlike change,
  In passing, with a grosser film made thick
  These heavy, horny eyes. The end! the end!
  Surely the end! What's here? a shape, a shade,
  A flash of light. Is that the angel there
  That holds a crown? Come, blessed brother, come,
  I know thy glittering face. I waited long;
  My brows are ready. What! deny it now?
  Nay, draw, draw, draw nigh. So I clutch it. Christ!
  'Tis gone: 'tis here again; the crown! the crown! [6]
  So now 'tis fitted on and grows to me,
  And from it melt the dews of Paradise,
  Sweet! sweet! spikenard, and balm, and frankincense.
  Ah! let me not be fool'd, sweet saints: I trust
  That I am whole, and clean, and meet for Heaven.
  Speak, if there be a priest, a man of God,
  Among you there, and let him presently
  Approach, and lean a ladder on the shaft,
  And climbing up into my airy home,
  Deliver me the blessed sacrament;
  For by the warning of the Holy Ghost,
  I prophesy that I shall die to-night,
  A quarter before twelve. [7] But thou, O Lord,
  Aid all this foolish people; let them take
  Example, pattern: lead them to thy light.

[Footnote 1: For this incident 'cf. Acta', v., 317:

  "Petit aliquando ab aliquo ad se invisente funem, acceptumque circa
  corpus convolvit constringitque tarn arete ut, exes carne, qu istuc
  mollis admodum ac tenera est, nud cost exstarent".

The same is told also of the younger Stylites, where the incident of
concealing the torture is added, 'Acta', i., 265.]


[Footnote 2: For this retirement to a mountain see 'Acta', i., 270, and
it is referred to in the other lives:

  "Post hc egressus occulte perrexit in montem non longe a monasterio,
  ibique sibi clausulam de sicc petr fecit, et stetit sic annos
  tres."]


[Footnote 3: In accurate accordance with the third life, 'Acta',
i., 277:

  "Primum quidem columna ad sex erecta cubitos est, deinde ad duodecim,
  post ad vigenti extensa est";

but for the thirty-six cubits which is assigned as the height of the
last column Tennyson's authority, drawing on another account ('Id'.,
271), substitutes forty:

  "Fecerunt illi columnam habentem cubitos quadraginta".]


[Footnote 4: For the miracles wrought by him see all the lives.]

[Footnote 5:  These details seem taken from the well-known stories about
Luther and Bunyan. All that the 'Acta' say about St. Simeon is that
he was pestered by devils.]

[Footnote 6: The 'Acta' say nothing about the crown, but dwell on the
supernatural fragrance which exhaled from the saint.]

[Footnote 7: Tennyson has given a very poor substitute for the
beautifully pathetic account given of the death of St. Simeon in 'Acta',
i., 168, and again in the ninth chapter of the second Life, 'Ibid'.,
273. But this is to be explained perhaps by the moral purpose of the
poem.]







THE TALKING OAK

First published in 1842, and republished in all subsequent editions with
only two slight alterations: in line 113 a mere variant in spelling, and
in line 185, where in place of the present reading the editions between
1842 and 1848 read, "For, ah! the Dryad-days were brief".

Tennyson told Mr. Aubrey de Vere that the poem was an experiment meant
to test the degree in which it is in the power of poetry to humanise
external nature. Tennyson might have remembered that Ovid had made the
same experiment nearly two thousand years ago, while Goethe had
immediately anticipated him in his charming 'Der Junggesett und der
Mhlbach'. There was certainly no novelty in such an attempt. The poem
is in parts charmingly written, but the oak is certainly "garrulously
given," and comes perilously near to tediousness.


  Once more the gate behind me falls;
  Once more before my face
  I see the moulder'd Abbey-walls,
  That stand within the chace.

  Beyond the lodge the city lies,
  Beneath its drift of smoke;
  And ah! with what delighted eyes
  I turn to yonder oak.

  For when my passion first began,
  Ere that, which in me burn'd,
  The love, that makes me thrice a man,
  Could hope itself return'd;

  To yonder oak within the field
  I spoke without restraint,
  And with a larger faith appeal'd
  Than Papist unto Saint.

  For oft I talk'd with him apart,
  And told him of my choice,
  Until he plagiarised a heart,
  And answer'd with a voice.

  Tho' what he whisper'd, under Heaven
  None else could understand;
  I found him garrulously given,
  A babbler in the land.

  But since I heard him make reply
  Is many a weary hour;
  'Twere well to question him, and try
  If yet he keeps the power.

  Hail, hidden to the knees in fern,
  Broad Oak of Sumner-chace,
  Whose topmost branches can discern
  The roofs of Sumner-place!

  Say thou, whereon I carved her name,
  If ever maid or spouse,
  As fair as my Olivia, came
  To rest beneath thy boughs.--

  "O Walter, I have shelter'd here
  Whatever maiden grace
  The good old Summers, year by year,
  Made ripe in Sumner-chace:

  "Old Summers, when the monk was fat,
  And, issuing shorn and sleek,
  Would twist his girdle tight, and pat
  The girls upon the cheek.

  "Ere yet, in scorn of Peter's-pence,
  And number'd bead, and shrift,
  Bluff Harry broke into the spence, [1]
  And turn'd the cowls adrift:

  "And I have seen some score of those
  Fresh faces, that would thrive
  When his man-minded offset rose
  To chase the deer at five;

  "And all that from the town would stroll,
  Till that wild wind made work
  In which the gloomy brewer's soul
  Went by me, like a stork:

  "The slight she-slips of loyal blood,
  And others, passing praise,
  Strait-laced, but all too full in bud
  For puritanic stays: [2]

  "And I have shadow'd many a group
  Of beauties, that were born
  In teacup-times of hood and hoop,
  Or while the patch was worn;

  "And, leg and arm with love-knots gay,
  About me leap'd and laugh'd
  The Modish Cupid of the day,
  And shrill'd his tinsel shaft.

  "I swear (and else may insects prick
  Each leaf into a gall)
  This girl, for whom your heart is sick,
  Is three times worth them all;

  "For those and theirs, by Nature's law,
  Have faded long ago;
  But in these latter springs I saw
  Your own Olivia blow,

  "From when she gamboll'd on the greens,
  A baby-germ, to when
  The maiden blossoms of her teens
  Could number five from ten.

  "I swear, by leaf, and wind, and rain
  (And hear me with thine ears),
  That, tho' I circle in the grain
  Five hundred rings of years--

  "Yet, since I first could cast a shade,
  Did never creature pass
  So slightly, musically made,
  So light upon the grass:

  "For as to fairies, that will flit
  To make the greensward fresh,
  I hold them exquisitely knit,
  But far too spare of flesh."

  Oh, hide thy knotted knees in fern,
  And overlook the chace;
  And from thy topmost branch discern
  The roofs of Sumner-place.

  But thou, whereon I carved her name,
  That oft hast heard my vows,
  Declare when last Olivia came
  To sport beneath thy boughs.

  "O yesterday, you know, the fair
  Was holden at the town;
  Her father left his good arm-chair,
  And rode his hunter down.

  "And with him Albert came on his.
  I look'd at him with joy:
  As cowslip unto oxlip is,
  So seems she to the boy.

  "An hour had past--and, sitting straight
  Within the low-wheel'd chaise,
  Her mother trundled to the gate
  Behind the dappled grays.

  "But, as for her, she stay'd [3] at home,
  And on the roof she went,
  And down the way you use to come,
  She look'd with discontent.

  "She left the novel half-uncut
  Upon the rosewood shelf;
  She left the new piano shut:
  She could not please herself.

  "Then ran she, gamesome as the colt,
  And livelier than a lark
  She sent her voice thro' all the holt
  Before her, and the park.

  "A light wind chased her on the wing,
  And in the chase grew wild,
  As close as might be would he cling
  About the darling child:

  "But light as any wind that blows
  So fleetly did she stir,
  The flower she touch'd on dipt and rose,
  And turn'd to look at her.

  "And here she came, and round me play'd,
  And sang to me the whole
  Of those three stanzas that you made
  About my 'giant bole';

  "And in a fit of frolic mirth
  She strove to span my waist:
  Alas, I was so broad of girth,
  I could not be embraced.

  "I wish'd myself the fair young beech
  That here beside me stands,
  That round me, clasping each in each,
  She might have lock'd her hands.

  "Yet seem'd the pressure thrice as sweet
  As woodbine's fragile hold,
  Or when I feel about my feet
  The berried briony fold."

  O muffle round thy knees with fern,
  And shadow Sumner-chace!
  Long may thy topmost branch discern
  The roofs of Sumner-place!

  But tell me, did she read the name
  I carved with many vows
  When last with throbbing heart I came
  To rest beneath thy boughs?

  "O yes, she wander'd round and round
  These knotted knees of mine,
  And found, and kiss'd the name she found,
  And sweetly murmur'd thine.

  "A teardrop trembled from its source,
  And down my surface crept.
  My sense of touch is something coarse,
  But I believe she wept.

  "Then flush'd her cheek with rosy light,
  She glanced across the plain;
  But not a creature was in sight:
  She kiss'd me once again.

  "Her kisses were so close and kind,
  That, trust me on my word,
  Hard wood I am, and wrinkled rind,
  But yet my sap was stirr'd:

  "And even into my inmost ring
  A pleasure I discern'd
  Like those blind motions of the Spring,
  That show the year is turn'd.

  "Thrice-happy he that may caress
  The ringlet's waving balm
  The cushions of whose touch may press
  The maiden's tender palm.

  "I, rooted here among the groves,
  But languidly adjust
  My vapid vegetable loves [4]
  With anthers and with dust:

  "For, ah! my friend, the days were brief [5]
  Whereof the poets talk,
  When that, which breathes within the leaf,
  Could slip its bark and walk.

  "But could I, as in times foregone,
  From spray, and branch, and stem,
  Have suck'd and gather'd into one
  The life that spreads in them,

  "She had not found me so remiss;
  But lightly issuing thro',
  I would have paid her kiss for kiss
  With usury thereto."

  O flourish high, with leafy towers,
  And overlook the lea,
  Pursue thy loves among the bowers,
  But leave thou mine to me.

  O flourish, hidden deep in fern,
  Old oak, I love thee well;
  A thousand thanks for what I learn
  And what remains to tell.

  "'Tis little more: the day was warm;
  At last, tired out with play,
  She sank her head upon her arm,
  And at my feet she lay.

  "Her eyelids dropp'd their silken eaves.
  I breathed upon her eyes
  Thro' all the summer of my leaves
  A welcome mix'd with sighs.

  "I took the swarming sound of life--
  The music from the town--
  The murmurs of the drum and fife
  And lull'd them in my own.

  "Sometimes I let a sunbeam slip,
  To light her shaded eye;
  A second flutter'd round her lip
  Like a golden butterfly;

  "A third would glimmer on her neck
  To make the necklace shine;
  Another slid, a sunny fleck,
  From head to ancle fine.

  "Then close and dark my arms I spread,
  And shadow'd all her rest--
  Dropt dews upon her golden head,
  An acorn in her breast.

  "But in a pet she started up,
  And pluck'd it out, and drew
  My little oakling from the cup,
  And flung him in the dew.

  "And yet it was a graceful gift--
  I felt a pang within
  As when I see the woodman lift
  His axe to slay my kin.

  "I shook him down because he was
  The finest on the tree.
  He lies beside thee on the grass.
  O kiss him once for me.

  "O kiss him twice and thrice for me,
  That have no lips to kiss,
  For never yet was oak on lea
  Shall grow so fair as this."

  Step deeper yet in herb and fern,
  Look further thro' the chace,
  Spread upward till thy boughs discern
  The front of Sumner-place.

  This fruit of thine by Love is blest,
  That but a moment lay
  Where fairer fruit of Love may rest
  Some happy future day.

  I kiss it twice, I kiss it thrice,
  The warmth it thence shall win
  To riper life may magnetise
  The baby-oak within.

  But thou, while kingdoms overset,
  Or lapse from hand to hand,
  Thy leaf shall never fail, nor yet
  Thine acorn in the land.

  May never saw dismember thee,
  Nor wielded axe disjoint,
  That art the fairest-spoken tree
  From here to Lizard-point.

  O rock upon thy towery top
  All throats that gurgle sweet!
  All starry culmination drop
  Balm-dews to bathe thy feet!

  All grass of silky feather grow--
  And while he sinks or swells
  The full south-breeze around thee blow
