that life of custom and accident in which many of us pass much of our
time in the world; that life in which we do what we have not purposed,
and speak what we do not mean, and assent to what we do not understand;
that life which is overlaid by the weight of things external to it, and
is moulded by them, instead of assimilating them; that, which instead of
growing and blossoming under any wholesome dew, is crystallised over
with it, as with hoar frost, and becomes to the true life what an
arborescence is to a tree, a candied agglomeration of thoughts and
habits foreign to it, brittle, obstinate, and icy, which can neither
bend nor grow, but must be crushed and broken to bits, if it stand in
our way. All men are liable to be in some degree frost-bitten in this
sort; all are partly encumbered and crusted over with idle matter; only,
if they have real life in them, they are always breaking this bark away
in noble rents, until it becomes, like the black strips upon the birch
tree, only a witness of their own inward strength. But, with all the
efforts that the best men make, much of their being passes in a kind of
dream, in which they indeed move, and play their parts sufficiently, to
the eyes of their fellow-dreamers, but have no clear consciousness of
what is around them, or within them; blind to the one, insensible to the
other, [Greek: nôthroi]. I would not press the definition into its
darker application to the dull heart and heavy ear; I have to do with it
only as it refers to the too frequent condition of natural existence,
whether of nations or individuals, settling commonly upon them in
proportion to their age. The life of a nation is usually, like the flow
of a lava stream, first bright and fierce, then languid and covered, at
last advancing only by the tumbling over and over of its frozen blocks.
And that last condition is a sad one to look upon. All the steps are
marked most clearly in the arts, and in Architecture more than in any
other; for it, being especially dependent, as we have just said, on the
warmth of the true life, is also peculiarly sensible of the hemlock cold
of the false; and I do not know anything more oppressive, when the mind
is once awakened to its characteristics, than the aspect of a dead
architecture. The feebleness of childhood is full of promise and of
interest,--the struggle of imperfect knowledge full of energy and
continuity,--but to see impotence and rigidity settling upon the form of
the developed man; to see the types which once had the die of thought
struck fresh upon them, worn flat by over use; to see the shell of the
living creature in its adult form, when its colors are faded, and its
inhabitant perished,--this is a sight more humiliating, more melancholy,
than the vanishing of all knowledge, and the return to confessed and
helpless infancy.

Nay, it is to be wished that such return were always possible. There
would be hope if we could change palsy into puerility; but I know not
how far we can become children again, and renew our lost life. The
stirring which has taken place in our architectural aims and interests
within these few years, is thought by many to be full of promise: I
trust it is, but it has a sickly look to me. I cannot tell whether it be
indeed a springing of seed or a shaking among bones; and I do not think
the time will be lost which I ask the reader to spend in the inquiry,
how far all that we have hitherto ascertained or conjectured to be the
best in principle, may be formally practised without the spirit or the
vitality which alone could give it influence, value, or delightfulness.

IV. Now, in the first place--and this is rather an important point--it
is no sign of deadness in a present art that it borrows or imitates, but
only if it borrows without paying interest, or if it imitates without
choice. The art of a great nation, which is developed without any
acquaintance with nobler examples than its own early efforts furnish,
exhibits always the most consistent and comprehensible growth, and
perhaps is regarded usually as peculiarly venerable in its
self-origination. But there is something to my mind more majestic yet in
the life of an architecture like that of the Lombards, rude and
infantine in itself, and surrounded by fragments of a nobler art of
which it is quick in admiration and ready in imitation, and yet so
strong in its own new instincts that it re-constructs and re-arranges
every fragment that it copies or borrows into harmony with its own
thoughts,--a harmony at first disjointed and awkward, but completed in
the end, and fused into perfect organisation; all the borrowed elements
being subordinated to its own primal, unchanged life. I do not know any
sensation more exquisite than the discovering of the evidence of this
magnificent struggle into independent existence; the detection of the
borrowed thoughts, nay, the finding of the actual blocks and stones
carved by other hands and in other ages, wrought into the new walls,
with a new expression and purpose given to them, like the blocks of
unsubdued rocks (to go back to our former simile) which we find in the
heart of the lava current, great witnesses to the power which has fused
all but those calcined fragments into the mass of its homogeneous fire.

V. It will be asked, How is imitation to be rendered healthy and vital?
Unhappily, while it is easy to enumerate the signs of life, it is
impossible to define or to communicate life; and while every intelligent
writer on Art has insisted on the difference between the copying found
in an advancing or recedent period, none have been able to communicate,
in the slightest degree, the force of vitality to the copyist over whom
they might have influence. Yet it is at least interesting, if not
profitable, to note that two very distinguishing characters of vital
imitation are, its Frankness and its Audacity; its Frankness is
especially singular; there is never any effort to conceal the degree of
the sources of its borrowing. Raffaelle carries off a whole figure from
Masaccio, or borrows an entire composition from Perugino, with as much
tranquillity and simplicity of innocence as a young Spartan pickpocket;
and the architect of a Romanesque basilica gathered his columns and
capitals where he could find them, as an ant picks up sticks. There is
at least a presumption, when we find this frank acceptance, that there
is a sense within the mind of power capable of transforming and renewing
whatever it adopts; and too conscious, too exalted, to fear the
accusation of plagiarism,--too certain that it can prove, and has
proved, its independence, to be afraid of expressing its homage to what
it admires in the most open and indubitable way; and the necessary
consequence of this sense of power is the other sign I have named--the
Audacity of treatment when it finds treatment necessary, the
unhesitating and sweeping sacrifice of precedent where precedent becomes
inconvenient. For instance, in the characteristic forms of Italian
Romanesque, in which the hypaethral portion of the heathen temple was
replaced by the towering nave, and where, in consequence, the pediment
of the west front became divided into three portions, of which the
central one, like the apex of a ridge of sloping strata lifted by a
sudden fault, was broken away from and raised above the wings; there
remained at the extremities of the aisles two triangular fragments of
pediment, which could not now be filled by any of the modes of
decoration adapted for the unbroken space; and the difficulty became
greater when the central portion of the front was occupied by columnar
ranges, which could not, without painful abruptness, terminate short of
the extremities of the wings. I know not what expedient would have been
adopted by architects who had much respect for precedent, under such
circumstances, but it certainly would not have been that of the
Pisan,--to continue the range of columns into the pedimental space,
shortening them to its extremity until the shaft of the last column
vanished altogether, and there remained only its _capital_ resting in
the angle on its basic plinth. I raise no question at present whether
this arrangement be graceful or otherwise; I allege it only as an
instance of boldness almost without a parallel, casting aside every
received principle that stood in its way, and struggling through every
discordance and difficulty to the fulfilment of its own instincts.

VI. Frankness, however, is in itself no excuse for repetition, nor
audacity for innovation, when the one is indolent and the other unwise.
Nobler and surer signs of vitality must be sought,--signs independent
alike of the decorative or original character of the style, and constant
in every style that is determinedly progressive.

Of these, one of the most important I believe to be a certain neglect or
contempt of refinement in execution, or, at all events, a visible
subordination of execution to conception, commonly involuntary, but not
unfrequently intentional. This is a point, however, on which, while I
speak confidently, I must at the same time reservedly and carefully, as
there would otherwise be much chance of my being dangerously
misunderstood. It has been truly observed and well stated by Lord
Lindsay, that the best designers of Italy were also the most careful in
their workmanship; and that the stability and finish of their masonry,
mosaic, or other work whatsoever, were always perfect in proportion to
the apparent improbability of the great designers condescending to the
care of details among us so despised. Not only do I fully admit and
re-assert this most important fact, but I would insist upon perfect and
most delicate finish in its right place, as a characteristic of all the
highest schools of architecture, as much as it is those of painting.
But on the other hand, as perfect finish belongs to the perfected art, a
progressive finish belongs to progressive art; and I do not think that
any more fatal sign of a stupor or numbness settling upon that
undeveloped art could possibly be detected, than that it had been _taken
aback_ by its own execution, and that the workmanship had gone ahead of
the design; while, even in my admission of absolute finish in the right
place, as an attribute of the perfected school, I must reserve to myself
the right of answering in my own way the two very important questions,
what _is_ finish? and what _is_ its right place?

VII. But in illustrating either of these points, we must remember that
the correspondence of workmanship with thought is, in existent examples,
interfered with by the adoption of the designs of an advanced period by
the workmen of a rude one. All the beginnings of Christian architecture
are of this kind, and the necessary consequence is of course an increase
of the visible interval between the power of realisation and the beauty
of the idea. We have at first an imitation, almost savage in its
rudeness, of a classical design; as the art advances, the design is
modified by a mixture of Gothic grotesqueness, and the execution more
complete, until a harmony is established between the two, in which
balance they advance to new perfection. Now during the whole period in
which the ground is being recovered, there will be found in the living
architecture marks not to be mistaken, of intense impatience; a struggle
towards something unattained, which causes all minor points of handling
to be neglected; and a restless disdain of all qualities which appear
either to confess contentment or to require a time and care which might
be better spent. And, exactly as a good and earnest student of drawing
will not lose time in ruling lines or finishing backgrounds about
studies which, while they have answered his immediate purpose, he knows
to be imperfect and inferior to what he will do hereafter,--so the vigor
of a true school of early architecture, which is either working under
the influence of high example or which is itself in a state of rapid
development, is very curiously traceable, among other signs, in the
contempt of exact symmetry and measurement, which in dead architecture
are the most painful necessities.

  [Illustration: PLATE XII.--(Page 149--Vol. V.)
  FRAGMENTS FROM ABBEVILLE, LUCCA, VENICE, AND PISA.]

VIII. In Plate XII. fig. 1 I have given a most singular instance both of
rude execution and defied symmetry, in the little pillar and spandril
from a panel decoration under the pulpit of St. Mark's at Venice. The
imperfection (not merely simplicity, but actual rudeness and ugliness)
of the leaf ornament will strike the eye at once: this is general in
works of the time, but it is not so common to find a capital which has
been so carelessly cut; its imperfect volutes being pushed up one side
far higher than on the other, and contracted on that side, an additional
drill hole being put in to fill the space; besides this, the member _a_,
of the mouldings, is a roll where it follows the arch, and a flat fillet
at _a_; the one being slurred into the other at the angle _b_, and
finally stopped short altogether at the other side by the most
uncourteous and remorseless interference of the outer moulding: and in
spite of all this, the grace, proportion, and feeling of the whole
arrangement are so great, that, in its place, it leaves nothing to be
desired; all the science and symmetry in the world could not beat it. In
fig. 4 I have endeavored to give some idea of the execution of the
subordinate portions of a much higher work, the pulpit of St. Andrea at
Pistoja, by Nicolo Pisano. It is covered with figure sculptures,
executed with great care and delicacy; but when the sculptor came to the
simple arch mouldings, he did not choose to draw the eye to them by over
precision of work or over sharpness of shadow. The section adopted, _k_,
_m_, is peculiarly simple, and so slight and obtuse in its recessions as
never to produce a sharp line; and it is worked with what at first
appears slovenliness, but it is in fact sculptural _sketching_; exactly
correspondent to a painter's light execution of a background: the lines
appear and disappear again, are sometimes deep, sometimes shallow,
sometimes quite broken off; and the recession of the cusp joins that of
the external arch at _n_, in the most fearless defiance of all
mathematical laws of curvilinear contact.

IX. There is something very delightful in this bold expression of the
mind of the great master. I do not say that it is the "perfect work" of
patience, but I think that impatience is a glorious character in an
advancing school; and I love the Romanesque and early Gothic especially,
because they afford so much room for it; accidental carelessness of
measurement or of execution being mingled undistinguishably with the
purposed departures from symmetrical regularity, and the luxuriousness
of perpetually variable fancy, which are eminently characteristic of
both styles. How great, how frequent they are, and how brightly the
severity of architectural law is relieved by their grace and suddenness,
has not, I think, been enough observed; still less, the unequal
measurements of even important features professing to be absolutely
symmetrical. I am not so familiar with modern practice as to speak with
confidence respecting its ordinary precision; but I imagine that the
following measures of the western front of the cathedral of Pisa, would
be looked upon by present architects as very blundering approximations.
That front is divided into seven arched compartments, of which the
second, fourth or central, and sixth contain doors; the seven are in a
most subtle alternating proportion; the central being the largest, next
to it the second and sixth, then the first and seventh, lastly the third
and fifth. By this arrangement, of course, these three pairs should be
equal; and they are so to the eye, but I found their actual measures to
be the following, taken from pillar to pillar, in Italian braccia, palmi
(four inches each), and inches:--

                                        Braccia. Palmi. Inches. Total in
                                                                inches.
  1. Central door                            8      0     0    = 192
  2. Northern door   }                       6      3    1-1/2 = 157-1/2
  3. Southern door   }                       6      4     3    = 163
  4. Extreme northern space  }               5      5    3-1/2 = 143-1/2
  5. Extreme southern space  }               6      1    0-1/2 = 148-1/2
  6. Northern intervals between the doors }  5      2     1    = 129
  7. Southern intervals between the doors }  5      2    1-1/2 = 129-1/2

There is thus a difference, severally, between 2, 3 and 4, 5, of five
inches and a half in the one case, and five inches in the other.

X. This, however, may perhaps be partly attributable to some
accommodation of the accidental distortions which evidently took place
in the walls of the cathedral during their building, as much as in those
of the campanile. To my mind, those of the Duomo are far the most
wonderful of the two: I do not believe that a single pillar of its walls
is absolutely vertical: the pavement rises and falls to different
heights, or rather the plinth of the walls sinks into it continually to
different depths, the whole west front literally overhangs (I have not
plumbed it; but the inclination may be seen by the eye, by bringing it
into visual contact with the upright pilasters of the Campo Santo): and
a most extraordinary distortion in the masonry of the southern wall
shows that this inclination had begun when the first story was built.
The cornice above the first arcade of that wall touches the tops of
eleven out of its fifteen arches; but it suddenly leaves the tops of the
four westernmost; the arches nodding westward and sinking into the
ground, while the cornice rises (or seems to rise), leaving at any rate,
whether by the rise of the one or the fall of the other, an interval of
more than two feet between it and the top of the western arch, filled by
added courses of masonry. There is another very curious evidence of this
struggle of the architect with his yielding wall in the columns of the
main entrance. (These notices are perhaps somewhat irrelevant to our
immediate subject, but they appear to me highly interesting; and they,
at all events, prove one of the points on which I would insist,--how
much of imperfection and variety in things professing to be symmetrical
the eyes of those eager builders could endure: they looked to loveliness
in detail, to nobility in the whole, never to petty measurements.) Those
columns of the principal entrance are among the loveliest in Italy;
cylindrical, and decorated with a rich arabesque of sculptured foliage,
which at the base extends nearly all round them, up to the black
pilaster in which they are lightly engaged: but the shield of foliage,
bounded by a severe line, narrows to their tops, where it covers their
frontal segment only; thus giving, when laterally seen, a terminal line
sloping boldly outwards, which, as I think, was meant to conceal the
accidental leaning of the western walls, and, by its exaggerated
inclination in the same direction, to throw them by comparison into a
seeming vertical.

XI. There is another very curious instance of distortion above the
central door of the west front. All the intervals between the seven
arches are filled with black marble, each containing in its centre a
white parallelogram filled with animal mosaics, and the whole surmounted
by a broad white band, which, generally, does not touch the
parallelogram below. But the parallelogram on the north of the central
arch has been forced into an oblique position, and touches the white
band; and, as if the architect was determined to show that he did not
care whether it did or not, the white band suddenly gets thicker at that
place, and remains so over the two next arches. And these differences
are the more curious because the workmanship of them all is most
finished and masterly, and the distorted stones are fitted with as much
neatness as if they tallied to a hair's breadth. There is no look of
slurring or blundering about it; it is all coolly filled in, as if the
builder had no sense of anything being wrong or extraordinary: I only
wish we had a little of his impudence.

XII. Still, the reader will say that all these variations are probably
dependent more on the bad foundation than on the architect's feeling.
Not so the exquisite delicacies of change in the proportions and
dimensions of the apparently symmetrical arcades of the west front. It
will be remembered that I said the tower of Pisa was the only ugly tower
in Italy, because its tiers were equal, or nearly so, in height; a fault
this, so contrary to the spirit of the builders of the time, that it can
be considered only as an unlucky caprice. Perhaps the general aspect of
the west front of the cathedral may then have occurred to the reader's
mind, as seemingly another contradiction of the rule I had advanced. It
would not have been so, however, even had its four upper arcades been
actually equal; as they are subordinated to the great seven-arched lower
story, in the manner before noticed respecting the spire of Salisbury,
and as is actually the case in the Duomo of Lucca and Tower of Pistoja.
But the Pisan front is far more subtly proportioned. Not one of its four
arcades is of like height with another. The highest is the third,
counting upwards; and they diminish in nearly arithmetical proportion
alternately; in the order 3rd, 1st, 2nd, 4th. The inequalities in their
arches are not less remarkable: they at first strike the eye as all
equal; but there is a grace about them which equality never obtained: on
closer observation, it is perceived that in the first row of nineteen
arches, eighteen are equal, and the central one larger than the rest; in
the second arcade, the nine central arches stand over the nine below,
having, like them, the ninth central one largest. But on their flanks,
where is the slope of the shoulder-like pediment, the arches vanish, and
a wedge-shaped frieze takes their place, tapering outwards, in order to
allow the columns to be carried to the extremity of the pediment; and
here, where the heights of the shafts are so far shortened, they are set
thicker; five shafts, or rather four and a capital, above, to four of
the arcade below, giving twenty-one intervals instead of nineteen. In
the next or third arcade,--which, remember, is the highest,--eight
arches, all equal, are given in the space of the nine below, so that
there is now a central shaft instead of a central arch, and the span of
the arches is increased in proportion to their increased height.
Finally, in the uppermost arcade, which is the lowest of all, the
arches, the same in number as those below, are narrower than any of the
façade; the whole eight going very nearly above the six below them,
while the terminal arches of the lower arcade are surmounted by flanking
masses of decorated wall with projecting figures.

XIV. Now I call _that_ Living Architecture. There is sensation in every
inch of it, and an accommodation to every architectural necessity, with
a determined variation in arrangement, which is exactly like the related
proportions and provisions in the structure of organic form. I have not
space to examine the still lovelier proportioning of the external shafts
of the apse of this marvellous building. I prefer, lest the reader
should think it a peculiar example, to state the structure of another
church, the most graceful and grand piece of Romanesque work, as a
fragment, in north Italy, that of San Giovanni Evangelista at Pistoja.

The side of that church has three stories of arcade, diminishing in
height in bold geometrical proportion, while the arches, for the most
part, increase in number in arithmetical, _i.e._ two in the second
arcade, and three in the third, to one in the first. Lest, however, this
arrangement should be too formal, of the fourteen arches in the lowest
series, that which contains the door is made larger than the rest, and
is not in the middle, but the sixth from the West, leaving five on one
side and eight on the other. Farther: this lowest arcade is terminated
by broad flat pilasters, about half the width of its arches; but the
arcade above is continuous; only the two extreme arches at the west end
are made larger than all the rest, and instead of coming, as they
should, into the space of the lower extreme arch, take in both it and
its broad pilaster. Even this, however, was not out of order enough to
satisfy the architect's eye; for there were still two arches above to
each single one below: so at the east end, where there are more arches,
and the eye might be more easily cheated, what does he do but _narrow_
the two extreme _lower_ arches by half a braccio; while he at the same
time slightly enlarged the upper ones, so as to get only seventeen upper
to nine lower, instead of eighteen to nine. The eye is thus thoroughly
confused, and the whole building thrown into one mass, by the curious
variations in the adjustments of the superimposed shafts, not one of
which is either exactly in nor positively out of its place; and, to get
this managed the more cunningly, there is from an inch to an inch and a
half of gradual gain in the space of the four eastern arches, besides
the confessed half braccio. Their measures, counting from the east, I
found as follows:--

         Braccia. Palmi. Inches.

  1st       3        0      1
  2nd       3        0      2
  3rd       3        3      2
  4th       3        3      3-1/2

The upper arcade is managed on the same principle; it looks at first as
if there were three arches to each under pair; but there are, in
reality, only thirty-eight (or thirty-seven, I am not quite certain of
this number) to the twenty-seven below; and the columns get into all
manner of relative positions. Even then, the builder was not satisfied,
but must needs carry the irregularity into the spring of the arches, and
actually, while the general effect is of a symmetrical arcade, there is
not one of the arches the same in height as another; their tops undulate
all along the wall like waves along a harbor quay, some nearly touching
the string course above, and others falling from it as much as five or
six inches.

XIV. Let us next examine the plan of the west front of St. Mark's at
Venice, which, though in many respects imperfect, is in its proportions,
and as a piece of rich and fantastic color, as lovely a dream as ever
filled human imagination. It may, perhaps, however, interest the reader
to hear one opposite opinion upon this subject, and after what has been
urged in the preceding pages respecting proportion in general, more
especially respecting the wrongness of balanced cathedral towers and
other regular designs, together with my frequent references to the
Doge's palace, and campanile of St. Mark's, as models of perfection, and
my praise of the former especially as projecting above its second
arcade, the following extracts from the journal of Wood the architect,
written on his arrival at Venice, may have a pleasing freshness in them,
and may show that I have not been stating principles altogether trite or
accepted.

"The strange looking church, and the great ugly campanile, could not be
mistaken. The exterior of this church surprises you by its extreme
ugliness, more than by anything else."

"The Ducal Palace is even more ugly than anything I have previously
mentioned. Considered in detail, I can imagine no alteration to make it
tolerable; but if this lofty wall had been _set back behind_ the two
stories of little arches, it would have been a very noble production."

After more observations on "a certain justness of proportion," and on
the appearance of riches and power in the church, to which he ascribes a
pleasing effect, he goes on: "Some persons are of opinion that
irregularity is a necessary part of its excellence. I am decidedly of a
contrary opinion, and am convinced that a regular design of the same
sort would be far superior. Let an oblong of good architecture, but not
very showy, conduct to a fine cathedral, which should appear between
_two lofty towers_ and have _two obelisks_ in front, and on each side of
this cathedral let other squares partially open into the first, and one
of these extend down to a harbor or sea shore, and you would have a
scene which might challenge any thing in existence."

Why Mr. Wood was unable to enjoy the color of St. Mark's, or perceive
the majesty of the Ducal Palace, the reader will see after reading the
two following extracts regarding the Caracci and Michael Angelo.

"The pictures here (Bologna) are to my taste far preferable to those of
Venice, for if the Venetian school surpass in coloring, and, perhaps, in
composition, the Bolognese is decidedly superior in drawing and
expression, and the Caraccis _shine here like Gods_."

"What is it that is so much admired in this artist (M. Angelo)? Some
contend for a grandeur of composition in the lines and disposition of
the figures; this, I confess, I do not comprehend; yet, while I
acknowledge the beauty of certain forms and proportions in architecture,
I cannot consistently deny that similar merits may exist in painting,
though I am unfortunately unable to appreciate them."

I think these passages very valuable, as showing the effect of a
contracted knowledge and false taste in painting upon an architect's
understanding of his own art; and especially with what curious notions,
or lack of notions, about proportion, that art has been sometimes
practised. For Mr. Wood is by no means unintelligent in his observations
generally, and his criticisms on classical art are often most valuable.
But those who love Titian better than the Caracci, and who see something
to admire in Michael Angelo, will, perhaps, be willing to proceed with
me to a charitable examination of St. Mark's. For, although, the present
course of European events affords us some chance of seeing the changes
proposed by Mr. Wood carried into execution, we may still esteem
ourselves fortunate in having first known how it was left by the
builders of the eleventh century.

XV. The entire front is composed of an upper and lower series of arches,
enclosing spaces of wall decorated with mosaic, and supported on ranges
of shafts of which, in the lower series of arches, there is an upper
range superimposed on a lower. Thus we have five vertical divisions of
the façade; _i.e._ two tiers of shafts, and the arched wall they bear,
below; one tier of shafts, and the arched wall they bear, above. In
order, however, to bind the two main divisions together, the central
lower arch (the main entrance) rises above the level of the gallery and
balustrade which crown the lateral arches.

The proportioning of the columns and walls of the lower story is so
lovely and so varied, that it would need pages of description before it
could be fully understood; but it may be generally stated thus: The
height of the lower shafts, upper shafts, and wall, being severally
expressed by _a_, _b_, and _c_, then _a_:_c_::_c_:_b_ (_a_ being the
highest); and the diameter of shaft _b_ is generally to the diameter of
shaft _a_ as height _b_ is to height _a_, or something less, allowing
for the large plinth which diminishes the apparent height of the upper
shaft: and when this is their proportion of width, one shaft above is
put above one below, with sometimes another upper shaft interposed: but
in the extreme arches a single under shaft bears two upper, proportioned
as truly as the boughs of a tree; that is to say, the diameter of each
upper = 2/3 of lower. There being thus the three terms of proportion
gained in the lower story, the upper, while it is only divided into two
main members, in order that the whole height may not be divided into an
even number, has the third term added in its pinnacles. So far of the
vertical division. The lateral is still more subtle. There are seven
arches in the lower story; and, calling the central arch _a_, and
counting to the extremity, they diminish in the alternate order _a_,
_c_, _b_, _d_. The upper story has five arches, and two added pinnacles;
and these diminish in _regular_ order, the central being the largest,
and the outermost the least. Hence, while one proportion ascends,
another descends, like parts in music; and yet the pyramidal form is
secured for the whole, and, which was another great point of attention,
none of the shafts of the upper arches stand over those of the lower.

XVI. It might have been thought that, by this plan, enough variety had
been secured, but the builder was not satisfied even thus: for--and this
is the point bearing on the present part of our subject--always calling
the central arch _a_, and the lateral ones _b_ and _c_ in succession,
the northern _b_ and _c_ are considerably wider than the southern _b_
and _c_, but the southern _d_ is as much wider than the northern _d_,
and lower beneath its cornice besides; and, more than this, I hardly
believe that one of the effectively symmetrical members of the façade is
actually symmetrical with any other. I regret that I cannot state the
actual measures. I gave up the taking them upon the spot, owing to their
excessive complexity, and the embarrassment caused by the yielding and
subsidence of the arches.

Do not let it be supposed that I imagine the Byzantine workmen to have
had these various principles in their minds as they built. I believe
they built altogether from feeling, and that it was because they did so,
that there is this marvellous life, changefulness, and subtlety running
through their every arrangement; and that we reason upon the lovely
building as we should upon some fair growth of the trees of the earth,
that know not their own beauty.

XVII. Perhaps, however, a stranger instance than any I have yet given,
of the daring variation of pretended symmetry, is found in the front of
the Cathedral of Bayeux. It consists of five arches with steep
pediments, the outermost filled, the three central with doors; and they
appear, at first, to diminish in regular proportion from the principal
one in the centre. The two lateral doors are very curiously managed. The
tympana of their arches are filled with bas-reliefs, in four tiers; in
the lowest tier there is in each a little temple or gate containing the
principal figure (in that on the right, it is the gate of Hades with
Lucifer). This little temple is carried, like a capital, by an isolated
shaft which divides the whole arch at about 2/3 of its breadth, the
larger portion outmost; and in that larger portion is the inner entrance
door. This exact correspondence, in the treatment of both gates, might
lead us to expect a correspondence in dimension. Not at all. The small
inner northern entrance measures, in English feet and inches, 4 ft. 7
in. from jamb to jamb, and the southern five feet exactly. Five inches
in five feet is a considerable variation. The outer northern porch
measures, from face shaft to face shaft, 13 ft. 11 in., and the
southern, 14 ft. 6 in.; giving a difference of 7 in. on 14-1/2 ft. There
are also variations in the pediment decorations not less extraordinary.

XVIII. I imagine I have given instances enough, though I could multiply
them indefinitely, to prove that these variations are not mere blunders,
nor carelessnesses, but the result of a fixed scorn, if not dislike, of
accuracy in measurements; and, in most cases, I believe, of a determined
resolution to work out an effective symmetry by variations as subtle as
those of Nature. To what lengths this principle was sometimes carried,
we shall see by the very singular management of the towers of Abbeville.
I do not say it is right, still less that it is wrong, but it is a
wonderful proof of the fearlessness of a living architecture; for, say
what we will of it, that Flamboyant of France, however morbid, was as
vivid and intense in its animation as ever any phase of mortal mind; and
it would have lived till now, if it had not taken to telling lies. I
have before noticed the general difficulty of managing even lateral
division, when it is into two equal parts, unless there be some third
reconciling member. I shall give, hereafter, more examples of the modes
in which this reconciliation is effected in towers with double lights:
the Abbeville architect put his sword to the knot perhaps rather too
sharply. Vexed by the want of unity between his two windows he literally
laid their heads together, and so distorted their ogee curves, as to
leave only one of the trefoiled panels above, on the inner side, and
three on the outer side of each arch. The arrangement is given in Plate
XII. fig. 3. Associated with the various undulation of flamboyant curves
below, it is in the real tower hardly observed, while it binds it into
one mass in general effect. Granting it, however, to be ugly and wrong,
I like sins of the kind, for the sake of the courage it requires to
commit them. In plate II. (part of a small chapel attached to the West
front of the Cathedral of St. Lo), the reader will see an instance,
from the same architecture, of a violation of its own principles, for
the sake of a peculiar meaning. If there be any one feature which the
flamboyant architect loved to decorate richly, it was the niche--it was
what the capital is to the Corinthian order; yet in the case before us
there is an ugly beehive put in the place of the principal niche of the
arch. I am not sure if I am right in my interpretation of its meaning,
but I have little doubt that two figures below, now broken away, once
represented an Annunciation; and on another part of the same cathedral,
I find the descent of the Spirit, encompassed by rays of light,
represented very nearly in the form of the niche in question; which
appears, therefore, to be intended for a representation of this
effulgence, while at the same time it was made a canopy for the delicate
figures below. Whether this was its meaning or not, it is remarkable as
a daring departure from the common habits of the time.

XIX. Far more splendid is a license taken with the niche decoration
of the portal of St. Maclou at Rouen. The subject of the tympanum
bas-relief is the Last Judgment, and the sculpture of the inferno side
is carried out with a degree of power whose fearful grotesqueness I can
only describe as a mingling of the minds of Orcagna and Hogarth. The
demons are perhaps even more awful than Orcagna's; and, in some of the
expressions of debased humanity in its utmost despair, the English
painter is at least equalled. Not less wild is the imagination which
gives fury and fear even to the placing of the figures. An evil angel,
poised on the wing, drives the condemned troops from before the Judgment
seat; with his left hand he drags behind him a cloud, which is spreading
like a winding-sheet over them all; but they are urged by him so
furiously, that they are driven not merely to the extreme limit of that
scene, which the sculptor confined elsewhere within the tympanum, but
out of the tympanum and _into the niches_ of the arch; while the flames
that follow them, bent by the blast, as it seems, of the angel's wings,
rush into the niches also, and burst up _through their tracery_, the
three lowermost niches being represented as all on fire, while,
instead of their usual vaulted and ribbed ceiling, there is a demon in
the roof of each, with his wings folded over it, grinning down out of
the black shadow.

  [Illustration: PLATE XIII.--(Page 161--Vol. V.)
  PORTIONS OF AN ARCADE ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF THE CATHEDRAL OF FERRARA.]

XX. I have, however, given enough instances of vitality shown in mere
daring, whether wise, as surely in this last instance, or inexpedient;
but, as a single example of the Vitality of Assimilation, the faculty
which turns to its purposes all material that is submitted to it, I
would refer the reader to the extraordinary columns of the arcade on the
south side of the Cathedral of Ferrara. A single arch of it is given in
Plate XIII. on the right. Four such columns forming a group, there are
interposed two pairs of columns, as seen on the left of the same plate;
and then come another four arches. It is a long arcade of, I suppose,
not less than forty arches, perhaps of many more; and in the grace and
simplicity of its stilted Byzantine curves I hardly know its equal. Its
like, in fancy of column, I certainly do not know; there being hardly
two correspondent, and the architect having been ready, as it seems, to
adopt ideas and resemblances from any sources whatsoever. The vegetation
growing up the two columns is fine, though bizarre; the distorted
pillars beside it suggest images of less agreeable character; the
serpentine arrangements founded on the usual Byzantine double knot are
generally graceful; but I was puzzled to account for the excessively
ugly type of the pillar, fig. 3, one of a group of four. It so happened,
fortunately for me, that there had been a fair in Ferrara; and, when I
had finished my sketch of the pillar, I had to get out of the way of
some merchants of miscellaneous wares, who were removing their stall. It
had been shaded by an awning supported by poles, which, in order that
the covering might be raised or lowered according to the height of the
sun, were composed of two separate pieces, fitted to each other by a
_rack_, in which I beheld the prototype of my ugly pillar. It will not
be thought, after what I have above said of the inexpedience of
imitating anything but natural form, that I advance this architect's
practice as altogether exemplary; yet the humility is instructive, which
condescended to such sources for motives of thought, the boldness, which
could depart so far from all established types of form, and the life
and feeling, which out of an assemblage of such quaint and uncouth
materials, could produce an harmonious piece of ecclesiastical
architecture.

XXI. I have dwelt, however, perhaps, too long upon that form of vitality
which is known almost as much by its errors as by its atonements for
them. We must briefly note the operation of it, which is always right,
and always necessary, upon those lesser details, where it can neither be
superseded by precedents, nor repressed by proprieties.

I said, early in this essay, that hand-work might always be known from
machine-work; observing, however, at the same time, that it was possible
for men to turn themselves into machines, and to reduce their labor to
the machine level; but so long as men work _as_ men, putting their heart
into what they do, and doing their best, it matters not how bad workmen
they may be, there will be that in the handling which is above all
price: it will be plainly seen that some places have been delighted in
more than others--that there has been a pause, and a care about them;
and then there will come careless bits, and fast bits; and here the
chisel will have struck hard, and there lightly, and anon timidly; and
if the man's mind as well as his heart went with his work, all this will
be in the right places, and each part will set off the other; and the
effect of the whole, as compared with the same design cut by a machine
or a lifeless hand, will be like that of poetry well read and deeply
felt to that of the same verses jangled by rote. There are many to whom
the difference is imperceptible; but to those who love poetry it is
everything--they had rather not hear it at all, than hear it ill read;
and to those who love Architecture, the life and accent of the hand are
everything. They had rather not have ornament at all, than see it ill
cut--deadly cut, that is. I cannot too often repeat, it is not coarse
cutting, it is not blunt cutting, that is necessarily bad; but it is
cold cutting--the look of equal trouble everywhere--the smooth, diffused
tranquillity of heartless pains--the regularity of a plough in a level
field. The chill is more likely, indeed, to show itself in finished work
than in any other--men cool and tire as they complete: and if
completeness is thought to be vested in polish, and to be attainable by
help of sand paper, we may as well give the work to the engine-lathe at
once. But _right_ finish is simply the full rendering of the intended
impression; and _high_ finish is the rendering of a well intended and
vivid impression; and it is oftener got by rough than fine handling. I
am not sure whether it is frequently enough observed that sculpture is
not the mere cutting of the _form_ of anything in stone; it is the
cutting of the _effect_ of it. Very often the true form, in the marble,
would not be in the least like itself. The sculptor must paint with his
chisel: half his touches are not to realize, but to put power into the
form: they are touches of light and shadow; and raise a ridge, or sink a
hollow, not to represent an actual ridge or hollow, but to get a line of
light, or a spot of darkness. In a coarse way, this kind of execution is
very marked in old French woodwork; the irises of the eyes of its
chimeric monsters being cut boldly into holes, which, variously placed,
and always dark, give all kinds of strange and startling expressions,
averted and askance, to the fantastic countenances. Perhaps the highest
examples of this kind of sculpture-painting are the works of Mino da
Fiesole; their best effects being reached by strange angular, and
seemingly rude, touches of the chisel. The lips of one of the children
on the tombs in the church of the Badia, appear only half finished when
they are seen close; yet the expression is farther carried and more
ineffable, than in any piece of marble I have ever seen, especially
considering its delicacy, and the softness of the child-features. In a
sterner kind, that of the statues in the sacristy of St. Lorenzo equals
it, and there again by incompletion. I know no example of work in which
the forms are absolutely true and complete where such a result is
attained; in Greek sculptures is not even attempted.

XXII. It is evident that, for architectural appliances, such masculine
handling, likely as it must be to retain its effectiveness when higher
finish would be injured by time, must always be the most expedient; and
as it is impossible, even were it desirable that the highest finish
should be given to the quantity of work which covers a large building,
it will be understood how precious the intelligence must become, which
renders incompletion itself a means of additional expression; and how
great must be the difference, when the touches are rude and few, between
those of a careless and those of a regardful mind. It is not easy to
retain anything of their character in a copy; yet the reader will find
one or two illustrative points in the examples, given in Plate XIV.,
from the bas-reliefs of the north of Rouen Cathedral. There are three
square pedestals under the three main niches on each side of it, and one
in the centre; each of these being on two sides decorated with five
quatrefoiled panels. There are thus seventy quatrefoils in the lower
ornament of the gate alone, without counting those of the outer course
round it, and of the pedestals outside: each quatrefoil is filled with a
bas-relief, the whole reaching to something above a man's height. A
modern architect would, of course, have made all the five quatrefoils of
each pedestal-side equal: not so the Mediæval. The general form being
apparently a quatrefoil composed of semicircles on the sides of a
square, it will be found on examination that none of the arcs are
semicircles, and none of the basic figures squares. The latter are
rhomboids, having their acute or obtuse angles uppermost according to
their larger or smaller size; and the arcs upon their sides slide into
such places as they can get in the angles of the enclosing
parallelogram, leaving intervals, at each of the four angles, of various
shapes, which are filled each by an animal. The size of the whole panel
being thus varied, the two lowest of the five are tall, the next two
short, and the uppermost a little higher than the lowest; while in the
course of bas-reliefs which surrounds the gate, calling either of the
two lowest (which are equal), _a_, and either of the next two _b_, and
the fifth and sixth _c_ and _d_, then _d_ (the largest):
_c_::_c_:_a_::_a_:_b_. It is wonderful how much of the grace of the
whole depends on these variations.

XXIII. Each of the angles, it was said, is filled by an animal. There
are thus 70 x 4=280 animals, all different, in the mere fillings of the
intervals of the bas-reliefs. Three of these intervals, with their
beasts, actual size, the curves being traced upon the stone, I have
given in Plate XIV.

  [Illustration: PLATE XIV.--(Page 165--Vol. V.)
  SCULPTURE FROM THE CATHEDRAL OF ROUEN.]

I say nothing of their general design, or of the lines of the wings and
scales, which are perhaps, unless in those of the central dragon, not
much above the usual commonplaces of good ornamental work; but there is
an evidence in the features of thoughtfulness and fancy which is not
common, at least now-a-days. The upper creature on the left is biting
something, the form of which is hardly traceable in the defaced
stone--but biting he is; and the reader cannot but recognise in the
peculiarly reverted eye the expression which is never seen, as I think,
but in the eye of a dog gnawing something in jest, and preparing to
start away with it: the meaning of the glance, so far as it can be
marked by the mere incision of the chisel, will be felt by comparing it
with the eye of the couchant figure on the right, in its gloomy and
angry brooding. The plan of this head, and the nod of the cap over its
brow, are fine; but there is a little touch above the hand especially
well meant: the fellow is vexed and puzzled in his malice; and his hand
is pressed hard on his cheek bone, and the flesh of the cheek is
_wrinkled_ under the eye by the pressure. The whole, indeed, looks
wretchedly coarse, when it is seen on a scale in which it is naturally
compared with delicate figure etchings; but considering it as a mere
filling of an interstice on the outside of a cathedral gate, and as one
of more than three hundred (for in my estimate I did not include the
outer pedestals), it proves very noble vitality in the art of the time.

XXIV. I believe the right question to ask, respecting all ornament, is
simply this: Was it done with enjoyment--was the carver happy while he
was about it? It may be the hardest work possible, and the harder
because so much pleasure was taken in it; but it must have been happy
too, or it will not be living. How much of the stone mason's toil this
condition would exclude I hardly venture to consider, but the condition
is absolute. There is a Gothic church lately built near Rouen, vile
enough, indeed, in its general composition, but excessively rich in
detail; many of the details are designed with taste, and all evidently
by a man who has studied old work closely. But it is all as dead as
leaves in December; there is not one tender touch, not one warm stroke,
on the whole façade. The men who did it hated it, and were thankful when
it was done. And so long as they do so they are merely loading your
walls with shapes of clay: the garlands of everlastings in Père la
Chaise are more cheerful ornaments. You cannot get the feeling by paying
for it--money will not buy life. I am not sure even that you can get it
by watching or waiting for it. It is true that here and there a workman
may be found who has it in him, but he does not rest contented in the
inferior work--he struggles forward into an Academician; and from the
mass of available handicraftsmen the power is gone--how recoverable I
know not: this only I know, that all expense devoted to sculptural
ornament, in the present condition of that power, comes literally under
the head of Sacrifice for the sacrifice's sake, or worse. I believe the
only manner of rich ornament that is open to us is the geometrical
color-mosaic, and that much might result from our strenuously taking up
this mode of design. But, at all events, one thing we have in our
power--the doing without machine ornament and cast-iron work. All the
stamped metals, and artificial stones, and imitation woods and bronzes,
over the invention of which we hear daily exultation--all the short, and
cheap, and easy ways of doing that whose difficulty is its honor--are
just so many new obstacles in our already encumbered road. They will not
make one of us happier or wiser--they will extend neither the pride of
judgment nor the privilege of enjoyment. They will only make us
shallower in our understandings, colder in our hearts, and feebler in
our wits. And most justly. For we are not sent into this world to do any
thing into which we cannot put our hearts. We have certain work to do
for our bread, and that is to be done strenuously; other work to do for
our delight, and that is to be done heartily: neither is to be done by
halves or shifts, but with a will; and what is not worth this effort is
not to be done at all. Perhaps all that we have to do is meant for
nothing more than an exercise of the heart and of the will, and is
useless in itself; but, at all events, the little use it has may well be
spared if it is not worth putting our hands and our strength to. It
does not become our immortality to take an ease inconsistent with its
authority, nor to suffer any instruments with which it can dispense, to
come between it and the things it rules: and he who would form the
creations of his own mind by any other instrument than his own hand,
would, also, if he might, give grinding organs to Heaven's angels, to
make their music easier. There is dreaming enough, and earthiness
enough, and sensuality enough in human existence without our turning the
few glowing moments of it into mechanism; and since our life must at the
best be but a vapor that appears for a little time and then vanishes
away, let it at least appear as a cloud in the height of Heaven, not as
the thick darkness that broods over the blast of the Furnace, and
rolling of the Wheel.




CHAPTER VI.

THE LAMP OF MEMORY.


I. Among the hours of his life to which the writer looks back with
peculiar gratitude, as having been marked by more than ordinary fulness
of joy or clearness of teaching, is one passed, now some years ago, near
time of sunset, among the broken masses of pine forest which skirt the
course of the Ain, above the village of Champagnole, in the Jura. It is
a spot which has all the solemnity, with none of the savageness, of the
Alps; where there is a sense of a great power beginning to be manifested
in the earth, and of a deep and majestic concord in the rise of the long
low lines of piny hills; the first utterance of those mighty mountain
symphonies, soon to be more loudly lifted and wildly broken along the
battlements of the Alps. But their strength is as yet restrained; and
the far-reaching ridges of pastoral mountain succeed each other, like
the long and sighing swell which moves over quiet waters from some
far-off stormy sea. And there is a deep tenderness pervading that vast
monotony. The destructive forces and the stern expression of the central
ranges are alike withdrawn. No frost-ploughed, dust-encumbered paths of
ancient glacier fret the soft Jura pastures; no splintered heaps of
ruin break the fair ranks of her forests; no pale, defiled, or furious
rivers rend their rude and changeful ways among her rocks. Patiently,
eddy by eddy, the clear green streams wind along their well-known beds;
and under the dark quietness of the undisturbed pines, there spring up,
year by year, such company of joyful flowers as I know not the like of
among all the blessings of the earth. It was Spring time, too; and all
were coming forth in clusters crowded for very love; there was room
enough for all, but they crushed their leaves into all manner of strange
shapes only to be nearer each other. There was the wood anemone, star
after star, closing every now and then into nebulæ: and there was the
oxalis, troop by troop like virginal processions of the Mois de Marie,
the dark vertical clefts in the limestone choked up with them as with
heavy snow, and touched with ivy on the edges--ivy as light and lovely
as the vine; and ever and anon, a blue gush of violets, and cowslip
bells in sunny places; and in the more open ground, the vetch, and
comfrey, and mezereon, and the small sapphire buds of the Polygala
Alpina, and the wild strawberry, just a blossom or two, all showered
amidst the golden softness of deep, warm, amber-colored moss. I came out
presently on the edge of the ravine; the solemn murmur of its waters
rose suddenly from beneath, mixed with the singing of the thrushes among
the pine boughs; and, on the opposite side of the valley, walled all
along as it was by grey cliffs of limestone, there was a hawk sailing
slowly off their brow, touching them nearly with his wings, and with the
shadows of the pines flickering upon his plumage from above; but with a
fall of a hundred fathoms under his breast, and the curling pools of the
green river gliding and glittering dizzily beneath him, their foam
globes moving with him as he flew. It would be difficult to conceive a
scene less dependent upon any other interest than that of its own
secluded and serious beauty; but the writer well remembers the sudden
blankness and chill which were cast upon it when he endeavored, in order
more strictly to arrive at the sources of its impressiveness, to imagine
it, for a moment, a scene in some aboriginal forest of the New
Continent. The flowers in an instant lost their light, the river its
music[15]; the hills became oppressively desolate; a heaviness in the
boughs of the darkened forest showed how much of their former power had
been dependent upon a life which was not theirs, how much of the glory
of the imperishable, or continually renewed, creation is reflected from
things more precious in their memories than it, in its renewing. Those
ever springing flowers and ever flowing streams had been dyed by the
deep colors of human endurance, valor, and virtue; and the crests of the
sable hills that rose against the evening sky received a deeper worship,
because their far shadows fell eastward over the iron wall of Joux and
the four-square keep of Granson.

II. It is as the centralisation and protectress of this sacred
influence, that Architecture is to be regarded by us with the most
serious thought. We may live without her, and worship without her, but
we cannot remember without her. How cold is all history how lifeless all
imagery, compared to that which the living nation writes, and the
uncorrupted marble bears! how many pages of doubtful record might we not
often spare, for a few stones left one upon another! The ambition of the
old Babel builders was well directed for this world: there are but two
strong conquerors of the forgetfulness of men, Poetry and Architecture;
and the latter in some sort includes the former, and is mightier in its
reality; it is well to have, not only what men have thought and felt,
but what their hands have handled, and their strength wrought, and their
eyes beheld, all the days of their life. The age of Homer is surrounded
with darkness, his very personality with doubt. Not so that of Pericles:
and the day is coming when we shall confess, that we have learned more
of Greece out of the crumbled fragments of her sculpture than even from
her sweet singers or soldier historians. And if indeed there be any
profit in our knowledge of the past, or any joy in the thought of being
remembered hereafter, which can give strength to present exertion, or
patience to present endurance, there are two duties respecting national
architecture whose importance it is impossible to overrate; the first,
to render the architecture of the day historical; and, the second, to
preserve, as the most precious of inheritances, that of past ages.

III. It is in the first of these two directions that Memory may truly be
said to be the Sixth Lamp of Architecture; for it is in becoming
memorial or monumental that a true perfection is attained by civil and
domestic buildings; and this partly as they are, with such a view, built
in a more stable manner, and partly as their decorations are
consequently animated by a metaphorical or historical meaning.

As regards domestic buildings, there must always be a certain limitation
to views of this kind in the power, as well as in the hearts, of men;
still I cannot but think it an evil sign of a people when their houses
are built to last for one generation only. There is a sanctity in a good
man's house which cannot be renewed in every tenement that rises on its
ruins: and I believe that good men would generally feel this; and that
having spent their lives happily and honorably, they would be grieved at
the close of them to think that the place of their earthly abode, which
had seen, and seemed almost to sympathise in all their honor, their
gladness, or their suffering,--that this, with all the record it bare of
them, and all of material things that they had loved and ruled over, and
set the stamp of themselves upon--was to be swept away, as soon as there
was room made for them in the grave; that no respect was to be shown to
it, no affection felt for it, no good to be drawn from it by their
children; that though there was a monument in the church, there was no
warm monument in the heart and house to them; that all that they ever
treasured was despised, and the places that had sheltered and comforted
them were dragged down to the dust. I say that a good man would fear
this; and that, far more, a good son, a noble descendant, would fear
doing it to his father's house. I say that if men lived like men indeed,
their houses would be temples--temples which we should hardly dare to
injure, and in which it would make us holy to be permitted to live; and
there must be a strange dissolution of natural affection, a strange
unthankfulness for all that homes have given and parents taught, a
strange consciousness that we have been unfaithful to our fathers'
honor, or that our own lives are not such as would make our dwellings
sacred to our children, when each man would fain build to himself, and
build for the little revolution of his own life only. And I look upon
those pitiful concretions of lime and clay which spring up in mildewed
forwardness out of the kneaded fields about our capital--upon those
thin, tottering, foundationless shells of splintered wood and imitated
stone--upon those gloomy rows of formalised minuteness, alike without
difference and without fellowship, as solitary as similar--not merely
with the careless disgust of an offended eye, not merely with sorrow for
a desecrated landscape, but with a painful foreboding that the roots of
our national greatness must be deeply cankered when they are thus
loosely struck in their native ground; that those comfortless and
unhonored dwellings are the signs of a great and spreading spirit of
popular discontent; that they mark the time when every man's aim is to
be in some more elevated sphere than his natural one, and every man's
past life is his habitual scorn; when men build in the hope of leaving
the places they have built, and live in the hope of forgetting the years
that they have lived; when the comfort, the peace, the religion of home
have ceased to be felt; and the crowded tenements of a struggling and
restless population differ only from the tents of the Arab or the Gipsy
by their less healthy openness to the air of heaven, and less happy
choice of their spot of earth; by their sacrifice of liberty without the
gain of rest, and of stability without the luxury of change.

IV. This is no slight, no consequenceless evil: it is ominous,
infectious, and fecund of other fault and misfortune. When men do not
love their hearths, nor reverence their thresholds, it is a sign that
they have dishonored both, and that they have never acknowledged the
true universality of that Christian worship which was indeed to
supersede the idolatry, but not the piety, of the pagan. Our God is a
household God, as well as a heavenly one; He has an altar in every man's
dwelling; let men look to it when they rend it lightly and pour out its
ashes. It is not a question of mere ocular delight, it is no question of
intellectual pride, or of cultivated and critical fancy, how, and with
what aspect of durability and of completeness, the domestic buildings
of a nation shall be raised. It is one of those moral duties, not with
more impunity to be neglected because the perception of them depends on
a finely toned and balanced conscientiousness, to build our dwellings
with care, and patience, and fondness, and diligent completion, and with
a view to their duration at least for such a period as, in the ordinary
course of national revolutions, might be supposed likely to extend to
the entire alteration of the direction of local interests. This at the
least; but it would be better if, in every possible instance, men built
their own houses on a scale commensurate rather with their condition at
the commencement, than their attainments at the termination, of their
worldly career; and built them to stand as long as human work at its
strongest can be hoped to stand; recording to their children what they
have been, and from what, if so it had been permitted them, they had
risen. And when houses are thus built, we may have that true domestic
architecture, the beginning of all other, which does not disdain to
treat with respect and thoughtfulness the small habitation as well as
the large, and which invests with the dignity of contented manhood the
narrowness of worldly circumstance.

V. I look to this spirit of honorable, proud, peaceful self-possession,
this abiding wisdom of contented life, as probably one of the chief
sources of great intellectual power in all ages, and beyond dispute as
the very primal source of the great architecture of old Italy and
France. To this day, the interest of their fairest cities depends, not
on the isolated richness of palaces, but on the cherished and exquisite
decoration of even the smallest tenements of their proud periods. The
most elaborate piece of architecture in Venice is a small house at the
head of the Grand Canal, consisting of a ground floor with two stories
above, three windows in the first, and two in the second. Many of the
most exquisite buildings are on the narrower canals, and of no larger
dimensions. One of the most interesting pieces of fifteenth century
architecture in North Italy, is a small house in a back street, behind
the market-place of Vicenza; it bears date 1481, and the motto, _Il.
n'est. rose. sans. épine_; it has also only a ground floor and two
stories, with three windows in each, separated by rich flower-work, and
with balconies, supported, the central one by an eagle with open wings,
the lateral ones by winged griffins standing on cornucopiæ. The idea
that a house must be large in order to be well built, is altogether of
modern growth, and is parallel with the idea, that no picture can be
historical, except of a size admitting figures larger than life.

VI. I would have, then, our ordinary dwelling-houses built to last, and
built to be lovely; as rich and full of pleasantness as may be, within
and without; with what degree of likeness to each other in style and
manner, I will say presently, under another head; but, at all events,
with such differences as might suit and express each man's character and
occupation, and partly his history. This right over the house, I
conceive, belongs to its first builder, and is to be respected by his
children; and it would be well that blank stones should be left in
places, to be inscribed with a summary of his life and of its
experience, raising thus the habitation into a kind of monument, and
developing, into more systematic instructiveness, that good custom which
was of old universal, and which still remains among some of the Swiss
and Germans, of acknowledging the grace of God's permission to build and
possess a quiet resting-place, in such sweet words as may well close our
speaking of these things. I have taken them from the front of a cottage
lately built among the green pastures which descend from the village of
Grindelwald to the lower glacier:--

  "Mit herzlichem Vertrauen
  Hat Johannes Mooter und Maria Rubi
  Dieses Haus bauen lassen.
  Der liebe Gott woll uns bewahren
  Vor allem Unglück und Gefahren,
  Und es in Segen lassen stehn
  Auf der Reise durch diese Jammerzeit
  Nach dem himmlischen Paradiese,
  Wo alle Frommen wohnen,
  Da wird Gott sie belohnen
  Mit der Friedenskrone
      Zu alle Ewigkeit."

VII. In public buildings the historical purpose should be still more
definite. It is one of the advantages of Gothic architecture,--I use the
word Gothic in the most extended sense as broadly opposed to
classical,--that it admits of a richness of record altogether unlimited.
Its minute and multitudinous sculptural decorations afford means of
expressing, either symbolically or literally, all that need be known of
national feeling or achievement. More decoration will, indeed, be
usually required than can take so elevated a character; and much, even
in the most thoughtful periods, has been left to the freedom of fancy,
or suffered to consist of mere repetitions of some national bearing or
symbol. It is, however, generally unwise, even in mere surface ornament,
to surrender the power and privilege of variety which the spirit of
Gothic architecture admits; much more in important features--capitals of
columns or bosses, and string-courses, as of course in all confessed
bas-reliefs. Better the rudest work that tells a story or records a
fact, than the richest without meaning. There should not be a single
ornament put upon great civic buildings, without some intellectual
intention. Actual representation of history has in modern times been
checked by a difficulty, mean indeed, but steadfast: that of
unmanageable costume; nevertheless, by a sufficiently bold imaginative
treatment, and frank use of symbols, all such obstacles may be
vanquished; not perhaps in the degree necessary to produce sculpture in
itself satisfactory, but at all events so as to enable it to become a
grand and expressive element of architectural composition. Take, for
example, the management of the capitals of the ducal palace at Venice.
History, as such, was indeed entrusted to the painters of its interior,
but every capital of its arcades was filled with meaning. The large one,
the corner stone of the whole, next the entrance, was devoted to the
symbolisation of Abstract Justice; above it is a sculpture of the
Judgment of Solomon, remarkable for a beautiful subjection in its
treatment to its decorative purpose. The figures, if the subject had
been entirely composed of them, would have awkwardly interrupted the
line of the angle, and diminished its apparent strength; and therefore
in the midst of them, entirely without relation to them, and indeed
actually between the executioner and interceding mother, there rises the
ribbed trunk of a massy tree, which supports and continues the shaft of
the angle, and whose leaves above overshadow and enrich the whole. The
capital below bears among its leafage a throned figure of Justice,
Trajan doing justice to the widow, Aristotle "che die legge," and one or
two other subjects now unintelligible from decay. The capitals next in
order represent the virtues and vices in succession, as preservative or
destructive of national peace and power, concluding with Faith, with the
inscription "Fides optima in Deo est." A figure is seen on the opposite
side of the capital, worshipping the sun. After these, one or two
capitals are fancifully decorated with birds (Plate V.), and then come a
series representing, first the various fruits, then the national
costumes, and then the animals of the various countries subject to
Venetian rule.

VIII. Now, not to speak of any more important public building, let us
imagine our own India House adorned in this way, by historical or
symbolical sculpture: massively built in the first place; then chased
with bas-reliefs of our Indian battles, and fretted with carvings of
Oriental foliage, or inlaid with Oriental stones; and the more important
members of its decoration composed of groups of Indian life and
landscape, and prominently expressing the phantasms of Hindoo worship in
their subjection to the Cross. Would not one such work be better than a
thousand histories? If, however, we have not the invention necessary for
such efforts, or if, which is probably one of the most noble excuses we
can offer for our deficiency in such matters, we have less pleasure in
talking about ourselves, even in marble, than the Continental nations,
at least we have no excuse for any want of care in the points which
insure the building's endurance. And as this question is one of great
interest in its relations to the choice of various modes of decoration,
it will be necessary to enter into it at some length.

IX. The benevolent regards and purposes of men in masses seldom can be
supposed to extend beyond their own generation. They may look to
posterity as an audience, may hope for its attention, and labor for its
praise: they may trust to its recognition of unacknowledged merit, and
demand its justice for contemporary wrong. But all this is mere
selfishness, and does not involve the slightest regard to, or
consideration of, the interest of those by whose numbers we would fain
swell the circle of our flatterers, and by whose authority we would
gladly support our presently disputed claims. The idea of self-denial
for the sake of posterity, of practising present economy for the sake of
debtors yet unborn, of planting forests that our descendants may live
under their shade, or of raising cities for future nations to inhabit,
never, I suppose, efficiently takes place among publicly recognised
motives of exertion. Yet these are not the less our duties; nor is our
part fitly sustained upon the earth, unless the range of our intended
and deliberate usefulness include not only the companions, but the
successors, of our pilgrimage. God has lent us the earth for our life;
it is a great entail. It belongs as much to those who are to come after
us, and whose names are already written in the book of creation, as to
us; and we have no right, by anything that we do or neglect, to involve
them in unnecessary penalties, or deprive them of benefits which it was
in our power to bequeath. And this the more, because it is one of the
appointed conditions of the labor of men that, in proportion to the time
between the seed-sowing and the harvest, is the fulness of the fruit;
and that generally, therefore, the farther off we place our aim, and the
less we desire to be ourselves the witnesses of what we have labored
for, the more wide and rich will be the measure of our success. Men
cannot benefit those that are with them as they can benefit those who
come after them; and of all the pulpits from which human voice is ever
sent forth, there is none from which it reaches so far as from the
grave.

X. Nor is there, indeed, any present loss, in such respect, for
futurity. Every human action gains in honor, in grace, in all true
magnificence, by its regard to things that are to come. It is the far
sight, the quiet and confident patience, that, above all other
attributes, separate man from man, and near him to his Maker; and there
is no action nor art, whose majesty we may not measure by this test.
Therefore, when we build, let us think that we build for ever. Let it
not be for present delight, nor for present use alone; let it be such
work as our descendants will thank us for, and let us think, as we lay
stone on stone, that a time is to come when those stones will be held
sacred because our hands have touched them, and that men will say as
they look upon the labor and wrought substance of them, "See! this our
fathers did for us." For, indeed, the greatest glory of a building is
not in its stones, or in its gold. Its glory is in its Age, and in that
deep sense of voicefulness, of stern watching, of mysterious sympathy,
nay, even of approval or condemnation, which we feel in walls that have
long been washed by the passing waves of humanity. It is in their
lasting witness against men, in their quiet contrast with the
transitional character of all things, in the strength which, through the
lapse of seasons and times, and the decline and birth of dynasties, and
the changing of the face of the earth, and of the limits of the sea,
maintains its sculptured shapeliness for a time insuperable, connects
forgotten and following ages with each other, and half constitutes the
identity, as it concentrates the sympathy, of nations; it is in that
golden stain of time, that we are to look for the real light, and color,
and preciousness of architecture; and it is not until a building has
assumed this character, till it has been entrusted with the fame, and
hallowed by the deeds of men, till its walls have been witnesses of
suffering, and its pillars rise out of the shadows of death, that its
existence, more lasting as it is than that of the natural objects of the
world around it, can be gifted with even so much as these possess of
language and of life.

XI. For that period, then, we must build; not, indeed, refusing to
ourselves the delight of present completion, nor hesitating to follow
such portions of character as may depend upon delicacy of execution to
the highest perfection of which they are capable, even although we may
know that in the course of years such details must perish; but taking
care that for work of this kind we sacrifice no enduring quality, and
that the building shall not depend for its impressiveness upon anything
that is perishable. This would, indeed, be the law of good composition
under any circumstances, the arrangement of the larger masses being
always a matter of greater importance than the treatment of the smaller;
but in architecture there is much in that very treatment which is
skilful or otherwise in proportion to its just regard to the probable
effects of time: and (which is still more to be considered) there is a
beauty in those effects themselves, which nothing else can replace, and
which it is our wisdom to consult and to desire. For though, hitherto,
we have been speaking of the sentiment of age only, there is an actual
beauty in the marks of it, such and so great as to have become not
unfrequently the subject of especial choice among certain schools of
art, and to have impressed upon those schools the character usually and
loosely expressed by the term "picturesque." It is of some importance to
our present purpose to determine the true meaning of this expression, as
it is now generally used; for there is a principle to be developed from
that use which, while it has occultly been the ground of much that is
true and just in our judgment of art, has never been so far understood
as to become definitely serviceable. Probably no word in the language
(exclusive of theological expressions), has been the subject of so
frequent or so prolonged dispute; yet none remained more vague in their
acceptance, and it seems to me to be a matter of no small interest to
investigate the essence of that idea which all feel, and (to appearance)
with respect to similar things, and yet which every attempt to define
has, as I believe, ended either in mere enumeration of the effects and
objects to which the term has been attached, or else in attempts at
abstraction more palpably nugatory than any which have disgraced
metaphysical investigation on other subjects. A recent critic on Art,
for instance, has gravely advanced the theory that the essence of the
picturesque consists in the expression of "universal decay." It would be
curious to see the result of an attempt to illustrate this idea of the
picturesque, in a painting of dead flowers and decayed fruit, and
equally curious to trace the steps of any reasoning which, on such a
theory, should account for the picturesqueness of an ass colt as opposed
to a horse foal. But there is much excuse for even the most utter
failure in reasonings of this kind, since the subject is, indeed, one
of the most obscure of all that may legitimately be submitted to human
reason; and the idea is itself so varied in the minds of different men,
according to their subjects of study, that no definition can be expected
to embrace more than a certain number of its infinitely multiplied
forms.

XII. That peculiar character, however, which separates the picturesque
from the characters of subject belonging to the higher walks of art (and
this is all that is necessary for our present purpose to define), may be
shortly and decisively expressed. Picturesqueness, in this sense, is
_Parasitical Sublimity_. Of course all sublimity, as well as all beauty,
is, in the simple etymological sense, picturesque, that is to say, fit
to become the subject of a picture; and all sublimity is, even in the
peculiar sense which I am endeavoring to develope, picturesque, as
opposed to beauty; that is to say, there is more picturesqueness in the
subject of Michael Angelo than of Perugino, in proportion to the
prevalence of the sublime element over the beautiful. But that
character, of which the extreme pursuit is generally admitted to be
degrading to art, is _parasitical_ sublimity; _i.e._, a sublimity
dependent on the accidents, or on the least essential characters, of the
objects to which it belongs; and the picturesque is _developed
distinctively exactly in proportion to the distance from the centre of
thought of those points of character in which the sublimity is found_.
Two ideas, therefore, are essential to picturesqueness,--the first, that
of sublimity (for pure beauty is not picturesque at all, and becomes so
only as the sublime element mixes with it), and the second, the
subordinate or parasitical position of that sublimity. Of course,
therefore, whatever characters of line or shade or expression are
productive of sublimity, will become productive of picturesqueness; what
these characters are I shall endeavor hereafter to show at length; but,
among those which are generally acknowledged, I may name angular and
broken lines, vigorous oppositions of light and shadow, and grave, deep,
or boldly contrasted color; and all these are in a still higher degree
effective, when, by resemblance or association, they remind us of
objects on which a true and essential sublimity exists, as of rocks or
mountains, or stormy clouds or waves. Now if these characters, or any
others of a higher and more abstract sublimity, be found in the very
heart and substance of what we contemplate, as the sublimity of Michael
Angelo depends on the expression of mental character in his figures far
more than even on the noble lines of their arrangement, the art which
represents such characters cannot be properly called picturesque: but,
if they be found in the accidental or external qualities, the
distinctive picturesque will be the result.

XIII. Thus, in the treatment of the features of the human face by
Francia or Angelico, the shadows are employed only to make the contours
of the features thoroughly felt; and to those features themselves the
mind of the observer is exclusively directed (that is to say, to the
essential characters of the thing represented). All power and all
sublimity rest on these; the shadows are used only for the sake of the
features. On the contrary, by Rembrandt, Salvator, or Caravaggio, the
features are used _for the sake of the shadows_; and the attention is
directed, and the power of the painter addressed to characters of
accidental light and shade cast across or around those features. In the
case of Rembrandt there is often an essential sublimity in invention and
expression besides, and always a high degree of it in the light and
shade itself; but it is for the most part parasitical or engrafted
sublimity as regards the subject of the painting, and, just so far,
picturesque.

XIV. Again, in the management of the sculptures of the Parthenon, shadow
is frequently employed as a dark field on which the forms are drawn.
This is visibly the case in the metopes, and must have been nearly as
much so in the pediment. But the use of that shadow is entirely to show
the confines of the figures; and it is to _their lines_, and not to the
shapes of the shadows behind them, that the art and the eye are
addressed. The figures themselves are conceived as much as possible in
full light, aided by bright reflections; they are drawn exactly as, on
vases, white figures on a dark ground: and the sculptors have dispensed
with, or even struggled to avoid, all shadows which were not absolutely
necessary to the explaining of the form. On the contrary, in Gothic
sculpture, the shadow becomes itself a subject of thought. It is
considered as a dark color, to be arranged in certain agreeable masses;
the figures are very frequently made even subordinate to the placing of
its divisions: and their costume is enriched at the expense of the forms
underneath, in order to increase the complexity and variety of the
points of shade. There are thus, both in sculpture and painting, two, in
some sort, opposite schools, of which the one follows for its subject
the essential forms of things, and the other the accidental lights and
shades upon them. There are various degrees of their contrariety: middle
steps, as in the works of Correggio, and all degrees of nobility and of
degradation in the several manners: but the one is always recognised as
the pure, and the other as the picturesque school. Portions of
picturesque treatment will be found in Greek work, and of pure and
unpicturesque in Gothic; and in both there are countless instances, as
pre-eminently in the works of Michael Angelo, in which shadows become
valuable as media of expression, and therefore take rank among essential
characteristics. Into these multitudinous distinctions and exceptions I
cannot now enter, desiring only to prove the broad applicability of the
general definition.

XV. Again, the distinction will be found to exist, not only between
forms and shades as subjects of choice, but between essential and
inessential forms. One of the chief distinctions between the dramatic
and picturesque schools of sculpture is found in the treatment of the
hair. By the artists of the time of Pericles it was considered as an
excrescence,[16] indicated by few and rude lines, and subordinated in
every particular to the principality of the features and person. How
completely this was an artistical, not a national idea, it is
unnecessary to prove. We need but remember the employment of the
Lacedæmonians, reported by the Persian spy on the evening before the
battle of Thermopylæ, or glance at any Homeric description of ideal
form, to see how purely _sculpturesque_ was the law which reduced the
markings of the hair, lest, under the necessary disadvantages of
material, they should interfere with the distinctness of the personal
forms. On the contrary, in later sculpture, the hair receives almost the
principal care of the workman; and while the features and limbs are
clumsily and bluntly executed, the hair is curled and twisted, cut into
bold and shadowy projections, and arranged in masses elaborately
ornamental: there is true sublimity in the lines and the chiaroscuro of
these masses, but it is, as regards the creature represented,
parasitical, and therefore picturesque. In the same sense we may
understand the application of the term to modern animal painting,
distinguished as it has been by peculiar attention to the colors,
lustre, and texture of skin; nor is it in art alone that the definition
will hold. In animals themselves, when their sublimity depends upon
their muscular forms or motions, or necessary and principal attributes,
as perhaps more than all others in the horse, we do not call them
picturesque, but consider them as peculiarly fit to be associated with
pure historical subject. Exactly in proportion as their character of
sublimity passes into excrescences;--into mane and beard as in the lion,
into horns as in the stag, into shaggy hide as in the instance above
given of the ass colt, into variegation as in the zebra, or into
plumage,--they become picturesque, and are so in art exactly in
proportion to the prominence of these excrescential characters. It may
often be most expedient that they should be prominent; often there is in
them the highest degree of majesty, as in those of the leopard and boar;
and in the hands of men like Tintoret and Rubens, such attributes become
means of deepening the very highest and most ideal impressions. But the
picturesque direction of their thoughts is always distinctly
recognizable, as clinging to the surface, to the less essential
character, and as developing out of this a sublimity different from that
of the creature itself; a sublimity which is, in a sort, common to all
the objects of creation, and the same in its constituent elements,
whether it be sought in the clefts and folds of shaggy hair, or in the
chasms and rents of rocks, or in the hanging of thickets or hill sides,
or in the alternations of gaiety and gloom in the variegation of the
shell, the plume, or the cloud.

XVI. Now, to return to our immediate subject, it so happens that, in
architecture, the superinduced and accidental beauty is most commonly
inconsistent with the preservation of original character, and the
picturesque is therefore sought in ruin, and supposed to consist in
decay. Whereas, even when so sought, it consists in the mere sublimity
of the rents, or fractures, or stains, or vegetation, which assimilate
the architecture with the work of Nature, and bestow upon it those
circumstances of color and form which are universally beloved by the eye
of man. So far as this is done, to the extinction of the true characters
of the architecture, it is picturesque, and the artist who looks to the
stem of the ivy instead of the shaft of the pillar, is carrying out in
more daring freedom the debased sculptor's choice of the hair instead of
the countenance. But so far as it can be rendered consistent with the
inherent character, the picturesque or extraneous sublimity of
architecture has just this of nobler function in it than that of any
other object whatsoever, that it is an exponent of age, of that in
which, as has been said, the greatest glory of a building consists; and,
therefore, the external signs of this glory, having power and purpose
greater than any belonging to their mere sensible beauty, may be
considered as taking rank among pure and essential character; so
essential to my mind, that I think a building cannot be considered as in
its prime until four or five centuries have passed over it; and that the
entire choice and arrangement of its details should have reference to
their appearance after that period, so that none should be admitted
which would suffer material injury either by the weather-staining, or
the mechanical degradation which the lapse of such a period would
necessitate.

XVII. It is not my purpose to enter into any of the questions which the
application of this principle involves. They are of too great interest
and complexity to be even touched upon within my present limits, but
this is broadly to be noticed, that those styles of architecture which
are picturesque in the sense above explained with respect to sculpture,
that is to say, whose decoration depends on the arrangement of points
of shade rather than on purity of outline, do not suffer, but commonly
gain in richness of effect when their details are partly worn away;
hence such styles, pre-eminently that of French Gothic, should always be
adopted when the materials to be employed are liable to degradation, as
brick, sandstone, or soft limestone; and styles in any degree dependent
on purity of line, as the Italian Gothic, must be practised altogether
in hard and undecomposing materials, granite serpentine, or crystalline
marbles. There can be no doubt that the nature of the accessible
materials influenced the formation of both styles; and it should still
more authoritatively determine our choice of either.

XVIII. It does not belong to my present plan to consider at length the
second head of duty of which I have above spoken; the preservation of
the architecture we possess: but a few words may be forgiven, as
especially necessary in modern times. Neither by the public, nor by
those who have the care of public monuments, is the true meaning of the
word _restoration_ understood. It means the most total destruction which
a building can suffer: a destruction out of which no remnants can be
gathered; a destruction accompanied with false description of the thing
destroyed. Do not let us deceive ourselves in this important matter; it
is _impossible_, as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore anything
that has ever been great or beautiful in architecture. That which I have
above insisted upon as the life of the whole, that spirit which is given
only by the hand and eye of the workman, never can be recalled. Another
spirit may be given by another time, and it is then a new building; but
the spirit of the dead workman cannot be summoned up, and commanded to
direct other hands, and other thoughts. And as for direct and simple
copying, it is palpably impossible. What copying can there be of
surfaces that have been worn half an inch down? The whole finish of the
work was in the half inch that is gone; if you attempt to restore that
finish, you do it conjecturally; if you copy what is left, granting
fidelity to be possible (and what care, or watchfulness, or cost can
secure it?), how is the new work better than the old? There was yet in
the old _some_ life, some mysterious suggestion of what it had been,
and of what it had lost; some sweetness in the gentle lines which rain
and sun had wrought. There can be none in the brute hardness of the new
carving. Look at the animals which I have given in Plate 14, as an
instance of living work, and suppose the markings of the scales and hair
once worn away, or the wrinkles of the brows, and who shall ever restore
them? The first step to restoration (I have seen it, and that again and
again, seen it on the Baptistery of Pisa, seen it on the Casa d' Oro at
Venice, seen it on the Cathedral of Lisieux), is to dash the old work to
pieces; the second is usually to put up the cheapest and basest
imitation which can escape detection, but in all cases, however careful,
and however labored, an imitation still, a cold model of such parts as
_can_ be modelled, with conjectural supplements; and my experience has
as yet furnished me with only one instance, that of the Palais de
Justice at Rouen, in which even this, the utmost degree of fidelity
which is possible, has been attained or even attempted.

XIX. Do not let us talk then of restoration. The thing is a Lie from
beginning to end. You may make a model of a building as you may of a
corpse, and your model may have the shell of the old walls within it as
your cast might have the skeleton, with what advantage I neither see nor
care; but the old building is destroyed, and that more totally and
mercilessly than if it had sunk into a heap of dust, or melted into a
mass of clay: more has been gleaned out of desolated Nineveh than ever
will be out of re-built Milan. But, it is said, there may come a
necessity for restoration! Granted. Look the necessity full in the face,
and understand it on its own terms. It is a necessity for destruction.
Accept it as such, pull the building down, throw its stones into
neglected corners, make ballast of them, or mortar, if you will; but do
it honestly, and do not set up a Lie in their place. And look that
necessity in the face before it comes, and you may prevent it. The
principle of modern times (a principle which I believe, at least in
France, to be _systematically acted on by the masons_, in order to find
themselves work, as the abbey of St. Ouen was pulled down by the
magistrates of the town by way of giving work to some vagrants,) is to
neglect buildings first, and restore them afterwards. Take proper care
of your monuments, and you will not need to restore them. A few sheets
of lead put in time upon the roof, a few dead leaves and sticks swept in
time out of a water-course, will save both roof and walls from ruin.
Watch an old building with an anxious care; guard it as best you may,
and at _any_ cost from every influence of dilapidation. Count its stones
as you would jewels of a crown; set watches about it as if at the gates
of a besieged city; bind it together with iron where it loosens; stay it
with timber where it declines; do not care about the unsightliness of
the aid; better a crutch than a lost limb; and do this tenderly, and
reverently, and continually, and many a generation will still be born
and pass away beneath its shadow. Its evil day must come at last; but
let it come declaredly and openly, and let no dishonoring and false
substitute deprive it of the funeral offices of memory.

XX. Of more wanton or ignorant ravage it is vain to speak; my words will
not reach those who commit them, and yet, be it heard or not, I must not
leave the truth unstated, that it is again no question of expediency or
feeling whether we shall preserve the buildings of past times or not.
_We have no right whatever to touch them._ They are not ours. They
belong partly to those who built them, and partly to all the generations
of mankind who are to follow us. The dead have still their right in
them: that which they labored for, the praise of achievement or the
expression of religious feeling, or whatsoever else it might be which in
those buildings they intended to be permanent, we have no right to
obliterate. What we have ourselves built, we are at liberty to throw
down; but what other men gave their strength, and wealth, and life to
accomplish, their right over does not pass away with their death; still
less is the right to the use of what they have left vested in us only.
It belongs to all their successors. It may hereafter be a subject of
sorrow, or a cause of injury, to millions, that we have consulted our
present convenience by casting down such buildings as we choose to
dispense with. That sorrow, that loss we have no right to inflict. Did
the cathedral of Avranches belong to the mob who destroyed it, any more
than it did to us, who walk in sorrow to and fro over its foundation?
Neither does any building whatever belong to those mobs who do violence
to it. For a mob it is, and must be always; it matters not whether
enraged, or in deliberate folly; whether countless, or sitting in
committees; the people who destroy anything causelessly are a mob, and
Architecture is always destroyed causelessly. A fair building is
necessarily worth the ground it stands upon, and will be so until
central Africa and America shall have become as populous as Middlesex;
nor is any cause whatever valid as a ground for its destruction. If ever
valid, certainly not now when the place both of the past and future is
too much usurped in our minds by the restless and discontented present.
The very quietness of nature is gradually withdrawn from us; thousands
who once in their necessarily prolonged travel were subjected to an
influence, from the silent sky and slumbering fields, more effectual
than known or confessed, now bear with them even there the ceaseless
fever of their life; and along the iron veins that traverse the frame of
our country, beat and flow the fiery pulses of its exertions, hotter and
faster every hour. All vitality is concentrated through those throbbing
arteries into the central cities; the country is passed over like a
green sea by narrow bridges, and we are thrown back in continually
closer crowds upon the city gates. The only influence which can in any
wise _there_ take the place of that of the woods and fields, is the
power of ancient Architecture. Do not part with it for the sake of the
formal square, or of the fenced and planted walk, nor of the goodly
street nor opened quay. The pride of a city is not in these. Leave them
to the crowd; but remember that there will surely be some within the
circuit of the disquieted walls who would ask for some other spots than
these wherein to walk; for some other forms to meet their sight
familiarly: like him who sat so often where the sun struck from the
west, to watch the lines of the dome of Florence drawn on the deep sky,
or like those, his Hosts, who could bear daily to behold, from their
palace chambers, the places where their fathers lay at rest, at the
meeting of the dark streets of Verona.




CHAPTER VII.

THE LAMP OF OBEDIENCE.


I. It has been my endeavor to show in the preceding pages how every form
of noble architecture is in some sort the embodiment of the Polity,
Life, History, and Religious Faith of nations. Once or twice in doing
this, I have named a principle to which I would now assign a definite
place among those which direct that embodiment; the last place, not only
as that to which its own humility would incline, but rather as belonging
to it in the aspect of the crowning grace of all the rest; that
principle, I mean, to which Polity owes its stability, Life its
happiness, Faith its acceptance, Creation its continuance,--Obedience.

Nor is it the least among the sources of more serious satisfaction which
I have found in the pursuit of a subject that at first appeared to bear
but slightly on the grave interests of mankind, that the conditions of
material perfection which it leads me in conclusion to consider, furnish
a strange proof how false is the conception, how frantic the pursuit, of
that treacherous phantom which men call Liberty; most treacherous,
indeed, of all phantoms; for the feeblest ray of reason might surely
show us, that not only its attainment, but its being, was impossible.
There is no such thing in the universe. There can never be. The stars
have it not; the earth has it not; the sea has it not; and we men have
the mockery and semblance of it only for our heaviest punishment.

In one of the noblest poems[17] for its imagery and its music belonging
to the recent school of our literature, the writer has sought in the
aspect of inanimate nature the expression of that Liberty which, having
once loved, he had seen among men in its true dyes of darkness. But with
what strange fallacy of interpretation! since in one noble line of his
invocation he has contradicted the assumptions of the rest, and
acknowledged the presence of a subjection, surely not less severe
because eternal? How could he otherwise? since if there be any one
principle more widely than another confessed by every utterance, or more
sternly than another imprinted on every atom, of the visible creation,
that principle is not Liberty, but Law.

II. The enthusiast would reply that by Liberty he meant the Law of
Liberty. Then why use the single and misunderstood word? If by liberty
you mean chastisement of the passions, discipline of the intellect,
subjection of the will; if you mean the fear of inflicting, the shame of
committing a wrong; if you mean respect for all who are in authority,
and consideration for all who are in dependence; veneration for the
good, mercy to the evil, sympathy with the weak; if you mean
watchfulness over all thoughts, temperance in all pleasures, and
perseverance in all toils; if you mean, in a word, that Service which is
defined in the liturgy of the English church to be perfect Freedom, why
do you name this by the same word by which the luxurious mean license,
and the reckless mean change; by which the rogue means rapine, and the
fool equality, by which the proud mean anarchy, and the malignant mean
violence? Call it by any name rather than this, but its best and truest
is, Obedience. Obedience is, indeed, founded on a kind of freedom, else
its would become mere subjugation, but that freedom is only granted that
obedience may be more perfect; and thus, while a measure of license is
necessary to exhibit the individual energies of things, the fairness and
pleasantness and perfection of them all consist in their Restraint.
Compare a river that has burst its banks with one that is bound by them,
and the clouds that are scattered over the face of the whole heaven with
those that are marshalled into ranks and orders by its winds. So that
though restraint, utter and unrelaxing, can never be comely, this is not
because it is in itself an evil, but only because, when too great, it
overpowers the nature of the thing restrained, and so counteracts the
other laws of which that nature is itself composed. And the balance
wherein consists the fairness of creation is between the laws of life
and being in the things governed and the laws of general sway to which
they are subjected; and the suspension or infringement of either kind of
law, or, literally, disorder, is equivalent to, and synonymous with,
disease; while the increase of both honor and beauty is habitually on
the side of restraint (or the action of superior law) rather than of
character (or the action of inherent law). The noblest word in the
catalogue of social virtue is "Loyalty," and the sweetest which men have
learned in the pastures of the wilderness is "Fold."

III. Nor is this all; but we may observe, that exactly in proportion to
the majesty of things in the scale of being, is the completeness of
their obedience to the laws that are set over them. Gravitation is less
quietly, less instantly obeyed by a grain of dust than it is by the sun
and moon; and the ocean falls and flows under influences which the lake
and river do not recognize. So also in estimating the dignity of any
action or occupation of men, there is perhaps no better test than the
question "are its laws strait?" For their severity will probably be
commensurate with the greatness of the numbers whose labor it
concentrates or whose interest it concerns.

This severity must be singular, therefore, in the case of that art,
above all others, whose productions are the most vast and the most
common; which requires for its practice the co-operation of bodies of
men, and for its perfection the perseverance of successive generations.
And taking into account also what we have before so often observed of
Architecture, her continual influence over the emotions of daily life,
and her realism, as opposed to the two sister arts which are in
comparison but the picturing of stories and of dreams, we might
beforehand expect that we should find her healthy state and action
dependent on far more severe laws than theirs; that the license which
they extend to the workings of individual mind would be withdrawn by
her; and that, in assertion of the relations which she holds with all
that is universally important to man, she would set forth, by her own
majestic subjection, some likeness of that on which man's social
happiness and power depend. We might, therefore, without the light of
experience, conclude, that Architecture never could flourish except when
it was subjected to a national law as strict and as minutely
authoritative as the laws which regulate religion, policy, and social
relations; nay, even more authoritative than these, because both capable
of more enforcement, as over more passive matter; and needing more
enforcement, as the purest type not of one law nor of another, but of
the common authority of all. But in this matter experience speaks more
loudly than reason. If there be any one condition which, in watching the
progress of architecture, we see distinct and general; if, amidst the
counter evidence of success attending opposite accidents of character
and circumstance, any one conclusion may be constantly and indisputably
drawn, it is this; that the architecture of a nation is great only when
it is as universal and as established as its language; and when
provincial differences of style are nothing more than so many dialects.
Other necessities are matters of doubt: nations have been alike
successful in their architecture in times of poverty and of wealth; in
times of war and of peace; in times of barbarism and of refinement;
under governments the most liberal or the most arbitrary; but this one
condition has been constant, this one requirement clear in all places
and at all times, that the work shall be that of a school, that no
individual caprice shall dispense with, or materially vary, accepted
types and customary decorations; and that from the cottage to the
palace, and from the chapel to the basilica, and from the garden fence
to the fortress wall, every member and feature of the architecture of
the nation shall be as commonly current, as frankly accepted, as its
language or its coin.

IV. A day never passes without our hearing our English architects called
upon to be original, and to invent a new style: about as sensible and
necessary an exhortation as to ask of a man who has never had rags
enough on his back to keep out cold, to invent a new mode of cutting a
coat. Give him a whole coat first, and let him concern himself about the
fashion of it afterwards. We want no new style of architecture. Who
wants a new style of painting or sculpture? But we want some style. It
is of marvellously little importance, if we have a code of laws and they
be good laws, whether they be new or old, foreign or native, Roman or
Saxon, or Norman or English laws. But it is of considerable importance
that we should have a code of laws of one kind or another, and that code
accepted and enforced from one side of the island to another, and not
one law made ground of judgment at York and another in Exeter. And in
like manner it does not matter one marble splinter whether we have an
old or new architecture, but it matters everything whether we have an
architecture truly so called or not; that is, whether an architecture
whose laws might be taught at our schools from Cornwall to
Northumberland, as we teach English spelling and English grammar, or an
architecture which is to be invented fresh every time we build a
workhouse or a parish school. There seems to me to be a wonderful
misunderstanding among the majority of architects at the present day as
to the very nature and meaning of Originality, and of all wherein it
consists. Originality in expression does not depend on invention of new
words; nor originality in poetry on invention of new measures; nor, in
painting, on invention of new colors, or new modes of using them. The
chords of music, the harmonies of color, the general principles of the
arrangement of sculptural masses, have been determined long ago, and, in
all probability, cannot be added to any more than they can be altered.
Granting that they may be, such additions or alterations are much more
the work of time and of multitudes than of individual inventors. We may
have one Van Eyck, who will be known as the introducer of a new style
once in ten centuries, but he himself will trace his invention to some
accidental bye-play or pursuit; and the use of that invention will
depend altogether on the popular necessities or instincts of the period.
Originality depends on nothing of the kind. A man who has the gift, will
take up any style that is going, the style of his day, and will work in
that, and be great in that, and make everything that he does in it look
as fresh as if every thought of it had just come down from heaven. I do
not say that he will not take liberties with his materials, or with his
rules: I do not say that strange changes will not sometimes be wrought
by his efforts, or his fancies, in both. But those changes will be
instructive, natural, facile, though sometimes marvellous; they will
never be sought after as things necessary to his dignity or to his
independence; and those liberties will be like the liberties that a
great speaker takes with the language, not a defiance of its rules for
the sake of singularity; but inevitable, uncalculated, and brilliant
consequences of an effort to express what the language, without such
infraction, could not. There may be times when, as I have above
described, the life of an art is manifested in its changes, and in its
refusal of ancient limitations: so there are in the life of an insect;
and there is great interest in the state of both the art and the insect
at those periods when, by their natural progress and constitutional
power, such changes are about to be wrought. But as that would be both
an uncomfortable and foolish caterpillar which, instead of being
contented with a caterpillar's life and feeding on caterpillar's food,
was always striving to turn itself into a chrysalis; and as that would
be an unhappy chrysalis which should lie awake at night and roll
restlessly in its cocoon, in efforts to turn itself prematurely into a
moth; so will that art be unhappy and unprosperous which, instead of
supporting itself on the food, and contenting itself with the customs
which have been enough for the support and guidance of other arts before
it and like it, is struggling and fretting under the natural limitations
of its existence, and striving to become something other than it is. And
though it is the nobility of the highest creatures to look forward to,
and partly to understand the changes which are appointed for them,
preparing for them beforehand; and if, as is usual with _appointed_
changes, they be into a higher state, even desiring them, and rejoicing
in the hope of them, yet it is the strength of every creature, be it
changeful or not, to rest for the time being, contented with the
conditions of its existence, and striving only to bring about the
changes which it desires, by fulfilling to the uttermost the duties for
which its present state is appointed and continued.

V. Neither originality, therefore, nor change, good though both may be,
and this is commonly a most merciful and enthusiastic supposition with
respect to either, are ever to be sought in themselves, or can ever be
healthily obtained by any struggle or rebellion against common laws. We
want neither the one nor the other. The forms of architecture already
known are good enough for us, and for far better than any of us: and it
will be time enough to think of changing them for better when we can use
them as they are. But there are some things which we not only want, but
cannot do without; and which all the struggling and raving in the world,
nay more, which all the real talent and resolution in England, will
never enable us to do without: and these are Obedience, Unity,
Fellowship, and Order. And all our schools of design, and committees of
tastes; all our academies and lectures, and journalisms, and essays; all
the sacrifices which we are beginning to make, all the truth which there
is in our English nature, all the power of our English will, and the
life of our English intellect, will in this matter be as useless as
efforts and emotions in a dream, unless we are contented to submit
architecture and all art, like other things, to English law.

VI. I say architecture and all art; for I believe architecture must be
the beginning of arts, and that the others must follow her in their time
and order; and I think the prosperity of our schools of painting and
sculpture, in which no one will deny the life, though many the health,
depends upon that of our architecture. I think that all will languish
until that takes the lead, and (this I do not _think_, but I proclaim,
as confidently as I would assert the necessity, for the safety of
society, of an understood and strongly administered legal government)
our architecture _will_ languish, and that in the very dust, until the
first principle of common sense be manfully obeyed, and an universal
system of form and workmanship be everywhere adopted and enforced. It
may be said that this is impossible. It may be so--I fear it is so: I
have nothing to do with the possibility or impossibility of it; I simply
know and assert the necessity of it. If it be impossible, English art is
impossible. Give it up at once. You are wasting time, and money, and
energy upon it, and though you exhaust centuries and treasuries, and
break hearts for it, you will never raise it above the merest
dilettanteism. Think not of it. It is a dangerous vanity, a mere gulph
in which genius after genius will be swallowed up, and it will not
close. And so it will continue to be, unless the one bold and broad step
be taken at the beginning. We shall not manufacture art out of pottery
and printed stuffs; we shall not reason out art by our philosophy; we
shall not stumble upon art by our experiments, not create it by our
fancies: I do not say that we can even build it out of brick and stone;
but there is a chance for us in these, and there is none else; and that
chance rests on the bare possibility of obtaining the consent, both of
architects and of the public, to choose a style, and to use it
universally.

VII. How surely its principles ought at first to be limited, we may
easily determine by the consideration of the necessary modes of teaching
any other branch of general knowledge. When we begin to teach children
writing, we force them to absolute copyism, and require absolute
accuracy in the formation of the letters; as they obtain command of the
received modes of literal expression, we cannot prevent their falling
into such variations as are consistent with their feeling, their
circumstances, or their characters. So, when a boy is first taught to
write Latin, an authority is required of him for every expression he
uses; as he becomes master of the language he may take a license, and
feel his right to do so without any authority, and yet write better
Latin than when he borrowed every separate expression. In the same way
our architects would have to be taught to write the accepted style. We
must first determine what buildings are to be considered Augustan in
their authority; their modes of construction and laws of proportion are
to be studied with the most penetrating care; then the different forms
and uses of their decorations are to be classed and catalogued, as a
German grammarian classes the powers of prepositions; and under this
absolute, irrefragable authority, we are to begin to work; admitting not
so much as an alteration in the depth of a cavetto, or the breadth of a
fillet. Then, when our sight is once accustomed to the grammatical forms
and arrangements, and our thoughts familiar with the expression of them
all; when we can speak this dead language naturally, and apply it to
whatever ideas we have to render, that is to say, to every practical
purpose of life; then, and not till then, a license might be permitted;
and individual authority allowed to change or to add to the received
forms, always within certain limits; the decorations, especially, might
be made subjects of variable fancy, and enriched with ideas either
original or taken from other schools. And thus in process of time and by
a great national movement, it might come to pass, that a new style
should arise, as language itself changes; we might perhaps come to speak
Italian instead of Latin, or to speak modern instead of old English; but
this would be a matter of entire indifference, and a matter, besides,
which no determination or desire could either hasten or prevent. That
alone which it is in our power to obtain, and which it is our duty to
desire, is an unanimous style of some kind, and such comprehension and
practice of it as would enable us to adapt its features to the peculiar
character of every several building, large or small, domestic, civil, or
ecclesiastical. I have said that it was immaterial what style was
adopted, so far as regards the room for originality which its
developement would admit: it is not so, however, when we take into
consideration the far more important questions of the facility of
adaptation to general purposes, and of the sympathy with which this or
that style would be popularly regarded. The choice of Classical or
Gothic, again using the latter term in its broadest sense, may be
questionable when it regards some single and considerable public
building; but I cannot conceive it questionable, for an instant, when it
regards modern uses in general: I cannot conceive any architect insane
enough to project the vulgarization of Greek architecture. Neither can
it be rationally questionable whether we should adopt early or late,
original or derivative Gothic: if the latter were chosen, it must be
either some impotent and ugly degradation, like our own Tudor, or else a
style whose grammatical laws it would be nearly impossible to limit or
arrange, like the French Flamboyant. We are equally precluded from
adopting styles essentially infantine or barbarous, however Herculean
their infancy, or majestic their outlawry, such as our own Norman, or
the Lombard Romanesque. The choice would lie I think between four
styles:--1. The Pisan Romanesque; 2. The early Gothic of the Western
Italian Republics, advanced as far and as fast as our art would enable
us to the Gothic of Giotto; 3. The Venetian Gothic in its purest
developement; 4. The English earliest decorated. The most natural,
perhaps the safest choice, would be of the last, well fenced from chance
of again stiffening into the perpendicular; and perhaps enriched by some
mingling of decorative elements from the exquisite decorated Gothic of
France, of which, in such cases, it would be needful to accept some well
known examples, as the North door of Rouen and the church of St. Urbain
at Troyes, for final and limiting authorities on the side of decoration.

VIII. It is almost impossible for us to conceive, in our present state
of doubt and ignorance, the sudden dawn of intelligence and fancy, the
rapidly increasing sense of power and facility, and, in its _proper
sense_, of Freedom, which such wholesome restraint would instantly cause
throughout the whole circle of the arts. Freed from the agitation and
embarrassment of that liberty of choice which is the cause of half the
discomforts of the world; freed from the accompanying necessity of
studying all past, present, or even possible styles; and enabled, by
concentration of individual, and co-operation of multitudinous energy,
to penetrate into the uttermost secrets of the adopted style, the
architect would find his whole understanding enlarged, his practical
knowledge certain and ready to hand, and his imagination playful and
vigorous, as a child's would be within a walled garden, who would sit
down and shudder if he were left free in a fenceless plain. How many and
how bright would be the results in every direction of interest, not to
the arts merely, but to national happiness and virtue, it would be as
difficult to preconceive as it would seem extravagant to state: but the
first, perhaps the least, of them would be an increased sense of
fellowship among ourselves, a cementing of every patriotic bond of
union, a proud and happy recognition of our affection for and sympathy
with each other, and our willingness in all things to submit ourselves
to every law that would advance the interest of the community; a
barrier, also, the best conceivable, to the unhappy rivalry of the upper
and middle classes, in houses, furniture, and establishments; and even a
check to much of what is as vain as it is painful in the oppositions of
religious parties respecting matters of ritual. These, I say, would be
the first consequences. Economy increased tenfold, as it would be by the
simplicity of practice; domestic comforts uninterfered with by the
caprice and mistakes of architects ignorant of the capacities of the
styles they use, and all the symmetry and sightliness of our harmonized
streets and public buildings, are things of slighter account in the
catalogue of benefits. But it would be mere enthusiasm to endeavor to
trace them farther. I have suffered myself too long to indulge in the
speculative statement of requirements which perhaps we have more
immediate and more serious work than to supply, and of feelings which it
may be only contingently in our power to recover. I should be unjustly
thought unaware of the difficulty of what I have proposed, or of the
unimportance of the whole subject as compared with many which are
brought home to our interests and fixed upon our consideration by the
wild course of the present century. But of difficulty and of importance
it is for others to judge. I have limited myself to the simple statement
of what, if we desire to have architecture, we MUST primarily endeavor
to feel and do: but then it may not be desirable for us to have
architecture at all. There are many who feel it to be so; many who
sacrifice much to that end; and I am sorry to see their energies wasted
and their lives disquieted in vain. I have stated, therefore, the only
ways in which that end is attainable, without venturing even to express
an opinion as to its real desirableness. I have an opinion, and the zeal
with which I have spoken may sometimes have betrayed it, but I hold to
it with no confidence. I know too well the undue importance which the
study that every man follows must assume in his own eyes, to trust my
own impressions of the dignity of that of Architecture; and yet I think
I cannot be utterly mistaken in regarding it as at least useful in the
sense of a National employment. I am confirmed in this impression by
what I see passing among the states of Europe at this instant. All the
horror, distress, and tumult which oppress the foreign nations, are
traceable, among the other secondary causes through which God is working
out His will upon them, to the simple one of their not having enough to
do. I am not blind to the distress among their operatives; nor do I deny
the nearer and visibly active causes of the movement: the recklessness
of villany in the leaders of revolt, the absence of common moral
principle in the upper classes, and of common courage and honesty in the
heads of governments. But these causes themselves are ultimately
traceable to a deeper and simpler one: the recklessness of the
demagogue, the immorality of the middle class, and the effeminacy and
treachery of the noble, are traceable in all these nations to the
commonest and most fruitful cause of calamity in households--idleness.
We think too much in our benevolent efforts, more multiplied and more
vain day by day, of bettering men by giving them advice and instruction.
There are few who will take either: the chief thing they need is
occupation. I do not mean work in the sense of bread,--I mean work in
the sense of mental interest; for those who either are placed above the
necessity of labor for their bread, or who will not work although they
should. There is a vast quantity of idle energy among European nations
at this time, which ought to go into handicrafts; there are multitudes
of idle semi-gentlemen who ought to be shoemakers and carpenters; but
since they will not be these so long as they can help it, the business
of the philanthropist is to find them some other employment than
disturbing governments. It is of no use to tell them they are fools, and
that they will only make themselves miserable in the end as well as
others: if they have nothing else to do, they will do mischief; and the
man who will not work, and who has no means of intellectual pleasure, is
as sure to become an instrument of evil as if he had sold himself bodily
to Satan. I have myself seen enough of the daily life of the young
educated men of France and Italy, to account for, as it deserves, the
deepest national suffering and degradation; and though, for the most
part, our commerce and our natural habits of industry preserve us from
a similar paralysis, yet it would be wise to consider whether the forms
of employment which we chiefly adopt or promote, are as well calculated
as they might be to improve and elevate us.

We have just spent, for instance, a hundred and fifty millions, with
which we have paid men for digging ground from one place and depositing
it in another. We have formed a large class of men, the railway navvies,
especially reckless, unmanageable, and dangerous. We have maintained
besides (let us state the benefits as fairly as possible) a number of
iron founders in an unhealthy and painful employment; we have developed
(this is at least good) a very large amount of mechanical ingenuity; and
we have, in fine, attained the power of going fast from one place to
another. Meantime we have had no mental interest or concern ourselves in
the operations we have set on foot, but have been left to the usual
vanities and cares of our existence. Suppose, on the other hand, that we
had employed the same sums in building beautiful houses and churches. We
should have maintained the same number of men, not in driving
wheelbarrows, but in a distinctly technical, if not intellectual,
employment, and those who were more intelligent among them would have
been especially happy in that employment, as having room in it for the
developement of their fancy, and being directed by it to that
observation of beauty which, associated with the pursuit of natural
science, at present forms the enjoyment of many of the more intelligent
manufacturing operatives. Of mechanical ingenuity, there is, I imagine,
at least as much required to build a cathedral as to cut a tunnel or
contrive a locomotive: we should, therefore, have developed as much
science, while the artistical element of intellect would have been added
to the gain. Meantime we should ourselves have been made happier and
wiser by the interest we should have taken in the work with which we
were personally concerned; and when all was done, instead of the very
doubtful advantage of the power of going fast from place to place, we
should have had the certain advantage of increased pleasure in stopping
at home.

IX. There are many other less capacious, but more constant, channels of
expenditure, quite as disputable in their beneficial tendency; and we
are, perhaps, hardly enough in the habit of inquiring, with respect to
any particular form of luxury or any customary appliance of life,
whether the kind of employment it gives to the operative or the
dependant be as healthy and fitting an employment as we might otherwise
provide for him. It is not enough to find men absolute subsistence; we
should think of the manner of life which our demands necessitate; and
endeavor, as far as may be, to make all our needs such as may, in the
supply of them, raise, as well as feed, the poor. It is far better to
give work which is above the men, than to educate the men to be above
their work. It may be doubted, for instance, whether the habits of
luxury, which necessitate a large train of men servants, be a wholesome
form of expenditure; and more, whether the pursuits which have a
tendency to enlarge the class of the jockey and the groom be a
philanthropic form of mental occupation. So again, consider the large
number of men whose lives are employed by civilized nations in cutting
facets upon jewels. There is much dexterity of hand, patience, and
ingenuity thus bestowed, which are simply burned out in the blaze of the
tiara, without, so far as I see, bestowing any pleasure upon those who
wear or who behold, at all compensatory for the loss of life and mental
power which are involved in the employment of the workman. He would be
far more healthily and happily sustained by being set to carve stone;
certain qualities of his mind, for which there is no room in his present
occupation, would develope themselves in the nobler; and I believe that
most women would, in the end, prefer the pleasure of having built a
church, or contributed to the adornment of a cathedral, to the pride of
bearing a certain quantity of adamant on their foreheads.

X. I could pursue this subject willingly, but I have some strange
notions about it which it is perhaps wiser not loosely to set down. I
content myself with finally reasserting, what has been throughout the
burden of the preceding pages, that whatever rank, or whatever
importance, may be attributed or attached to their immediate subject,
there is at least some value in the analogies with which its pursuit has
presented us, and some instruction in the frequent reference of its
commonest necessities to the mighty laws, in the sense and scope of
which all men are Builders, whom every hour sees laying the stubble or
the stone.

I have paused, not once nor twice, as I wrote, and often have checked
the course of what might otherwise have been importunate persuasion, as
the thought has crossed me, how soon all Architecture may be vain,
except that which is not made with hands. There is something ominous in
the light which has enabled us to look back with disdain upon the ages
among whose lovely vestiges we have been wandering. I could smile when I
hear the hopeful exultation of many, at the new reach of worldly
science, and vigor of worldly effort; as if we were again at the
beginning of days. There is thunder on the horizon as well as dawn. The
sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.




NOTES


NOTE I.

Page 21.

_"With the idolatrous Egyptian."_

The probability is indeed slight in comparison, but it _is_ a
probability nevertheless, and one which is daily on the increase. I
trust that I may not be thought to underrate the danger of such
sympathy, though I speak lightly of the chance of it. I have confidence
in the central religious body of the English and Scottish people, as
being not only untainted with Romanism, but immoveably adverse to it:
and, however strangely and swiftly the heresy of the Protestant and
victory of the Papist may seem to be extending among us, I feel assured
that there are barriers in the living faith of this nation which neither
can overpass. Yet this confidence is only in the ultimate faithfulness
of a few, not in the security of the nation from the sin and the
punishment of partial apostasy. Both have, indeed, in some sort, been
committed and suffered already; and, in expressing my belief of the
close connection of the distress and burden which the mass of the people
at present sustain, with the encouragement which, in various directions,
has been given to the Papist, do not let me be called superstitious or
irrational. No man was ever more inclined than I, both by natural
disposition and by many ties of early association, to a sympathy with
the principles and forms of the Romanist Church; and there is much in
its discipline which conscientiously, as well as sympathetically, I
could love and advocate. But, in confessing this strength of
affectionate prejudice, surely I vindicate more respect for my firmly
expressed belief, that the entire doctrine and system of that Church is
in the fullest sense anti-Christian; that its lying and idolatrous Power
is the darkest plague that ever held commission to hurt the Earth; that
all those yearnings for unity and fellowship, and common obedience,
which have been the root of our late heresies, are as false in their
grounds as fatal in their termination; that we never can have the
remotest fellowship with the utterers of that fearful Falsehood, and
live; that we have nothing to look to from them but treacherous
hostility; and that, exactly in proportion to the sternness of our
separation from them, will be not only the spiritual but the temporal
blessings granted by God to this country. How close has been the
correspondence hitherto between the degree of resistance to Romanism
marked in our national acts, and the honor with which those acts have
been crowned, has been sufficiently proved in a short essay by a writer
whose investigations into the influence of Religion upon the fate of
Nations have been singularly earnest and successful--a writer with whom
I faithfully and firmly believe that England will never be prosperous
again, and that the honor of her arms will be tarnished, and her
commerce blighted, and her national character degraded, until the
Romanist is expelled from the place which has impiously been conceded to
him among her legislators. "Whatever be the lot of those to whom error
is an inheritance, woe be to the man and the people to whom it is an
adoption. If England, free above all other nations, sustained amidst the
trials which have covered Europe, before her eyes, with burning and
slaughter, and enlightened by the fullest knowledge of divine truth,
shall refuse fidelity to the compact by which those matchless privileges
have been given, her condemnation will not linger. She has already made
one step full of danger. She has committed the capital error of
mistaking that for a purely political question which was a purely
religious one. Her foot already hangs over the edge of the precipice. It
must be retracted, or the empire is but a name. In the clouds and
darkness which seem to be deepening on all human policy--in the
gathering tumults of Europe, and the feverish discontents at home--it
may be even difficult to discern where the power yet lives to erect the
fallen majesty of the constitution once more. But there are mighty means
in sincerity; and if no miracle was ever wrought for the faithless and
despairing, the country that will help itself will never be left
destitute of the help of Heaven" (Historical Essays, by the Rev. Dr.
Croly, 1842). The first of these essays, "England the Fortress of
Christianity," I most earnestly recommend to the meditation of those who
doubt that a special punishment is inflicted by the Deity upon all
national crime, and perhaps, of all such crime most instantly upon the
betrayal on the part of England of the truth and faith with which she
has been entrusted.


NOTE II.

Page 25.

"_Not the gift, but the giving._"

Much attention has lately been directed to the subject of religious art,
and we are now in possession of all kinds of interpretations and
classifications of it, and of the leading facts of its history. But the
greatest question of all connected with it remains entirely unanswered,
What good did it do to real religion? There is no subject into which I
should so much rejoice to see a serious and conscientious inquiry
instituted as this; an inquiry neither undertaken in artistical
enthusiasm nor in monkish sympathy, but dogged, merciless and fearless.
I love the religious art of Italy as well as most men, but there is a
wide difference between loving it as a manifestation of individual
feeling, and looking to it as an instrument of popular benefit. I have
not knowledge enough to form even the shadow of an opinion on this
latter point, and I should be most grateful to any one who would put it
in my power to do so. There are, as it seems to me, three distinct
questions to be considered: the first, What has been the effect of
external splendor on the genuineness and earnestness of Christian
worship? the second, What the use of pictorial or sculptural
representation in the communication of Christian historical knowledge,
or excitement of affectionate imagination? the third, What the influence
of the practice of religious art on the life of the artist?

In answering these inquiries, we should have to consider separately
every collateral influence and circumstance; and, by a most subtle
analysis, to eliminate the real effect of art from the effects of the
abuses with which it was associated. This could be done only by a
Christian; not a man who would fall in love with a sweet color or sweet
expression, but who would look for true faith and consistent life as the
object of all. It never has been done yet, and the question remains a
subject of vain and endless contention between parties of opposite
prejudices and temperaments.


NOTE III.

Page 26.

_"To the concealment of what is really good or great."_

I have often been surprised at the supposition that Romanism, In its
present condition, could either patronise art or profit by it. The noble
painted windows of St. Maclou at Rouen, and many other churches in
France, are entirely blocked up behind the altars by the erection of
huge gilded wooden sunbeams, with interspersed cherubs.


NOTE IV.

Page 33.

_"With different pattern of traceries in each."_

I have certainly not examined the seven hundred and four traceries (four
to each niche) so as to be sure that none are alike; but they have the
aspect of continual variation, and even the roses of the pendants of the
small groined niche roofs are all of different patterns.


NOTE V.

Page 43.

"_Its flamboyant traceries of the last and most degraded forms._"

They are noticed by Mr. Whewell as forming the figure of the
fleur-de-lis, always a mark, when in tracery bars, of the most debased
flamboyant. It occurs in the central tower of Bayeux, very richly in the
buttresses of St. Gervais at Falaise, and in the small niches of some of
the domestic buildings at Rouen. Nor is it only the tower of St. Ouen
which is overrated. Its nave is a base imitation, in the flamboyant
period, of an early Gothic arrangement; the niches on its piers are
barbarisms; there is a huge square shaft run through the ceiling of the
aisles to support the nave piers, the ugliest excrescence I ever saw on
a Gothic building; the traceries of the nave are the most insipid and
faded flamboyant; those of the transept clerestory present a singularly
distorted condition of perpendicular; even the elaborate door of the
south transept is, for its fine period, extravagant and almost grotesque
in its foliation and pendants. There is nothing truly fine in the church
but the choir, the light triforium, and tall clerestory, the circle of
Eastern chapels, the details of sculpture, and the general lightness of
proportion; these merits being seen to the utmost advantage by the
freedom of the body of the church from all incumbrance.


NOTE VI.

Page 43.

Compare Iliad [Greek: S]. 1. 219 with Odyssey [Greek: Ô]. 1. 5-10.


NOTE VII.

Page 44.

"_Does not admit iron as a constructive material._"

Except in Chaucer's noble temple of Mars.

  "And dounward from an hill under a bent,
  Ther stood the temple of Mars, armipotent,
  Wrought all of burned stele, of which th' entree
  Was longe and streite, and gastly for to see.
  And thereout came a rage and swiche a vise,
  That it made all the gates for to rise.
  The northern light in at the dore shone,
  For window on the wall ne was ther none,
  Thurgh which men mighten any light discerne
  The dore was all of athamant eterne,
  Yclenched overthwart and ende long
  With yren tough, and for to make it strong,
  Every piler the temple to sustene
  Was tonne-gret, of yren bright and shene."
                                                 _The Knighte's Tale._

There is, by the bye, an exquisite piece of architectural color just
before:

  "And northward, in a turret on the wall
  _Of alabaster white, and red corall_,
  An oratorie riche for to see,
  In worship of Diane of Chastitee."


NOTE VIII.

Page 44.

_"The Builders of Salisbury."_

"This way of tying walls together with iron, instead of making them of
that substance and form, that they shall naturally poise themselves upon
their buttment, is against the rules of good architecture, not only
because iron is corruptible by rust, but because it is fallacious,
having unequal veins in the metal, some places of the same bar being
three times stronger than others, and yet all sound to appearance."
Survey of Salisbury Cathedral in 1668, by Sir C. Wren. For my own part,
I think it better work to bind a tower with iron, than to support a
false dome by a brick pyramid.


NOTE IX.

Page 60.

PLATE III.

In this plate, figures 4, 5, and 6, are glazed windows, but fig. 2 is
the open light of a belfry tower, and figures 1 and 3 are in triforia,
the latter also occurring filled, on the central tower of Coutances.


NOTE X.

Page 94.

_"Ornaments of the transept towers of Rouen."_

The reader cannot but observe agreeableness, as a mere arrangement of
shade, which especially belongs to the "sacred trefoil." I do not think
that the element of foliation has been enough insisted upon in its
intimate relations with the power of Gothic work. If I were asked what
was the most distinctive feature of its perfect style, I should say the
Trefoil. It is the very soul of it; and I think the loveliest Gothic is
always formed upon simple and bold tracings of it, taking place between
the blank lancet arch on the one hand, and the overcharged cinquefoiled
arch on the other.


NOTE XI.

Page 95.

"_And levelled cusps of stone._"

The plate represents one of the lateral windows of the third story of
the Palazzo Foscari. It was drawn from the opposite side of the Grand
Canal, and the lines of its traceries are therefore given as they appear
in somewhat distant effect. It shows only segments of the characteristic
quatrefoils of the central windows. I found by measurement their
construction exceedingly simple. Four circles are drawn in contact
within the large circle. Two tangential lines are then drawn to each
opposite pair, enclosing the four circles in a hollow cross. An inner
circle struck through the intersections of the circles by the tangents,
truncates the cusps.


NOTE XII.

Page 124.

"_Into vertical equal parts._"

Not absolutely so. There are variations partly accidental (or at least
compelled by the architect's effort to recover the vertical), between
the sides of the stories; and the upper and lower story are taller than
the rest. There is, however, an apparent equality between five out of
the eight tiers.


NOTE XIII.

Page 133.

"_Never paint a column with vertical lines._"

It should be observed, however, that any pattern which gives opponent
lines in its parts, may be arranged on lines parallel with the main
structure. Thus, rows of diamonds, like spots on a snake's back, or the
bones on a sturgeon, are exquisitely applied both to vertical and spiral
columns. The loveliest instances of such decoration that I know, are the
pillars of the cloister of St. John Lateran, lately illustrated by Mr.
Digby Wyatt, in his most valuable and faithful work on antique mosaic.


NOTE XIV.

Page 139.

On the cover of this volume the reader will find some figure outlines of
the same period and character, from the floor of San Miniato at
Florence. I have to thank its designer, Mr. W. Harry Rogers, for his
intelligent arrangement of them, and graceful adaptation of the
connecting arabesque. (Stamp on cloth cover of _London_ edition.)


NOTE XV.

Page 169.

"_The flowers lost their light, the river its music._"

Yet not all their light, nor all their music. Compare Modern Painters,
vol. ii. sec. 1. chap. iv. SECTION 8.


NOTE XVI.

Page 181.

"_By the artists of the time of Perides._"

This subordination was first remarked to me by a friend, whose profound
knowledge of Greek art will not, I trust, be reserved always for the
advantage of his friends only: Mr. C. Newton, of the British Museum.


NOTE XVII.

Page 188.

"_In one of the noblest poems._"

Coleridge's Ode to France:

  "Ye Clouds! that far above me float and pause,
    Whose pathless march no mortal may control!
    Ye Ocean-Waves! that wheresoe'er ye roll,
  Yield homage only to eternal laws!
  Ye Woods! that listen to the night-birds singing.
    Midway the smooth and perilous slope reclined,
  Save when your own imperious branches swinging,
    Have made a solemn music of the wind!
  Where, like a man beloved of God,
  Through glooms, which never woodman trod,
    How oft, pursuing fancies holy,
  My moonlight way o'er flowering weeds I wound,
    Inspired, beyond the guess of folly,
  By each rude shape and wild unconquerable sound!
  O ye loud Waves! and O ye Forests high!
    And O ye Clouds that far above me soared!
  Thou rising Sun! thou blue rejoicing Sky!
    Yea, everything that is and will be free!
    Bear witness for me, wheresoe'er ye be,
    With what deep worship I have still adored
      The spirit of divinest Liberty."

Noble verse, but erring thought: contrast George Herbert:--

  "Slight those who say amidst their sickly healths,
  Thou livest by rule. What doth not so but man?
  Houses are built by rule and Commonwealths.
  Entice the trusty sun, if that you can,
  From his ecliptic line; beckon the sky.
  Who lives by rule then, keeps good company.

  "Who keeps no guard upon himself is slack,
  And rots to nothing at the next great thaw;
  Man is a shop of rules: a well-truss'd pack
  Whose every parcel underwrites a law.
  Lose not thyself, nor give thy humors way;
  God gave them to thee under lock and key."







The Complete Works of John Ruskin

Volume IX

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME III


[Illustration:
     THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS
     FROM A PHOTOGRAPH]


Library Edition

The Complete Works of John Ruskin

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME III

Giotto
Lectures on Architecture
Harbours of England
A Joy Forever







National Library Association
New York             Chicago




THE
STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME III.

THE FALL




CONTENTS.


  THIRD, OR RENAISSANCE, PERIOD.

                          CHAPTER I.
                                                      PAGE
    Early Renaissance,                                   1

                         CHAPTER II.
    Roman Renaissance,                                  32

                         CHAPTER III.
    Grotesque Renaissance,                             112

                         CHAPTER IV.
    Conclusion,                                        166


  APPENDIX.

     1. Architect of the Ducal Palace,                 199
     2. Theology of Spenser,                           205
     3. Austrian Government in Italy,                  209
     4. Date of the Palaces of the Byzantine
          Renaissance,                                 211
     5. Renaissance Side of Ducal Palace,              212
     6. Character of the Doge Michele Morosini,        213
     7. Modern Education,                              214
     8. Early Venetian Marriages,                      222
     9. Character of the Venetian Aristocracy,         223
    10. Final Appendix,                                224


  INDICES.

     I. Personal Index,                                263
    II. Local Index,                                   268
   III. Topical Index,                                 271
    IV. Venetian Index,                                287




LIST OF PLATES.

                                                    Facing Page

 PLATE 1. Temperance and Intemperance in Ornament,            6
   "   2. Gothic Capitals,                                    8
   "   3. Noble and Ignoble Grotesque,                      125
   "   4. Mosaic of Olive Tree and Flowers,                 179
   "   5. Byzantine Bases,                                  225
   "   6. Byzantine Jambs,                                  229
   "   7. Gothic Jambs,                                     230
   "   8. Byzantine Archivolts,                             244
   "   9. Gothic Archivolts,                                245
   "  10. Cornices,                                         248
   "  11. Tracery Bars,                                     252
   "  12. Capitals of Fondaco de Turchi,                    304




THE

STONES OF VENICE.

THIRD, OR RENAISSANCE, PERIOD.




CHAPTER I.

EARLY RENAISSANCE.


§ I. I trust that the reader has been enabled, by the preceding
chapters, to form some conception of the magnificence of the streets of
Venice during the course of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Yet
by all this magnificence she was not supremely distinguished above the
other cities of the middle ages. Her early edifices have been preserved
to our times by the circuit of her waves; while continual recurrences of
ruin have defaced the glory of her sister cities. But such fragments as
are still left in their lonely squares, and in the corners of their
streets, so far from being inferior to the buildings of Venice, are even
more rich, more finished, more admirable in invention, more exuberant in
beauty. And although, in the North of Europe, civilization was less
advanced, and the knowledge of the arts was more confined to the
ecclesiastical orders, so that, for domestic architecture, the period of
perfection must be there placed much later than in Italy, and considered
as extending to the middle of the fifteenth century; yet, as each city
reached a certain point in civilization, its streets became decorated
with the same magnificence, varied only in style according to the
materials at hand, and temper of the people. And I am not aware of any
town of wealth and importance in the middle ages, in which some proof
does not exist, that, at its period of greatest energy and prosperity,
its streets were inwrought with rich sculpture, and even (though in
this, as before noticed, Venice always stood supreme) glowing with color
and with gold. Now, therefore, let the reader,--forming for himself as
vivid and real a conception as he is able, either of a group of Venetian
palaces in the fourteenth century, or, if he likes better, of one of the
more fantastic but even richer street scenes of Rouen, Antwerp, Cologne,
or Nuremberg, and keeping this gorgeous image before him,--go out into
any thoroughfare, representative, in a general and characteristic way,
of the feeling for domestic architecture in modern times; let him, for
instance, if in London, walk once up and down Harley Street, or Baker
Street, or Gower Street; and then, looking upon this picture and on
this, set himself to consider (for this is to be the subject of our
following and final inquiry) what have been the causes which have
induced so vast a change in the European mind.

§ II. Renaissance architecture is the school which has conducted men's
inventive and constructive faculties from the Grand Canal to Gower
Street; from the marble shaft, and the lancet arch, and the wreathed
leafage, and the glowing and melting harmony of gold and azure, to the
square cavity in the brick wall. We have now to consider the causes and
the steps of this change; and, as we endeavored above to investigate the
nature of Gothic, here to investigate also the nature of Renaissance.

§ III. Although Renaissance architecture assumes very different forms
among different nations, it may be conveniently referred to three
heads:--Early Renaissance, consisting of the first corruptions
introduced into the Gothic schools: Central or Roman Renaissance, which
is the perfectly formed style: and Grotesque Renaissance, which is the
corruption of the Renaissance itself.

§ IV. Now, in order to do full justice to the adverse cause, we will
consider the abstract _nature_ of the school with reference only to its
best or central examples. The forms of building which must be classed
generally under the term _early_ Renaissance are, in many cases, only
the extravagances and corruptions of the languid Gothic, for whose
errors the classical principle is in no wise answerable. It was stated
in the second chapter of the "Seven Lamps," that, unless luxury had
enervated and subtlety falsified the Gothic forms, Roman traditions
could not have prevailed against them; and, although these enervated and
false conditions are almost instantly colored by the classical
influence, it would be utterly unfair to lay to the charge of that
influence the first debasement of the earlier schools, which had lost
the strength of their system before they could be struck by the plague.

§ V. The manner, however, of the debasement of all schools of art, so
far as it is natural, is in all ages the same; luxuriance of ornament,
refinement of execution, and idle subtleties of fancy, taking the place
of true thought and firm handling: and I do not intend to delay the
reader long by the Gothic sick-bed, for our task is not so much to watch
the wasting of fever in the features of the expiring king, as to trace
the character of that Hazael who dipped the cloth in water, and laid it
upon his face, Nevertheless, it is necessary to the completeness of our
view of the architecture of Venice, as well as to our understanding of
the manner in which the Central Renaissance obtained its universal
dominion, that we glance briefly at the principal forms into which
Venetian Gothic first declined. They are two in number: one the
corruption of the Gothic itself; the other a partial return to Byzantine
forms; for the Venetian mind having carried the Gothic to a point at
which it was dissatisfied, tried to retrace its steps, fell back first
upon Byzantine types, and through them passed to the first Roman. But in
thus retracing its steps, it does not recover its own lost energy. It
revisits the places through which it had passed in the morning light,
but it is now with wearied limbs, and under the gloomy shadows of
evening.

§ VI. It has just been said that the two principal causes of natural
decline in any school, are over-luxuriance and over-refinement. The
corrupt Gothic of Venice furnishes us with a curious instance of the
one, and the corrupt Byzantine of the other. We shall examine them in
succession.

Now, observe, first, I do not mean by _luxuriance_ of ornament,
_quantity_ of ornament. In the best Gothic in the world there is hardly
an inch of stone left unsculptured. But I mean that character of
extravagance in the ornament itself which shows that it was addressed to
jaded faculties; a violence and coarseness in curvature, a depth of
shadow, a lusciousness in arrangement of line, evidently arising out of
an incapability of feeling the true beauty of chaste form and restrained
power. I do not know any character of design which may be more easily
recognized at a glance than this over-lusciousness; and yet it seems to
me that at the present day there is nothing so little understood as the
essential difference between chasteness and extravagance, whether in
color, shade, or lines. We speak loosely and inaccurately of
"overcharged" ornament, with an obscure feeling that there is indeed
something in visible Form which is correspondent to Intemperance in
moral habits; but without any distinct detection of the character which
offends us, far less with any understanding of the most important lesson
which there can be no doubt was intended to be conveyed by the
universality of this ornamental law.

§ VII. In a word, then, the safeguard of highest beauty, in all visible
work, is exactly that which is also the safeguard of conduct in the
soul,--Temperance, in the broadest sense; the Temperance which we have
seen sitting on an equal throne with Justice amidst the Four Cardinal
Virtues, and, wanting which, there is not any other virtue which may not
lead us into desperate error. Now, observe: Temperance, in the nobler
sense, does not mean a subdued and imperfect energy; it does not mean a
stopping short in any good thing, as in Love or in Faith; but it means
the power which governs the most intense energy, and prevents its acting
in any way but as it ought. And with respect to things in which there
may be excess, it does not mean imperfect enjoyment of them; but the
regulation of their quantity, so that the enjoyment of them shall be
greatest. For instance, in the matter we have at present in hand,
temperance in color does not mean imperfect or dull enjoyment of color;
but it means that government of color which shall bring the utmost
possible enjoyment out of all hues. A bad colorist does not _love_
beautiful color better than the best colorist does, nor half so much.
But he indulges in it to excess; he uses it in large masses, and
unsubdued; and then it is a law of Nature, a law as universal as that of
gravitation, that he shall not be able to enjoy it so much as if he had
used it in less quantity. His eye is jaded and satiated, and the blue
and red have life in them no more. He tries to paint them bluer and
redder, in vain: all the blue has become grey, and gets greyer the more
he adds to it; all his crimson has become brown, and gets more sere and
autumnal the more he deepens it. But the great painter is sternly
temperate in his work; he loves the vivid color with all his heart; but
for a long time he does not allow himself anything like it, nothing but
sober browns and dull greys, and colors that have no conceivable beauty
in them; but these by his government become lovely: and after bringing
out of them all the life and power they possess, and enjoying them to
the uttermost,--cautiously, and as the crown of the work, and the
consummation of its music, he permits the momentary crimson and azure,
and the whole canvas is in a flame.

§ VIII. Again, in curvature, which is the cause of loveliness in all
form; the bad designer does not enjoy it more than the great designer,
but he indulges in it till his eye is satiated, and he cannot obtain
enough of it to touch his jaded feeling for grace. But the great and
temperate designer does not allow himself any violent curves; he works
much with lines in which the curvature, though always existing, is long
before it is perceived. He dwells on all these subdued curvatures to the
uttermost, and opposes them with still severer lines to bring them out
in fuller sweetness; and, at last, he allows himself a momentary curve
of energy, and all the work is, in an instant, full of life and grace.

The curves drawn in Plate VII. of the first volume, were chosen entirely
to show this character of dignity and restraint, as it appears in the
lines of nature, together with the perpetual changefulness of the
degrees of curvature in one and the same line; but although the purpose
of that plate was carefully explained in the chapter which it
illustrates, as well as in the passages of "Modern Painters" therein
referred to (vol. ii. pp. 43, 79), so little are we now in the habit of
considering the character of abstract lines, that it was thought by many
persons that this plate only illustrated Hogarth's reversed line of
beauty, even although the curve of the salvia leaf, which was the one
taken from that plate for future use, in architecture, was not a
reversed or serpentine curve at all. I shall now, however, I hope, be
able to show my meaning better.

§ IX. Fig. 1 in Plate I., opposite, is a piece of ornamentation from a
Norman-French manuscript of the thirteenth century, and fig. 2 from an
Italian one of the fifteenth. Observe in the first its stern moderation
in curvature; the gradually united lines _nearly straight_, though none
quite straight, used for its main limb, and contrasted with the bold but
simple offshoots of its leaves, and the noble spiral from which it
shoots, these in their turn opposed by the sharp trefoils and thorny
cusps. And see what a reserve of resource there is in the whole; how
easy it would have been to make the curves more palpable and the foliage
more rich, and how the noble hand has stayed itself, and refused to
grant one wave of motion more.

[Illustration: Plate I.
               TEMPERANCE AND INTEMPERANCE.
               IN CURVATURE.]

§ X. Then observe the other example, in which, while the same idea is
continually repeated, excitement and interest are sought for by means of
violent and continual curvatures wholly unrestrained, and rolling hither
and thither in confused wantonness. Compare the character of the
separate lines in these two examples carefully, and be assured that
wherever this redundant and luxurious curvature shows itself in
ornamentation, it is a sign of jaded energy and failing invention. Do
not confuse it with fulness or richness. Wealth is not necessarily
wantonness: a Gothic moulding may be buried half a foot deep in thorns
and leaves, and yet will be chaste in every line; and a late Renaissance
moulding may be utterly barren and poverty-stricken, and yet will show
the disposition to luxury in every line.

§ XI. Plate XX., in the second volume, though prepared for the special
illustration of the notices of capitals, becomes peculiarly interesting
when considered in relation to the points at present under
consideration. The four leaves in the upper row are Byzantine; the two
middle rows are transitional, all but fig. 11, which is of the formed
Gothic; fig. 12 is perfect Gothic of the finest time (Ducal Palace,
oldest part), fig. 13 is Gothic beginning to decline, fig. 14 is
Renaissance Gothic in complete corruption.

Now observe, first, the Gothic naturalism advancing gradually from the
Byzantine severity; how from the sharp, hard, formalized conventionality
of the upper series the leaves gradually expand into more free and
flexible animation, until in fig. 12 we have the perfect living leaf as
if fresh gathered out of the dew. And then, in the last two examples and
partly in fig. 11, observe how the forms which can advance no longer in
animation, advance, or rather decline, into luxury and effeminacy as the
strength of the school expires.

§ XII. In the second place, note that the Byzantine and Gothic schools,
however differing in degree of life, are both alike in _temperance_,
though the temperance of the Gothic is the nobler, because it consists
with entire animation. Observe how severe and subtle the curvatures are
in all the leaves from fig. 1 to fig. 12, except only in fig. 11; and
observe especially the firmness and strength obtained by the close
approximation to the straight line in the lateral ribs of the leaf, fig.
12. The longer the eye rests on these temperate curvatures the more it
will enjoy them, but it will assuredly in the end be wearied by the
morbid exaggeration of the last example.

[Illustration: Plate II.
               GOTHIC CAPITALS.]

§ XIII. Finally, observe--and this is very important--how one and the
same character in the work may be a sign of totally different states of
mind, and therefore in one case bad, and in the other good. The
examples, fig. 3. and fig. 12., are both equally pure in line; but one
is subdivided in the extreme, the other broad in the extreme, and both
are beautiful. The Byzantine mind delighted in the delicacy of
subdivision which nature shows in the fern-leaf or parsley-leaf; and so,
also, often the Gothic mind, much enjoying the oak, thorn, and thistle.
But the builder of the Ducal Palace used great breadth in his foliage,
in order to harmonize with the broad surface of his mighty wall, and
delighted in this breadth as nature delights in the sweeping freshness
of the dock-leaf or water-lily. Both breadth and subdivision are thus
noble, when they are contemplated or conceived by a mind in health; and
both become ignoble, when conceived by a mind jaded and satiated. The
subdivision in fig. 13 as compared with the type, fig. 12, which it was
intended to improve, is the sign, not of a mind which loved intricacy,
but of one which could not relish simplicity, which had not strength
enough to enjoy the broad masses of the earlier leaves, and cut them to
pieces idly, like a child tearing the book which, in its weariness, it
cannot read. And on the other hand, we shall continually find, in other
examples of work of the same period, an unwholesome breadth or
heaviness, which results from the mind having no longer any care for
refinement or precision, nor taking any delight in delicate forms, but
making all things blunted, cumbrous, and dead, losing at the same time
the sense of the elasticity and spring of natural curves. It is as if
the soul of man, itself severed from the root of its health, and about
to fall into corruption, lost the perception of life in all things
around it; and could no more distinguish the wave of the strong
branches, full of muscular strength and sanguine circulation, from the
lax bending of a broken cord, nor the sinuousness of the edge of the
leaf, crushed into deep folds by the expansion of its living growth,
from the wrinkled contraction of its decay.[1] Thus, in morals, there
is a care for trifles which proceeds from love and conscience, and is
most holy; and a care for trifles which comes of idleness and frivolity,
and is most base. And so, also, there is a gravity proceeding from
thought, which is most noble; and a gravity proceeding from dulness and
mere incapability of enjoyment, which is most base. Now, in the various
forms assumed by the later Gothic of Venice, there are one or two
features which, under other circumstances, would not have been signs of
decline; but, in the particular manner of their occurrence here,
indicate the fatal weariness of decay. Of all these features the most
distinctive are its crockets and finials.

§ XIV. There is not to be found a single crocket or finial upon any part
of the Ducal Palace built during the fourteenth century; and although
they occur on contemporary, and on some much earlier, buildings, they
either indicate detached examples of schools not properly Venetian, or
are signs of incipient decline.

The reason of this is, that the finial is properly the ornament of
gabled architecture; it is the compliance, in the minor features of the
building, with the spirit of its towers, ridged roof, and spires.
Venetian building is not gabled, but horizontal in its roots and general
masses; therefore the finial is a feature contradictory to its spirit,
and adopted only in that search for morbid excitement which is the
infallible indication of decline. When it occurs earlier, it is on
fragments of true gabled architecture, as, for instance, on the porch of
the Carmini.

In proportion to the unjustifiableness of its introduction was the
extravagance of the form it assumed; becoming, sometimes, a tuft at the
top of the ogee windows, half as high as the arch itself, and
consisting, in the richest examples, of a human figure, half emergent
out of a cup of leafage, as, for instance, in the small archway of the
Campo San Zaccaria: while the crockets, as being at the side of the
arch, and not so strictly connected with its balance and symmetry,
appear to consider themselves at greater liberty even than the finials,
and fling themselves, hither and thither, in the wildest contortions.
Fig. 4. in Plate I, is the outline of one, carved in stone, from the
later Gothic of St. Mark's; fig. 3. a crocket from the fine Veronese
Gothic; in order to enable the reader to discern the Renaissance
character better by comparison with the examples of curvature above
them, taken from the manuscripts. And not content with this exuberance
in the external ornaments of the arch, the finial interferes with its
traceries. The increased intricacy of these, as such, being a natural
process in the developement of Gothic, would have been no evil; but they
are corrupted by the enrichment of the finial at the point of the
cusp,--corrupted, that is to say, in Venice: for at Verona the finial,
in the form of a fleur-de-lis, appears long previously at the cusp
point, with exquisite effect; and in our own best Northern Gothic it is
often used beautifully in this place, as in the window from Salisbury,
Plate XII. (Vol. II.), fig. 2. But in Venice, such a treatment of it was
utterly contrary to the severe spirit of the ancient traceries; and the
adoption of a leafy finial at the extremity of the cusps in the door of
San Stefano, as opposed to the simple ball which terminates those of the
Ducal Palace, is an unmistakable indication of a tendency to decline.

In like manner, the enrichment and complication of the jamb mouldings,
which, in other schools, might and did take place in the healthiest
periods, are, at Venice, signs of decline, owing to the entire
inconsistency of such mouldings with the ancient love of the single
square jamb and archivolt. The process of enrichment in them is shown by
the successive examples given in Plate VII., below. They are numbered,
and explained in the Appendix.

§ XV. The date at which this corrupt form of Gothic first prevailed over
the early simplicity of the Venetian types can be determined in an
instant, on the steps of the choir of the Church of St. John and Paul.
On our left hand, as we enter, is the tomb of the Doge Marco Cornaro,
who died in 1367. It is rich and fully developed Gothic, with crockets
and finials, but not yet attaining any extravagant developement.
Opposite to it is that of the Doge Andrea Morosini, who died in 1382.
Its Gothic is voluptuous, and over-wrought; the crockets are bold and
florid, and the enormous finial represents a statue of St. Michael.
There is no excuse for the antiquaries who, having this tomb before
them, could have attributed the severe architecture of the Ducal Palace
to a later date; for every one of the Renaissance errors is here in
complete developement, though not so grossly as entirely to destroy the
loveliness of the Gothic forms. In the Porta della Carta, 1423, the vice
reaches its climax.

§ XVI. Against this degraded Gothic, then, came up the Renaissance
armies; and their first assault was in the requirement of universal
perfection. For the first time since the destruction of Rome, the world
had seen, in the work of the greatest artists of the fifteenth
century,--in the painting of Ghirlandajo, Masaccio, Francia, Perugino,
Pinturicchio, and Bellini; in the sculpture of Mino da Fiesole, of
Ghiberti, and Verrocchio,--a perfection of execution and fulness of
knowledge which cast all previous art into the shade, and which, being
in the work of those men united with all that was great in that of
former days, did indeed justify the utmost enthusiasm with which their
efforts were, or could be, regarded. But when this perfection had once
been exhibited in anything, it was required in everything; the world
could no longer be satisfied with less exquisite execution, or less
disciplined knowledge. The first thing that it demanded in all work was,
that it should be done in a consummate and learned way; and men
altogether forgot that it was possible to consummate what was
contemptible, and to know what was useless. Imperatively requiring
dexterity of touch, they gradually forgot to look for tenderness of
feeling; imperatively requiring accuracy of knowledge, they gradually
forgot to ask for originality of thought. The thought and the feeling
which they despised departed from them, and they were left to
felicitate themselves on their small science and their neat fingering.
This is the history of the first attack of the Renaissance upon the
Gothic schools, and of its rapid results, more fatal and immediate in
architecture than in any other art, because there the demand for
perfection was less reasonable, and less consistent with the
capabilities of the workman; being utterly opposed to that rudeness or
savageness on which, as we saw above, the nobility of the elder schools
in great part depends. But inasmuch as the innovations were founded on
some of the most beautiful examples of art, and headed by some of the
greatest men that the world ever saw, and as the Gothic with which they
interfered was corrupt and valueless, the first appearance of the
Renaissance feeling had the appearance of a healthy movement. A new
energy replaced whatever weariness or dulness had affected the Gothic
mind; an exquisite taste and refinement, aided by extended knowledge,
furnished the first models of the new school; and over the whole of
Italy a style arose, generally now known as cinque-cento, which in
sculpture and painting, as I just stated, produced the noblest masters
which the world ever saw, headed by Michael Angelo, Raphael, and
Leonardo; but which failed of doing the same in architecture, because,
as we have seen above, perfection is therein not possible, and failed
more totally than it would otherwise have done, because the classical
enthusiasm had destroyed the best types of architectural form.

§ XVII. For, observe here very carefully, the Renaissance principle, as
it consisted in a demand for universal perfection, is quite distinct
from the Renaissance principle as it consists in a demand for classical
and Roman _forms_ of perfection. And if I had space to follow out the
subject as I should desire, I would first endeavor to ascertain what
might have been the course of the art of Europe if no manuscripts of
classical authors had been recovered, and no remains of classical
architecture left, in the fifteenth century; so that the executive
perfection to which the efforts of all great men had tended for five
hundred years, and which now at last was reached, might have been
allowed to develope itself in its own natural and proper form, in
connexion with the architectural structure of earlier schools. This
refinement and perfection had indeed its own perils, and the history of
later Italy, as she sank into pleasure and thence into corruption, would
probably have been the same whether she had ever learned again to write
pure Latin or not. Still the inquiry into the probable cause of the
enervation which might naturally have followed the highest exertion of
her energies, is a totally distinct one from that into the particular
form given to this enervation by her classical learning; and it is
matter of considerable regret to me that I cannot treat these two
subjects separately: I must be content with marking them for separation
in the mind of the reader.

§ XVIII. The effect, then, of the sudden enthusiasm for classical
literature, which gained strength during every hour of the fifteenth
century, was, as far as respected architecture, to do away with the
entire system of Gothic science. The pointed arch, the shadowy vault,
the clustered shaft, the heaven-pointing spire, were all swept away; and
no structure was any longer permitted but that of the plain cross-beam
from pillar to pillar, over the round arch, with square or circular
shafts, and a low-gabled roof and pediment: two elements of noble form,
which had fortunately existed in Rome, were, however, for that reason,
still permitted; the cupola, and, internally, the waggon vault.

§ XIX. These changes in form were all of them unfortunate; and it is
almost impossible to do justice to the occasionally exquisite
ornamentation of the fifteenth century, on account of its being placed
upon edifices of the cold and meagre Roman outline. There is, as far as
I know, only one Gothic building in Europe, the Duomo of Florence, in
which, though the ornament be of a much earlier school, it is yet so
exquisitely finished as to enable us to imagine what might have been the
effect of the perfect workmanship of the Renaissance, coming out of the
hands of men like Verrocchio and Ghiberti, had it been employed on the
magnificent framework of Gothic structure. This is the question which,
as I shall note in the concluding chapter, we ought to set ourselves
practically to solve in modern times.

§ XX. The changes effected in form, however, were the least part of the
evil principles of the Renaissance. As I have just said, its main
mistake, in its early stages, was the unwholesome demand for
_perfection_, at any cost. I hope enough has been advanced, in the
chapter on the Nature of Gothic, to show the reader that perfection is
_not_ to be had from the general workman, but at the cost of
everything,--of his whole life, thought, and energy. And Renaissance
Europe thought this a small price to pay for manipulative perfection.
Men like Verrocchio and Ghiberti were not to be had every day, nor in
every place; and to require from the common workman execution or
knowledge like theirs, was to require him to become their copyist. Their
strength was great enough to enable them to join science with invention,
method with emotion, finish with fire; but, in them, the invention and
the fire were first, while Europe saw in them only the method and the
finish. This was new to the minds of men, and they pursued it to the
neglect of everything else. "This," they cried, "we must have in all our
work henceforward:" and they were obeyed. The lower workman secured
method and finish, and lost, in exchange for them, his soul.

§ XXI. Now, therefore, do not let me be misunderstood when I speak
generally of the evil spirit of the Renaissance. The reader may look
through all I have written, from first to last, and he will not find one
word but of the most profound reverence for those mighty men who could
wear the Renaissance armor of proof, and yet not feel it encumber their
living limbs,[2]--Leonardo and Michael Angelo, Ghirlandajo and Masaccio,
Titian and Tintoret. But I speak of the Renaissance as an evil time,
because, when it saw those men go burning forth into the battle, it
mistook their armor for their strength: and forthwith encumbered with
the painful panoply every stripling who ought to have gone forth only
with his own choice of three smooth stones out of the brook.

§ XXII. This, then, the reader must always keep in mind when he is
examining for himself any examples of cinque-cento work. When it has
been done by a truly great man, whose life and strength could not be
oppressed, and who turned to good account the whole science of his day,
nothing is more exquisite. I do not believe, for instance, that there is
a more glorious work of sculpture existing in the world than that
equestrian statue of Bartolomeo Colleone, by Verrocchio, of which, I
hope, before these pages are printed, there will be a cast in England.
But when the cinque-cento work has been done by those meaner men, who,
in the Gothic times, though in a rough way, would yet have found some
means of speaking out what was in their hearts, it is utterly
inanimate,--a base and helpless copy of more accomplished models; or, if
not this, a mere accumulation of technical skill, in gaining which the
workman had surrendered all other powers that were in him.

There is, therefore, of course, an infinite gradation in the art of the
period, from the Sistine Chapel down to modern upholstery; but, for the
most part, since in architecture the workman must be of an inferior
order, it will be found that this cinque-cento painting and higher
religious sculpture is noble, while the cinque-cento architecture, with
its subordinate sculpture, is universally bad; sometimes, however,
assuming forms, in which the consummate refinement almost atones for the
loss of force.

§ XXIII. This is especially the case with that second branch of the
Renaissance which, as above noticed, was engrafted at Venice on the
Byzantine types. So soon as the classical enthusiasm required the
banishment of Gothic forms, it was natural that the Venetian mind should
turn back with affection to the Byzantine models in which the round
arches and simple shafts, necessitated by recent law, were presented
under a form consecrated by the usage of their ancestors. And,
accordingly, the first distinct school of architecture[3] which arose
under the new dynasty, was one in which the method of inlaying marble,
and the general forms of shaft and arch, were adopted from the buildings
of the twelfth century, and applied with the utmost possible refinements
of modern skill. Both at Verona and Venice the resulting architecture is
exceedingly beautiful. At Verona it is, indeed, less Byzantine, but
possesses a character of richness and tenderness almost peculiar to that
city. At Venice it is more severe, but yet adorned with sculpture which,
for sharpness of touch and delicacy of minute form, cannot be rivalled,
and rendered especially brilliant and beautiful by the introduction of
those inlaid circles of colored marble, serpentine, and porphyry, by
which Phillippe de Commynes was so much struck on his first entrance
into the city. The two most refined buildings in this style in Venice
are, the small Church of the Miracoli, and the Scuola di San Marco
beside the Church of St. John and St. Paul. The noblest is the Rio
Façade of the Ducal Palace. The Casa Dario, and Casa Manzoni, on the
Grand Canal, are exquisite examples of the school, as applied to
domestic architecture; and, in the reach of the canal between the Casa
Foscari and the Rialto, there are several palaces, of which the Casa
Contarini (called "delle Figure") is the principal, belonging to the
same group, though somewhat later, and remarkable for the association of
the Byzantine principles of color with the severest lines of the Roman
pediment, gradually superseding the round arch. The precision of
chiselling and delicacy of proportion in the ornament and general lines
of these palaces cannot be too highly praised; and I believe that the
traveller in Venice, in general, gives them rather too little attention
than too much. But while I would ask him to stay his gondola beside each
of them long enough to examine their every line, I must also warn him to
observe, most carefully, the peculiar feebleness and want of soul in the
conception of their ornament, which mark them as belonging to a period
of decline; as well as the absurd mode of introduction of their pieces
of colored marble: these, instead of being simply and naturally inserted
in the masonry, are placed in small circular or oblong frames of
sculpture, like mirrors or pictures, and are represented as suspended by
ribands against the wall; a pair of wings being generally fastened on to
the circular tablets, as if to relieve the ribands and knots from their
weight, and the whole series tied under the chin of a little cherub at
the top, who is nailed against the façade like a hawk on a barn door.

But chiefly let him notice, in the Casa Contarini delle Figure, one most
strange incident, seeming to have been permitted, like the choice of the
subjects at the three angles of the Ducal Palace, in order to teach us,
by a single lesson, the true nature of the style in which it occurs. In
the intervals of the windows of the first story, certain shields and
torches are attached, in the form of trophies, to the stems of two trees
whose boughs have been cut off, and only one or two of their faded
leaves left, scarcely observable, but delicately sculptured here and
there, beneath the insertions of the severed boughs.

It is as if the workman had intended to leave us an image of the
expiring naturalism of the Gothic school. I had not seen this sculpture
when I wrote the passage referring to its period, in the first volume of
this work (Chap. XX. § XXXI.):--"Autumn came,--the leaves were
shed,--and the eye was directed to the extremities of the delicate
branches. _The Renaissance frosts came, and all perished!_"

§ XXIV. And the hues of this autumn of the early Renaissance are the
last which appear in architecture. The winter which succeeded was
colorless as it was cold; and although the Venetian painters struggled
long against its influence, the numbness of the architecture prevailed
over them at last, and the exteriors of all the latter palaces were
built only in barren stone. As at this point of our inquiry, therefore,
we must bid farewell to color, I have reserved for this place the
continuation of the history of chromatic decoration, from the Byzantine
period, when we left it in the fifth chapter of the second volume, down
to its final close.

§ XXV. It was above stated, that the principal difference in general
form and treatment between the Byzantine and Gothic palaces was the
contraction of the marble facing into the narrow spaces between the
windows, leaving large fields of brick wall perfectly bare. The reason
for this appears to have been, that the Gothic builders were no longer
satisfied with the faint and delicate hues of the veined marble; they
wished for some more forcible and piquant mode of decoration,
corresponding more completely with the gradually advancing splendor of
chivalric costume and heraldic device. What I have said above of the
simple habits of life of the thirteenth century, in no wise refers
either to costumes of state, or of military service; and any
illumination of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries (the great
period being, it seems to me, from 1250 to 1350), while it shows a
peculiar majesty and simplicity in the fall of the robes (often worn
over the chain armor), indicates, at the same time, an exquisite
brilliancy of color and power of design in the hems and borders, as well
as in the armorial bearings with which they are charged; and while, as
we have seen, a peculiar simplicity is found also in the _forms_ of the
architecture, corresponding to that of the folds of the robes, its
_colors_ were constantly increasing in brilliancy and decision,
corresponding to those of the quartering of the shield, and of the
embroidery of the mantle.

§ XXVI. Whether, indeed, derived from the quarterings of the knights'
shields, or from what other source, I know not; but there is one
magnificent attribute of the coloring of the late twelfth, the whole
thirteenth, and the early fourteenth century, which I do not find
definitely in any previous work, nor afterwards in general art, though
constantly, and necessarily, in that of great colorists, namely, the
union of one color with another by reciprocal interference: that is to
say, if a mass of red is to be set beside a mass of blue, a piece of the
red will be carried into the blue, and a piece of the blue carried into
the red; sometimes in nearly equal portions, as in a shield divided into
four quarters, of which the uppermost on one side will be of the same
color as the lowermost on the other; sometimes in smaller fragments,
but, in the periods above named, always definitely and grandly, though
in a thousand various ways. And I call it a magnificent principle, for
it is an eternal and universal one, not in art only,[4] but in human
life. It is the great principle of Brotherhood, not by equality, nor by
likeness, but by giving and receiving; the souls that are unlike, and
the nations that are unlike, and the natures that are unlike, being
bound into one noble whole by each receiving something from, and of, the
others' gifts and the others' glory. I have not space to follow out this
thought,--it is of infinite extent and application,--but I note it for
the reader's pursuit, because I have long believed, and the whole second
volume of "Modern Painters" was written to prove, that in whatever has
been made by the Deity externally delightful to the human sense of
beauty, there is some type of God's nature or of God's laws; nor are any
of His laws, in one sense, greater than the appointment that the most
lovely and perfect unity shall be obtained by the taking of one nature
into another. I trespass upon too high ground; and yet I cannot fully
show the reader the extent of this law, but by leading him thus far. And
it is just because it is so vast and so awful a law, that it has rule
over the smallest things; and there is not a vein of color on the
lightest leaf which the spring winds are at this moment unfolding in the
fields around us, but it is an illustration of an ordainment to which
the earth and its creatures owe their continuance, and their Redemption.

§ XXVII. It is perfectly inconceivable, until it has been made a subject
of special inquiry, how perpetually Nature employs this principle in the
distribution of her light and shade; how by the most extraordinary
adaptations, apparently accidental, but always in exactly the right
place, she contrives to bring darkness into light, and light into
darkness; and that so sharply and decisively, that at the very instant
when one object changes from light to dark, the thing relieved upon it
will change from dark to light, and yet so subtly that the eye will not
detect the transition till it looks for it. The secret of a great part
of the grandeur in all the noblest compositions is the doing of this
delicately in _degree_, and broadly in _mass_; in color it may be done
much more decisively than in light and shade, and, according to the
simplicity of the work, with greater frankness of confession, until, in
purely decorative art, as in the illumination, glass-painting, and
heraldry of the great periods, we find it reduced to segmental accuracy.
Its greatest masters, in high art, are Tintoret, Veronese, and Turner.

§ XXVIII. Together with this great principle of quartering is introduced
another, also of very high value as far as regards the delight of the
eye, though not of so profound meaning. As soon as color began to be
used in broad and opposed fields, it was perceived that the mass of it
destroyed its brilliancy, and it was _tempered_ by chequering it with
some other color or colors in smaller quantities, mingled with minute
portions of pure white. The two moral principles of which this is the
type, are those of Temperance and Purity; the one requiring the fulness
of the color to be subdued, and the other that it shall be subdued
without losing either its own purity or that of the colors with which it
is associated.

§ XXIX. Hence arose the universal and admirable system of the diapered
or chequered background of early ornamental art. They are completely
developed in the thirteenth century, and extend through the whole of
the fourteenth gradually yielding to landscape, and other pictorial
backgrounds, as the designers lost perception of the purpose of their
art, and of the value of color. The chromatic decoration of the Gothic
palaces of Venice was of course founded on these two great principles,
which prevailed constantly wherever the true chivalric and Gothic spirit
possessed any influence. The windows, with their intermediate spaces of
marble, were considered as the objects to be relieved, and variously
quartered with vigorous color. The whole space of the brick wall was
considered as a background; it was covered with stucco, and painted in
fresco, with diaper patterns.

§ XXX. What? the reader asks in some surprise,--Stucco! and in the great
Gothic period? Even so, but _not stucco to imitate stone_. Herein lies
all the difference; it is stucco confessed and understood, and laid on
the bricks precisely as gesso is laid on canvas, in order to form them
into a ground for receiving color from the human hand,--color which, if
well laid on, might render the brick wall more precious than if it had
been built of emeralds. Whenever we wish to paint, we may prepare our
paper as we choose; the value of the ground in no wise adds to the value
of the picture. A Tintoret on beaten gold would be of no more value than
a Tintoret on coarse canvas; the gold would merely be wasted. All that
we have to do is to make the ground as good and fit for the color as
possible, by whatever means.

§ XXXI. I am not sure if I am right in applying the term "stucco" to the
ground of fresco; but this is of no consequence; the reader will
understand that it was white, and that the whole wall of the palace was
considered as the page of a book to be illuminated: but he will
understand also that the sea winds are bad librarians; that, when once
the painted stucco began to fade or to fall, the unsightliness of the
defaced color would necessitate its immediate restoration; and that
therefore, of all the chromatic decoration of the Gothic palaces, there
is hardly a fragment left.

Happily, in the pictures of Gentile Bellini, the fresco coloring of the
Gothic palaces is recorded, as it still remained in his time; not with
rigid accuracy, but quite distinctly enough to enable us, by comparing
it with the existing colored designs in the manuscripts and glass of the
period, to ascertain precisely what it must have been.

§ XXXII. The walls were generally covered with chequers of very warm
color, a russet inclining to scarlet, more or less relieved with white,
black, and grey; as still seen in the only example which, having been
executed in marble, has been perfectly preserved, the front of the Ducal
Palace. This, however, owing to the nature of its materials, was a
peculiarly simple example; the ground is white, crossed with double bars
of pale red, and in the centre of each chequer there is a cross,
alternately black with a red centre and red with a black centre where
the arms cross. In painted work the grounds would be, of course, as
varied and complicated as those of manuscripts; but I only know of one
example left, on the Casa Sagredo, where, on some fragments of stucco, a
very early chequer background is traceable, composed of crimson
quatrefoils interlaced, with cherubim stretching their wings filling the
intervals. A small portion of this ground is seen beside the window
taken from the palace, Vol. II. Plate XIII. fig. 1.

§ XXXIII. It ought to be especially noticed, that, in all chequered
patterns employed in the colored designs of these noble periods, the
greatest care is taken to mark that they are _grounds_ of design rather
than designs themselves. Modern architects, in such minor imitations as
they are beginning to attempt, endeavor to dispose the parts in the
patterns so as to occupy certain symmetrical positions with respect to
the parts of the architecture. A Gothic builder never does this: he cuts
his ground into pieces of the shape he requires with utter
remorselessness, and places his windows or doors upon it with no regard
whatever to the lines in which they cut the pattern: and, in
illuminations of manuscripts, the chequer itself is constantly changed
in the most subtle and arbitrary way, wherever there is the least chance
of its regularity attracting the eye, and making it of importance. So
_intentional_ is this, that a diaper pattern is often set obliquely to
the vertical lines of the designs, for fear it should appear in any way
connected with them.

§ XXXIV. On these russet or crimson backgrounds the entire space of the
series of windows was relieved, for the most part, as a subdued white
field of alabaster; and on this delicate and veined white were set the
circular disks of purple and green. The arms of the family were of
course blazoned in their own proper colors, but I think generally on a
pure azure ground; the blue color is still left behind the shields in
the Casa Priuli and one or two more of the palaces which are unrestored,
and the blue ground was used also to relieve the sculptures of religious
subject. Finally, all the mouldings, capitals, cornices, cusps, and
traceries, were either entirely gilded or profusely touched with gold.

The whole front of a Gothic palace in Venice may, therefore, be simply
described as a field of subdued russet, quartered with broad sculptured
masses of white and gold; these latter being relieved by smaller inlaid
fragments of blue, purple, and deep green.

§ XXXV. Now, from the beginning of the fourteenth century, when painting
and architecture were thus united, two processes of change went on
simultaneously to the beginning of the seventeenth. The merely
decorative chequerings on the walls yielded gradually to more elaborate
paintings of figure-subject; first small and quaint, and then enlarging
into enormous pictures filled by figures generally colossal. As these
paintings became of greater merit and importance, the architecture with
which they were associated was less studied; and at last a style was
introduced in which the framework of the building was little more
interesting than that of a Manchester factory, but the whole space of
its walls was covered with the most precious fresco paintings. Such
edifices are of course no longer to be considered as forming an
architectural school; they were merely large preparations of artists'
panels; and Titian, Giorgione, and Veronese no more conferred merit on
the later architecture of Venice, as such, by painting on its façades,
than Landseer or Watts could confer merit on that of London by first
whitewashing and then painting its brick streets from one end to the
other.

§ XXXVI. Contemporarily with this change in the relative values of the
color decoration and the stone-work, one equally important was taking
place in the opposite direction, but of course in another group of
buildings. For in proportion as the architect felt himself thrust aside
or forgotten in one edifice, he endeavored to make himself principal in
another; and, in retaliation for the painter's entire usurpation of
certain fields of design, succeeded in excluding him totally from those
in which his own influence was predominant. Or, more accurately
speaking, the architects began to be too proud to receive assistance
from the colorists; and these latter sought for ground which the
architect had abandoned, for the unrestrained display of their own
skill. And thus, while one series of edifices is continually becoming
feebler in design and richer in superimposed paintings, another, that of
which we have so often spoken as the earliest or Byzantine Renaissance,
fragment by fragment rejects the pictorial decoration; supplies its
place first with marbles, and then, as the latter are felt by the
architect, daily increasing in arrogance and deepening in coldness, to
be too bright for his dignity, he casts even these aside one by one: and
when the last porphyry circle has vanished from the façade, we find two
palaces standing side by side, one built, so far as mere masonry goes,
with consummate care and skill, but without the slightest vestige of
color in any part of it; the other utterly without any claim to interest
in its architectural form, but covered from top to bottom with paintings
by Veronese. At this period, then, we bid farewell to color, leaving the
painters to their own peculiar field; and only regretting that they
waste their noblest work on walls, from which in a couple of centuries,
if not before, the greater part of their labor must be effaced. On the
other hand, the architecture whose decline we are tracing, has now
assumed an entirely new condition, that of the Central or True
Renaissance, whose nature we are to examine in the next chapter.

§ XXXVII. But before leaving these last palaces over which the Byzantine
influence extended itself, there is one more lesson to be learned from
them of much importance to us. Though in many respects debased in style,
they are consummate in workmanship, and unstained in honor; there is no
imperfection in them, and no dishonesty. That there is absolutely _no_
imperfection, is indeed, as we have seen above, a proof of their being
wanting in the highest qualities of architecture; but, as lessons in
masonry, they have their value, and may well be studied for the
excellence they display in methods of levelling stones, for the
precision of their inlaying, and other such qualities, which in them are
indeed too principal, yet very instructive in their particular way.

§ XXXVIII. For instance, in the inlaid design of the dove with the olive
branch, from the Casa Trevisan (Vol. I. Plate XX. p. 369), it is
impossible for anything to go beyond the precision with which the olive
leaves are cut out of the white marble; and, in some wreaths of laurel
below, the rippled edge of each leaf is as finely and easily drawn, as
if by a delicate pencil. No Florentine table is more exquisitely
finished than the façade of this entire palace; and as ideals of an
executive perfection, which, though we must not turn aside from our main
path to reach it, may yet with much advantage be kept in our sight and
memory, these palaces are most notable amidst the architecture of
Europe. The Rio Façade of the Ducal Palace, though very sparing in
color, is yet, as an example of finished masonry in a vast building, one
of the finest things, not only in Venice, but in the world. It differs
from other work of the Byzantine Renaissance, in being on a very large
scale; and it still retains one pure Gothic character, which adds not a
little to its nobleness, that of perpetual variety. There is hardly one
window of it, or one panel, that is like another; and this continual
change so increases its apparent size by confusing the eye, that, though
presenting no bold features, or striking masses of any kind, there are
few things in Italy more impressive than the vision of it overhead, as
the gondola glides from beneath the Bridge of Sighs. And lastly (unless
we are to blame these buildings for some pieces of very childish
perspective), they are magnificently honest, as well as perfect. I do
not remember even any gilding upon them; all is pure marble, and of the
finest kind.[5]

And therefore, in finally leaving the Ducal Palace,[6] let us take with
us one more lesson, the last which we shall receive from the Stones of
Venice, except in the form of a warning.

§ XXXIX. The school of architecture which we have just been examining
is, as we have seen above, redeemed from severe condemnation by its
careful and noble use of inlaid marbles as a means of color. From that
time forward, this art has been unknown, or despised; the frescoes of
the swift and daring Venetian painters long contended with the inlaid
marbles, outvying them with color, indeed more glorious than theirs, but
fugitive as the hues of woods in autumn; and, at last, as the art itself
of painting in this mighty manner failed from among men,[7] the modern
decorative system established itself, which united the meaninglessness
of the veined marble with the evanescence of the fresco, and completed
the harmony by falsehood.

§ XL. Since first, in the second chapter of the "Seven Lamps," I
endeavored to show the culpableness, as well as the baseness, of our
common modes of decoration by painted imitation of various woods or
marbles, the subject has been discussed in various architectural works,
and is evidently becoming one of daily increasing interest. When it is
considered how many persons there are whose means of livelihood consist
altogether in these spurious arts, and how difficult it is, even for the
most candid, to admit a conviction contrary both to their interests and
to their inveterate habits of practice and thought, it is rather a
matter of wonder, that the cause of Truth should have found even a few
maintainers, than that it should have encountered a host of adversaries.
It has, however, been defended repeatedly by architects themselves, and
so successfully, that I believe, so far as the desirableness of this or
that method of ornamentation is to be measured by the fact of its simple
honesty or dishonesty, there is little need to add anything to what has
been already urged upon the subject. But there are some points connected
with the practice of imitating marble, which I have been unable to touch
upon until now, and by the consideration of which we may be enabled to
see something of the _policy_ of honesty in this matter, without in the
least abandoning the higher ground of principle.

§ XLI. Consider, then, first, what marble seems to have been made for.
Over the greater part of the surface of the world, we find that a rock
has been providentially distributed, in a manner particularly pointing
it out as intended for the service of man. Not altogether a common rock,
it is yet rare enough to command a certain degree of interest and
attention wherever it is found; but not so rare as to preclude its use
for any purpose to which it is fitted. It is exactly of the consistence
which is best adapted for sculpture: that is to say, neither hard nor
brittle, nor flaky nor splintery, but uniform, and delicately, yet not
ignobly, soft,--exactly soft enough to allow the sculptor to work it
without force, and trace on it the finest lines of finished form; and
yet so hard as never to betray the touch or moulder away beneath the
steel; and so admirably crystallized, and of such permanent elements,
that no rains dissolve it, no time changes it, no atmosphere decomposes
it: once shaped, it is shaped for ever, unless subjected to actual
violence or attrition. This rock, then, is prepared by Nature for the
sculptor and architect, just as paper is prepared by the manufacturer
for the artist, with as great--nay, with greater--care, and more perfect
adaptation of the material to the requirements. And of this marble
paper, some is white and some colored; but more is colored than white,
because the white is evidently meant for sculpture, and the colored for
the covering of large surfaces.

§ XLII. Now, if we would take Nature at her word, and use this precious
paper which she has taken so much care to provide for us (it is a long
process, the making of that paper; the pulp of it needing the subtlest
possible solution, and the pressing of it--for it is all
hot-pressed--having to be done under the saw, or under something at
least as heavy); if, I say, we use it as Nature would have us, consider
what advantages would follow. The colors of marble are mingled for us
just as if on a prepared palette. They are of all shades and hues
(except bad ones), some being united and even, some broken, mixed, and
interrupted, in order to supply, as far as possible, the want of the
painter's power of breaking and mingling the color with the brush. But
there is more in the colors than this delicacy of adaptation. There is
history in them. By the manner in which they are arranged in every piece
of marble, they record the means by which that marble has been produced,
and the successive changes through which it has passed. And in all their
veins and zones, and flame-like stainings, or broken and disconnected
lines, they write various legends, never untrue, of the former political
state of the mountain kingdom to which they belonged, of its infirmities
and fortitudes, convulsions and consolidations, from the beginning of
time.

Now, if we were never in the habit of seeing anything but real marbles,
this language of theirs would soon begin to be understood; that is to
say, even the least observant of us would recognize such and such stones
as forming a peculiar class, and would begin to inquire where they came
from, and, at last, take some feeble interest in the main question, Why
they were only to be found in that or the other place, and how they
came to make a part of this mountain, and not of that? And in a little
while, it would not be possible to stand for a moment at a shop door,
leaning against the pillars of it, without remembering or questioning of
something well worth the memory or the inquiry, touching the hills of
Italy, or Greece, or Africa, or Spain; and we should be led on from
knowledge to knowledge, until even the unsculptured walls of our streets
became to us volumes as precious as those of our libraries.

§ XLIII. But the moment we admit imitation of marble, this source of
knowledge is destroyed. None of us can be at the pains to go through the
work of verification. If we knew that every colored stone we saw was
natural, certain questions, conclusions, interests, would force
themselves upon us without any effort of our own; but we have none of us
time to stop in the midst of our daily business, to touch and pore over,
and decide with painful minuteness of investigation, whether such and
such a pillar be stucco or stone. And the whole field of this knowledge,
which Nature intended us to possess when we were children, is hopelessly
shut out from us. Worse than shut out, for the mass of coarse imitations
confuses our knowledge acquired from other sources; and our memory of
the marbles we have perhaps once or twice carefully examined, is
disturbed and distorted by the inaccuracy of the imitations which are
brought before us continually.

§ XLIV. But it will be said, that it is too expensive to employ real
marbles in ordinary cases. It may be so: yet not always more expensive
than the fitting windows with enormous plate glass, and decorating them
with elaborate stucco mouldings and other useless sources of expenditure
in modern building; nay, not always in the end more expensive than the
frequent repainting of the dingy pillars, which a little water dashed
against them would refresh from day to day, if they were of true stone.
But, granting that it be so, in that very costliness, checking their
common use in certain localities, is part of the interest of marbles,
considered as history. Where they are not found, Nature has supplied
other materials,--clay for brick, or forest for timber,--in the working
of which she intends other characters of the human mind to be developed,
and by the proper use of which certain local advantages will assuredly
be attained, while the delightfulness and meaning of the precious
marbles will be felt more forcibly in the districts where they occur, or
on the occasions when they may be procured.

§ XLV. It can hardly be necessary to add, that, as the imitation of
marbles interferes with and checks the knowledge of geography and
geology, so the imitation of wood interferes with that of botany; and
that our acquaintance with the nature, uses, and manner of growth of the
timber trees of our own and of foreign countries, would probably, in the
majority of cases, become accurate and extensive, without any labor or
sacrifice of time, were not all inquiry checked, and all observation
betrayed, by the wretched labors of the "Grainer."

§ XLVI. But this is not all. As the practice of imitation retards
knowledge, so also it retards art.

There is not a meaner occupation for the human mind than the imitation
of the stains and striæ of marble and wood. When engaged in any easy and
simple mechanical occupation, there is still some liberty for the mind
to leave the literal work; and the clash of the loom or the activity of
the fingers will not always prevent the thoughts from some happy
expatiation in their own domains. But the grainer must think of what he
is doing; and veritable attention and care, and occasionally
considerable skill, are consumed in the doing of a more absolute nothing
than I can name in any other department of painful idleness. I know not
anything so humiliating as to see a human being, with arms and limbs
complete, and apparently a head, and assuredly a soul, yet into the
hands of which when you have put a brush and pallet, it cannot do
anything with them but imitate a piece of wood. It cannot color, it has
no ideas of color; it cannot draw, it has no ideas of form; it cannot
caricature, it has no ideas of humor. It is incapable of anything beyond
knots. All its achievement, the entire result of the daily application
of its imagination and immortality, is to be such a piece of texture as
the sun and dew are sucking up out of the muddy ground, and weaving
together, far more finely, in millions of millions of growing branches,
over every rood of waste woodland and shady hill.

§ XLVII. But what is to be done, the reader asks, with men who are
capable of nothing else than this? Nay, they may be capable of
everything else, for all we know, and what we are to do with them I will
try to say in the next chapter; but meanwhile one word more touching the
higher principles of action in this matter, from which we have descended
to those of expediency. I trust that some day the language of Types will
be more read and understood by us than it has been for centuries; and
when this language, a better one than either Greek or Latin, is again
recognized amongst us, we shall find, or remember, that as the other
visible elements of the universe--its air, its water, and its flame--set
forth, in their pure energies, the life-giving, purifying, and
sanctifying influences of the Deity upon His creatures, so the earth, in
its purity, sets forth His eternity and His TRUTH. I have dwelt above on
the historical language of stones; let us not forget this, which is
their theological language; and, as we would not wantonly pollute the
fresh waters when they issue forth in their clear glory from the rock,
nor stay the mountain winds into pestilential stagnancy, nor mock the
sunbeams with artificial and ineffective light; so let us not by our own
base and barren falsehoods, replace the crystalline strength and burning
color of the earth from which we were born, and to which we must return;
the earth which, like our own bodies, though dust in its degradation, is
full of splendor when God's hand gathers its atoms; and which was for
ever sanctified by Him, as the symbol no less of His love than of His
truth, when He bade the high priest bear the names of the Children of
Israel on the clear stones of the Breastplate of Judgment.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] There is a curious instance of this in the modern imitations of
    the Gothic capitals of the Casa d' Oro, employed in its
    restorations. The old capitals look like clusters of leaves, the
    modern ones like kneaded masses of dough with holes in them.

  [2] Not that even these men were able to wear it altogether without
    harm, as we shall see in the next chapter.

  [3] Appendix 4, "Date of Palaces of Byzantine Renaissance."

  [4] In the various works which Mr. Prout has written on light and
    shade, no principle will be found insisted on more strongly than
    this carrying of the dark into the light, and _vice versa_. It is
    curious to find the untaught instinct of a merely picturesque artist
    in the nineteenth century, fixing itself so intensely on a principle
    which regulated the entire sacred composition of the thirteenth. I
    say "untaught" instinct, for Mr. Prout was, throughout his life, the
    discoverer of his own principles; fortunately so, considering what
    principles were taught in his time, but unfortunately in the
    abstract, for there were gifts in him, which, had there been any
    wholesome influences to cherish them, might have made him one of the
    greatest men of his age. He was great, under all adverse
    circumstances, but the mere wreck of what he might have been, if,
    after the rough training noticed in my pamphlet on Pre-Raphaelitism,
    as having fitted him for his great function in the world, he had met
    with a teacher who could have appreciated his powers, and directed
    them.

  [5] There may, however, be a kind of dishonesty even in the use of
    marble, if it is attempted to make the marble look like something
    else. See the final or Venetian Index under head "Scalzi."

  [6] Appendix 5, "Renaissance Side of Ducal Palace."

  [7] We have, as far as I _know_, at present among us, only one
    painter, G. F. Watts, who is capable of design in color on a large
    scale. He stands alone among our artists of the old school, in his
    perception of the value of breadth in distant masses, and in the
    vigor of invention by which such breadth must be sustained; and his
    power of expression and depth of thought are not less remarkable
    than his bold conception of color effect. Very probably some of the
    Pre-Raphaelites have the gift also; I am nearly certain that Rosetti
    has it, and I think also Millais; but the experiment has yet to be
    tried. I wish it could be made in Mr. Hope's church in Margaret
    Street.




CHAPTER II.

ROMAN RENAISSANCE.


§ I. Of all the buildings in Venice, later in date than the final
additions to the Ducal Palace, the noblest is, beyond all question, that
which, having been condemned by its proprietor, not many years ago, to
be pulled down and sold for the value of its materials, was rescued by
the Austrian government, and appropriated--the government officers
having no other use for it--to the business of the Post-Office; though
still known to the gondolier by its ancient name, the Casa Grimani. It
is composed of three stories of the Corinthian order, at once simple,
delicate, and sublime; but on so colossal a scale, that the
three-storied palaces on its right and left only reach to the cornice
which marks the level of its first floor. Yet it is not at first
perceived to be so vast; and it is only when some expedient is employed
to hide it from the eye, that by the sudden dwarfing of the whole reach
of the Grand Canal, which it commands, we become aware that it is to the
majesty of the Casa Grimani that the Rialto itself, and the whole group
of neighboring buildings, owe the greater part of their impressiveness.
Nor is the finish of its details less notable than the grandeur of their
scale. There is not an erring line, nor a mistaken proportion,
throughout its noble front; and the exceeding fineness of the chiselling
gives an appearance of lightness to the vast blocks of stone out of
whose perfect union that front is composed. The decoration is sparing,
but delicate: the first story only simpler than the rest, in that it has
pilasters instead of shafts, but all with Corinthian capitals, rich in
leafage, and fruited delicately; the rest of the walls flat and smooth,
and the mouldings sharp and shallow, so that the bold shafts look like
crystals of beryl running through a rock of quartz.

§ II. This palace is the principal type at Venice, and one of the best
in Europe, of the central architecture of the Renaissance schools; that
carefully studied and perfectly executed architecture to which those
schools owe their principal claims to our respect, and which became the
model of most of the important works subsequently produced by civilized
nations. I have called it the Roman Renaissance, because it is founded,
both in its principles of superimposition, and in the style of its
ornament, upon the architecture of classic Rome at its best period. The
revival of Latin literature both led to its adoption, and directed its
form; and the most important example of it which exists is the modern
Roman basilica of St. Peter's. It had, at its Renaissance or new birth,
no resemblance either to Greek, Gothic, or Byzantine forms, except in
retaining the use of the round arch, vault, and dome; in the treatment
of all details, it was exclusively Latin; the last links of connexion
with mediæval tradition having been broken by its builders in their
enthusiasm for classical art, and the forms of true Greek or Athenian
architecture being still unknown to them. The study of these noble Greek
forms has induced various modifications of the Renaissance in our own
times; but the conditions which are found most applicable to the uses of
modern life are still Roman, and the entire style may most fitly be
expressed by the term "Roman Renaissance."

§ III. It is this style, in its purity and fullest form,--represented by
such buildings as the Casa Grimani at Venice (built by San Micheli), the
Town Hall at Vicenza (by Palladio), St. Peter's at Rome (by Michael
Angelo), St. Paul's and Whitehall in London (by Wren and Inigo
Jones),--which is the true antagonist of the Gothic school. The
intermediate, or corrupt conditions of it, though multiplied over
Europe, are no longer admired by architects, or made the subjects of
their study; but the finished work of this central school is still, in
most cases, the model set before the student of the nineteenth century,
as opposed to those Gothic, Romanesque, or Byzantine forms which have
long been considered barbarous, and are so still by most of the leading
men of the day. That they are, on the contrary, most noble and
beautiful, and that the antagonistic Renaissance is, in the main,
unworthy and unadmirable, whatever perfection of a certain kind it may
possess, it was my principal purpose to show, when I first undertook the
labor of this work. It has been attempted already to put before the
reader the various elements which unite in the Nature of Gothic, and to
enable him thus to judge, not merely of the beauty of the forms which
that system has produced already, but of its future applicability to the
wants of mankind, and endless power over their hearts. I would now
endeavor, in like manner, to set before the reader the Nature of
Renaissance, and thus to enable him to compare the two styles under the
same light, and with the same enlarged view of their relations to the
intellect, and capacities for the service, of man.

§ IV. It will not be necessary for me to enter at length into any
examination of its external form. It uses, whether for its roofs of
aperture or roofs proper, the low gable or circular arch: but it differs
from Romanesque work in attaching great importance to the horizontal
lintel or architrave _above_ the arch; transferring the energy of the
principal shafts to the supporting of this horizontal beam, and thus
rendering the arch a subordinate, if not altogether a superfluous,
feature. The type of this arrangement has been given already at _c_,
Fig. XXXVI., p. 145, Vol. I.: and I might insist at length upon the
absurdity of a construction in which the shorter shaft, which has the
real weight of wall to carry, is split into two by the taller one, which
has nothing to carry at all,--that taller one being strengthened,
nevertheless, as if the whole weight of the building bore upon it; and
on the ungracefulness, never conquered in any Palladian work, of the two
half-capitals glued, as it were, against the slippery round sides of the
central shaft. But it is not the form of this architecture against which
I would plead. Its defects are shared by many of the noblest forms of
earlier building, and might have been entirely atoned for by excellence
of spirit. But it is the moral nature of it which is corrupt, and which
it must, therefore, be our principal business to examine and expose.

§ V. The moral, or immoral, elements which unite to form the spirit of
Central Renaissance architecture are, I believe, in the main,
two,--Pride and Infidelity; but the pride resolves itself into three
main branches,--Pride of Science, Pride of State, and Pride of System:
and thus we have four separate mental conditions which must be examined
successively.

§ VI. 1. PRIDE OF SCIENCE. It would have been more charitable, but more
confusing, to have added another element to our list, namely the _Love_
of Science; but the love is included in the pride, and is usually so
very subordinate an element that it does not deserve equality of
nomenclature. But, whether pursued in pride or in affection (how far by
either we shall see presently), the first notable characteristic of the
Renaissance central school is its introduction of accurate knowledge
into all its work, so far as it possesses such knowledge; and its
evident conviction, that such science is necessary to the excellence of
the work, and is the first thing to be expressed therein. So that all
the forms introduced, even in its minor ornament, are studied with the
utmost care; the anatomy of all animal structure is thoroughly
understood and elaborately expressed, and the whole of the execution
skilful and practised in the highest degree. Perspective, linear and
aerial, perfect drawing and accurate light and shade in painting, and
true anatomy in all representations of the human form, drawn or
sculptured, are the first requirements in all the work of this school.

§ VII. Now, first considering all this in the most charitable light, as
pursued from a real love of truth, and not from vanity, it would, of
course, have been all excellent and admirable, had it been regarded as
the aid of art, and not as its essence. But the grand mistake of the
Renaissance schools lay in supposing that science and art are the same
things, and that to advance in the one was necessarily to perfect the
other. Whereas they are, in reality, things not only different, but so
opposed, that to advance in the one is, in ninety-nine cases out of the
hundred, to retrograde in the other. This is the point to which I would
at present especially bespeak the reader's attention.

§ VIII. Science and art are commonly distinguished by the nature of
their actions; the one as knowing, the other as changing, producing, or
creating. But there is a still more important distinction in the nature
of the things they deal with. Science deals exclusively with things as
they are in themselves; and art exclusively with things as they affect
the human senses and human soul.[8] Her work is to portray the
appearance of things, and to deepen the natural impressions which they
produce upon living creatures. The work of science is to substitute
facts for appearances, and demonstrations for impressions. Both,
observe, are equally concerned with truth; the one with truth of aspect,
the other with truth of essence. Art does not represent things falsely,
but truly as they appear to mankind. Science studies the relations of
things to each other: but art studies only their relations to man; and
it requires of everything which is submitted to it imperatively this,
and only this,--what that thing is to the human eyes and human heart,
what it has to say to men, and what it can become to them: a field of
question just as much vaster than that of science, as the soul is larger
than the material creation.

§ IX. Take a single instance. Science informs us that the sun is
ninety-five millions of miles distant from, and 111 times broader than,
the earth; that we and all the planets revolve round it; and that it
revolves on its own axis in 25 days, 14 hours and 4 minutes. With all
this, art has nothing whatsoever to do. It has no care to know anything
of this kind. But the things which it does care to know, are these: that
in the heavens God hath set a tabernacle for the sun, "which is as a
bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to
run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his
circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof."

§ X. This, then, being the kind of truth with which art is exclusively
concerned, how is such truth as this to be ascertained and accumulated?
Evidently, and only, by perception and feeling. Never either by
reasoning, or report. Nothing must come between Nature and the artist's
sight; nothing between God and the artist's soul. Neither calculation
nor hearsay,--be it the most subtle of calculations, or the wisest of
sayings,--may be allowed to come between the universe, and the witness
which art bears to its visible nature. The whole value of that witness
depends on its being _eye_-witness; the whole genuineness,
acceptableness, and dominion of it depend on the personal assurance of
the man who utters it. All its victory depends on the veracity of the
one preceding word, "Vidi."

The whole function of the artist in the world is to be a seeing and
feeling creature; to be an instrument of such tenderness and
sensitiveness, that no shadow, no hue, no line, no instantaneous and
evanescent expression of the visible things around him, nor any of the
emotions which they are capable of conveying to the spirit which has
been given him, shall either be left unrecorded, or fade from the book
of record. It is not his business either to think, to judge, to argue,
or to know. His place is neither in the closet, nor on the bench, nor at
the bar, nor in the library. They are for other men and other work. He
may think, in a by-way; reason, now and then, when he has nothing better
to do; know, such fragments of knowledge as he can gather without
stooping, or reach without pains; but none of these things are to be his
care. The work of his life is to be twofold only: to see, to feel.

§ XI. Nay, but, the reader perhaps pleads with me, one of the great uses
of knowledge is to open the eyes; to make things perceivable which,
never would have been seen, unless first they had been known.

Not so. This could only be said or believed by those who do not know
what the perceptive faculty of a great artist is, in comparison with
that of other men. There is no great painter, no great workman in any
art, but he sees more with the glance of a moment than he could learn by
the labor of a thousand hours. God has made every man fit for his work;
He has given to the man whom he means for a student, the reflective,
logical, sequential faculties; and to the man whom He means for an
artist, the perceptive, sensitive, retentive faculties. And neither of
these men, so far from being able to do the other's work, can even
comprehend the way in which it is done. The student has no understanding
of the vision, nor the painter of the process; but chiefly the student
has no idea of the colossal grasp of the true painter's vision and
sensibility.

The labor of the whole Geological Society, for the last fifty years, has
but now arrived at the ascertainment of those truths respecting mountain
form which Turner saw and expressed with a few strokes of a camel's hair
pencil fifty years ago, when he was a boy. The knowledge of all the laws
of the planetary system, and of all the curves of the motion of
projectiles, would never enable the man of science to draw a waterfall
or a wave; and all the members of Surgeons' Hall helping each other
could not at this moment see, or represent, the natural movement of a
human body in vigorous action, as a poor dyer's son did two hundred
years ago.[9]

§ XII. But surely, it is still insisted, granting this peculiar faculty
to the painter, he will still see more as he knows more, and the more
knowledge he obtains, therefore, the better. No; not even so. It is
indeed true, that, here and there, a piece of knowledge will enable the
eye to detect a truth which might otherwise have escaped it; as, for
instance, in watching a sunrise, the knowledge of the true nature of the
orb may lead the painter to feel more profoundly, and express more
fully, the distance between the bars of cloud that cross it, and the
sphere of flame that lifts itself slowly beyond them into the infinite
heaven. But, for one visible truth to which knowledge thus opens the
eyes, it seals them to a thousand: that is to say, if the knowledge
occur to the mind so as to occupy its powers of contemplation at the
moment when the sight work is to be done, the mind retires inward, fixes
itself upon the known fact, and forgets the passing visible ones; and a
_moment_ of such forgetfulness loses more to the painter than a day's
thought can gain. This is no new or strange assertion. Every person
accustomed to careful reflection of any kind, knows that its natural
operation is to close his eyes to the external world. While he is
thinking deeply, he neither sees nor feels, even though naturally he may
possess strong powers of sight and emotion. He who, having journeyed all
day beside the Leman Lake, asked of his companions, at evening, where it
was,[10] probably was not wanting in sensibility; but he was generally a
thinker, not a perceiver. And this instance is only an extreme one of
the effect which, in all cases, knowledge, becoming a subject of
reflection, produces upon the sensitive faculties. It must be but poor
and lifeless knowledge, if it has no tendency to force itself forward,
and become ground for reflection, in despite of the succession of
external objects. It will not obey their succession. The first that
comes gives it food enough for its day's work; it is its habit, its
duty, to cast the rest aside, and fasten upon that. The first thing that
a thinking and knowing man sees in the course of the day, he will not
easily quit. It is not his way to quit anything without getting to the
bottom of it, if possible. But the artist is bound to receive all things
on the broad, white, lucid field of his soul, not to grasp at one. For
instance, as the knowing and thinking man watches the sunrise, he sees
something in the color of a ray, or the change of a cloud, that is new
to him; and this he follows out forthwith into a labyrinth of optical
and pneumatical laws, perceiving no more clouds nor rays all the
morning. But the painter must catch all the rays, all the colors that
come, and see them all truly, all in their real relations and
succession; therefore, everything that occupies room in his mind he must
cast aside for the time, as completely as may be. The thoughtful man is
gone far away to seek; but the perceiving man must sit still, and open
his heart to receive. The thoughtful man is knitting and sharpening
himself into a two-edged sword, wherewith to pierce. The perceiving man
is stretching himself into a four-cornered sheet wherewith to catch. And
all the breadth to which he can expand himself, and all the white
emptiness into which he can blanch himself, will not be enough to
receive what God has to give him.

§ XIII. What, then, it will be indignantly asked, is an utterly ignorant
and unthinking man likely to make the best artist? No, not so neither.
Knowledge is good for him so long as he can keep it utterly, servilely,
subordinate to his own divine work, and trample it under his feet, and
out of his way, the moment it is likely to entangle him.

And in this respect, observe, there is an enormous difference between
knowledge and education. An artist need not be a _learned_ man, in all
probability it will be a disadvantage to him to become so; but he ought,
if possible, always to be an _educated_ man: that is, one who has
understanding of his own uses and duties in the world, and therefore of
the general nature of the things done and existing in the world; and who
has so trained himself, or been trained, as to turn to the best and most
courteous account whatever faculties or knowledge he has. The mind of an
educated man is greater than the knowledge it possesses; it is like the
vault of heaven, encompassing the earth which lives and flourishes
beneath it: but the mind of an educated and learned man is like a
caoutchouc band, with an everlasting spirit of contraction in it,
fastening together papers which it cannot open, and keeps others from
opening.

Half our artists are ruined for want of education, and by the possession
of knowledge; the best that I have known have been educated, and
illiterate. The ideal of an artist, however, is not that he should be
illiterate, but well read in the best books, and thoroughly high bred,
both in heart and in bearing. In a word, he should be fit for the best
society, _and should keep out of it_.[11]

§ XIV. There are, indeed, some kinds of knowledge with which an artist
ought to be thoroughly furnished; those, for instance, which enable him
to express himself; for this knowledge relieves instead of encumbering
his mind, and permits it to attend to its purposes instead of wearying
itself about means. The whole mystery of manipulation and manufacture
should be familiar to the painter from a child. He should know the
chemistry of all colors and materials whatsoever, and should prepare all
his colors himself, in a little laboratory of his own. Limiting his
chemistry to this one object, the amount of practical science necessary
for it, and such accidental discoveries as might fall in his way in the
course of his work, of better colors or better methods of preparing
them, would be an infinite refreshment to his mind; a minor subject of
interest to which it might turn when jaded with comfortless labor, or
exhausted with feverish invention, and yet which would never interfere
with its higher functions, when it chose to address itself to them. Even
a considerable amount of manual labor, sturdy color-grinding and
canvas-stretching, would be advantageous; though this kind of work ought
to be in great part done by pupils. For it is one of the conditions of
perfect knowledge in these matters, that every great master should have
a certain number of pupils, to whom he is to impart all the knowledge of
materials and means which he himself possesses, as soon as possible; so
that, at any rate, by the time they are fifteen years old, they may know
all that he knows himself in this kind; that is to say, all that the
world of artists know, and his own discoveries besides, and so never be
troubled about methods any more. Not that the knowledge even of his own
particular methods is to be of purpose confined to himself and his
pupils, but that necessarily it must be so in some degree; for only
those who see him at work daily can understand his small and
multitudinous ways of practice. These cannot verbally be explained to
everybody, nor is it needful that they should, only let them be
concealed from nobody who cares to see them; in which case, of course,
his attendant scholars will know them best. But all that can be made
public in matters of this kind should be so with all speed, every artist
throwing his discovery into the common stock, and the whole body of
artists taking such pains in this department of science as that there
shall be no unsettled questions about any known material or method: that
it shall be an entirely ascertained and indisputable matter which is the
best white, and which the best brown; which the strongest canvas, and
safest varnish; and which the shortest and most perfect way of doing
everything known up to that time: and if any one discovers a better, he
is to make it public forthwith. All of them taking care to embarrass
themselves with no theories or reasons for anything, but to work
empirically only: it not being in any wise their business to know
whether light moves in rays or in waves; or whether the blue rays of the
spectrum move slower or faster than the rest; but simply to know how
many minutes and seconds such and such a powder must be calcined, to
give the brightest blue.

§ XV. Now it is perhaps the most exquisite absurdity of the whole
Renaissance system, that while it has encumbered the artist with every
species of knowledge that is of no use to him, this one precious and
necessary knowledge it has utterly lost. There is not, I believe, at
this moment, a single question which could be put respecting pigments
and methods, on which the body of living artists would agree in their
answers. The lives of artists are passed in fruitless experiments;
fruitless, because undirected by experience and uncommunicated in their
results. Every man has methods of his own, which he knows to be
insufficient, and yet jealously conceals from his fellow-workmen: every
colorman has materials of his own, to which it is rare that the artist
can trust: and in the very front of the majestic advance of chemical
science, the empirical science of the artist has been annihilated, and
the days which should have led us to higher perfection are passed in
guessing at, or in mourning over, lost processes; while the so-called
Dark ages, possessing no more knowledge of chemistry than a village
herbalist does now, discovered, established, and put into daily practice
such methods of operation as have made their work, at this day, the
despair of all who look upon it.

§ XVI. And yet even this, to the painter, the safest of sciences, and in
some degree necessary, has its temptations, and capabilities of abuse.
For the simplest means are always enough for a great man; and when once
he has obtained a few ordinary colors, which he is sure will stand, and
a white surface that will not darken nor moulder, nor rend, he is master
of the world, and of his fellow-men. And, indeed, as if in these times
we were bent on furnishing examples of every species of opposite error,
while we have suffered the traditions to escape us of the simple methods
of doing simple things, which are enough for all the arts, and to all
the ages, we have set ourselves to discover fantastic modes of doing
fantastic things,--new mixtures and manipulations of metal, and
porcelain, and leather, and paper, and every conceivable condition of
false substance and cheap work, to our own infinitely multiplied
confusion,--blinding ourselves daily more and more to the great,
changeless, and inevitable truth, that there is but one goodness in art;
and that is one which the chemist cannot prepare, nor the merchant
cheapen, for it comes only of a rare human hand, and rare human soul.

§ XVII. Within its due limits, however, here is one branch of science
which the artist may pursue; and, within limits still more strict,
another also, namely, the science of the appearances of things as they
have been ascertained and registered by his fellow-men. For no day
passes but some visible fact is pointed out to us by others, which,
without their help, we should not have noticed; and the accumulation and
generalization of visible facts have formed, in the succession of ages,
the sciences of light and shade, and perspective, linear and aerial: so
that the artist is now at once put in possession of certain truths
respecting the appearances of things, which, so pointed out to him, any
man may in a few days understand and acknowledge; but which, without
aid, he could not probably discover in his lifetime. I say, probably
could not, because the time which the history of art shows us to have
been actually occupied in the discovery and systematization of such
truth, is no measure of the time _necessary_ for such discovery. The
lengthened period which elapsed between the earliest and the perfect
developement of the science of light (if I may so call it) was not
occupied in the actual effort to ascertain its laws, but in _acquiring
the disposition to make that effort_. It did not take five centuries to
find out the appearance of natural objects; but it took five centuries
to make people care about representing them. An artist of the twelfth
century did not desire to represent nature. His work was symbolical and
ornamental. So long as it was intelligible and lovely, he had no care to
make it like nature. As, for instance, when an old painter represented
the glory round a saint's head by a burnished plate of pure gold, he had
no intention of imitating an effect of light. He meant to tell the
spectator that the figure so decorated was a saint, and to produce
splendor of effect by the golden circle. It was no matter to him what
light was like. So soon as it entered into his intention to represent
the appearance of light, he was not long in discovering the natural
facts necessary for his purpose.

§ XVIII. But, this being fully allowed, it is still true that the
accumulation of facts now known respecting visible phenomena, is greater
than any man could hope to gather for himself, and that it is well for
him to be made acquainted with them; provided always, that he receive
them only at their true value, and do not suffer himself to be misled by
them. I say, at their true value; that is, an exceedingly small one. All
the information which men can receive from the accumulated experience of
others, is of no use but to enable them more quickly and accurately to
see for themselves. It will in no wise take the place of this personal
sight. Nothing can be done well in art, except by vision. Scientific
principles and experiences are helps to the eye, as a microscope is; and
they are of exactly as much use _without_ the eye. No science of
perspective, or of anything else, will enable us to draw the simplest
natural line accurately, unless we see it and feel it. Science is soon
at her wits' end. All the professors of perspective in Europe, could
not, by perspective, draw the line of curve of a sea beach; nay, could
not outline one pool of the quiet water left among the sand. The eye and
hand can do it, nothing else. All the rules of aerial perspective that
ever were written, will not tell me how sharply the pines on the
hill-top are drawn at this moment on the sky. I shall know if I see
them, and love them; not till then. I may study the laws of atmospheric
gradation for fourscore years and ten, and I shall not be able to draw
so much as a brick-kiln through its own smoke, unless I look at it; and
that in an entirely humble and unscientific manner, ready to see all
that the smoke, my master, is ready to show me, and expecting to see
nothing more.

§ XIX. So that all the knowledge a man has must be held cheap, and
neither trusted nor respected, the moment he comes face to face with
Nature. If it help him, well; if not, but, on the contrary, thrust
itself upon him in an impertinent and contradictory temper, and venture
to set itself in the slightest degree in opposition to, or comparison
with, his sight, let it be disgraced forthwith. And the slave is less
likely to take too much upon herself, if she has not been bought for a
high price. All the knowledge an artist needs, will, in these days, come
to him almost without his seeking; if he has far to look for it, he may
be sure he does not want it. Prout became Prout, without knowing a
single rule of perspective to the end of his days; and all the
perspective in the Encyclopædia will never produce us another Prout.

§ XX. And observe, also, knowledge is not only very often unnecessary,
but it is often _untrustworthy_. It is inaccurate, and betrays us where
the eye would have been true to us. Let us take the single instance of
the knowledge of aerial perspective, of which the moderns are so proud,
and see how it betrays us in various ways. First by the conceit of it,
which often prevents our enjoying work in which higher and better things
were thought of than effects of mist. The other day I showed a line
impression of Albert Durer's "St. Hubert" to a modern engraver, who had
never seen it nor any other of Albert Durer's works. He looked at it for
a minute contemptuously, then turned away: "Ah, I see that man did not
know much about aerial perspective!" All the glorious work and thought
of the mighty master, all the redundant landscape, the living
vegetation, the magnificent truth of line, were dead letters to him,
because he happened to have been taught one particular piece of
knowledge which Durer despised.

§ XXI. But not only in the conceit of it, but in the inaccuracy of it,
this science betrays us. Aerial perspective, as given by the modern
artist, is, in nine cases out of ten, a gross and ridiculous
exaggeration, as is demonstrable in a moment. The effect of air in
altering the hue and depth of color is of course great in the exact
proportion of the volume of air between the observer and the object. It
is not violent within the first few yards, and then diminished
gradually, but it is equal for each foot of interposing air. Now in a
clear day, and clear climate, such as that generally presupposed in a
work of fine color, objects are completely visible at a distance of ten
miles; visible in light and shade, with gradations between the two.
Take, then, the faintest possible hue of shadow, or of any color, and
the most violent and positive possible, and set them side by side. The
interval between them is greater than the real difference (for objects
may often be seen clearly much farther than ten miles, I have seen Mont
Blanc at 120) caused by the ten miles of intervening air between any
given hue of the nearest, and most distant, objects; but let us assume
it, in courtesy to the masters of aerial perspective, to be the real
difference. Then roughly estimating a mile at less than it really is,
also in courtesy to them, or at 5000 feet, we have this difference
between tints produced by 50,000 feet of air. Then, ten feet of air
will produce the 5000th part of this difference. Let the reader take the
two extreme tints, and carefully gradate the one into the other. Let him
divide this gradated shadow or color into 5000 successive parts; and the
difference in depth between one of these parts and the next is the exact
amount of aerial perspective between one object, and another, ten feet
behind it, on a clear day.

§ XXII. Now, in Millais' "Huguenot," the figures were standing about
three feet from the wall behind them; and the wise world of critics,
which could find no other fault with the picture, professed to have its
eyes hurt by the want of an aerial perspective, which, had it been
accurately given (as, indeed, I believe it was), would have amounted to
the 10/3-5000th, or less than the 15,000th part of the depth of any
given color. It would be interesting to see a picture painted by the
critics, upon this scientific principle. The aerial perspective usually
represented is entirely conventional and ridiculous; a mere struggle on
the part of the pretendedly well-informed, but really ignorant, artist,
to express distances by mist which he cannot by drawing.

It is curious that the critical world is just as much offended by the
true _presence_ of aerial perspective, over distances of fifty miles,
and with definite purpose of representing mist, in the works of Turner,
as by the true _absence_ of aerial perspective, over distances of three
feet, and in clear weather, in those of Millais.

§ XXIII. "Well but," still answers the reader, "this kind of error may
here and there be occasioned by too much respect for undigested
knowledge; but, on the whole, the gain is greater than the loss, and the
fact is, that a picture of the Renaissance period, or by a modern
master, does indeed represent nature more faithfully than one wrought in
the ignorance of old times." No, not one whit; for the most part less
faithfully. Indeed, the outside of nature is more truly drawn; the
material commonplace, which can be systematized, catalogued, and taught
to all pains-taking mankind,--forms of ribs and scapulæ,[12] of eyebrows
and lips, and curls of hair. Whatever can be measured and handled,
dissected and demonstrated,--in a word, whatever is of the body
only,--that the schools of knowledge do resolutely and courageously
possess themselves of, and portray. But whatever is immeasurable,
intangible, indivisible, and of the spirit, that the schools of
knowledge do as certainly lose, and blot out of their sight, that is to
say, all that is worth art's possessing or recording at all; for
whatever can be arrested, measured, and systematized, we can contemplate
as much as we will in nature herself. But what we want art to do for us
is to stay what is fleeting, and to enlighten what is incomprehensible,
to incorporate the things that have no measure, and immortalize the
things that have no duration. The dimly seen, momentary glance, the
flitting shadow of faint emotion, the imperfect lines of fading thought,
and all that by and through such things as these is recorded on the
features of man, and all that in man's person and actions, and in the
great natural world, is infinite and wonderful; having in it that spirit
and power which man may witness, but not weigh; conceive, but not
comprehend; love, but not limit; and imagine, but not define;--this, the
beginning and the end of the aim of all noble art, we have, in the
ancient art, by perception; and we have _not_, in the newer art, by
knowledge. Giotto gives it us, Orcagna gives it us. Angelico, Memmi,
Pisano, it matters not who,--all simple and unlearned men, in their
measure and manner,--give it us; and the learned men that followed them
give it us not, and we, in our supreme learning, own ourselves at this
day farther from it than ever.

§ XXIV. "Nay," but it is still answered, "this is because we have not
yet brought our knowledge into right use, but have been seeking to
accumulate it, rather than to apply it wisely to the ends of art. Let us
now do this, and we may achieve all that was done by that elder ignorant
art, and infinitely more." No, not so; for as soon as we try to put our
knowledge to good use, we shall find that we have much more than we can
use, and that what more we have is an encumbrance. All our errors in
this respect arise from a gross misconception as to the true nature of
knowledge itself. We talk of learned and ignorant men, as if there were
a certain quantity of knowledge, which to possess was to be learned, and
which not to possess was to be ignorant; instead of considering that
knowledge is infinite, and that the man most learned in human estimation
is just as far from knowing anything as he ought to know it, as the
unlettered peasant. Men are merely on a lower or higher stage of an
eminence, whose summit is God's throne, infinitely above all; and there
is just as much reason for the wisest as for the simplest man being
discontented with his position, as respects the real quantity of
knowledge he possesses. And, for both of them, the only true reasons for
contentment with the sum of knowledge they possess are these: that it is
the kind of knowledge they need for their duty and happiness in life;
that all they have is tested and certain, so far as it is in their
power; that all they have is well in order, and within reach when they
need it; that it has not cost too much time in the getting; that none of
it, once got, has been lost; and that there is not too much to be easily
taken care of.

§ XXV. Consider these requirements a little, and the evils that result
in our education and polity from neglecting them. Knowledge is mental
food, and is exactly to the spirit what food is to the body (except that
the spirit needs several sorts of food, of which knowledge is only one),
and it is liable to the same kind of misuses. It may be mixed and
disguised by art, till it becomes unwholesome; it may be refined,
sweetened, and made palatable, until it has lost all its power of
nourishment; and, even of its best kind, it may be eaten to surfeiting,
and minister to disease and death.

§ XXVI. Therefore, with respect to knowledge, we are to reason and act
exactly as with respect to food. We no more live to know, than we live
to eat. We live to contemplate, enjoy, act, adore; and we may know all
that is to be known in this world, and what Satan knows in the other,
without being able to do any of these. We are to ask, therefore, first,
is the knowledge we would have fit food for us, good and simple, not
artificial and decorated? and secondly, how much of it will enable us
best for our work; and will leave our hearts light, and our eyes clear?
For no more than that is to be eaten without the old Eve-sin.

§ XXVII. Observe, also, the difference between tasting knowledge, and
hoarding it. In this respect it is also like food; since, in some
measure, the knowledge of all men is laid up in granaries, for future
use; much of it is at any given moment dormant, not fed upon or enjoyed,
but in store. And by all it is to be remembered, that knowledge in this
form may be kept without air till it rots, or in such unthreshed
disorder that it is of no use; and that, however good or orderly, it is
still only in being tasted that it becomes of use; and that men may
easily starve in their own granaries, men of science, perhaps, most of
all, for they are likely to seek accumulation of their store, rather
than nourishment from it. Yet let it not be thought that I would
undervalue them. The good and great among them are like Joseph, to whom
all nations sought to buy corn; or like the sower going forth to sow
beside all waters, sending forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass:
only let us remember that this is not all men's work. We are not
intended to be all keepers of granaries, nor all to be measured by the
filling of a storehouse; but many, nay, most of us, are to receive day
by day our daily bread, and shall be as well nourished and as fit for
our labor, and often, also, fit for nobler and more divine labor, in
feeding from the barrel of meal that does not waste, and from the cruse
of oil that does not fail, than if our barns were filled with plenty,
and our presses bursting out with new wine.

§ XXVIII. It is for each man to find his own measure in this matter; in
great part, also, for others to find it for him, while he is yet a
youth. And the desperate evil of the whole Renaissance system is, that
all idea of measure is therein forgotten, that knowledge is thought the
one and the only good, and it is never inquired whether men are vivified
by it or paralyzed. Let us leave figures. The reader may not believe the
analogy I have been pressing so far; but let him consider the subject in
itself, let him examine the effect of knowledge in his own heart, and
see whether the trees of knowledge and of life are one now, any more
than in Paradise. He must feel that the real animating power of
knowledge is only in the moment of its being first received, when it
fills us with wonder and joy; a joy for which, observe, the previous
ignorance is just as necessary as the present knowledge. That man is
always happy who is in the presence of something which he cannot know to
the full, which he is always going on to know. This is the necessary
condition of a finite creature with divinely rooted and divinely
directed intelligence; this, therefore, its happy state,--but observe, a
state, not of triumph or joy in what it knows, but of joy rather in the
continual discovery of new ignorance, continual self-abasement,
continual astonishment. Once thoroughly our own, the knowledge ceases to
give us pleasure. It may be practically useful to us, it may be good for
others, or good for usury to obtain more; but, in itself, once let it be
thoroughly familiar, and it is dead. The wonder is gone from it, and all
the fine color which it had when first we drew it up out of the infinite
sea. And what does it matter how much or how little of it we have laid
aside, when our only enjoyment is still in the casting of that deep sea
line? What does it matter? Nay, in one respect, it matters much, and not
to our advantage. For one effect of knowledge is to deaden the force of
the imagination and the original energy of the whole man: under the
weight of his knowledge he cannot move so lightly as in the days of his
simplicity. The pack-horse is furnished for the journey, the war-horse
is armed for war; but the freedom of the field and the lightness of the
limb are lost for both. Knowledge is, at best, the pilgrim's burden or
the soldier's panoply, often a weariness to them both: and the
Renaissance knowledge is like the Renaissance armor of plate, binding
and cramping the human form; while all good knowledge is like the
crusader's chain mail, which throws itself into folds with the body, yet
it is rarely so forged as that the clasps and rivets do not gall us. All
men feel this, though they do not think of it, nor reason out its
consequences. They look back to the days of childhood as of greatest
happiness, because those were the days of greatest wonder, greatest
simplicity, and most vigorous imagination. And the whole difference
between a man of genius and other men, it has been said a thousand
times, and most truly, is that the first remains in great part a child,
seeing with the large eyes of children, in perpetual wonder, not
conscious of much knowledge,--conscious, rather, of infinite ignorance,
and yet infinite power; a fountain of eternal admiration, delight, and
creative force within him meeting the ocean of visible and governable
things around him.

That is what we have to make men, so far as we may. All are to be men of
genius in their degree,--rivulets or rivers, it does not matter, so that
the souls be clear and pure; not dead walls encompassing dead heaps of
things known and numbered, but running waters in the sweet wilderness of
things unnumbered and unknown, conscious only of the living banks, on
which they partly refresh and partly reflect the flowers, and so pass
on.

§ XXIX. Let each man answer for himself how far his knowledge has made
him this, or how far it is loaded upon him as the pyramid is upon the
tomb. Let him consider, also, how much of it has cost him labor and time
that might have been spent in healthy, happy action, beneficial to all
mankind; how many living souls may have been left uncomforted and
unhelped by him, while his own eyes were failing by the midnight lamp;
how many warm sympathies have died within him as he measured lines or
counted letters; how many draughts of ocean air, and steps on
mountain-turf, and openings of the highest heaven he has lost for his
knowledge; how much of that knowledge, so dearly bought, is now
forgotten or despised, leaving only the capacity of wonder less within
him, and, as it happens in a thousand instances, perhaps even also the
capacity of devotion. And let him,--if, after thus dealing with his own
heart, he can say that his knowledge has indeed been fruitful to
him,--yet consider how many there are who have been forced by the
inevitable laws of modern education into toil utterly repugnant to their
natures, and that in the extreme, until the whole strength of the young
soul was sapped away; and then pronounce with fearfulness how far, and
in how many senses, it may indeed be true that the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God.

§ XXX. Now all this possibility of evil, observe, attaches to knowledge
pursued for the noblest ends, if it be pursued imprudently. I have
assumed, in speaking of its effect both on men generally and on the
artist especially, that it was sought in the true love of it, and with
all honesty and directness of purpose. But this is granting far too much
in its favor. Of knowledge in general, and without qualification, it is
said by the Apostle that "it puffeth up;" and the father of all modern
science, writing directly in its praise, yet asserts this danger even in
more absolute terms, calling it a "venomousness" in the very nature of
knowledge itself.

§ XXXI. There is, indeed, much difference in this respect between the
tendencies of different branches of knowledge; it being a sure rule that
exactly in proportion as they are inferior, nugatory, or limited in
scope, their power of feeding pride is greater. Thus philology, logic,
rhetoric, and the other sciences of the schools, being for the most part
ridiculous and trifling, have so pestilent an effect upon those who are
devoted to them, that their students cannot conceive of any higher
sciences than these, but fancy that all education ends in the knowledge
of words: but the true and great sciences, more especially natural
history, make men gentle and modest in proportion to the largeness of
their apprehension, and just perception of the infiniteness of the
things they can never know. And this, it seems to me, is the principal
lesson we are intended to be caught by the book of Job; for there God
has thrown open to us the heart of a man most just and holy, and
apparently perfect in all things possible to human nature except
humility. For this he is tried: and we are shown that no suffering, no
self-examination, however honest, however stern, no searching out of the
heart by its own bitterness, is enough to convince man of his
nothingness before God; but that the sight of God's creation will do it.
For, when the Deity himself has willed to end the temptation, and to
accomplish in Job that for which it was sent, He does not vouchsafe to
reason with him, still less does He overwhelm him with terror, or
confound him by laying open before his eyes the book of his iniquities.
He opens before him only the arch of the dayspring, and the fountains of
the deep; and amidst the covert of the reeds, and on the heaving waves,
He bids him watch the kings of the children of pride,--"Behold now
Behemoth, which I made with thee:" And the work is done.

§ XXXII. Thus, if, I repeat, there is any one lesson in the whole book
which stands forth more definitely than another, it is this of the holy
and humbling influence of natural science on the human heart. And yet,
even here, it is not the science, but the perception, to which the good
is owing; and the natural sciences may become as harmful as any others,
when they lose themselves in classification and catalogue-making. Still,
the principal danger is with the sciences of words and methods; and it
was exactly into those sciences that the whole energy of men during the
Renaissance period was thrown. They discovered suddenly that the world
for ten centuries had been living in an ungrammatical manner, and they
made it forthwith the end of human existence to be grammatical. And it
mattered thenceforth nothing what was said, or what was done, so only
that it was said with scholarship, and done with system. Falsehood in a
Ciceronian dialect had no opposers; truth in patois no listeners. A
Roman phrase was thought worth any number of Gothic facts. The sciences
ceased at once to be anything more than different kinds of
grammars,--grammar of language, grammar of logic, grammar of ethics,
grammar of art; and the tongue, wit, and invention of the human race
were supposed to have found their utmost and most divine mission in
syntax and syllogism, perspective and five orders.

Of such knowledge as this, nothing but pride could come; and, therefore,
I have called the first mental characteristic of the Renaissance
schools, the "pride" of science. If they had reached any science worth
the name, they might have loved it; but of the paltry knowledge they
possessed, they could only be proud. There was not anything in it
capable of being loved. Anatomy, indeed, then first made a subject of
accurate study, is a true science, but not so attractive as to enlist
the affections strongly on its side: and therefore, like its meaner
sisters, it became merely a ground for pride; and the one main purpose
of the Renaissance artists, in all their work, was to show how much they
knew.

§ XXXIII. There were, of course, noble exceptions; but chiefly belonging
to the earliest periods of the Renaissance, when its teaching had not
yet produced its full effect. Raphael, Leonardo, and Michael Angelo were
all trained in the old school; they all had masters who knew the true
ends of art, and had reached them; masters nearly as great as they were
themselves, but imbued with the old religious and earnest spirit, which
their disciples receiving from them, and drinking at the same time
deeply from all the fountains of knowledge opened in their day, became
the world's wonders. Then the dull wondering world believed that their
greatness rose out of their new knowledge, instead of out of that
ancient religious root, in which to abide was life, from which to be
severed was annihilation. And from that day to this, they have tried to
produce Michael Angelos and Leonardos by teaching the barren sciences,
and still have mourned and marvelled that no more Michael Angelos came;
not perceiving that those great Fathers were only able to receive such
nourishment because they were rooted on the rock of all ages, and that
our scientific teaching, nowadays, is nothing more nor less than the
assiduous watering of trees whose stems are cut through. Nay, I have
even granted too much in saying that those great men were able to
receive pure nourishment from the sciences; for my own conviction is,
and I know it to be shared by most of those who love Raphael
truly,--that he painted best when he knew least. Michael Angelo was
betrayed, again and again, into such vain and offensive exhibition of
his anatomical knowledge as, to this day, renders his higher powers
indiscernible by the greater part of men; and Leonardo fretted his life
away in engineering, so that there is hardly a picture left to bear his
name. But, with respect to all who followed, there can be no question
that the science they possessed was utterly harmful; serving merely to
draw away their hearts at once from the purposes of art and the power of
nature, and to make, out of the canvas and marble, nothing more than
materials for the exhibition of petty dexterity and useless knowledge.

§ XXXIV. It is sometimes amusing to watch the naïve and childish way in
which this vanity is shown. For instance, when perspective was first
invented, the world thought it a mighty discovery, and the greatest men
it had in it were as proud of knowing that retiring lines converge, as
if all the wisdom of Solomon had been compressed into a vanishing point.
And, accordingly, it became nearly impossible for any one to paint a
Nativity, but he must turn the stable and manger into a Corinthian
arcade, in order to show his knowledge of perspective; and half the best
architecture of the time, instead of being adorned with historical
sculpture, as of old, was set forth with bas-relief of minor corridors
and galleries, thrown into perspective.

Now that perspective can be taught to any schoolboy in a week, we can
smile at this vanity. But the fact is, that all pride in knowledge is
precisely as ridiculous, whatever its kind, or whatever its degree.
There is, indeed, nothing of which man has any right to be proud; but
the very last thing of which, with any show of reason, he can make his
boast is his knowledge, except only that infinitely small portion of it
which he has discovered for himself. For what is there to be more proud
of in receiving a piece of knowledge from another person, than in
receiving a piece of money? Beggars should not be proud, whatever kind
of alms they receive. Knowledge is like current coin. A man may have
some right to be proud of possessing it, if he has worked for the gold
of it, and assayed it, and stamped it, so that it may be received of
all men as true; or earned it fairly, being already assayed: but if he
has done none of these things, but only had it thrown in his face by a
passer-by, what cause has he to be proud? And though, in this mendicant
fashion, he had heaped together the wealth of Croesus, would pride any
more, for this, become him, as, in some sort, it becomes the man who has
labored for his fortune, however small? So, if a man tells me the sun is
larger than the earth, have I any cause for pride in knowing it? or, if
any multitude of men tell me any number of things, heaping all their
wealth of knowledge upon me, have I any reason to be proud under the
heap? And is not nearly all the knowledge of which we boast in these
days cast upon us in this dishonorable way; worked for by other men,
proved by them, and then forced upon us, even against our wills, and
beaten into us in our youth, before we have the wit even to know if it
be good or not? (Mark the distinction between knowledge and thought.)
Truly a noble possession to be proud of! Be assured, there is no part of
the furniture of a man's mind which he has a right to exult in, but that
which he has hewn and fashioned for himself. He who has built himself a
hut on a desert heath, and carved his bed, and table, and chair out of
the nearest forest, may have some right to take pride in the appliances
of his narrow chamber, as assuredly he will have joy in them. But the
man who has had a palace built, and adorned, and furnished for him, may,
indeed, have many advantages above the other, but he has no reason to be
proud of his upholsterer's skill; and it is ten to one if he has half
the joy in his couches of ivory that the other will have in his pallet
of pine.

§ XXXV. And observe how we feel this, in the kind of respect we pay to
such knowledge as we are indeed capable of estimating the value of. When
it is our own, and new to us, we cannot judge of it; but let it be
another's also, and long familiar to us, and see what value we set on
it. Consider how we regard a schoolboy, fresh from his term's labor. If
he begin to display his newly acquired small knowledge to us, and plume
himself thereupon, how soon do we silence him with contempt! But it is
not so if the schoolboy begins to feel or see anything. In the strivings
of his soul within him he is our equal; in his power of sight and
thought he stands separate from us, and may be a greater than we. We are
ready to hear him forthwith. "You saw that? you felt that? No matter for
your being a child; let us hear."

§ XXXVI. Consider that every generation of men stands in this relation
to its successors. It is as the schoolboy: the knowledge of which it is
proudest will be as the alphabet to those who follow. It had better make
no noise about its knowledge; a time will come when its utmost, in that
kind, will be food for scorn. Poor fools! was that all they knew? and
behold how proud they were! But what we see and feel will never be
mocked at. All men will be thankful to us for telling them that.
"Indeed!" they will say, "they felt that in their day? saw that? Would
God we may be like them, before we go to the home where sight and
thought are not!"

This unhappy and childish pride in knowledge, then, was the first
constituent element of the Renaissance mind, and it was enough, of
itself, to have cast it into swift decline: but it was aided by another
form of pride, which was above called the Pride of State; and which we
have next to examine.

§ XXXVII. II. PRIDE OF STATE. It was noticed in the second volume of
"Modern Painters," p. 122, that the principle which had most power in
retarding the modern school of portraiture was its constant expression
of individual vanity and pride. And the reader cannot fail to have
observed that one of the readiest and commonest ways in which the
painter ministers to this vanity, is by introducing the pedestal or
shaft of a column, or some fragment, however simple, of Renaissance
architecture, in the background of the portrait. And this is not merely
because such architecture is bolder or grander than, in general, that of
the apartments of a private house. No other architecture would produce
the same effect in the same degree. The richest Gothic, the most massive
Norman, would not produce the same sense of exaltation as the simple
and meagre lines of the Renaissance.

§ XXXVIII. And if we think over this matter a little, we shall soon feel
that in those meagre lines there is indeed an expression of aristocracy
in its worst characters; coldness, perfectness of training, incapability
of emotion, want of sympathy with the weakness of lower men, blank,
hopeless, haughty self-sufficiency. All these characters are written in
the Renaissance architecture as plainly as if they were graven on it in
words. For, observe, all other architectures have something in them that
common men can enjoy; some concession to the simplicities of humanity,
some daily bread for the hunger of the multitude. Quaint fancy, rich
ornament, bright color, something that shows a sympathy with men of
ordinary minds and hearts; and this wrought out, at least in the Gothic,
with a rudeness showing that the workman did not mind exposing his own
ignorance if he could please others. But the Renaissance is exactly the
contrary of all this. It is rigid, cold, inhuman; incapable of glowing,
of stooping, of conceding for an instant. Whatever excellence it has is
refined, high-trained, and deeply erudite; a kind which the architect
well knows no common mind can taste. He proclaims it to us aloud. "You
cannot feel my work unless you study Vitruvius. I will give you no gay
color, no pleasant sculpture, nothing to make you happy; for I am a
learned man. All the pleasure you can have in anything I do is in its
proud breeding, its rigid formalism, its perfect finish, its cold
tranquillity. I do not work for the vulgar, only for the men of the
academy and the court."

§ XXXIX. And the instinct of the world felt this in a moment. In the new
precision and accurate law of the classical forms, they perceived
something peculiarly adapted to the setting forth of state in an
appalling manner: Princes delighted in it, and courtiers. The Gothic was
good for God's worship, but this was good for man's worship. The Gothic
had fellowship with all hearts, and was universal, like nature: it could
frame a temple for the prayer of nations, or shrink into the poor man's
winding stair. But here was an architecture that would not shrink, that
had in it no submission, no mercy. The proud princes and lords rejoiced
in it. It was full of insult to the poor in its every line. It would not
be built of the materials at the poor man's hand; it would not roof
itself with thatch or shingle, and black oak beams; it would not wall
itself with rough stone or brick; it would not pierce itself with small
windows where they were needed; it would not niche itself, wherever
there was room for it, in the street corners. It would be of hewn stone;
it would have its windows and its doors, and its stairs and its pillars,
in lordly order, and of stately size; it would have its wings and its
corridors, and its halls and its gardens, as if all the earth were its
own. And the rugged cottages of the mountaineers, and the fantastic
streets of the laboring burgher were to be thrust out of its way, as of
a lower species.

§ XL. It is to be noted also, that it ministered as much to luxury as to
pride. Not to luxury of the eye, that is a holy luxury; Nature ministers
to that in her painted meadows, and sculptured forests, and gilded
heavens; the Gothic builder ministered to that in his twisted traceries,
and deep-wrought foliage, and burning casements. The dead Renaissance
drew back into its earthliness, out of all that was warm and heavenly;
back into its pride, out of all that was simple and kind; back into its
stateliness, out of all that was impulsive, reverent, and gay. But it
understood the luxury of the body; the terraced and scented and grottoed
garden, with its trickling fountains and slumbrous shades; the spacious
hall and lengthened corridor for the summer heat; the well-closed
windows, and perfect fittings and furniture, for defence against the
cold; and the soft picture, and frescoed wall and roof, covered with the
last lasciviousness of Paganism;--this is understood and possessed to
the full, and still possesses. This is the kind of domestic architecture
on which we pride ourselves, even to this day, as an infinite and
honorable advance from the rough habits of our ancestors; from the time
when the king's floor was strewn with rushes, and the tapestries swayed
before the searching wind in the baron's hall.

§ XLI. Let us hear two stories of those rougher times.

At the debate of King Edwin with his courtiers and priests, whether he
ought to receive the Gospel preached to him by Paulinus, one of his
nobles spoke as follows:

"The present life, O king! weighed with the time that is unknown, seems
to me like this. When you are sitting at a feast with your earls and
thanes in winter time, and the fire is lighted, and the hall is warmed,
and it rains and snows, and the storm is loud without, there comes a
sparrow, and flies through the house. It comes in at one door and goes
out at the other. While it is within, it is not touched by the winter's
storm; but it is but for the twinkling of an eye, for from winter it
comes and to winter it returns. So also this life of man endureth for a
little space; what goes before or what follows after, we know not.
Wherefore, if this new lore bring anything more certain, it is fit that
we should follow it."[13]

That could not have happened in a Renaissance building. The bird could
not have dashed in from the cold into the heat, and from the heat back
again into the storm. It would have had to come up a flight of marble
stairs, and through seven or eight antechambers; and so, if it had ever
made its way into the presence chamber, out again through loggias and
corridors innumerable. And the truth which the bird brought with it,
fresh from heaven, has, in like manner, to make its way to the
Renaissance mind through many antechambers, hardly, and as a despised
thing, if at all.

§ XLII. Hear another story of those early times.

The king of Jerusalem, Godfrey of Bouillon, at the siege of Asshur, or
Arsur, gave audience to some emirs from Samaria and Naplous. They found
him seated on the ground on a sack of straw. They expressing surprise,
Godfrey answered them: "May not the earth, out of which we came, and
which is to be our dwelling after death, serve us for a seat during
life?"

It is long since such a throne has been set in the reception chambers
of Christendom, or such an answer heard from the lips of a king.

Thus the Renaissance spirit became base both in its abstinence and its
indulgence. Base in its abstinence; curtailing the bright and playful
wealth of form and thought, which filled the architecture of the earlier
ages with sources of delight for their hardy spirit, pure, simple, and
yet rich as the fretwork of flowers and moss, watered by some strong and
stainless mountain stream: and base in its indulgence; as it granted to
the body what it withdrew from the heart, and exhausted, in smoothing
the pavement for the painless feet, and softening the pillow for the
sluggish brain, the powers of art which once had hewn rough ladders into
the clouds of heaven, and set up the stones by which they rested for
houses of God.

§ XLIII. And just in proportion as this courtly sensuality lowered the
real nobleness of the men whom birth or fortune raised above their
fellows, rose their estimate of their own dignity, together with the
insolence and unkindness of its expression, and the grossness of the
flattery with which it was fed. Pride is indeed the first and the last
among the sins of men, and there is no age of the world in which it has
not been unveiled in the power and prosperity of the wicked. But there
was never in any form of slavery, or of feudal supremacy, a
forgetfulness so total of the common majesty of the human soul, and of
the brotherly kindness due from man to man, as in the aristocratic
follies in the Renaissance. I have not space to follow out this most
interesting and extensive subject; but here is a single and very curious
example of the kind of flattery with which architectural teaching was
mingled when addressed to the men of rank of the day.

§ XLIV. In St. Mark's library there is a very curious Latin manuscript
of the twenty-five books of Averulinus, a Florentine architect, upon the
principles of his art. The book was written in or about 1460, and
translated into Latin, and richly illuminated for Corvinus, king of
Hungary, about 1483. I extract from the third book the following passage
on the nature of stones. "As there are three genera of men,--that is to
say, nobles, men of the middle classes, and rustics,--so it appears that
there are of stones. For the marbles and common stones of which we have
spoken above, set forth the rustics. The porphyries and alabasters, and
the other harder stones of mingled quality, represent the middle
classes, if we are to deal in comparisons: and by means of these the
ancients adorned their temples with incrustations and ornaments in a
magnificent manner. And after these come the chalcedonies and
sardonyxes, &c., which are so transparent that there can be seen no spot
in them.[14] Thus men endowed with nobility lead a life in which no spot
can be found."

Canute or Coeur de Lion (I name not Godfrey or St. Louis) would have
dashed their sceptres against the lips of a man who should have dared to
utter to them flattery such as this. But in the fifteenth century it was
rendered and accepted as a matter of course, and the tempers which
delighted in it necessarily took pleasure also in every vulgar or false
means, of taking worldly superiority. And among such false means
largeness of scale in the dwelling-house was of course one of the
easiest and most direct. All persons, however senseless or dull, could
appreciate size: it required some exertion of intelligence to enter into
the spirit of the quaint carving of the Gothic times, but none to
perceive that one heap of stones was higher than another.[15] And
therefore, while in the execution and manner of work the Renaissance
builders zealously vindicated for themselves the attribute of cold and
superior learning, they appealed for such approbation as they needed
from the multitude, to the lowest possible standard of taste; and while
the older workman lavished his labor on the minute niche and narrow
casement, on the doorways no higher than the head, and the contracted
angles of the turreted chamber, the Renaissance builder spared such cost
and toil in his detail, that he might spend it in bringing larger stones
from a distance; and restricted himself to rustication and five orders,
that he might load the ground with colossal piers, and raise an
ambitious barrenness of architecture, as inanimate as it was gigantic,
above the feasts and follies of the powerful or the rich. The Titanic
insanity extended itself also into ecclesiastical design: the principal
church in Italy was built with little idea of any other admirableness
than that which was to result from its being huge; and the religious
impressions of those who enter it are to this day supposed to be
dependent, in a great degree, on their discovering that they cannot span
the thumbs of the statues which sustain the vessels for holy water.

§ XLV. It is easy to understand how an architecture which thus appealed
not less to the lowest instincts of dulness than to the subtlest pride
of learning, rapidly found acceptance with a large body of mankind; and
how the spacious pomp of the new manner of design came to be eagerly
adopted by the luxurious aristocracies, not only of Venice, but of the
other countries of Christendom, now gradually gathering themselves into
that insolent and festering isolation, against which the cry of the poor
sounded hourly in more ominous unison, bursting at last into thunder
(mark where,--first among the planted walks and plashing fountains of
the palace wherein the Renaissance luxury attained its utmost height in
Europe, Versailles); that cry, mingling so much piteousness with its
wrath and indignation, "Our soul is filled with the scornful reproof of
the wealthy, and with the despitefulness of the proud."

§ XLVI. But of all the evidence bearing upon this subject presented by
the various arts of the fifteenth century, none is so interesting or so
conclusive as that deduced from its tombs. For, exactly in proportion as
the pride of life became more insolent, the fear of death became more
servile; and the difference in the manner in which the men of early and
later days adorned the sepulchre, confesses a still greater difference
in their manner of regarding death. To those he came as the comforter
and the friend, rest in his right hand, hope in his left; to these as
the humiliator, the spoiler, and the avenger. And, therefore, we find
the early tombs at once simple and lovely in adornment, severe and
solemn in their expression; confessing the power, and accepting the
peace, of death, openly and joyfully; and in all their symbols marking
that the hope of resurrection lay only in Christ's righteousness; signed
always with this simple utterance of the dead, "I will lay me down in
peace, and take my rest; for it is thou, Lord, only that makest me dwell
in safety." But the tombs of the later ages are a ghastly struggle of
mean pride and miserable terror: the one mustering the statues of the
Virtues about the tomb, disguising the sarcophagus with delicate
sculpture, polishing the false periods of the elaborate epitaph, and
filling with strained animation the features of the portrait statue; and
the other summoning underneath, out of the niche or from behind the
curtain, the frowning skull, or scythed skeleton, or some other more
terrible image of the enemy in whose defiance the whiteness of the
sepulchre had been set to shine above the whiteness of the ashes.

§ XLVII. This change in the feeling with which sepulchral monuments were
designed, from the eleventh to the eighteenth centuries, has been common
to the whole of Europe. But, as Venice is in other respects the centre
of the Renaissance system, so also she exhibits this change in the
manner of the sepulchral monument under circumstances peculiarly
calculated to teach us its true character. For the severe guard which,
in earlier times, she put upon every tendency to personal pomp and
ambition, renders the tombs of her ancient monarchs as remarkable for
modesty and simplicity as for their religious feeling; so that, in this
respect, they are separated by a considerable interval from the more
costly monuments erected at the same periods to the kings or nobles of
other European states. In later times, on the other hand, as the piety
of the Venetians diminished, their pride overleaped all limits, and the
tombs which in recent epochs, were erected for men who had lived only to
impoverish or disgrace the state, were as much more magnificent than
those contemporaneously erected for the nobles of Europe, as the
monuments for the great Doges had been humbler. When, in addition to
this, we reflect that the art of sculpture, considered as expressive of
emotion, was at a low ebb in Venice in the twelfth century, and that in
the seventeenth she took the lead in Italy in luxurious work, we shall
at once see the chain of examples through which the change of feeling is
expressed, must present more remarkable extremes here than it can in any
other city; extremes so startling that their impressiveness cannot be
diminished, while their intelligibility is greatly increased, by the
large number of intermediate types which have fortunately been
preserved.

It would, however, too much weary the general reader if, without
illustrations, I were to endeavor to lead him step by step through the
aisles of St. John and Paul; and I shall therefore confine myself to a
slight notice of those features in sepulchral architecture generally
which are especially illustrative of the matter at present in hand, and
point out the order in which, if possible, the traveller should visit
the tombs in Venice, so as to be most deeply impressed with the true
character of the lessons they convey.

§ XLVIII. I have not such an acquaintance with the modes of entombment
or memorial in the earliest ages of Christianity as would justify me in
making any general statement respecting them: but it seems to me that
the perfect type of a Christian tomb was not developed until toward the
thirteenth century, sooner or later according to the civilization of
each country; that perfect type consisting in the raised and perfectly
visible sarcophagus of stone, bearing upon it a recumbent figure, and
the whole covered by a canopy. Before that type was entirely developed,
and in the more ordinary tombs contemporary with it, we find the simple
sarcophagus, often with only a rough block of stone for its lid,
sometimes with a low-gabled lid like a cottage roof, derived from
Egyptian forms, and bearing, either on the sides or the lid, at least a
sculpture of the cross, and sometimes the name of the deceased, and date
of erection of the tomb. In more elaborate examples rich
figure-sculpture is gradually introduced; and in the perfect period the
sarcophagus, even when it does not bear any recumbent figure, has
generally a rich sculpture on its sides representing an angel presenting
the dead, in person and dress as he lived, to Christ or to the Madonna,
with lateral figures, sometimes of saints, sometimes--as in the tombs of
the Dukes of Burgundy at Dijon--of mourners; but in Venice almost always
representing the Annunciation, the angel being placed at one angle of
the sarcophagus, and the Madonna at the other. The canopy, in a very
simple foursquare form, or as an arch over a recess, is added above the
sarcophagus, long before the life-size recumbent figure appears resting
upon it. By the time that the sculptors had acquired skill enough to
give much expression to this figure, the canopy attains an exquisite
symmetry and richness; and, in the most elaborate examples, is
surmounted by a statue, generally small, representing the dead person in
the full strength and pride of life, while the recumbent figure shows
him as he lay in death. And, at this point, the perfect type of the
Gothic tomb is reached.

§ XLIX. Of the simple sarcophagus tomb there are many exquisite examples
both at Venice and Verona; the most interesting in Venice are those
which are set in the recesses of the rude brick front of the Church of
St. John and Paul, ornamented only, for the most part, with two crosses
set in circles, and the legend with the name of the dead, and an "Orate
pro anima" in another circle in the centre. And in this we may note one
great proof of superiority in Italian over English tombs; the latter
being often enriched with quatrefoils, small shafts, and arches, and
other ordinary architectural decorations, which destroy their
seriousness and solemnity, render them little more than ornamental, and
have no religious meaning whatever; while the Italian sarcophagi are
kept massive, smooth, and gloomy,--heavy-lidded dungeons of stone, like
rock-tombs,--but bearing on their surface, sculptured with tender and
narrow lines, the emblem of the cross, not presumptuously nor proudly,
but dimly graven upon their granite, like the hope which the human heart
holds, but hardly perceives in its heaviness.

§ L. Among the tombs in front of the Church of St. John and Paul there
is one which is peculiarly illustrative of the simplicity of these
earlier ages. It is on the left of the entrance, a massy sarcophagus
with low horns as of an altar, placed in a rude recess of the outside
wall, shattered and worn, and here and there entangled among wild grass
and weeds. Yet it is the tomb of two Doges, Jacopo and Lorenzo Tiepolo,
by one of whom nearly the whole ground was given for the erection of the
noble church in front of which his unprotected tomb is wasting away. The
sarcophagus bears an inscription in the centre, describing the acts of
the Doges, of which the letters show that it was added a considerable
period after the erection of the tomb: the original legend is still left
in other letters on its base, to this effect,

  "Lord James, died 1251. Lord Laurence, died 1288."

At the two corners of the sarcophagus are two angels bearing censers;
and on its lid two birds, with crosses like crests upon their heads. For
the sake of the traveller in Venice the reader will, I think, pardon me
the momentary irrelevancy of telling the meaning of these symbols.

§ LI. The foundation of the church of St. John and Paul was laid by the
Dominicans about 1234, under the immediate protection of the Senate and
the Doge Giacomo Tiepolo, accorded to them in consequence of a
miraculous vision appearing to the Doge; of which the following account
is given in popular tradition:

"In the year 1226, the Doge Giacomo Tiepolo dreamed a dream; and in his
dream he saw the little oratory of the Dominicans, and, behold, the
ground all around it (now occupied by the church) was covered with
roses of the color of vermilion, and the air was filled with their
fragrance. And in the midst of the roses, there were seen flying to and
fro a crowd of white doves, with golden crosses upon their heads. And
while the Doge looked, and wondered, behold, two angels descended from
heaven with golden censers, and passing through the oratory, and forth
among the flowers, they filled the place with the smoke of their
incense. Then the Doge heard suddenly a clear and loud voice which
proclaimed, 'This is the place that I have chosen for my preachers;' and
having heard it, straightway he awoke and went to the Senate, and
declared to them the vision. Then the Senate decreed that forty paces of
ground should be given to enlarge the monastery; and the Doge Tiepolo
himself made a still larger grant afterwards."

There is nothing miraculous in the occurrence of such a dream as this to
the devout Doge; and the fact, of which there is no doubt, that the
greater part of the land on which the church stands was given by him, is
partly a confirmation of the story. But, whether the sculptures on the
tomb were records of the vision, or the vision a monkish invention from
the sculptures on the tomb, the reader will not, I believe, look upon
its doves and crosses, or rudely carved angels, any more with disdain;
knowing how, in one way or another, they were connected with a point of
deep religious belief.

§ LII. Towards the beginning of the fourteenth century, in Venice, the
recumbent figure begins to appear on the sarcophagus, the first dated
example being also one of the most beautiful; the statue of the prophet
Simeon, sculptured upon the tomb which was to receive his relics in the
church dedicated to him under the name of San Simeone Grande. So soon as
the figure appears, the sarcophagus becomes much more richly sculptured,
but always with definite religious purpose. It is usually divided into
two panels, which are filled with small bas-reliefs of the acts or
martyrdom of the patron saints of the deceased: between them, in the
centre, Christ, or the Virgin and Child, are richly enthroned, under a
curtained canopy; and the two figures representing the Annunciation are
almost always at the angles; the promise of the Birth of Christ being
taken as at once the ground and the type of the promise of eternal life
to all men.

§ LIII. These figures are always in Venice most rudely chiselled; the
progress of figure sculpture being there comparatively tardy. At Verona,
where the great Pisan school had strong influence, the monumental
sculpture is immeasurably finer; and, so early as about the year
1335,[16] the consummate form of the Gothic tomb occurs in the monument
of Can Grande della Scala at Verona. It is set over the portal of the
chapel anciently belonging to the family. The sarcophagus is sculptured
with shallow bas-reliefs, representing (which is rare in the tombs with
which I am acquainted in Italy, unless they are those of saints) the
principal achievements of the warrior's life, especially the siege of
Vicenza and battle of Placenza; these sculptures, however, form little
more than a chased and roughened groundwork for the fully relieved
statues representing the Annunciation, projecting boldly from the front
of the sarcophagus. Above, the Lord of Verona is laid in his long robe
of civil dignity, wearing the simple bonnet, consisting merely of a
fillet bound round the brow, knotted and falling on the shoulder. He is
laid as asleep; his arms crossed upon his body, and his sword by his
side. Above him, a bold arched canopy is sustained by two projecting
shafts, and on the pinnacle of its roof is the statue of the knight on
his war-horse; his helmet, dragon-winged and crested with the dog's
head, tossed back behind his shoulders, and the broad and blazoned
drapery floating back from his horse's breast,--so truly drawn by the
old workman from the life, that it seems to wave in the wind, and the
knight's spear to shake, and his marble horse to be evermore quickening
its pace, and starting into heavier and hastier charge, as the silver
clouds float past behind it in the sky.

§ LIV. Now observe, in this tomb, as much concession is made to the
pride of man as may ever consist with honor, discretion, or dignity. I
do not enter into any question respecting the character of Can Grande,
though there can be little doubt that he was one of the best among the
nobles of his time; but that is not to our purpose. It is not the
question whether his wars were just, or his greatness honorably
achieved; but whether, supposing them to have been so, these facts are
well and gracefully told upon his tomb. And I believe there can be no
hesitation in the admission of its perfect feeling and truth. Though
beautiful, the tomb is so little conspicuous or intrusive, that it
serves only to decorate the portal of the little chapel, and is hardly
regarded by the traveller as he enters. When it is examined, the history
of the acts of the dead is found subdued into dim and minute ornament
upon his coffin; and the principal aim of the monument is to direct the
thoughts to his image as he lies in death, and to the expression of his
hope of resurrection; while, seen as by the memory far away, diminished
in the brightness of the sky, there is set the likeness of his armed
youth, stately, as it stood of old, in the front of battle, and meet to
be thus recorded for us, that we may now be able to remember the dignity
of the frame, of which those who once looked upon it hardly remembered
that it was dust.

§ LV. This, I repeat, is as much as may ever be granted, but this ought
always to be granted, to the honor and the affection of men. The tomb
which stands beside that of Can Grande, nearest it in the little field
of sleep, already shows the traces of erring ambition. It is the tomb of
Mastino the Second, in whose reign began the decline of his family. It
is altogether exquisite as a work of art; and the evidence of a less
wise or noble feeling in its design is found only in this, that the
image of a virtue, Fortitude, as belonging to the dead, is placed on the
extremity of the sarcophagus, opposite to the Crucifixion. But for this
slight circumstance, of which the significance will only be appreciated
as we examine the series of later monuments, the composition of this
monument of Can Mastino would have been as perfect as its decoration is
refined. It consists, like that of Can Grande, of the raised
sarcophagus, bearing the recumbent statue, protected by a noble
foursquare canopy, sculptured with ancient Scripture history. On one
side of the sarcophagus is Christ enthroned, with Can Mastino kneeling
before Him; on the other, Christ is represented in the mystical form,
half-rising from the tomb, meant, I believe, to be at once typical of
His passion and resurrection. The lateral panels are occupied by statues
of saints. At one extremity of the sarcophagus is the Crucifixion; at
the other, a noble statue of Fortitude, with a lion's skin thrown over
her shoulders, its head forming a shield upon her breast, her flowing
hair bound with a narrow fillet, and a three-edged sword in her
gauntleted right hand, drawn back sternly behind her thigh, while, in
her left, she bears high the shield of the Scalas.

§ LVI. Close to this monument is another, the stateliest and most
sumptuous of the three; it first arrests the eye of the stranger, and
long detains it,--a many-pinnacled pile surrounded by niches with
statues of the warrior saints.

It is beautiful, for it still belongs to the noble time, the latter part
of the fourteenth century; but its work is coarser than that of the
other, and its pride may well prepare us to learn that it was built for
himself, in his own lifetime, by the man whose statue crowns it, Can
Signorio della Scala. Now observe, for this is infinitely significant.
Can Mastino II. was feeble and wicked, and began the ruin of his house;
his sarcophagus is the first which bears upon it the image of a virtue,
but he lays claim only to Fortitude. Can Signorio was twice a
fratricide, the last time when he lay upon his death-bed: _his_ tomb
bears upon its gables the images of six virtues,--Faith, Hope, Charity,
Prudence, and (I believe) Justice and Fortitude.

§ LVII. Let us now return to Venice, where, in the second chapel
counting from right to left, at the west end of the Church of the Frari,
there is a very early fourteenth, or perhaps late thirteenth, century
tomb, another exquisite example of the perfect Gothic form. It is a
knight's; but there is no inscription upon it, and his name is unknown.
It consists of a sarcophagus, supported on bold brackets against the
chapel wall, bearing the recumbent figure, protected by a simple canopy
in the form of a pointed arch, pinnacled by the knight's crest; beneath
which the shadowy space is painted dark blue, and strewn with stars. The
statue itself is rudely carved; but its lines, as seen from the intended
distance, are both tender and masterly. The knight is laid in his mail,
only the hands and face being bare. The hauberk and helmet are of
chain-mail, the armor for the limbs of jointed steel; a tunic, fitting
close to the breast, and marking the noble swell of it by two narrow
embroidered lines, is worn over the mail; his dagger is at his right
side; his long cross-belted sword, not seen by the spectator from below,
at his left. His feet rest on a hound (the hound being his crest), which
looks up towards its master. In general, in tombs of this kind, the face
of the statue is slightly turned towards the spectator; in this
monument, on the contrary, it is turned away from him, towards the depth
of the arch: for there, just above the warrior's breast, is carved a
small image of St. Joseph bearing the infant Christ, who looks down upon
the resting figure; and to this image its countenance is turned. The
appearance of the entire tomb is as if the warrior had seen the vision
of Christ in his dying moments, and had fallen back peacefully upon his
pillow, with his eyes still turned to it, and his hands clasped in
prayer.

§ LVIII. On the opposite side of this chapel is another very lovely
tomb, to Duccio degli Alberti, a Florentine ambassador at Venice;
noticeable chiefly as being the first in Venice on which any images of
the Virtues appear. We shall return to it presently, but some account
must first be given of the more important among the other tombs in
Venice belonging to the perfect period. Of these, by far the most
interesting, though not the most elaborate, is that of the great Doge
Francesco Dandolo, whose ashes, it might have been thought, were
honorable enough to have been permitted to rest undisturbed in the
chapter-house of the Frari, where they were first laid. But, as if there
were not room enough, nor waste houses enough in the desolate city to
receive a few convent papers, the monks, wanting an "archivio," have
separated the tomb into three pieces: the canopy, a simple arch
sustained on brackets, still remains on the blank walls of the
desecrated chamber; the sarcophagus has been transported to a kind of
museum of antiquities, established in what was once the cloister of
Santa Maria della Salute; and the painting which filled the lunette
behind it is hung far out of sight, at one end of the sacristy of the
same church. The sarcophagus is completely charged with bas-reliefs: at
its two extremities are the types of St. Mark and St. John; in front, a
noble sculpture of the death of the Virgin; at the angles, angels
holding vases. The whole space is occupied by the sculpture; there are
no spiral shafts or panelled divisions; only a basic plinth below, and
crowning plinth above, the sculpture being raised from a deep concave
field between the two, but, in order to give piquancy and
picturesqueness to the mass of figures, two small trees are introduced
at the head and foot of the Madonna's couch, an oak and a stone pine.

§ LIX. It was said above,[17] in speaking of the frequent disputes of
the Venetians with the Pontifical power, which in their early days they
had so strenuously supported, that "the humiliation of Francesco Dandolo
blotted out the shame of Barbarossa." It is indeed well that the two
events should be remembered together. By the help of the Venetians,
Alexander III. was enabled, in the twelfth century, to put his foot upon
the neck of the emperor Barbarossa, quoting the words of the Psalm,
"Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder." A hundred and fifty
years later, the Venetian ambassador, Francesco Dandolo, unable to
obtain even an audience from the Pope, Clement V., to whom he had been
sent to pray for a removal of the sentence of excommunication pronounced
against the republic, concealed himself (according to the common
tradition) beneath the Pontiff's dining-table; and thence coming out as
he sat down to meat, embraced his feet, and obtained, by tearful
entreaties, the removal of the terrible sentence.

I say, "according to the common tradition;" for there are some doubts
cast upon the story by its supplement. Most of the Venetian historians
assert that Francesco Dandolo's surname of "Dog" was given him first on
this occasion, in insult, by the cardinals; and that the Venetians, in
remembrance of the grace which his humiliation had won for them, made it
a title of honor to him and to his race. It has, however, been
proved[18] that the surname was borne by the ancestors of Francesco
Dandolo long before; and the falsity of this seal of the legend renders
also its circumstances doubtful. But the main fact of grievous
humiliation having been undergone, admits of no dispute; the existence
of such a tradition at all is in itself a proof of its truth; it was not
one likely to be either invented or received without foundation: and it
will be well, therefore, that the reader should remember, in connection
with the treatment of Barbarossa at the door of the Church of St.
Mark's, that in the Vatican, one hundred and fifty years later, a
Venetian noble, a future Doge, submitted to a degradation, of which the
current report among his people was, that he had crept on his hands and
knees from beneath the Pontiff's table to his feet, and had been spurned
as a "dog" by the cardinals present.

§ LX. There are two principal conclusions to be drawn from this: the
obvious one respecting the insolence of the Papal dominion in the
thirteenth century; the second, that there were probably most deep piety
and humility in the character of the man who could submit to this
insolence for the sake of a benefit to his country. Probably no motive
would have been strong enough to obtain such a sacrifice from most men,
however unselfish; but it was, without doubt, made easier to Dandolo by
his profound reverence for the Pontifical office; a reverence which,
however _we_ may now esteem those who claimed it, could not but have
been felt by nearly all good and faithful men at the time of which we
are speaking. This is the main point which I wish the reader to remember
as we look at his tomb, this, and the result of it,--that, some years
afterwards, when he was seated on the throne which his piety had saved,
"there were sixty princes' ambassadors in Venice at the same time,
requesting the judgment of the Senate on matters of various concernment,
_so great was the fame of the uncorrupted justice of the Fathers_."[19]

Observe, there are no virtues on this tomb. Nothing but religious
history or symbols; the Death of the Virgin in front, and the types of
St. Mark and St. John at the extremities.

§ LXI. Of the tomb of the Doge Andrea Dandolo, in St. Mark's, I have
spoken before. It is one of the first in Venice which presents, in a
canopy, the Pisan idea of angels withdrawing curtains, as of a couch, to
look down upon the dead. The sarcophagus is richly decorated with
flower-work; the usual figures of the Annunciation are at the sides; an
enthroned Madonna in the centre; and two bas-reliefs, one of the
martyrdom of the Doge's patron saint, St. Andrew, occupy the
intermediate spaces. All these tombs have been richly colored; the hair
of the angels has here been gilded, their wings bedropped with silver,
and their garments covered with the most exquisite arabesques. This
tomb, and that of St. Isidore in another chapel of St. Mark's, which was
begun by this very Doge, Andrea Dandolo, and completed after his death
in 1354, are both nearly alike in their treatment, and are, on the
whole, the best existing examples of Venetian monumental sculpture.

§ LXII. Of much ruder workmanship, though still most precious, and
singularly interesting from its quaintness, is a sarcophagus in the
northernmost chapel, beside the choir of St. John and Paul, charged with
two bas-reliefs and many figures, but which bears no inscription. It
has, however, a shield with three dolphins on its brackets; and as at
the feet of the Madonna in its centre there is a small kneeling figure
of a Doge, we know it to be the tomb of the Doge Giovanni Dolfino, who
came to the throne in 1356.

He was chosen Doge while, as provveditore, he was in Treviso, defending
the city against the King of Hungary. The Venetians sent to the
besiegers, praying that their newly elected Doge might be permitted to
pass the Hungarian lines. Their request was refused, the Hungarians
exulting that they held the Doge of Venice prisoner in Treviso. But
Dolfino, with a body of two hundred horse, cut his way through their
lines by night, and reached Mestre (Malghera) in safety, where he was
met by the Senate. His bravery could not avert the misfortunes which
were accumulating on the republic. The Hungarian war was ignominiously
terminated by the surrender of Dalmatia: the Doge's heart was broken,
his eyesight failed him, and he died of the plague four years after he
had ascended the throne.

§ LXIII. It is perhaps on this account, perhaps in consequence of later
injuries, that the tomb has neither effigy nor inscription: that it has
been subjected to some violence is evident from the dentil which once
crowned its leaf-cornice being now broken away, showing the whole front.
But, fortunately, the sculpture of the sarcophagus itself is little
injured.

There are two saints, male and female, at its angles, each in a little
niche; a Christ, enthroned in the centre, the Doge and Dogaressa
kneeling at his feet; in the two intermediate panels, on one side the
Epiphany, on the other the Death of the Virgin; the whole supported, as
well as crowned, by an elaborate leaf-plinth. The figures under the
niches are rudely cut, and of little interest. Not so the central group.
Instead of a niche, the Christ is seated under a square tent, or
tabernacle, formed by curtains running on rods; the idea, of course, as
usual, borrowed from the Pisan one, but here ingeniously applied. The
curtains are opened in front, showing those at the back of the tent,
behind the seated figure; the perspective of the two retiring sides
being very tolerably suggested. Two angels, of half the size of the
seated figure, thrust back the near curtains, and look up reverently to
the Christ; while again, at their feet, about one third of _their_ size,
and half-sheltered, as it seems, by their garments, are the two kneeling
figures of the Doge and Dogaressa, though so small and carefully cut,
full of life. The Christ raising one hand as to bless, and holding a
book upright and open on the knees, does not look either towards them or
to the angels, but forward; and there is a very noticeable effort to
represent Divine abstraction in the countenance: the idea of the three
magnitudes of spiritual being,--the God, the Angel, and the Man,--is
also to be observed, aided as it is by the complete subjection of the
angelic power to the Divine; for the angels are in attitudes of the most
lowly watchfulness of the face of Christ, and appear unconscious of the
presence of the human beings who are nestled in the folds of their
garments.

§ LXIV. With this interesting but modest tomb of one of the kings of
Venice, it is desirable to compare that of one of her senators, of
exactly the same date, which is raised against the western wall of the
Frari, at the end of the north aisle. It bears the following remarkable
inscription:

 "ANNO MCCCLX. prima die Julii Sepultura . Domini . Simonii Dandolo .
   amador . de . Justisia . e . desiroso . de . acrese . el . ben .
   chomum."

The "Amador de Justitia" has perhaps some reference to Simon Dandolo's
having been one of the Giunta who condemned the Doge Faliero. The
sarcophagus is decorated merely by the Annunciation group, and an
enthroned Madonna with a curtain behind her throne, sustained by four
tiny angels, who look over it as they hold it up; but the workmanship of
the figures is more than usually beautiful.

§ LXV. Seven years later, a very noble monument was placed on the north
side of the choir of St. John and Paul, to the Doge Marco Cornaro,
chiefly, with respect to our present subject, noticeable for the absence
of religious imagery from the sarcophagus, which is decorated with
roses only; three very beautiful statues of the Madonna and two saints
are, however, set in the canopy above. Opposite this tomb, though about
fifteen years later in date, is the richest monument of the Gothic
period in Venice; that of the Doge Michele Morosini, who died in 1382.
It consists of a highly florid canopy,--an arch crowned by a gable, with
pinnacles at the flanks, boldly crocketed, and with a huge finial at the
top representing St. Michael,--a medallion of Christ set in the gable;
under the arch, a mosaic, representing the Madonna presenting the Doge
to Christ upon the cross; beneath, as usual, the sarcophagus, with a
most noble recumbent figure of the Doge, his face meagre and severe, and
sharp in its lines, but exquisite in the form of its small and princely
features. The sarcophagus is adorned with elaborate wrinkled leafage,
projecting in front of it into seven brackets, from which the statues
are broken away; but by which, for there can be no doubt that these last
statues represented the theological and cardinal Virtues, we must for a
moment pause.

§ LXVI. It was noticed above, that the tomb of the Florentine
ambassador, Duccio, was the first in Venice which presented images of
the Virtues. Its small lateral statues of Justice and Temperance are
exquisitely beautiful, and were, I have no doubt, executed by a
Florentine sculptor; the whole range of artistical power and religious
feeling being, in Florence, full half a century in advance of that of
Venice. But this is the first truly Venetian tomb which has the Virtues;
and it becomes of importance, therefore, to know what was the character
of Morosini.

The reader must recollect, that I dated the commencement of the fall of
Venice from the death of Carlo Zeno, considering that no state could be
held as in decline, which numbered such a man amongst its citizens.
Carlo Zeno was a candidate for the Ducal bonnet together with Michael
Morosini; and Morosini was chosen. It might be anticipated, therefore,
that there was something more than usually admirable or illustrious in
his character. Yet it is difficult to arrive at a just estimate of it,
as the reader will at once understand by comparing the following
statements:

   § LXVI. 1. "To him (Andrea Contarini) succeeded Morosini, at the age
   of seventy-four years; a most learned and prudent man, who also
   reformed several laws."--_Sansovino_, Vite de' Principi.

   2. "It was generally believed that, if his reign had been longer, he
   would have dignified the state by many noble laws and institutes; but
   by so much as his reign was full of hope, by as much was it short in
   duration, for he died when he had been at the head of the republic
   but four months."--_Sabellico_, lib. viii.

   3. "He was allowed but a short time to enjoy this high dignity, which
   he had so well deserved by his rare virtues, for God called him to
   Himself on the 15th of October."--_Muratori_, Annali de' Italia.

   4. "Two candidates presented themselves; one was Zeno, the other that
   Michael Morosini who, during the war, had tripled his fortune by his
   speculations. The suffrages of the electors fell upon him, and he was
   proclaimed Doge on the 10th of June."--_Daru_, Histoire de Venise,
   lib. x.

   5. "The choice of the electors was directed to Michele Morosini, a
   noble of illustrious birth, derived from a stock which, coeval with
   the republic itself, had produced the conqueror of Tyre, given a
   queen to Hungary, and more than one Doge to Venice. The brilliancy of
   this descent was tarnished in the present chief representative of the
   family by the most base and grovelling avarice; for at that moment,
   in the recent war, at which all other Venetians were devoting their
   whole fortunes to the service of the state, Morosini sought in the
   distresses of his country an opening for his own private enrichment,
   and employed his ducats, not in the assistance of the national wants,
   but in speculating upon houses which were brought to market at a
   price far beneath their real value, and which, upon the return of
   peace, insured the purchaser a fourfold profit. 'What matters the
   fall of Venice to me, so as I fall not together with her?' was his
   selfish and sordid reply to some one who expressed surprise at the
   transaction."--_Sketches of Venetian History_. Murray, 1831.

§ LXVIII. The writer of the unpretending little history from which the
last quotation is taken has not given his authority for this statement,
and I could not find it, but believed, from the general accuracy of the
book, that some authority might exist better than Daru's. Under these
circumstances, wishing if possible to ascertain the truth, and to clear
the character of this great Doge from the accusation, if it proved
groundless, I wrote to the Count Carlo Morosini, his descendant, and one
of the few remaining representatives of the ancient noblesse of Venice;
one, also, by whom his great ancestral name is revered, and in whom it
is exalted. His answer appears to me altogether conclusive as to the
utter fallacy of the reports of Daru and the English history. I have
placed his letter in the close of this volume (Appendix 6), in order
that the reader may himself be the judge upon this point; and I should
not have alluded to Daru's report, except for the purpose of
contradicting it, but that it still appears to me impossible that any
modern historian should have gratuitously invented the whole story, and
that, therefore, there must have been a trace in the documents which
Daru himself possessed, of some scandal of this kind raised by
Morosini's enemies, perhaps at the very time of the disputed election
with Carlo Zeno. The occurrence of the Virtues upon his tomb, for the
first time in Venetian monumental work, and so richly and conspicuously
placed, may partly have been in public contradiction of such a floating
rumor. But the face of the statue is a more explicit contradiction
still; it is resolute, thoughtful, serene, and full of beauty; and we
must, therefore, for once, allow the somewhat boastful introduction of
the Virtues to have been perfectly just: though the whole tomb is most
notable, as furnishing not only the exact intermediate condition in
style between the pure Gothic and its final Renaissance corruption, but,
at the same time, the exactly intermediate condition of _feeling_
between the pure calmness of early Christianity, and the boastful pomp
of the Renaissance faithlessness; for here we have still the religious
humility remaining in the mosaic of the canopy, which shows the Doge
kneeling before the cross, while yet this tendency to self-trust is
shown in the surrounding of the coffin by the Virtues.

§ LXIX. The next tomb by the side of which they appear is that of Jacopo
Cavalli, in the same chapel of St. John and Paul which contains the tomb
of the Doge Delfin. It is peculiarly rich in religious imagery, adorned
by boldly cut types of the four evangelists, and of two saints, while,
on projecting brackets in front of it, stood three statues of Faith,
Hope, and Charity, now lost, but drawn in Zanotto's work. It is all rich
in detail, and its sculptor has been proud of it, thus recording his
name below the epitaph:

  "QST OPERA DINTALGIO E FATTO IN PIERA,
   UNVENICIAN LAFE CHANOME POLO,
   NATO DI JACHOMEL CHATAIAPIERA."

   This work of sculpture is done in stone;
   A Venetian did it, named Paul,
   Son of Jachomel the stone-cutter.

Jacopo Cavalli died in 1384. He was a bold and active Veronese soldier,
did the state much service, was therefore ennobled by it, and became the
founder of the house of the Cavalli; but I find no especial reason for
the images of the Virtues, especially that of Charity, appearing at his
tomb, unless it be this: that at the siege of Feltre, in the war against
Leopold of Austria, he refused to assault the city, because the senate
would not grant his soldiers the pillage of the town. The feet of the
recumbent figure, which is in full armor, rest on a dog, and its head on
two lions; and these animals (neither of which form any part of the
knight's bearings) are said by Zanotto to be intended to symbolize his
bravery and fidelity. If, however, the lions are meant to set forth
courage, it is a pity they should have been represented as howling.

§ LXX. We must next pause for an instant beside the tomb of Michael
Steno, now in the northern aisle of St. John and Paul, having been
removed there from the destroyed church of the Servi: first, to note its
remarkable return to the early simplicity, the sarcophagus being
decorated only with two crosses in quatrefoils, though it is of the
fifteenth century, Steno dying in 1413; and, in the second place, to
observe the peculiarity of the epitaph, which eulogises Steno as having
been "amator justitie, pacis, et ubertatis," "a lover of justice, peace,
and plenty." In the epitaphs of this period, the virtues which are made
most account of in public men are those which were most useful to their
country. We have already seen one example in the epitaph on Simon
Dandolo; and similar expressions occur constantly in laudatory mentions
of their later Doges by the Venetian writers. Thus Sansovino of Marco
Cornaro, "Era savio huomo, eloquente, e amava molto la pace e l'
abbondanza della citta;" and of Tomaso Mocenigo, "Huomo oltre modo
desideroso della pace."

Of the tomb of this last-named Doge mention has before been made. Here,
as in Morosini's, the images of the Virtues have no ironical power,
although their great conspicuousness marks the increase of the boastful
feeling in the treatment of monuments. For the rest, this tomb is the
last in Venice which can be considered as belonging to the Gothic
period. Its mouldings are already rudely classical, and it has
meaningless figures in Roman armor at the angles; but its tabernacle
above is still Gothic, and the recumbent figure is very beautiful. It
was carved by two Florentine sculptors in 1423.

§ LXXI. Tomaso Mocenigo was succeeded by the renowned Doge, Francesco
Foscari, under whom, it will be remembered, the last additions were made
to the Gothic Ducal Palace; additions which, in form only, not in
spirit, corresponded to the older portions; since, during his reign, the
transition took place which permits us no longer to consider the
Venetian architecture as Gothic at all. He died in 1457, and his tomb is
the first important example of Renaissance art.

Not, however, a good characteristic example. It is remarkable chiefly as
introducing all the faults of the Renaissance at an early period, when
its merits, such as they are, were yet undeveloped. Its claim to be
rated as a classical composition is altogether destroyed by the remnants
of Gothic feeling which cling to it here and there in their last forms
of degradation; and of which, now that we find them thus corrupted, the
sooner we are rid the better. Thus the sarcophagus is supported by a
species of trefoil arches; the bases of the shafts have still their
spurs; and the whole tomb is covered by a pediment, with crockets and a
pinnacle. We shall find that the perfect Renaissance is at least pure in
its insipidity, and subtle in its vice; but this monument is remarkable
as showing the refuse of one style encumbering the embryo of another,
and all principles of life entangled either in the swaddling clothes or
the shroud.

§ LXXII. With respect to our present purpose, however, it is a monument
of enormous importance. We have to trace, be it remembered, the pride of
state in its gradual intrusion upon the sepulchre; and the consequent
and correlative vanishing of the expressions of religious feeling and
heavenly hope, together with the more and more arrogant setting forth of
the virtues of the dead. Now this tomb is the largest and most costly we
have yet seen; but its means of religious expression are limited to a
single statue of Christ, small and used merely as a pinnacle at the top.
The rest of the composition is as curious as it is vulgar. The conceit,
so often noticed as having been borrowed from the Pisan school, of
angels withdrawing the curtains of the couch to look down upon the dead,
was brought forward with increasing prominence by every succeeding
sculptor; but, as we draw nearer to the Renaissance period, we find that
the _angels_ become of less importance, and the _curtains_ of more. With
the Pisans, the curtains are introduced as a motive for the angels; with
the Renaissance sculptors, the angels are introduced merely as a motive
for the curtains, which become every day more huge and elaborate. In the
monument of Mocenigo, they have already expanded into a tent, with a
pole in the centre of it: and in that of Foscari, for the first time,
the _angels are absent altogether_; while the curtains are arranged in
the form of an enormous French tent-bed, and are sustained at the flanks
by two diminutive figures in Roman armor; substituted for the angels,
merely that the sculptor might _show his knowledge_ of classical
costume. And now observe how often a fault in feeling induces also a
fault in style. In the old tombs, the angels used to stand on or by the
side of the sarcophagus; but their places are here to be occupied by the
Virtues, and therefore, to sustain the diminutive Roman figures at the
necessary height, each has a whole Corinthian pillar to himself, a
pillar whose shaft is eleven feet high, and some three or four feet
round: and because this was not high enough, it is put on a pedestal
four feet and a half high; and has a spurred base besides of its own, a
tall capital, then a huge bracket above the capital, and then another
pedestal above the bracket, and on the top of all the diminutive figure
who has charge of the curtains.

§ LXXIII. Under the canopy, thus arranged, is placed the sarcophagus
with its recumbent figure. The statues of the Virgin and the saints have
disappeared from it. In their stead, its panels are filled with
half-length figures of Faith, Hope, and Charity; while Temperance and
Fortitude are at the Doge's feet, Justice and Prudence at his head,
figures now the size of life, yet nevertheless recognizable only by
their attributes: for, except that Hope raises her eyes, there is no
difference in the character or expression of any of their faces,--they
are nothing more than handsome Venetian women, in rather full and
courtly dresses, and tolerably well thrown into postures for effect from
below. Fortitude could not of course be placed in a graceful one without
some sacrifice of her character, but that was of no consequence in the
eyes of the sculptors of this period, so she leans back languidly, and
nearly overthrows her own column; while Temperance, and Justice opposite
to her, as neither the left hand of the one nor the right hand of the
other could be seen from below, have been _left with one hand each_.

§ LXXIV. Still these figures, coarse and feelingless as they are, have
been worked with care, because the principal effect of the tomb depends
on them. But the effigy of the Doge, of which nothing but the side is
visible, has been utterly neglected; and the ingenuity of the sculptor
is not so great, at the best, as that he can afford to be slovenly.
There is, indeed, nothing in the history of Foscari which would lead us
to expect anything particularly noble in his face; but I trust,
nevertheless, it has been misrepresented by this despicable carver; for
no words are strong enough to express the baseness of the portraiture. A
huge, gross, bony clown's face, with the peculiar sodden and sensual
cunning in it which is seen so often in the countenances of the worst
Romanist priest; a face part of iron and part of clay, with the
immobility of the one, and the foulness of the other, double chinned,
blunt-mouthed, bony-cheeked, with its brows drawn down into meagre lines
and wrinkles over the eyelids; the face of a man incapable either of joy
or sorrow, unless such as may be caused by the indulgence of passion, or
the mortification of pride. Even had he been such a one, a noble workman
would not have written it so legibly on his tomb; and I believe it to be
the image of the carver's own mind that is there hewn in the marble, not
that of the Doge Foscari. For the same mind is visible enough
throughout, the traces of it mingled with those of the evil taste of the
whole time and people. There is not anything so small but it is shown in
some portion of its treatment; for instance, in the placing of the
shields at the back of the great curtain. In earlier times, the shield,
as we have seen, was represented as merely suspended against the tomb by
a thong, or if sustained in any other manner, still its form was simple
and undisguised. Men in those days used their shields in war, and
therefore there was no need to add dignity to their form by external
ornament. That which, through day after day of mortal danger, had borne
back from them the waves of battle, could neither be degraded by
simplicity, nor exalted by decoration. By its rude leathern thong it
seemed to be fastened to their tombs, and the shield of the mighty was
not cast away, though capable of defending its master no more.

§ LXXV. It was otherwise in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The
changed system of warfare was rapidly doing away with the practical
service of the shield; and the chiefs who directed the battle from a
distance, or who passed the greater part of their lives in the
council-chamber, soon came to regard the shield as nothing more than a
field for their armorial bearings. It then became a principal object of
their Pride of State to increase the conspicuousness of these marks of
family distinction by surrounding them with various and fantastic
ornament, generally scroll or flower work, which of course deprived the
shield of all appearance of being intended for a soldier's use. Thus the
shield of the Foscari is introduced in two ways. On the sarcophagus,
the bearings are three times repeated, enclosed in circular disks, which
are sustained each by a couple of naked infants. Above the canopy, two
shields of the usual form are set in the centre of circles filled by a
radiating ornament of shell flutings, which give them the effect of
ventilators; and their circumference is farther adorned by gilt rays,
undulating to represent a glory.

§ LXXVI. We now approach that period of the early Renaissance which was
noticed in the preceding chapter as being at first a very visible
improvement on the corrupted Gothic. The tombs executed during the
period of the Byzantine Renaissance exhibit, in the first place, a
consummate skill in handling the chisel, perfect science of drawing and
anatomy, high appreciation of good classical models, and a grace of
composition and delicacy of ornament derived, I believe, principally
from the great Florentine sculptors. But, together with this science,
they exhibit also, for a short time, some return to the early religious
feeling, forming a school of sculpture which corresponds to that of the
school of the Bellini in painting; and the only wonder is that there
should not have been more workmen in the fifteenth century doing in
marble what Perugino, Francia, and Bellini did on canvas. There are,
indeed, some few, as I have just said, in whom the good and pure temper
shows itself: but the sculptor was necessarily led sooner than the
painter to an exclusive study of classical models, utterly adverse to
the Christian imagination; and he was also deprived of the great
purifying and sacred element of color, besides having much more of
merely mechanical and therefore degrading labor to go through in the
realization of his thought. Hence I do not know any example in sculpture
at this period, at least in Venice, which has not conspicuous faults
(not faults of imperfection, as in early sculpture, but of purpose and
sentiment), staining such beauties as it may possess; and the whole
school soon falls away, and merges into vain pomp and meagre metaphor.

§ LXXVII. The most celebrated monument of this period is that to the
Doge Andrea Vendramin, in the Church of St. John and Paul, sculptured
about 1480, and before alluded to in the first chapter of the first
volume. It has attracted public admiration, partly by its costliness,
partly by the delicacy and precision of its chiselling; being otherwise
a very base and unworthy example of the school, and showing neither
invention nor feeling. It has the Virtues, as usual, dressed like
heathen goddesses, and totally devoid of expression, though graceful and
well studied merely as female figures. The rest of its sculpture is all
of the same kind; perfect in workmanship, and devoid of thought. Its
dragons are covered with marvellous scales, but have no terror nor sting
in them; its birds are perfect in plumage, but have no song in them; its
children lovely of limb, but have no childishness in them.

§ LXXVIII. Of far other workmanship are the tombs of Pietro and Giovanni
Mocenigo, in St. John and Paul, and of Pietro Bernardo in the Frari; in
all which the details are as full of exquisite fancy, as they are
perfect in execution; and in the two former, and several others of
similar feeling, the old religious symbols return; the Madonna is again
seen enthroned under the canopy, and the sarcophagus is decorated with
legends of the saints. But the fatal errors of sentiment are,
nevertheless, always traceable. In the first place, the sculptor is
always seen to be intent upon the exhibition of his skill, more than on
producing any effect on the spectator's mind; elaborate backgrounds of
landscape, with tricks of perspective, imitations of trees, clouds, and
water, and various other unnecessary adjuncts, merely to show how marble
could be subdued; together with useless under-cutting, and over-finish
in subordinate parts, continually exhibiting the same cold vanity and
unexcited precision of mechanism. In the second place, the figures have
all the peculiar tendency to posture-making, which, exhibiting itself
first painfully in Perugino, rapidly destroyed the veracity of
composition in all art. By posture-making I mean, in general, that
action of figures which results from the painter's considering, in the
first place, not how, under the circumstances, they would actually have
walked, or stood, or looked, but how they may most gracefully and
harmoniously walk or stand. In the hands of a great man, posture, like
everything else, becomes noble, even when over-studied, as with Michael
Angelo, who was, perhaps, more than any other, the cause of the
mischief; but, with inferior men, this habit of composing attitudes ends
necessarily in utter lifelessness and abortion. Giotto was, perhaps, of
all painters, the most free from the infection of the poison, always
conceiving an incident naturally, and drawing it unaffectedly; and the
absence of posture-making in the works of the Pre-Raphaelites, as
opposed to the Attitudinarianism of the modern school, has been both one
of their principal virtues, and of the principal causes of outcry
against them.

§ LXXIX. But the most significant change in the treatment of these
tombs, with respect to our immediate object, is in the form of the
sarcophagus. It was above noted, that, exactly in proportion to the
degree of the pride of life expressed in any monument, would be also the
fear of death; and therefore, as these tombs increase in splendor, in
size, and beauty of workmanship, we perceive a gradual desire to _take
away from the definite character of the sarcophagus_. In the earliest
times, as we have seen, it was a gloomy mass of stone; gradually it
became charged with religious sculpture; but never with the slightest
desire to disguise its form, until towards the middle of the fifteenth
century. It then becomes enriched with flower-work and hidden by the
Virtues; and, finally, losing its foursquare form, it is modelled on
graceful types of ancient vases, made as little like a coffin as
possible, and refined away in various elegancies, till it becomes, at
last, a mere pedestal or stage for the portrait statue. This statue, in
the meantime, has been gradually coming back to life, through a curious
series of transitions. The Vendramin monument is one of the last which
shows, or pretends to show, the recumbent figure laid in death. A few
years later, this idea became disagreeable to polite minds; and, lo! the
figures which before had been laid at rest upon the tomb pillow, raised
themselves on their elbows, and began to look round them. The soul of
the sixteenth century dared not contemplate its body in death.

§ LXXX. The reader cannot but remember many instances of this form of
monument, England being peculiarly rich in examples of them; although,
with her, tomb sculpture, after the fourteenth century, is altogether
imitative, and in no degree indicative of the temper of the people. It
was from Italy that the authority for the change was derived; and in
Italy only, therefore, that it is truly correspondent to the change in
the national mind. There are many monuments in Venice of this
semi-animate type, most of them carefully sculptured, and some very
admirable as portraits, and for the casting of the drapery, especially
those in the Church of San Salvador; but I shall only direct the reader
to one, that of Jacopo Pesaro, Bishop of Paphos, in the Church of the
Frari; notable not only as a very skilful piece of sculpture, but for
the epitaph, singularly characteristic of the period, and confirmatory
of all that I have alleged against it:

 "James Pesaro, Bishop of Paphos, who conquered the Turks in war,
   himself in peace, transported from a noble family among the Venetians
   to a nobler among the angels, laid here, expects the noblest crown,
   which the just Judge shall give to him in that day. He lived the
   years of Plato. He died 24th March, 1547."[20]

The mingled classicism and carnal pride of this epitaph surely need no
comment. The crown is expected as a right from the justice of the judge,
and the nobility of the Venetian family is only a little lower than that
of the angels. The quaint childishness of the "Vixit annos Platonicos"
is also very notable.

§ LXXXI. The statue, however, did not long remain in this partially
recumbent attitude. Even the expression of peace became painful to the
frivolous and thoughtless Italians, and they required the portraiture to
be rendered in a manner that should induce no memory of death. The
statue rose up, and presented itself in front of the tomb, like an actor
upon a stage, surrounded now not merely, or not at all, by the Virtues,
but by allegorical figures of Fame and Victory, by genii and muses, by
personifications of humbled kingdoms and adoring nations, and by every
circumstance of pomp, and symbol of adulation, that flattery could
suggest, or insolence could claim.

§ LXXXII. As of the intermediate monumental type, so also of this, the
last and most gross, there are unfortunately many examples in our own
country; but the most wonderful, by far, are still at Venice. I shall,
however, particularize only two; the first, that of the Doge John
Pesaro, in the Frari. It is to be observed that we have passed over a
considerable interval of time; we are now in the latter half of the
seventeenth century; the progress of corruption has in the meantime been
incessant, and sculpture has here lost its taste and learning as well as
its feeling. The monument is a huge accumulation of theatrical scenery
in marble: four colossal negro caryatides, grinning and horrible, with
faces of black marble and white eyes, sustain the first story of it;
above this, two monsters, long-necked, half dog and half dragon, sustain
an ornamental sarcophagus, on the top of which the full-length statue of
the Doge in robes of state stands forward with its arms expanded, like
an actor courting applause, under a huge canopy of metal, like the roof
of a bed, painted crimson and gold; on each side of him are sitting
figures of genii, and unintelligible personifications gesticulating in
Roman armor; below, between the negro caryatides, are two ghastly
figures in bronze, half corpse, half skeleton, carrying tablets on which
is written the eulogium: but in large letters graven in gold, the
following words are the first and last that strike the eye; the first
two phrases, one on each side, on tablets in the lower story, the last
under the portrait statue above:

  VIXIT ANNOS LXX.            DEVIXIT ANNO MDCLIX.
             "HIC REVIXIT ANNO MDCLXIX."

We have here, at last, the horrible images of death in violent contrast
with the defiant monument, which pretends to bring the resurrection
down to earth, "Hic revixit;" and it seems impossible for false taste
and base feeling to sink lower. Yet even this monument is surpassed by
one in St. John and Paul.

§ LXXXIII. But before we pass to this, the last with which I shall
burden the reader's attention, let us for a moment, and that we may feel
the contrast more forcibly, return to a tomb of the early times.

In a dark niche in the outer wall of the outer corridor of St.
Mark's--not even in the church, observe, but in the atrium or porch of
it, and on the north side of the church,--is a solid sarcophagus of
white marble, raised only about two feet from the ground on four stunted
square pillars. Its lid is a mere slab of stone; on its extremities are
sculptured two crosses; in front of it are two rows of rude figures, the
uppermost representing Christ with the Apostles: the lower row is of six
figures only, alternately male and female, holding up their hands in the
usual attitude of benediction; the sixth is smaller than the rest, and
the midmost of the other five has a glory round its head. I cannot tell
the meaning of these figures, but between them are suspended censers
attached to crosses; a most beautiful symbolic expression of Christ's
mediatorial function. The whole is surrounded by a rude wreath of vine
leaves, proceeding out of the foot of a cross.

On the bar of marble which separates the two rows of figures are
inscribed these words:

  "Here lies the Lord Marin Morosini, Duke."

It is the tomb of the Doge Marino Morosini, who reigned from 1249 to
1252.

§ LXXXIV. From before this rude and solemn sepulchre let us pass to the
southern aisle of the church of St. John and Paul; and there, towering
from the pavement to the vaulting of the church, behold a mass of
marble, sixty or seventy feet in height, of mingled yellow and white,
the yellow carved into the form of an enormous curtain, with ropes,
fringes, and tassels, sustained by cherubs; in front of which, in the
now usual stage attitudes, advance the statues of the Doge Bertuccio
Valier, his son the Doge Silvester Falier, and his son's wife,
Elizabeth. The statues of the Doges, though mean and Polonius-like, are
partly redeemed by the Ducal robes; but that of the Dogaressa is a
consummation of grossness, vanity, and ugliness,--the figure of a large
and wrinkled woman, with elaborate curls in stiff projection round her
face, covered from her shoulders to her feet with ruffs, furs, lace,
jewels, and embroidery. Beneath and around are scattered Virtues,
Victories, Fames, genii,--the entire company of the monumental stage
assembled, as before a drop scene,--executed by various sculptors, and
deserving attentive study as exhibiting every condition of false taste
and feeble conception. The Victory in the centre is peculiarly
interesting; the lion by which she is accompanied, springing on a
dragon, has been intended to look terrible, but the incapable sculptor
could not conceive any form of dreadfulness, could not even make the
lion look angry. It looks only lachrymose; and its lifted forepaws,
there being no spring nor motion in its body, give it the appearance of
a dog begging. The inscriptions under the two principal statues are as
follows:

      "Bertucius Valier, Duke,
   Great in wisdom and eloquence,
  Greater in his Hellespontic victory,
    Greatest in the Prince his son.
       Died in the year 1658."

         "Elisabeth Quirina,
       The wife of Silvester,
    Distinguished by Roman virtue,
         By Venetian piety,
       And by the Ducal crown,
            Died 1708."

The writers of this age were generally anxious to make the world aware
that they understood the degrees of comparison, and a large number of
epitaphs are principally constructed with this object (compare, in the
Latin, that of the Bishop of Paphos, given above): but the latter of
these epitaphs is also interesting from its mention, in an age now
altogether given up to the pursuit of worldly honor, of that "Venetian
piety" which once truly distinguished the city from all others; and of
which some form and shadow, remaining still, served to point an epitaph,
and to feed more cunningly and speciously the pride which could not be
satiated with the sumptuousness of the sepulchre.

§ LXXXV. Thus far, then, of the second element of the Renaissance spirit,
the Pride of State; nor need we go farther to learn the reason of the
fall of Venice. She was already likened in her thoughts, and was
therefore to be likened in her ruin, to the Virgin of Babylon. The Pride
of State and the Pride of Knowledge were no new passions: the sentence
against them had gone forth from everlasting. "Thou saidst, I shall be a
lady for ever; so that thou didst not lay these things to thine heart ...
_Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee_; and thou hast
said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. Therefore shall evil
come upon thee ...; thy merchants from thy youth, they shall wander every
one to his quarter; none shall save thee."[21]

§ LXXXVI. III. PRIDE OF SYSTEM. I might have illustrated these evil
principles from a thousand other sources, but I have not time to pursue
the subject farther, and must pass to the third element above named, the
Pride of System. It need not detain us so long as either of the others,
for it is at once more palpable and less dangerous. The manner in which
the pride of the fifteenth century corrupted the sources of knowledge,
and diminished the majesty, while it multiplied the trappings, of state,
is in general little observed; but the reader is probably already well
and sufficiently aware of the curious tendency to formulization and
system which, under the name of philosophy, encumbered the minds of the
Renaissance schoolmen. As it was above stated, grammar became the first
of sciences; and whatever subject had to be treated, the first aim of
the philosopher was to subject its principles to a code of laws, in the
observation of which the merit of the speaker, thinker, or worker, in
or on that subject, was thereafter to consist; so that the whole mind of
the world was occupied by the exclusive study of Restraints. The sound
of the forging of fetters was heard from sea to sea. The doctors of all
the arts and sciences set themselves daily to the invention of new
varieties of cages and manacles; they themselves wore, instead of gowns,
a chain mail, whose purpose was not so much to avert the weapon of the
adversary as to restrain the motions of the wearer; and all the acts,
thoughts, and workings of mankind,--poetry, painting, architecture, and
philosophy,--were reduced by them merely to so many different forms of
fetter-dance.

§ LXXXVII. Now, I am very sure that no reader who has given any
attention to the former portions of this work, or the tendency of what
else I have written, more especially the last chapter of the "Seven
Lamps," will suppose me to underrate the importance, or dispute the
authority, of law. It has been necessary for me to allege these again
and again, nor can they ever be too often or too energetically alleged,
against the vast masses of men who now disturb or retard the advance of
civilization; heady and high-minded, despisers of discipline, and
refusers of correction. But law, so far as it can be reduced to form and
system, and is not written upon the heart,--as it is, in a Divine
loyalty, upon the hearts of the great hierarchies who serve and wait
about the throne of the Eternal Lawgiver,--this lower and formally
expressible law has, I say, two objects. It is either for the definition
and restraint of sin, or the guidance of simplicity; it either explains,
forbids, and punishes wickedness, or it guides the movements and actions
both of lifeless things and of the more simple and untaught among
responsible agents. And so long, therefore, as sin and foolishness are
in the world, so long it will be necessary for men to submit themselves
painfully to this lower law, in proportion to their need of being
corrected, and to the degree of childishness or simplicity by which they
approach more nearly to the condition of the unthinking and inanimate
things which are governed by law altogether; yet yielding, in the manner
of their submission to it, a singular lesson to the pride of
man,--being obedient more perfectly in proportion to their
greatness.[22] But, so far as men become good and wise, and rise above
the state of children, so far they become emancipated from this written
law, and invested with the perfect freedom which consists in the fulness
and joyfulness of compliance with a higher and unwritten law; a law so
universal, so subtle, so glorious, that nothing but the heart can keep
it.

§ LXXXVIII. Now pride opposes itself to the observance of this Divine
law in two opposite ways: either by brute resistance, which is the way
of the rabble and its leaders, denying or defying law altogether; or by
formal compliance, which is the way of the Pharisee, exalting himself
while he pretends to obedience, and making void the infinite and
spiritual commandment by the finite and lettered commandment. And it is
easy to know which law we are obeying: for any law which we magnify and
keep through pride, is always the law of the letter; but that which we
love and keep through humility, is the law of the Spirit: And the letter
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.

§ LXXXIX. In the appliance of this universal principle to what we have
at present in hand, it is to be noted, that all written or writable law
respecting the arts is for the childish and ignorant: that in the
beginning of teaching, it is possible to say that this or that must or
must not be done; and laws of color and shade may be taught, as laws of
harmony are to the young scholar in music. But the moment a man begins
to be anything deserving the name of an artist, all this teachable law
has become a matter of course with him; and if, thenceforth, he boast
himself anywise in the law, or pretend that he lives and works by it, it
is a sure sign that he is merely tithing cummin, and that there is no
true art nor religion in him. For the true artist has that inspiration
in him which is above all law, or rather, which is continually working
out such magnificent and perfect obedience to supreme law, as can in no
wise be rendered by line and rule. There are more laws perceived and
fulfilled in the single stroke of a great workman, than could be written
in a volume. His science is inexpressibly subtle, directly taught him by
his Maker, not in any wise communicable or imitable.[23] Neither can any
written or definitely observable laws enable us to do any great thing.
It is possible, by measuring and administering quantities of color, to
paint a room wall so that it shall not hurt the eye; but there are no
laws by observing which we can become Titians. It is possible so to
measure and administer syllables, as to construct harmonious verse; but
there are no laws by which we can write Iliads. Out of the poem or the
picture, once produced, men may elicit laws by the volume, and study
them with advantage, to the better understanding of the existing poem or
picture; but no more write or paint another, than by discovering laws of
vegetation they can make a tree to grow. And therefore, wheresoever we
find the system and formality of rules much dwelt upon, and spoken of as
anything else than a help for children, there we may be sure that noble
art is not even understood, far less reached. And thus it was with all
the common and public mind in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The
greater men, indeed, broke through the thorn hedges; and, though much
time was lost by the learned among them in writing Latin verses and
anagrams, and arranging the framework of quaint sonnets and dexterous
syllogisms, still they tore their way through the sapless thicket by
force of intellect or of piety; for it was not possible that, either in
literature or in painting, rules could be received by any strong mind,
so as materially to interfere with its originality: and the crabbed
discipline and exact scholarship became an advantage to the men who
could pass through and despise them; so that in spite of the rules of
the drama we had Shakspeare, and in spite of the rules of art we had
Tintoret,--both of them, to this day, doing perpetual violence to the
vulgar scholarship and dim-eyed proprieties of the multitude.

§ XC. But in architecture it was not so; for that was the art of the
multitude, and was affected by all their errors; and the great men who
entered its field, like Michael Angelo, found expression for all the
best part of their minds in sculpture, and made the architecture merely
its shell. So the simpletons and sophists had their way with it: and the
reader can have no conception of the inanities and puerilities of the
writers, who, with the help of Vitruvius, re-established its "five
orders," determined the proportions of each, and gave the various
recipes for sublimity and beauty, which have been thenceforward followed
to this day, but which may, I believe, in this age of perfect machinery,
be followed out still farther. If, indeed, there are only five perfect
forms of columns and architraves, and there be a fixed proportion to
each, it is certainly possible, with a little ingenuity, so to regulate
a stonecutting machine, as that it shall furnish pillars and friezes to
the size ordered, of any of the five orders, on the most perfect Greek
models, in any quantity; an epitome, also, of Vitruvius, may be made so
simple, as to enable any bricklayer to set them up at their proper
distances, and we may dispense with our architects altogether.

§ XCI. But if this be not so, and there be any truth in the faint
persuasion which still lurks in men's minds that architecture _is_ an
art, and that it requires some gleam of intellect to practise it, then
let the whole system of the orders and their proportions be cast out and
trampled down as the most vain, barbarous, and paltry deception that was
ever stamped on human prejudice; and let us understand this plain truth,
common to all work of man, that, if it be good work, it is not a copy,
nor anything done by rule, but a freshly and divinely imagined thing.
Five orders! There is not a side chapel in any Gothic cathedral but it
has fifty orders, the worst of them better than the best of the Greek
ones, and all new; and a single inventive human soul could create a
thousand orders in an hour.[24] And this would have been discovered even
in the worst times, but that, as I said, the greatest men of the age
found expression for their invention in the other arts, and the best of
those who devoted themselves to architecture were in great part occupied
in adapting the construction of buildings to new necessities, such as
those developed by the invention of gunpowder (introducing a totally new
and most interesting science of fortification, which directed the
ingenuity of Sanmicheli and many others from its proper channel), and
found interest of a meaner kind in the difficulties of reconciling the
obsolete architectural laws they had consented to revive, and the forms
of Roman architecture which they agreed to copy, with the requirements
of the daily life of the sixteenth century.

§ XCII. These, then, were the three principal directions in which the
Renaissance pride manifested itself, and its impulses were rendered
still more fatal by the entrance of another element, inevitably
associated with pride. For, as it is written, "He that trusteth in his
own heart is a fool," so also it is written, "The fool hath said in his
heart, There is no God;" and the self-adulation which influenced not
less the learning of the age than its luxury, led gradually to the
forgetfulness of all things but self, and to an infidelity only the more
fatal because it still retained the form and language of faith.

§ XCIII. IV. INFIDELITY. In noticing the more prominent forms in which
this faithlessness manifested itself, it is necessary to distinguish
justly between that which was the consequence of respect for Paganism,
and that which followed from the corruption of Catholicism. For as the
Roman architecture is not to be made answerable for the primal
corruption of the Gothic, so neither is the Roman philosophy to be made
answerable for the primal corruption of Christianity. Year after year,
as the history of the life of Christ sank back into the depths of time,
and became obscured by the misty atmosphere of the history of the
world,--as intermediate actions and incidents multiplied in number, and
countless changes in men's modes of life, and tones of thought, rendered
it more difficult for them to imagine the facts of distant time,--it
became daily, almost hourly, a greater effort for the faithful heart to
apprehend the entire veracity and vitality of the story of its Redeemer;
and more easy for the thoughtless and remiss to deceive themselves as to
the true character of the belief they had been taught to profess. And
this must have been the case, had the pastors of the Church never failed
in their watchfulness, and the Church itself never erred in its practice
or doctrine. But when every year that removed the truths of the Gospel
into deeper distance, added to them also some false or foolish
tradition; when wilful distortion was added to natural obscurity, and
the dimness of memory was disguised by the fruitfulness of fiction;
when, moreover, the enormous temporal power granted to the clergy
attracted into their ranks multitudes of men who, but for such
temptation, would not have pretended to the Christian name, so that
grievous wolves entered in among them, not sparing the flock; and when,
by the machinations of such men, and the remissness of others, the form
and administrations of Church doctrine and discipline had become little
more than a means of aggrandizing the power of the priesthood, it was
impossible any longer for men of thoughtfulness or piety to remain in an
unquestioning serenity of faith. The Church had become so mingled with
the world that its witness could no longer be received; and the
professing members of it, who were placed in circumstances such as to
enable them to become aware of its corruptions, and whom their interest
or their simplicity did not bribe or beguile into silence, gradually
separated themselves into two vast multitudes of adverse energy, one
tending to Reformation, and the other to Infidelity.

§ XCIV. Of these, the last stood, as it were, apart, to watch the course
of the struggle between Romanism and Protestantism; a struggle which,
however necessary, was attended with infinite calamity to the Church.
For, in the first place, the Protestant movement was, in reality, not
_reformation_ but _reanimation_. It poured new life into the Church, but
it did not form or define her anew. In some sort it rather broke down
her hedges, so that all they who passed by might pluck off her grapes.
The reformers speedily found that the enemy was never far behind the
sower of good seed; that an evil spirit might enter the ranks of
reformation as well as those of resistance; and that though the deadly
blight might be checked amidst the wheat, there was no hope of ever
ridding the wheat itself from the tares. New temptations were invented
by Satan wherewith to oppose the revived strength of Christianity: as
the Romanist, confiding in his human teachers, had ceased to try whether
they were teachers sent from God, so the Protestant, confiding in the
teaching of the Spirit, believed every spirit, and did not try the
spirits whether they were of God. And a thousand enthusiasms and
heresies speedily obscured the faith and divided the force of the
Reformation.

§ XCV. But the main evils rose out of the antagonism of the two great
parties; primarily, in the mere fact of the existence of an antagonism.
To the eyes of the unbeliever the Church of Christ, for the first time
since its foundation, bore the aspect of a house divided against itself.
Not that many forms of schism had not before arisen in it; but either
they had been obscure and silent, hidden among the shadows of the Alps
and the marshes of the Rhine; or they had been outbreaks of visible and
unmistakable error, cast off by the Church, rootless, and speedily
withering away, while, with much that was erring and criminal, she still
retained within her the pillar and ground of the truth. But here was at
last a schism in which truth and authority were at issue. The body that
was cast off withered away no longer. It stretched out its boughs to the
sea and its branches to the river, and it was the ancient trunk that
gave signs of decrepitude. On one side stood the reanimated faith, in
its right hand the book open, and its left hand lifted up to heaven,
appealing for its proof to the Word of the Testimony and the power of
the Holy Ghost. On the other stood, or seemed to stand, all beloved
custom and believed tradition; all that for fifteen hundred years had
been closest to the hearts of men, or most precious for their help.
Long-trusted legend; long-reverenced power; long-practised discipline;
faiths that had ruled the destiny, and sealed the departure, of souls
that could not be told or numbered for multitude; prayers, that from the
lips of the fathers to those of the children had distilled like sweet
waterfalls, sounding through the silence of ages, breaking themselves
into heavenly dew to return upon the pastures of the wilderness; hopes,
that had set the face as a flint in the torture, and the sword as a
flame in the battle, that had pointed the purposes and ministered the
strength of life, brightened the last glances and shaped the last
syllables of death; charities, that had bound together the brotherhoods
of the mountain and the desert, and had woven chains of pitying or
aspiring communion between this world and the unfathomable beneath and
above; and, more than these, the spirits of all the innumerable,
undoubting, dead, beckoning to the one way by which they had been
content to follow the things that belonged unto their peace;--these all
stood on the other side: and the choice must have been a bitter one,
even at the best; but it was rendered tenfold more bitter by the
natural, but most sinful animosity of the two divisions of the Church
against each other.

§ XCVI. On one side this animosity was, of course, inevitable. The
Romanist party, though still including many Christian men, necessarily
included, also, all the worst of those who called themselves Christians.
In the fact of its refusing correction, it stood confessed as the Church
of the unholy; and, while it still counted among its adherents many of
the simple and believing,--men unacquainted with the corruption of the
body to which they belonged, or incapable of accepting any form of
doctrine but that which they had been taught from their youth,--it
gathered together with them whatever was carnal and sensual in
priesthood or in people, all the lovers of power in the one, and of ease
in the other. And the rage of these men was, of course, unlimited
against those who either disputed their authority, reprehended their
manner of life, or cast suspicion upon the popular methods of lulling
the conscience in the lifetime, or purchasing salvation on the
death-bed.

§ XCVII. Besides this, the reassertion and defence of various tenets
which before had been little more than floating errors in the popular
mind, but which, definitely attacked by Protestantism, it became
necessary to fasten down with a band of iron and brass, gave a form at
once more rigid, and less rational, to the whole body of Romanist
Divinity. Multitudes of minds which in other ages might have brought
honor and strength to the Church, preaching the more vital truths which
it still retained, were now occupied in pleading for arraigned
falsehoods, or magnifying disused frivolities; and it can hardly be
doubted by any candid observer, that the nascent or latent errors which
God pardoned in times of ignorance, became unpardonable when they were
formally defined and defended; that fallacies which were forgiven to the
enthusiasm of a multitude, were avenged upon the stubbornness of a
Council; that, above all, the great invention of the age, which rendered
God's word accessible to every man, left all sins against its light
incapable of excuse or expiation; and that from the moment when Rome set
herself in direct opposition to the Bible, the judgment was pronounced
upon her, which made her the scorn and the prey of her own children, and
cast her down from the throne where she had magnified herself against
heaven, so low, that at last the unimaginable scene of the Bethlehem
humiliation was mocked in the temples of Christianity. Judea had seen
her God laid in the manger of the beasts of burden; it was for
Christendom to stable the beasts of burden by the altar of her God.

§ XCVIII. Nor, on the other hand, was the opposition of Protestantism to
the Papacy less injurious to itself. That opposition was, for the most
part, intemperate, undistinguishing, and incautious. It could indeed
hardly be otherwise. Fresh bleeding from the sword of Rome, and still
trembling at her anathema, the reformed churches were little likely to
remember any of her benefits, or to regard any of her teaching. Forced
by the Romanist contumely into habits of irreverence, by the Romanist
fallacies into habits of disbelief, the self-trusting, rashly-reasoning
spirit gained ground among them daily. Sect branched out of sect,
presumption rose over presumption; the miracles of the early Church
were denied and its martyrs forgotten, though their power and palm were
claimed by the members of every persecuted sect; pride, malice, wrath,
love of change, masked themselves under the thirst for truth, and
mingled with the just resentment of deception, so that it became
impossible even for the best and truest men to know the plague of their
own hearts; while avarice and impiety openly transformed reformation
into robbery, and reproof into sacrilege. Ignorance could as easily lead
the foes of the Church, as lull her slumber; men who would once have
been the unquestioning recipients, were now the shameless inventors of
absurd or perilous superstitions; they who were of the temper that
walketh in darkness, gained little by having discovered their guides to
be blind; and the simplicity of the faith, ill understood and
contumaciously alleged, became an excuse for the rejection of the
highest arts and most tried wisdom of mankind: while the learned
infidel, standing aloof, drew his own conclusions, both from the rancor
of the antagonists, and from their errors; believed each in all that he
alleged against the other; and smiled with superior humanity, as he
watched the winds of the Alps drift the ashes of Jerome, and the dust of
England drink the blood of King Charles.

§ XCIX. Now all this evil was, of course, entirely independent of the
renewal of the study of Pagan writers. But that renewal found the faith
of Christendom already weakened and divided; and therefore it was itself
productive of an effect tenfold greater than could have been apprehended
from it at another time. It acted first, as before noticed, in leading
the attention of all men to words instead of things; for it was
discovered that the language of the middle ages had been corrupt, and
the primal object of every scholar became now to purify his style. To
this study of words, that of forms being added, both as of matters of
the first importance, half the intellect of the age was at once absorbed
in the base sciences of grammar, logic, and rhetoric; studies utterly
unworthy of the serious labor of men, and necessarily rendering those
employed upon them incapable of high thoughts or noble emotion. Of the
debasing tendency of philology, no proof is needed beyond once reading
a grammarian's notes on a great poet: logic is unnecessary for men who
can reason; and about as useful to those who cannot, as a machine for
forcing one foot in due succession before the other would be to a man
who could not walk: while the study of rhetoric is exclusively one for
men who desire to deceive or be deceived; he who has the truth at his
heart need never fear the want of persuasion on his tongue, or, if he
fear it, it is because the base rhetoric of dishonesty keeps the truth
from being heard.

§ C. The study of these sciences, therefore, naturally made men shallow
and dishonest in general; but it had a peculiarly fatal effect with
respect to religion, in the view which men took of the Bible. Christ's
teaching was discovered not to be rhetorical, St. Paul's preaching not
to be logical, and the Greek of the New Testament not to be grammatical.
The stern truth, the profound pathos, the impatient period, leaping from
point to point and leaving the intervals for the hearer to fill, the
comparatively Hebraized and unelaborate idiom, had little in them of
attraction for the students of phrase and syllogism; and the chief
knowledge of the age became one of the chief stumbling-blocks to its
religion.

§ CI. But it was not the grammarian and logician alone who was thus
retarded or perverted; in them there had been small loss. The men who
could truly appreciate the higher excellences of the classics were
carried away by a current of enthusiasm which withdrew them from every
other study. Christianity was still professed as a matter of form, but
neither the Bible nor the writings of the Fathers had time left for
their perusal, still less heart left for their acceptance. The human
mind is not capable of more than a certain amount of admiration or
reverence, and that which was given to Horace was withdrawn from David.
Religion is, of all subjects, that which will least endure a second
place in the heart or thoughts, and a languid and occasional study of it
was sure to lead to error or infidelity. On the other hand, what was
heartily admired and unceasingly contemplated was soon brought nigh to
being believed; and the systems of Pagan mythology began gradually to
assume the places in the human mind from which the unwatched
Christianity was wasting. Men did not indeed openly sacrifice to
Jupiter, or build silver shrines for Diana, but the ideas of Paganism
nevertheless became thoroughly vital and present with them at all times;
and it did not matter in the least, as far as respected the power of
true religion, whether the Pagan image was believed in or not, so long
as it entirely occupied the thoughts. The scholar of the sixteenth
century, if he saw the lightning shining from the east unto the west,
thought forthwith of Jupiter, not of the coming of the Son of Man; if he
saw the moon walking in brightness, he thought of Diana, not of the
throne which was to be established for ever as a faithful witness in
heaven; and though his heart was but secretly enticed, yet thus he
denied the God that is above.[25]

And, indeed, this double creed, of Christianity confessed and Paganism
beloved, was worse than Paganism itself, inasmuch as it refused
effective and practical belief altogether. It would have been better to
have worshipped Diana and Jupiter at once, than to have gone on through
the whole of life naming one God, imagining another, and dreading none.
Better, a thousandfold, to have been "a Pagan suckled in some creed
outworn," than to have stood by the great sea of Eternity and seen no
God walking on its waves, no heavenly world on its horizon.

§ CII. This fatal result of an enthusiasm for classical literature was
hastened and heightened by the misdirection of the powers of art. The
imagination of the age was actively set to realize these objects of
Pagan belief; and all the most exalted faculties of man, which, up to
that period, had been employed in the service of Faith, were now
transferred to the service of Fiction. The invention which had formerly
been both sanctified and strengthened by laboring under the command of
settled intention, and on the ground of assured belief, had now the
reins laid upon its neck by passion, and all ground of fact cut from
beneath its feet; and the imagination which formerly had helped men to
apprehend the truth, now tempted them to believe a falsehood. The
faculties themselves wasted away in their own treason; one by one they
fell in the potter's field; and the Raphael who seemed sent and inspired
from heaven that he might paint Apostles and Prophets, sank at once into
powerlessness at the feet of Apollo and the Muses.

§ CIII. But this was not all. The habit of using the greatest gifts of
imagination upon fictitious subjects, of course destroyed the honor and
value of the same imagination used in the cause of truth. Exactly in the
proportion in which Jupiters and Mercuries were embodied and believed,
in that proportion Virgins and Angels were disembodied and disbelieved.
The images summoned by art began gradually to assume one average value
in the spectator's mind; and incidents from the Iliad and from the
Exodus to come within the same degrees of credibility. And, farther,
while the powers of the imagination were becoming daily more and more
languid, because unsupported by faith, the manual skill and science of
the artist were continually on the increase. When these had reached a
certain point, they began to be the principal things considered in the
picture, and its story or scene to be thought of only as a theme for
their manifestation. Observe the difference. In old times, men used
their powers of painting to show the objects of faith; in later times,
they used the objects of faith that they might show their powers of
painting. The distinction is enormous, the difference incalculable as
irreconcilable. And thus, the more skilful the artist, the less his
subject was regarded; and the hearts of men hardened as their handling
softened, until they reached a point when sacred, profane, or sensual
subjects were employed, with absolute indifference, for the display of
color and execution; and gradually the mind of Europe congealed into
that state of utter apathy,--inconceivable, unless it had been
witnessed, and unpardonable, unless by us, who have been infected by
it,--which permits us to place the Madonna and the Aphrodite side by
side in our galleries, and to pass, with the same unmoved inquiry into
the manner of their handling, from a Bacchanal to a Nativity.

Now all this evil, observe, would have been merely the necessary and
natural operation of an enthusiasm for the classics, and of a delight in
the mere science of the artist, on the most virtuous mind. But this
operation took place upon minds enervated by luxury, and which were
tempted, at the very same period, to forgetfulness or denial of all
religious principle by their own basest instincts. The faith which had
been undermined by the genius of Pagans, was overthrown by the crimes of
Christians; and the ruin which was begun by scholarship, was completed
by sensuality. The characters of the heathen divinities were as suitable
to the manners of the time as their forms were agreeable to its taste;
and Paganism again became, in effect, the religion of Europe. That is to
say, the civilized world is at this moment, collectively, just as Pagan
as it was in the second century; a small body of believers being now, as
they were then, representative of the Church of Christ in the midst of
the faithless: but there is just this difference, and this very fatal
one, between the second and nineteenth centuries, that the Pagans are
nominally and fashionably Christians, and that there is every
conceivable variety and shade of belief between the two; so that not
only is it most difficult theoretically to mark the point where
hesitating trust and failing practice change into definite infidelity,
but it has become a point of politeness not to inquire too deeply into
our neighbor's religious opinions; and, so that no one be offended by
violent breach of external forms, to waive any close examination into
the tenets of faith. The fact is, we distrust each other and ourselves
so much, that we dare not press this matter; we know that if, on any
occasion of general intercourse, we turn to our next neighbor, and put
to him some searching or testing question, we shall, in nine cases out
of ten, discover him to be only a Christian in his own way, and as far
as he thinks proper, and that he doubts of many things which we
ourselves do not believe strongly enough to hear doubted without danger.
What is in reality cowardice and faithlessness, we call charity; and
consider it the part of benevolence sometimes to forgive men's evil
practice for the sake of their accurate faith, and sometimes to forgive
their confessed heresy for the sake of their admirable practice. And
under this shelter of charity, humility, and faintheartedness, the
world, unquestioned by others or by itself, mingles with and overwhelms
the small body of Christians, legislates for them, moralizes for them,
reasons for them; and, though itself of course greatly and beneficently
influenced by the association, and held much in check by its pretence to
Christianity, yet undermines, in nearly the same degree, the sincerity
and practical power of Christianity itself, until at last, in the very
institutions of which the administration may be considered as the
principal test of the genuineness of national religion, those devoted to
education, the Pagan system is completely triumphant; and the entire
body of the so-called Christian world has established a system of
instruction for its youth, wherein neither the history of Christ's
Church, nor the language of God's law, is considered a study of the
smallest importance; wherein, of all subjects of human inquiry, his own
religion is the one in which a youth's ignorance is most easily
forgiven;[26] and in which it is held a light matter that he should be
daily guilty of lying, or debauchery, or of blasphemy, so only that he
write Latin verses accurately, and with speed.

I believe that in few years more we shall wake from all these errors in
astonishment, as from evil dreams; having been preserved, in the midst
of their madness, by those hidden roots of active and earnest
Christianity which God's grace has bound in the English nation with iron
and brass. But in the Venetian, those roots themselves had withered;
and, from the palace of their ancient religion, their pride cast them
forth hopelessly to the pasture of the brute. From pride to infidelity,
from infidelity to the unscrupulous and insatiable pursuit of pleasure,
and from this to irremediable degradation, the transitions were swift,
like the falling of a star. The great palaces of the haughtiest nobles
of Venice were stayed, before they had risen far above their
foundations, by the blast of a penal poverty; and the wild grass, on the
unfinished fragments of their mighty shafts, waves at the tide-mark
where the power of the godless people first heard the "Hitherto shalt
thou come." And the regeneration in which they had so vainly
trusted,--the new birth and clear dawning, as they thought it, of all
art, all knowledge, and all hope,--became to them as that dawn which
Ezekiel saw on the hills of Israel: "Behold the day; behold, it is come.
The rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded, violence is risen up into a
rod of wickedness. None of them shall remain, nor of their multitude;
let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn, for wrath is upon all
the multitude thereof."


FOOTNOTES:

  [8] Or, more briefly, science has to do with facts, art with
    phenomena. To science, phenomena are of use only as they lead to
    facts; and to art facts are of use only as they lead to phenomena. I
    use the word "art" here with reference to the fine arts only, for
    the lower arts of mechanical production I should reserve the word
    "manufacture."

  [9] Tintoret.

  [10] St. Bernard.

  [11] Society always has a destructive influence upon an artist:
    first by its sympathy with his meanest powers; secondly, by its
    chilling want of understanding of his greatest; and, thirdly, by its
    vain occupation of his time and thoughts. Of course a painter of men
    must be _among_ men; but it ought to be as a watcher, not as a
    companion.

  [12] I intended in this place to have introduced some special
    consideration of the science of anatomy, which I believe to have
    been in great part the cause of the decline of modern art; but I
    have been anticipated by a writer better able to treat the subject.
    I have only glanced at his book; and there is something in the
    spirit of it which I do not like, and some parts of it are assuredly
    wrong; but, respecting anatomy, it seems to me to settle the
    question indisputably, more especially as being written by a master
    of the science. I quote two passages, and must refer the reader to
    the sequel.

    "_The scientific men of forty centuries_ have failed to describe so
    accurately, so beautifully, so artistically, as Homer did, the
    organic elements constituting the emblems of youth and beauty, and
    the waste and decay which these sustain by time and age. All these
    Homer understood better, and has described more truthfully than the
    scientific men of forty centuries....

    "Before I approach this question, permit me to make a few remarks on
    the pre-historic period of Greece; that era which seems to have
    produced nearly all the great men.

    "On looking attentively at the statues within my observation, I
    cannot find the slightest foundation for the assertion that their
    sculptors must have dissected the human frame and been well
    acquainted with the human anatomy. They, like Homer, had discovered
    Nature's secret, and bestowed their whole attention on the exterior.
    The exterior they read profoundly, and studied deeply--the _living
    exterior_ and the _dead_. Above all, they avoided displaying the
    dead and dissected interior, through the exterior. They had
    discovered that the interior presents hideous shapes, but not forms.
    Men during the philosophic era of Greece saw all this, each reading
    the antique to the best of his abilities. The man of genius
    rediscovered the canon of the ancient masters, and wrought on its
    principles. The greater number, as now, unequal to this step, merely
    imitated and copied those who preceded them."--_Great Artists and
    Great Anatomists_. By R. Knox, M.D. London, Van Voorst, 1852.

    Respecting the value of literary knowledge in general as regards
    art, the reader will also do well to meditate on the following
    sentences from Hallam's "Literature of Europe;" remembering at the
    same time what I have above said, that "the root of all great art in
    Europe is struck in the thirteenth century," and that the great time
    is from 1250 to 1350:

    "In Germany the tenth century, Leibnitz declares, was a golden age
    of learning compared with the thirteenth."

    "The writers of the thirteenth century display an incredible
    ignorance, not only of pure idiom, but of common grammatical rules."

    The fourteenth century was "not superior to the thirteenth in
    learning.... We may justly praise Richard of Bury for his zeal in
    collecting books. But his erudition appears crude, his style
    indifferent, and his thoughts superficial."

    I doubt the superficialness of the _thoughts_: at all events, this
    is not a character of the time, though it may be of the writer; for
    this would affect art more even than literature.

  [13] Churton's "Early English Church." London, 1840.

  [14] "Quibus nulla macula inest quæ non cernatur. Ita viri nobilitate
    præditi eam vitam peragant cui nulla nota possit inviri." The first
    sentence is literally, "in which there is no spot that may not be
    seen." But I imagine the writer meant it as I have put it in the
    text, else his comparison does not hold.

  [15] Observe, however, that the magnitude spoken of here and in the
    following passages, is the finished and polished magnitude sought
    for the sake of pomp: not the rough magnitude sought for the sake of
    sublimity: respecting which see the "Seven Lamps," chap. iii. § 5,
    6, and 8.

  [16] Can Grande died in 1329: we can hardly allow more than five
    years for the erection of his tomb.

  [17] Vol. I. Chap. I.

  [18] Sansovino, lib. xiii.

  [19] Tentori, vi. 142, i. 157.

  [20] "Jacobus Pisaurius Paphi Episcopus qui Turcos bello, se ipsum
    pace vincebat, ex nobili inter Venetas, ad nobiliorem inter Angelos
    familiam delatus, nobilissimam in illa die Coronam justo Judice
    reddente, hic situs expectat Vixit annos Platonicos. Obijt MDXLVII.
    IX. Kal. Aprilis."

  [21] Isaiah xlvii. 7, 10, 11, 15.

  [22] Compare "Seven Lamps," chap. vii. § 3.

  [23] See the farther remarks on Inspiration, in the fourth chapter.

  [24] That is to say, orders separated by such distinctions as the old
    Greek ones: considered with reference to the bearing power of the
    capital, all orders may be referred to two, as long ago stated; just
    as trees may be referred to the two great classes, monocotyledonous
    and dicotyledonous.

  [25] Job xxi: 26-28; Psalm lxxxix. 37.

  [26] I shall not forget the impression made upon me at Oxford, when,
    going up for my degree, and mentioning to one of the authorities
    that I had not had time enough to read the Epistles properly, I was
    told, that "the Epistles were separate sciences, and I need not
    trouble myself about them."

    The reader will find some farther notes on this subject in Appendix
    7, "Modern Education."




CHAPTER III.

GROTESQUE RENAISSANCE.


§ I. In the close of the last chapter it was noted that the phases of
transition in the moral temper of the falling Venetians, during their
fall, were from pride to infidelity, and from infidelity to the
unscrupulous _pursuit of pleasure_. During the last years of the
existence of the state, the minds both of the nobility and the people
seem to have been set simply upon the attainment of the means of
self-indulgence. There was not strength enough in them to be proud, nor
forethought enough to be ambitious. One by one the possessions of the
state were abandoned to its enemies; one by one the channels of its
trade were forsaken by its own languor, or occupied and closed against
it by its more energetic rivals; and the time, the resources, and the
thoughts of the nation were exclusively occupied in the invention of
such fantastic and costly pleasures as might best amuse their apathy,
lull their remorse, or disguise their ruin.

§ II. The architecture raised at Venice during this period is amongst
the worst and basest ever built by the hands of men, being especially
distinguished by a spirit of brutal mockery and insolent jest, which,
exhausting itself in deformed and monstrous sculpture, can sometimes be
hardly otherwise defined than as the perpetuation in stone of the
ribaldries of drunkenness. On such a period, and on such work, it is
painful to dwell, and I had not originally intended to do so; but I
found that the entire spirit of the Renaissance could not be
comprehended unless it was followed to its consummation; and that there
were many most interesting questions arising out of the study of this
particular spirit of jesting, with reference to which I have called it
the _Grotesque_ Renaissance. For it is not this period alone which is
distinguished by such a spirit. There is jest--perpetual, careless, and
not unfrequently obscene--in the most noble work of the Gothic periods;
and it becomes, therefore, of the greatest possible importance to
examine into the nature and essence of the Grotesque itself, and to
ascertain in what respect it is that the jesting of art in its highest
flight, differs from its jesting in its utmost degradation.

§ III. The place where we may best commence our inquiry is one renowned
in the history of Venice, the space of ground before the Church of Santa
Maria Formosa; a spot which, after the Rialto and St. Mark's Place,
ought to possess a peculiar interest in the mind of the traveller, in
consequence of its connexion with the most touching and true legend of
the Brides of Venice. That legend is related at length in every Venetian
history, and, finally, has been told by the poet Rogers, in a way which
renders it impossible for any one to tell it after him. I have only,
therefore, to remind the reader that the capture of the brides took
place in the cathedral church, St. Pietro di Castello; and that this of
Santa Maria Formosa is connected with the tale, only because it was
yearly visited with prayers by the Venetian maidens, on the anniversary
of their ancestors' deliverance. For that deliverance, their thanks were
to be rendered to the Virgin; and there was no church then dedicated to
the Virgin, in Venice, except this.[27]

Neither of the cathedral church, nor of this dedicated to St. Mary the
Beautiful, is one stone left upon another. But, from that which has been
raised on the site of the latter, we may receive a most important
lesson, introductory to our immediate subject, if first we glance back
to the traditional history of the church which has been destroyed.

§ IV. No more honorable epithet than "traditional" can be attached to
what is recorded concerning it, yet I should grieve to lose the legend
of its first erection. The Bishop of Uderzo, driven by the Lombards from
his Bishopric, as he was praying, beheld in a vision the Virgin Mother,
who ordered him to found a church in her honor, in the place where he
should see a white cloud rest. And when he went out, the white cloud
went before him; and on the place where it rested he built a church, and
it was called the Church of St. Mary the Beautiful, from the loveliness
of the form in which she had appeared in the vision.[28]

The first church stood only for about two centuries. It was rebuilt in
864, and enriched with various relics some fifty years later; relics
belonging principally to St. Nicodemus, and much lamented when they and
the church were together destroyed by fire in 1105.

It was then rebuilt in "magnifica forma," much resembling, according to
Corner, the architecture of the chancel of St. Mark;[29] but the
information which I find in various writers, as to the period at which
it was reduced to its present condition, is both sparing and
contradictory.

§ V. Thus, by Corner, we are told that this church, resembling St.
Mark's, "remained untouched for more than four centuries," until, in
1689, it was thrown down by an earthquake, and restored by the piety of
a rich merchant, Turrin Toroni, "in ornatissima forma;" and that, for
the greater beauty of the renewed church, it had added to it two façades
of marble. With this information that of the Padre dell' Oratoria
agrees, only he gives the date of the earlier rebuilding of the church
in 1175, and ascribes it to an architect of the name of Barbetta. But
Quadri, in his usually accurate little guide, tells us that this
Barbetta rebuilt the church in the fourteenth century; and that of the
two façades, so much admired by Corner, one is of the sixteenth century,
and its architect unknown; and the rest of the church is of the
seventeenth, "in the style of Sansovino."

§ VI. There is no occasion to examine, or endeavor to reconcile, these
conflicting accounts. All that is necessary for the reader to know is,
that every vestige of the church in which the ceremony took place was
destroyed _at least_ as early as 1689; and that the ceremony itself,
having been abolished in the close of the fourteenth century, is only to
be conceived as taking place in that more ancient church, resembling St.
Mark's, which, even according to Quadri, existed until that period. I
would, therefore, endeavor to fix the reader's mind, for a moment, on
the contrast between the former and latter aspect of this plot of
ground; the former, when it had its Byzantine church, and its yearly
procession of the Doge and the Brides; and the latter, when it has its
Renaissance church "in the style of Sansovino," and its yearly honoring
is done away.

§ VII. And, first, let us consider for a little the significance and
nobleness of that early custom of the Venetians, which brought about the
attack and the rescue of the year 943: that there should be but one
marriage day for the nobles of the whole nation,[30] so that all might
rejoice together; and that the sympathy might be full, not only of the
families who that year beheld the alliance of their children, and prayed
for them in one crowd, weeping before the altar, but of all the families
of the state, who saw, in the day which brought happiness to others, the
anniversary of their own. Imagine the strong bond of brotherhood thus
sanctified among them, and consider also the effect on the minds of the
youth of the state; the greater deliberation and openness necessarily
given to the contemplation of marriage, to which all the people were
solemnly to bear testimony; the more lofty and unselfish tone which it
would give to all their thoughts. It was the exact contrary of stolen
marriage. It was marriage to which God and man were taken for witnesses,
and every eye was invoked for its glance, and every tongue for its
prayers.[31]

§ VIII. Later historians have delighted themselves in dwelling on the
pageantry of the marriage day itself, but I do not find that they have
authority for the splendor of their descriptions. I cannot find a word
in the older Chronicles about the jewels or dress of the brides, and I
believe the ceremony to have been more quiet and homely than is usually
supposed. The only sentence which gives color to the usual accounts of
it is one of Sansovino's, in which he says that the magnificent dress of
the brides in his day was founded "on ancient custom."[32] However this
may have been, the circumstances of the rite were otherwise very simple.
Each maiden brought her dowry with her in a small "cassetta," or chest;
they went first to the cathedral, and waited for the youths, who having
come, they heard mass together, and the bishop preached to them and
blessed them: and so each bridegroom took his bride and her dowry and
bore her home.

§ IX. It seems that the alarm given by the attack of the pirates put an
end to the custom of fixing one day for all marriages: but the main
objects of the institution were still attained by the perfect publicity
given to the marriages of all the noble families; the bridegroom
standing in the Court of the Ducal Palace to receive congratulations on
his betrothal, and the whole body of the nobility attending the
nuptials, and rejoicing, "as at some personal good fortune; since, by
the constitution of the state, they are for ever incorporated together,
as if of one and the same family."[33] But the festival of the 2nd of
February, after the year 943, seems to have been observed only in memory
of the deliverance of the brides, and no longer set apart for public
nuptials.

§ X. There is much difficulty in reconciling the various accounts, or
distinguishing the inaccurate ones, of the manner of keeping this
memorable festival. I shall first give Sansovino's, which is the popular
one, and then note the points of importance in the counter-statements.
Sansovino says that the success of the pursuit of the pirates was owing
to the ready help and hard fighting of the men of the district of Sta.
Maria Formosa, for the most part trunkmakers; and that they, having been
presented after the victory to the Doge and the Senate, were told to ask
some favor for their reward. "The good men then said that they desired
the Prince, with his wife and the Signory, to visit every year the
church of their district, on the day of its feast. And the Prince asking
them, 'Suppose it should rain?' they answered, 'We will give you hats to
cover you; and if you are thirsty, we will give you to drink.' Whence is
it that the Vicar, in the name of the people, presents to the Doge, on
his visit, two flasks of malvoisie[34] and two oranges; and presents to
him two gilded hats, bearing the arms of the Pope, of the Prince, and of
the Vicar. And thus was instituted the Feast of the Maries, which was
called noble and famous because the people from all round came together
to behold it. And it was celebrated in this manner:...." The account
which follows is somewhat prolix; but its substance is, briefly, that
twelve maidens were elected, two for each division of the city; and that
it was decided by lot which contrade, or quarters of the town, should
provide them with dresses. This was done at enormous expense, one
contrada contending with another, and even the jewels of the treasury of
St. Mark being lent for the occasion to the "Maries," as the twelve
damsels were called. They, being thus dressed with gold, and silver, and
jewels, went in their galley to St. Mark's for the Doge, who joined them
with the Signory, and went first to San Pietro di Castello to hear mass
on St. Mark's day, the 31st of January, and to Santa Maria Formosa on
the 2nd of February, the intermediate day being spent in passing in
procession through the streets of the city; "and sometimes there arose
quarrels about the places they should pass through, for every one wanted
them to pass by his house."

§ XI. Nearly the same account is given by Corner, who, however, does not
say anything about the hats or the malvoisie. These, however, we find
again in the Matricola de' Casseleri, which, of course, sets the
services of the trunkmakers and the privileges obtained by them in the
most brilliant light. The quaintness of the old Venetian is hardly to be
rendered into English. "And you must know that the said trunkmakers were
the men who were the cause of such victory, and of taking the galley,
and of cutting all the Triestines to pieces, because, at that time, they
were valiant men and well in order. The which victory was on the 2nd
February, on the day of the Madonna of candles. And at the request and
entreaties of the said trunkmakers, it was decreed that the Doge, every
year, as long as Venice shall endure, should go on the eve of the said
feast to vespers in the said church, with the Signory. And be it noted,
that the vicar is obliged to give to the Doge two flasks of malvoisie,
with two oranges besides. And so it is observed, and will be observed
always." The reader must observe the continual confusion between St.
Mark's day the 31st of January, and Candlemas the 2nd of February. The
fact appears to be, that the marriage day in the old republic was St.
Mark's day, and the recovery of the brides was the same day at evening;
so that, as we are told by Sansovino, the commemorative festival began
on that day, but it was continued to the day of the Purification, that
especial thanks might be rendered to the Virgin; and, the visit to Sta.
Maria Formosa being the most important ceremony of the whole festival,
the old chroniclers, and even Sansovino, got confused, and asserted the
victory itself to have taken place on the day appointed for that
pilgrimage.

§ XII. I doubt not that the reader who is acquainted with the beautiful
lines of Rogers is as much grieved as I am at the interference of the
"casket-makers" with the achievement which the poet ascribes to the
bridegrooms alone; an interference quite as inopportune as that of old
Le Balafré with the victory of his nephew, in the unsatisfactory
conclusion of "Quentin Durward." I am afraid I cannot get the
casket-makers quite out of the way; but it may gratify some of my
readers to know that a chronicle of the year 1378, quoted by
Galliciolli, denies the agency of the people of Sta. Maria Formosa
altogether, in these terms: "Some say that the people of Sta. M. Formosa
were those who recovered the _spoil_ ("predra;" I may notice, in
passing, that most of the old chroniclers appear to consider the
recovery of the _caskets_ rather more a subject of congratulation than
that of the brides), and that, for their reward, they asked the Doge and
Signory to visit Sta. M. Formosa; but _this is false_. The going to Sta.
M. Formosa was because the thing had succeeded on that day, and because
this was then the only church in Venice in honor of the Virgin." But
here is again the mistake about the day itself; and besides if we get
rid altogether of the trunkmakers, how are we to account for the
ceremony of the oranges and hats, of which the accounts seem authentic?
If, however, the reader likes to substitute "carpenters" or
"house-builders" for casket-makers, he may do so with great reason (vide
Galliciolli, lib. ii. § 1758); but I fear that one or the other body of
tradesmen must be allowed to have had no small share in the honor of the
victory.

§ XIII. But whatever doubt attaches to the particular circumstances of
its origin, there is none respecting the splendor of the festival
itself, as it was celebrated for four centuries afterwards. We find that
each contrada spent from 800 to 1000 zecchins in the dress of the
"Maries" entrusted to it; but I cannot find among how many contrade the
twelve Maries were divided; it is also to be supposed that most of the
accounts given refer to the later periods of the celebration of the
festival. In the beginning of the eleventh century, the good Doge Pietro
Orseolo II. left in his will the third of his entire fortune "per la
Festa della Marie;" and, in the fourteenth century, so many people came
from the rest of Italy to see it, that special police regulations were
made for it, and the Council of Ten were twice summoned before it took
place.[35] The expense lavished upon it seems to have increased till the
year 1379, when all the resources of the republic were required for the
terrible war of Chiozza, and all festivity was for that time put an end
to. The issue of the war left the Venetians with neither the power nor
the disposition to restore the festival on its ancient scale, and they
seem to have been ashamed to exhibit it in reduced splendor. It was
entirely abolished.

§ XIV. As if to do away even with its memory, every feature of the
surrounding scene which was associated with that festival has been in
succeeding ages destroyed. With one solitary exception,[36] there is not
a house left in the whole Piazza of Santa Maria Formosa from whose
windows the festa of the Maries has ever been seen: of the church in
which they worshipped, not a stone is left, even the form of the ground
and direction of the neighboring canals are changed; and there is now
but one landmark to guide the steps of the traveller to the place where
the white cloud rested, and the shrine was built to St. Mary the
Beautiful. Yet the spot is still worth his pilgrimage, for he may
receive a lesson upon it, though a painful one. Let him first fill his
mind with the fair images of the ancient festival, and then seek that
landmark the tower of the modern church, built upon the place where the
daughters of Venice knelt yearly with her noblest lords; and let him
look at the head that is carved on the base of the tower,[37] still
dedicated to St. Mary the Beautiful.

§ XV. A head,--huge, inhuman, and monstrous,--leering in bestial
degradation, too foul to be either pictured or described, or to be
beheld for more than an instant: yet let it be endured for that instant;
for in that head is embodied the type of the evil spirit to which Venice
was abandoned in the fourth period of her decline; and it is well that
we should see and feel the full horror of it on this spot, and know what
pestilence it was that came and breathed upon her beauty, until it
melted away like the white cloud from the ancient fields of Santa Maria
Formosa.

§ XVI. This head is one of many hundreds which disgrace the latest
buildings of the city, all more or less agreeing in their expression of
sneering mockery, in most cases enhanced by thrusting out the tongue.
Most of them occur upon the bridges, which were among the very last
works undertaken by the republic, several, for instance, upon the Bridge
of Sighs; and they are evidences of a delight in the contemplation of
bestial vice, and the expression of low sarcasm, which is, I believe,
the most hopeless state into which the human mind can fall. This spirit
of idiotic mockery is, as I have said, the most striking characteristic
of the last period of the Renaissance, which, in consequence of the
character thus imparted to its sculpture, I have called grotesque; but
it must be our immediate task, and it will be a most interesting one, to
distinguish between this base grotesqueness, and that magnificent
condition of fantastic imagination, which was above noticed as one of
the chief elements of the Northern Gothic mind. Nor is this a question
of interesting speculation merely: for the distinction between the true
and false grotesque is one which the present tendencies of the English
mind have rendered it practically important to ascertain; and that in a
degree which, until he has made some progress in the consideration of
the subject, the reader will hardly anticipate.

§ XVII. But, first, I have to note one peculiarity in the late
architecture of Venice, which will materially assist us in understanding
the true nature of the spirit which is to be the subject of our inquiry;
and this peculiarity, singularly enough, is first exemplified in the
very façade of Santa Maria Formosa which is flanked by the grotesque
head to which our attention has just been directed. This façade, whose
architect is unknown, consists of a pediment, sustained on four
Corinthian pilasters, and is, I believe, the earliest in Venice which
appears _entirely destitute of every religious symbol, sculpture, or
inscription_; unless the Cardinal's hat upon the shield in the centre of
the impediment be considered a religious symbol. The entire façade is
nothing else than a monument to the Admiral Vincenzo Cappello. Two
tablets, one between each pair of flanking pillars, record his acts and
honors; and, on the corresponding spaces upon the base of the church,
are two circular trophies, composed of halberts, arrows, flags,
tridents, helmets, and lances: sculptures which are just as valueless in
a military as in an ecclesiastical point of view; for, being all copied
from the forms of Roman arms and armor, they cannot even be referred to
for information respecting the costume of the period. Over the door, as
the chief ornament of the façade, exactly in the spot which in the
"barbarous" St. Mark's is occupied by the figure of Christ, is the
statue of Vincenzo Cappello, in Roman armor. He died in 1542; and we
have, therefore, the latter part of the sixteenth century fixed as the
period when, in Venice, churches were first built to the glory of man,
instead of the glory of God.

§ XVIII. Throughout the whole of Scripture history, nothing is more
remarkable than the close connection of punishment with the sin of
vain-glory. Every other sin is occasionally permitted to remain, for
lengthened periods, without definite chastisement; but the forgetfulness
of God, and the claim of honor by man, as belonging to himself, are
visited at once, whether in Hezekiah, Nebuchadnezzar, or Herod, with the
most tremendous punishment. We have already seen, that the first reason
for the fall of Venice was the manifestation of such a spirit; and it is
most singular to observe the definiteness with which it is here
marked,--as if so appointed, that it might be impossible for future ages
to miss the lesson. For, in the long inscriptions[38] which record the
acts of Vincenzo Cappello, it might, at least, have been anticipated
that some expressions would occur indicative of remaining pretence to
religious feeling, or formal acknowledgement of Divine power. But there
are none whatever. The name of God does not once occur; that of St. Mark
is found only in the statement that Cappello was a procurator of the
church: there is no word touching either on the faith or hope of the
deceased; and the only sentence which alludes to supernatural powers at
all, alludes to them under the heathen name of _fates_, in its
explanation of what the Admiral Cappello _would_ have accomplished,
"nisi fata Christianis adversa vetuissent."

§ XIX. Having taken sufficient note of all the baseness of mind which
these facts indicate in the people, we shall not be surprised to find
immediate signs of dotage in the conception of their architecture. The
churches raised throughout this period are so grossly debased, that even
the Italian critics of the present day, who are partially awakened to
the true state of art in Italy, though blind, as yet, to its true cause,
exhaust their terms of reproach upon these last efforts of the
Renaissance builders. The two churches of San Moisè and Santa Maria
Zobenigo, which are among the most remarkable in Venice for their
manifestation of insolent atheism, are characterized by Lazari, the one
as "culmine d'ogni follia architettonica," the other as "orrido ammasso
di pietra d'Istria," with added expressions of contempt, as just as it
is unmitigated.

§ XX. Now both these churches, which I should like the reader to visit
in succession, if possible, after that of Sta. Maria Formosa, agree with
that church, and with each other, in being totally destitute of
religious symbols, and entirely dedicated to the honor of two Venetian
families. In San Moisè, a bust of Vincenzo Fini is set on a tall narrow
pyramid, above the central door, with this marvellous inscription:

  "OMNE FASTIGIVM
   VIRTVTE IMPLET
   VINCENTIVS FINI."

It is very difficult to translate this; for fastigium, besides its
general sense, has a particular one in architecture, and refers to the
part of the building occupied by the bust; but the main meaning of it is
that "Vincenzo Fini fills all height with his virtue." The inscription
goes on into farther praise, but this example is enough. Over the two
lateral doors are two other laudatory inscriptions of younger members of
the Fini family, the dates of death of the three heroes being 1660,
1685, and 1726, marking thus the period of consummate degradation.

[Illustration: Plate III.
               NOBLE AND IGNOBLE GROTESQUE.]

§ XXI. In like manner, the Church of Santa Maria Zobenigo is entirely
dedicated to the Barbaro family; the only religious symbols with which
it is invested being statues of angels blowing brazen trumpets, intended
to express the spreading of the fame of the Barbaro family in heaven. At
the top of the church is Venice crowned, between Justice and Temperance,
Justice holding a pair of grocer's scales, of iron, swinging in the
wind. There is a two-necked stone eagle (the Barbaro crest), with a
copper crown, in the centre of the pediment. A huge statue of a Barbaro
in armor, with a fantastic head-dress, over the central door; and four
Barbaros in niches, two on each side of it, strutting statues, in the
common stage postures of the period,--Jo. Maria Barbaro, sapiens
ordinum; Marinus Barbaro, Senator (reading a speech in a Ciceronian
attitude); Franc. Barbaro, legatus in classe (in armor, with high-heeled
boots, and looking resolutely fierce); and Carolus Barbaro, sapiens
ordinum: the decorations of the façade being completed by two trophies,
consisting of drums, trumpets, flags and cannon; and six plans,
sculptured in relief, of the towns of Zara, Candia, Padua, Rome, Corfu,
and Spalatro.

§ XXII. When the traveller has sufficiently considered the meaning of
this façade, he ought to visit the Church of St. Eustachio, remarkable
for the dramatic effect of the group of sculpture on its façade, and
then the Church of the Ospedaletto (see Index, under head Ospedaletto);
noticing, on his way, the heads on the foundations of the Palazzo Corner
della Regina, and the Palazzo Pesaro, and any other heads carved on the
modern bridges, closing with those on the Bridge of Sighs.

He will then have obtained a perfect idea of the style and feeling of
the Grotesque Renaissance. I cannot pollute this volume by any
illustration of its worst forms, but the head turned to the front, on
the right-hand in the opposite Plate, will give the general reader an
idea of its most graceful and refined developments. The figure set
beside it, on the left, is a piece of noble grotesque, from fourteenth
century Gothic; and it must be our present task to ascertain the nature
of the difference which exists between the two, by an accurate inquiry
into the true essence of the grotesque spirit itself.

§ XXIII. First, then, it seems to me that the grotesque is, in almost
all cases, composed of two elements, one ludicrous, the other fearful;
that, as one or other of these elements prevails, the grotesque falls
into two branches, sportive grotesque and terrible grotesque; but that
we cannot legitimately consider it under these two aspects, because
there are hardly any examples which do not in some degree combine both
elements; there are few grotesques so utterly playful as to be overcast
with no shade of fearfulness, and few so fearful as absolutely to
exclude all ideas of jest. But although we cannot separate the grotesque
itself into two branches, we may easily examine separately the two
conditions of mind which it seems to combine; and consider successively
what are the kinds of jest, and what the kinds of fearfulness, which may
be legitimately expressed in the various walks of art, and how their
expressions actually occur in the Gothic and Renaissance schools.

First, then, what are the conditions of playfulness which we may fitly
express in noble art, or which (for this is the same thing) are
consistent with nobleness in humanity? In other words, what is the
proper function of play, with respect not to youth merely, but to all
mankind?

§ XXIV. It is a much more serious question than may be at first
supposed; for a healthy manner of play is necessary in order to a
healthy manner of work: and because the choice of our recreation is, in
most cases, left to ourselves, while the nature of our work is generally
fixed by necessity or authority, it may be well doubted whether more
distressful consequences may not have resulted from mistaken choice in
play than from mistaken direction in labor.

§ XXV. Observe, however, that we are only concerned, here, with that
kind of play which causes laughter or implies recreation, not with that
which consists in the excitement of the energies whether of body or
mind. Muscular exertion is, indeed, in youth, one of the conditions of
recreation; "but neither the violent bodily labor which children of all
ages agree to call play," nor the grave excitement of the mental
faculties in games of skill or chance, are in anywise connected with the
state of feeling we have here to investigate, namely, that sportiveness
which man possesses in common with many inferior creatures, but to which
his higher faculties give nobler expression in the various
manifestations of wit, humor, and fancy.

With respect to the manner in which this instinct of playfulness is
indulged or repressed, mankind are broadly distinguishable into four
classes: the men who play wisely; who play necessarily; who play
inordinately; and who play not at all.

§ XXVI. First: Those who play wisely. It is evident that the idea of any
kind of play can only be associated with the idea of an imperfect,
childish, and fatigable nature. As far as men can raise that nature, so
that it shall no longer be interested by trifles or exhausted by toils,
they raise it above play; he whose heart is at once fixed upon heaven,
and open to the earth, so as to apprehend the importance of heavenly
doctrines, and the compass of human sorrow, will have little disposition
for jest; and exactly in proportion to the breadth and depth of his
character and intellect, will be, in general, the incapability of
surprise, or exuberant and sudden emotion, which must render play
impossible. It is, however, evidently not intended that many men should
even reach, far less pass their lives in, that solemn state of
thoughtfulness, which brings them into the nearest brotherhood with
their Divine Master; and the highest and healthiest state which is
competent to ordinary humanity appears to be that which, accepting the
necessity of recreation, and yielding to the impulses of natural delight
springing out of health and innocence, does, indeed, condescend often to
playfulness, but never without such deep love of God, of truth, and of
humanity, as shall make even its slightest words reverent, its idlest
fancies profitable, and its keenest satire indulgent. Wordsworth and
Plato furnish us with, perhaps, the finest and highest examples of this
playfulness: in the one case, unmixed with satire, the perfectly simple
effusion of that spirit--in

  "Which gives to all the self-same bent,
   Whose life is wise, and innocent;"

Plato, and, by the by, in a very wise book of our own times, not
unworthy of being named in such companionship, "Friends in Council,"
mingled with an exquisitely tender and loving satire.

§ XXVII. Secondly: The men who play necessarily. That highest species of
playfulness, which we have just been considering, is evidently the
condition of a mind, not only highly cultivated, but so habitually
trained to intellectual labor that it can bring a considerable force of
accurate thought into its moments even of recreation. This is not
possible, unless so much repose of mind and heart are enjoyed, even at
the periods of greatest exertion, that the rest required by the system
is diffused over the whole life. To the majority of mankind, such a
state is evidently unattainable. They must, perforce, pass a large part
of their lives in employments both irksome and toilsome, demanding an
expenditure of energy which exhausts the system, and yet consuming that
energy upon subjects incapable of interesting the nobler faculties. When
such employments are intermitted, those noble instincts, fancy,
imagination, and curiosity, are all hungry for the food which the labor
of the day has denied to them, while yet the weariness of the body, in a
great degree, forbids their application to any serious subject. They
therefore exert themselves without any determined purpose, and under no
vigorous restraint, but gather, as best they may, such various
nourishment, and put themselves to such fantastic exercise, as may
soonest indemnify them for their past imprisonment, and prepare them to
endure their recurrence. This sketching of the mental limbs as their
fetters fall away,--this leaping and dancing of the heart and intellect,
when they are restored to the fresh air of heaven, yet half paralyzed by
their captivity, and unable to turn themselves to any earnest
purpose,--I call necessary play. It is impossible to exaggerate its
importance, whether in polity, or in art.

§ XXVIII. Thirdly: The men who play inordinately. The most perfect state
of society which, consistently with due understanding of man's nature,
it may be permitted us to conceive, would be one in which the whole
human race were divided, more or less distinctly, into workers and
thinkers; that is to say, into the two classes, who only play wisely, or
play necessarily. But the number and the toil of the working class are
enormously increased, probably more than doubled, by the vices of the
men who neither play wisely nor necessarily, but are enabled by
circumstances, and permitted by their want of principle, to make
amusement the object of their existence. There is not any moment of the
lives of such men which is not injurious to others; both because they
leave the work undone which was appointed for them, and because they
necessarily think wrongly, whenever it becomes compulsory upon them to
think at all. The greater portion of the misery of this world arises
from the false opinions of men whose idleness has physically
incapacitated them from forming true ones. Every duty which we omit
obscures some truth which we should have known; and the guilt of a life
spent in the pursuit of pleasure is twofold, partly consisting in the
perversion of action, and partly in the dissemination of falsehood.

§ XXIX. There is, however, a less criminal, though hardly less dangerous
condition of mind; which, though not failing in its more urgent duties,
fails in the finer conscientiousness which regulates the degree, and
directs the choice, of amusement, at those times when amusement is
allowable. The most frequent error in this respect is the want of
reverence in approaching subjects of importance or sacredness, and of
caution in the expression of thoughts which may encourage like
irreverence in others: and these faults are apt to gain upon the mind
until it becomes habitually more sensible to what is ludicrous and
accidental, than to what is grave and essential, in any subject that is
brought before it; or even, at last, desires to perceive or to know
nothing but what may end in jest. Very generally minds of this
character are active and able; and many of them are so far
conscientious, that they believe their jesting forwards their work. But
it is difficult to calculate the harm they do, by destroying the
reverence which is our best guide into all truth; for weakness and evil
are easily visible, but greatness and goodness are often latent; and we
do infinite mischief by exposing weakness to eyes which cannot
comprehend greatness. This error, however, is more connected with abuses
of the satirical than of the playful instinct; and I shall have more to
say of it presently.

§ XXX. Lastly: The men who do not play at all: those who are so dull or
so morose as to be incapable of inventing or enjoying jest, and in whom
care, guilt, or pride represses all healthy exhilaration of the fancy;
or else men utterly oppressed with labor, and driven too hard by the
necessities of the world to be capable of any species of happy
relaxation.

§ XXXI. We have now to consider the way in which the presence or absence
of joyfulness, in these several classes, is expressed in art.

1. Wise play. The first and noblest class hardly ever speak through art,
except seriously; they feel its nobleness too profoundly, and value the
time necessary for its production too highly, to employ it in the
rendering of trivial thoughts. The playful fancy of a moment may
innocently be expressed by the passing word; but he can hardly have
learned the preciousness of life, who passes days in the elaboration of
a jest. And, as to what regards the delineation of human character, the
nature of all noble art is to epitomize and embrace so much at once,
that its subject can never be altogether ludicrous; it must possess all
the solemnities of the whole, not the brightness of the partial, truth.
For all truth that makes us smile is partial. The novelist amuses us by
his relation of a particular incident; but the painter cannot set any
one of his characters before us without giving some glimpse of its whole
career. That of which the historian informs us in successive pages, it
is the task of the painter to inform us of at once, writing upon the
countenance not merely the expression of the moment, but the history of
the life: and the history of a life can never be a jest.

Whatever part, therefore, of the sportive energy of these men of the
highest class would be expressed in verbal wit or humor finds small
utterance through their art, and will assuredly be confined, if it occur
there at all, to scattered and trivial incidents. But so far as their
minds can recreate themselves by the imagination of strange, yet not
laughable, forms, which, either in costume, in landscape, or in any
other accessaries, may be combined with those necessary for their more
earnest purposes, we find them delighting in such inventions; and a
species of grotesqueness thence arising in all their work, which is
indeed one of its most valuable characteristics, but which is so
intimately connected with the sublime or terrible form of the grotesque,
that it will be better to notice it under that head.

§ XXXII. 2. Necessary play. I have dwelt much in a former portion of
this work, on the justice and desirableness of employing the minds of
inferior workmen, and of the lower orders in general, in the production
of objects of art of one kind or another. So far as men of this class
are compelled to hard manual labor for their daily bread, so far forth
their artistical efforts must be rough and ignorant, and their
artistical perceptions comparatively dull. Now it is not possible, with
blunt perceptions and rude hands, to produce works which shall be
pleasing by their beauty; but it is perfectly possible to produce such
as shall be interesting by their character or amusing by their satire.
For one hard-working man who possesses the finer instincts which decide
on perfection of lines and harmonies of color, twenty possess dry humor
or quaint fancy; not because these faculties were originally given to
the human race, or to any section of it, in greater degree than the
sense of beauty, but because these are exercised in our daily
intercourse with each other, and developed by the interest which we take
in the affairs of life, while the others are not. And because,
therefore, a certain degree of success will probably attend the effort
to express this humor or fancy, while comparative failure will
assuredly result from an ignorant struggle to reach the forms of solemn
beauty, the working-man, who turns his attention partially to art, will
probably, and wisely, choose to do that which he can do best, and
indulge the pride of an effective satire rather than subject himself to
assured mortification in the pursuit of beauty; and this the more,
because we have seen that his application to art is to be playful and
recreative, and it is not in recreation that the conditions of
perfection can be fulfilled.

§ XXXIII. Now all the forms of art which result from the comparatively
recreative exertion of minds more or less blunted or encumbered by other
cares and toils, the art which we may call generally art of the wayside,
as opposed to that which is the business of men's lives, is, in the best
sense of the word, Grotesque. And it is noble or inferior, first,
according to the tone of the minds which have produced it, and in
proportion to their knowledge, wit, love of truth, and kindness;
secondly, according to the degree of strength they have been able to
give forth; but yet, however much we may find in it needing to be
forgiven, always delightful so long as it is the work of good and
ordinarily intelligent men. And its delightfulness ought mainly to
consist _in those very imperfections_ which mark it for work done in
times of rest. It is not its own merit so much as the enjoyment of him
who produced it, which is to be the source of the spectator's pleasure;
it is to the strength of his sympathy, not to the accuracy of his
criticism, that it makes appeal; and no man can indeed be a lover of
what is best in the higher walks of art, who has not feeling and charity
enough to rejoice with the rude sportiveness of hearts that have escaped
out of prison, and to be thankful for the flowers which men have laid
their burdens down to sow by the wayside.

§ XXXIV. And consider what a vast amount of human work this right
understanding of its meaning will make fruitful and admirable to us,
which otherwise we could only have passed by with contempt. There is
very little architecture in the world which is, in the full sense of the
words, good and noble. A few pieces of Italian Gothic and Romanesque, a
few scattered fragments of Gothic cathedrals, and perhaps two or three
of Greek temples, are all that we possess approaching to an ideal of
perfection. All the rest--Egyptian, Norman, Arabian, and most Gothic,
and, which is very noticeable, for the most part all the strongest and
mightiest--depend for their power on some developement of the grotesque
spirit; but much more the inferior domestic architecture of the middle
ages, and what similar conditions remain to this day in countries from
which the life of art has not yet been banished by its laws. The
fantastic gables, built up in scroll-work and steps, of the Flemish
street; the pinnacled roofs set with their small humorist double
windows, as if with so many ears and eyes, of Northern France; the
blackened timbers, crossed and carved into every conceivable waywardness
of imagination, of Normandy and old England; the rude hewing of the pine
timbers of the Swiss cottage; the projecting turrets and bracketed
oriels of the German street; these, and a thousand other forms, not in
themselves reaching any high degree of excellence, are yet admirable,
and most precious, as the fruits of a rejoicing energy in uncultivated
minds. It is easier to take away the energy, than to add the
cultivation; and the only effect of the better knowledge which civilized
nations now possess, has been, as we have seen in a former chapter, to
forbid their being happy, without enabling them to be great.

§ XXXV. It is very necessary, however, with respect to this provincial
or rustic architecture, that we should carefully distinguish its truly
grotesque from its picturesque elements. In the "Seven Lamps" I defined
the picturesque to be "parasitical sublimity," or sublimity belonging to
the external or accidental characters of a thing, not to the thing
itself. For instance, when a highland cottage roof is covered with
fragments of shale instead of slates, it becomes picturesque, because
the irregularity and rude fractures of the rocks, and their grey and
gloomy color, give to it something of the savageness, and much of the
general aspect, of the slope of a mountain side. But as a mere cottage
roof, it cannot be sublime, and whatever sublimity it derives from the
wildness or sternness which the mountains have given it in its covering,
is, so far forth, parasitical. The mountain itself would have been
grand, which is much more than picturesque; but the cottage cannot be
grand as such, and the parasitical grandeur which it may possess by
accidental qualities, is the character for which men have long agreed to
use the inaccurate word "Picturesque."

§ XXXVI. On the other hand, beauty cannot be parasitical. There is
nothing so small or so contemptible, but it may be beautiful in its own
right. The cottage may be beautiful, and the smallest moss that grows on
its roof, and the minutest fibre of that moss which the microscope can
raise into visible form, and all of them in their own right, not less
than the mountains and the sky; so that we use no peculiar term to
express their beauty, however diminutive, but only when the sublime
element enters, without sufficient worthiness in the nature of the thing
to which it is attached.

§ XXXVII. Now this picturesque element, which is always given, if by
nothing else, merely by ruggedness, adds usually very largely to the
pleasurableness of grotesque work, especially to that of its inferior
kinds; but it is not for this reason to be confounded with the
grotesqueness itself. The knots and rents of the timbers, the irregular
lying of the shingles on the roofs, the vigorous light and shadow, the
fractures and weather-stains of the old stones, which were so deeply
loved and so admirably rendered by our lost Prout, are the picturesque
elements of the architecture: the grotesque ones are those which are not
produced by the working of nature and of time, but exclusively by the
fancy of man; and, as also for the most part by his indolent and
uncultivated fancy, they are always, in some degree, wanting in
grandeur, unless the picturesque element be united with them.

§ XXXVIII. 3. Inordinate play. The reader will have some difficulty, I
fear, in keeping clearly in his mind the various divisions of our
subject; but, when he has once read the chapter through, he will see
their places and coherence. We have next to consider the expression
throughout of the minds of men who indulge themselves in unnecessary
play. It is evident that a large number of these men will be more
refined and more highly educated than those who only play necessarily;
the power of pleasure-seeking implies, in general, fortunate
circumstances of life. It is evident also that their play will not be so
hearty, so simple, or so joyful; and this deficiency of brightness will
affect it in proportion to its unnecessary and unlawful continuance,
until at last it becomes a restless and dissatisfied indulgence in
excitement, or a painful delving after exhausted springs of pleasure.

The art through which this temper is expressed will, in all probability,
be refined and sensual,--therefore, also, assuredly feeble; and because,
in the failure of the joyful energy of the mind, there will fail, also,
its perceptions and its sympathies, it will be entirely deficient in
expression of character, and acuteness of thought, but will be
peculiarly restless, manifesting its desire for excitement in idle
changes of subject and purpose. Incapable of true imagination, it will
seek to supply its place by exaggerations, incoherencies, and
monstrosities; and the form of the grotesque to which it gives rise will
be an incongruous chain of hackneyed graces, idly thrown
together,--prettinesses or sublimities, not of its own invention,
associated in forms which will be absurd without being fantastic, and
monstrous without being terrible. And because, in the continual pursuit
of pleasure, men lose both cheerfulness and charity, there will be small
hilarity, but much malice, in this grotesque; yet a weak malice,
incapable of expressing its own bitterness, not having grasp enough of
truth to become forcible, and exhausting itself in impotent or
disgusting caricature.

§ XXXIX. Of course, there are infinite ranks and kinds of this
grotesque, according to the natural power of the minds which originate
it, and to the degree in which they have lost themselves. Its highest
condition is that which first developed itself among the enervated
Romans, and which was brought to the highest perfection of which it was
capable, by Raphael, in the arabesques of the Vatican. It may be
generally described as an elaborate and luscious form of nonsense. Its
lower conditions are found in the common upholstery and decorations
which, over the whole of civilized Europe, have sprung from this
poisonous root; an artistical pottage, composed of nymphs, cupids, and
satyrs, with shreddings of heads and paws of meek wild beasts, and
nondescript vegetables. And the lowest of all are those which have not
even graceful models to recommend them, but arise out of the corruption
of the higher schools, mingled with clownish or bestial satire, as is
the case in the latter Renaissance of Venice, which we were above
examining. It is almost impossible to believe the depth to which the
human mind can be debased in following this species of grotesque. In a
recent Italian garden, the favorite ornaments frequently consist of
stucco images, representing, in dwarfish caricature, the most disgusting
types of manhood and womanhood which can be found amidst the dissipation
of the modern drawingroom; yet without either veracity or humor, and
dependent, for whatever interest they possess, upon simple grossness of
expression and absurdity of costume. Grossness, of one kind or another,
is, indeed, an unfailing characteristic of the style; either latent, as
in the refined sensuality of the more graceful arabesques, or, in the
worst examples, manifested in every species of obscene conception and
abominable detail. In the head, described in the opening of this
chapter, at Santa Maria Formosa, the _teeth_ are represented as
_decayed_.

§ XL. 4. The minds of the fourth class of men who do not play at all,
are little likely to find expression in any trivial form of art, except
in bitterness of mockery; and this character at once stamps the work in
which it appears, as belonging to the class of terrible, rather than of
playful, grotesque. We have, therefore, now to examine the state of mind
which gave rise to this second and more interesting branch of
imaginative work.

§ XLI. Two great and principal passions are evidently appointed by the
Deity to rule the life of man; namely, the love of God, and the fear of
sin, and of its companion--Death. How many motives we have for Love, how
much there is in the universe to kindle our admiration and to claim our
gratitude, there are, happily, multitudes among us who both feel and
teach. But it has not, I think, been sufficiently considered how
evident, throughout the system of creation, is the purpose of God that
we should often be affected by Fear; not the sudden, selfish, and
contemptible fear of immediate danger, but the fear which arises out of
the contemplation of great powers in destructive operation, and
generally from the perception of the presence of death. Nothing appears
to me more remarkable than the array of scenic magnificence by which the
imagination is appalled, in myriads of instances, when the actual danger
is comparatively small; so that the utmost possible impression of awe
shall be produced upon the minds of all, though direct suffering is
inflicted upon few. Consider, for instance, the moral effect of a single
thunder-storm. Perhaps two or three persons may be struck dead within
the space of a hundred square miles; and their deaths, unaccompanied by
the scenery of the storm, would produce little more than a momentary
sadness in the busy hearts of living men. But the preparation for the
Judgment by all that mighty gathering of clouds; by the questioning of
the forest leaves, in their terrified stillness, which way the winds
shall go forth; by the murmuring to each other, deep in the distance, of
the destroying angels before they draw forth their swords of fire; by
the march of the funeral darkness in the midst of the noon-day, and the
rattling of the dome of heaven beneath the chariot-wheels of death;--on
how many minds do not these produce an impression almost as great as the
actual witnessing of the fatal issue! and how strangely are the
expressions of the threatening elements fitted to the apprehension of
the human soul! The lurid color, the long, irregular, convulsive sound,
the ghastly shapes of flaming and heaving cloud, are all as true and
faithful in their appeal to our instinct of danger, as the moaning or
wailing of the human voice itself is to our instinct of pity. It is not
a reasonable calculating terror which they awake in us; it is no matter
that we count distance by seconds, and measure probability by averages.
That shadow of the thunder-cloud will still do its work upon our hearts,
and we shall watch its passing away as if we stood upon the
threshing-floor of Araunah.

§ XLII. And this is equally the case with respect to all the other
destructive phenomena of the universe. From the mightiest of them to the
gentlest, from the earthquake to the summer shower, it will be found
that they are attended by certain aspects of threatening, which strike
terror into the hearts of multitudes more numerous a thousandfold than
those who actually suffer from the ministries of judgment; and that,
besides the fearfulness of these immediately dangerous phenomena, there
is an occult and subtle horror belonging to many aspects of the creation
around us, calculated often to fill us with serious thought, even in our
times of quietness and peace. I understand not the most dangerous,
because most attractive form of modern infidelity, which, pretending to
exalt the beneficence of the Deity, degrades it into a reckless
infinitude of mercy, and blind obliteration of the work of sin; and
which does this chiefly by dwelling on the manifold appearances of God's
kindness on the face of creation. Such kindness is indeed everywhere and
always visible; but not alone. Wrath and threatening are invariably
mingled with the love; and in the utmost solitudes of nature, the
existence of Hell seems to me as legibly declared by a thousand
spiritual utterances, as that of Heaven. It is well for us to dwell with
thankfulness on the unfolding of the flower, and the falling of the dew,
and the sleep of the green fields in the sunshine; but the blasted
trunk, the barren rock, the moaning of the bleak winds, the roar of the
black, perilous, merciless whirlpools of the mountain streams, the
solemn solitudes of moors and seas, the continual fading of all beauty
into darkness, and of all strength into dust, have these no language for
us? We may seek to escape their teaching by reasonings touching the good
which is wrought out of all evil; but it is vain sophistry. The good
succeeds to the evil as day succeeds the night, but so also the evil to
the good. Gerizim and Ebal, birth and death, light and darkness, heaven
and hell, divide the existence of man, and his Futurity.[39]

§ XLIII. And because the thoughts of the choice we have to make between
these two, ought to rule us continually, not so much in our own actions
(for these should, for the most part, be governed by settled habit and
principle) as in our manner of regarding the lives of other men, and our
own responsibilities with respect to them; therefore, it seems to me
that the healthiest state into which the human mind can be brought is
that which is capable of the greatest love, and the greatest awe: and
this we are taught even in our times of rest; for when our minds are
rightly in tone, the merely pleasurable excitement which they seek with
most avidity is that which rises out of the contemplation of beauty or
of terribleness. We thirst for both, and, according to the height and
tone of our feeling, desire to see them in noble or inferior forms. Thus
there is a Divine beauty, and a terribleness or sublimity coequal with
it in rank, which are the subjects of the highest art; and there is an
inferior or ornamental beauty, and an inferior terribleness coequal with
it in rank, which are the subjects of grotesque art. And the state of
mind in which the terrible form of the grotesque is developed, is that
which in some irregular manner, dwells upon certain conditions of
terribleness, into the complete depth of which it does not enter for the
time.

§ XLIV. Now the things which are the proper subjects of human fear are
twofold; those which have the power of Death, and those which have the
nature of Sin. Of which there are many ranks, greater or less in power
and vice, from the evil angels themselves down to the serpent which is
their type, and which though of a low and contemptible class, appears
to unite the deathful and sinful natures in the most clearly visible and
intelligible form; for there is nothing else which we know, of so small
strength and occupying so unimportant a place in the economy of
creation, which yet is so mortal and so malignant. It is, then, on these
two classes of objects that the mind fixes for its excitement, in that
mood which gives rise to the terrible grotesque; and its subject will be
found always to unite some expression of vice and danger, but regarded
in a peculiar temper; sometimes (A) of predetermined or involuntary
apathy, sometimes (B) of mockery, sometimes (C) of diseased and
ungoverned imaginativeness.

§ XLV. For observe, the difficulty which, as I above stated, exists in
distinguishing the playful from the terrible grotesque arises out of
this cause; that the mind, under certain phases of excitement, _plays_
with _terror_, and summons images which, if it were in another temper,
would be awful, but of which, either in weariness or in irony, it
refrains for the time to acknowledge the true terribleness. And the mode
in which this refusal takes place distinguishes the noble from the
ignoble grotesque. For the master of the noble grotesque knows the depth
of all at which he seems to mock, and would feel it at another time, or
feels it in a certain undercurrent of thought even while he jests with
it; but the workman of the ignoble grotesque can feel and understand
nothing, and mocks at all things with the laughter of the idiot and the
cretin.

To work out this distinction completely is the chief difficulty in our
present inquiry; and, in order to do so, let us consider the above-named
three conditions of mind in succession, with relation to objects of
terror.

§ _XLVI_. (A). Involuntary or predetermined apathy. We saw above that
the grotesque was produced, chiefly in subordinate or ornamental art, by
rude, and in some degree uneducated men, and in their times of rest. At
such times, and in such subordinate work, it is impossible that they
should represent any solemn or terrible subject with a full and serious
entrance into its feeling. It is not in the languor of a leisure hour
that a man will set his whole soul to conceive the means of representing
some important truth, nor to the projecting angle of a timber bracket
that he would trust its representation, if conceived. And yet, in this
languor, and in this trivial work, he must find some expression of the
serious part of his soul, of what there is within him capable of awe, as
well as of love. The more noble the man is, the more impossible it will
be for him to confine his thoughts to mere loveliness, and that of a low
order. Were his powers and his time unlimited, so that, like Frà
Angelico, he could paint the Seraphim, in that order of beauty he could
find contentment, bringing down heaven to earth. But by the conditions
of his being, by his hard-worked life, by his feeble powers of
execution, by the meanness of his employment and the languor of his
heart, he is bound down to earth. It is the world's work that he is
doing, and world's work is not to be done without fear. And whatever
there is of deep and eternal consciousness within him, thrilling his
mind with the sense of the presence of sin and death around him, must be
expressed in that slight work, and feeble way, come of it what will. He
cannot forget it, among all that he sees of beautiful in nature; he may
not bury himself among the leaves of the violet on the rocks, and of the
lily in the glen, and twine out of them garlands of perpetual gladness.
He sees more in the earth than these,--misery and wrath, and
discordance, and danger, and all the work of the dragon and his angels;
this he sees with too deep feeling ever to forget. And though when he
returns to his idle work,--it may be to gild the letters upon the page,
or to carve the timbers of the chamber, or the stones of the
pinnacle,--he cannot give his strength of thought any more to the woe or
to the danger, there is a shadow of them still present with him: and as
the bright colors mingle beneath his touch, and the fair leaves and
flowers grow at his bidding, strange horrors and phantasms rise by their
side; grisly beasts and venomous serpents, and spectral fiends and
nameless inconsistencies of ghastly life, rising out of things most
beautiful, and fading back into them again, as the harm and the horror
of life do out of its happiness. He has seen these things; he wars with
them daily; he cannot but give them their part in his work, though in a
state of comparative apathy to them at the time. He is but carving and
gilding, and must not turn aside to weep; but he knows that hell is
burning on, for all that, and the smoke of it withers his oak-leaves.

§ XLVII. Now, the feelings which give rise to the false or ignoble
grotesque, are exactly the reverse of these. In the true grotesque, a
man of naturally strong feeling is accidentally or resolutely apathetic;
in the false grotesque, a man naturally apathetic is forcing himself
into temporary excitement. The horror which is expressed by the one,
comes upon him whether he will or not; that which is expressed by the
other, is sought out by him, and elaborated by his art. And therefore,
also, because the fear of the one is true, and of true things, however
fantastic its expression may be, there will be reality in it, and force.
It is not a manufactured terribleness, whose author, when he had
finished it, knew not if it would terrify any one else or not: but it is
a terribleness taken from the life; a spectre which the workman indeed
saw, and which, as it appalled him, will appal us also. But the other
workman never felt any Divine fear; he never shuddered when he heard the
cry from the burning towers of the earth,

  "Venga Medusa; sì lo farem di smalto."

He is stone already, and needs no gentle hand laid upon his eyes to save
him.

§ XLVIII. I do not mean what I say in this place to apply to the
creations of the imagination. It is not as the creating but as the
_seeing_ man, that we are here contemplating the master of the true
grotesque. It is because the dreadfulness of the universe around him
weighs upon his heart, that his work is wild; and therefore through the
whole of it we shall find the evidence of deep insight into nature. His
beasts and birds, however monstrous, will have profound relations with
the true. He may be an ignorant man, and little acquainted with the laws
of nature; he is certainly a busy man, and has not much time to watch
nature; but he never saw a serpent cross his path, nor a bird flit
across the sky, nor a lizard bask upon a stone, without learning so much
of the sublimity and inner nature of each as will not suffer him
thenceforth to conceive them coldly. He may not be able to carve plumes
or scales well; but his creatures will bite and fly, for all that. The
ignoble workman is the very reverse of this. He never felt, never looked
at nature; and if he endeavor to imitate the work of the other, all his
touches will be made at random, and all his extravagances will be
ineffective; he may knit brows, and twist lips, and lengthen beaks, and
sharpen teeth, but it will be all in vain. He may make his creatures
disgusting, but never fearful.

§ XLIX. There is, however, often another cause of difference than this.
The true grotesque being the expression of the _repose_ or play of a
_serious_ mind, there is a false grotesque opposed to it, which is the
result of the _full exertion_ of a _frivolous_ one. There is much
grotesque which is wrought out with exquisite care and pains, and as
much labor given to it as if it were of the noblest subject; so that the
workman is evidently no longer apathetic, and has no excuse for
unconnectedness of thought, or sudden unreasonable fear. If he awakens
horror now, it ought to be in some truly sublime form. His strength is
in his work; and he must not give way to sudden humor, and fits of
erratic fancy. If he does so, it must be because his mind is naturally
frivolous, or is for the time degraded into the deliberate pursuit of
frivolity. And herein lies the real distinction between the base
grotesque of Raphael and the Renaissance, above alluded to, and the true
Gothic grotesque. Those grotesques or arabesques of the Vatican, and
other such work, which have become the patterns of ornamentation in
modern times, are the fruit of great minds degraded to base objects. The
care, skill, and science, applied to the distribution of the leaves, and
the drawing of the figures, are intense, admirable, and accurate;
therefore, they ought to have produced a grand and serious work, not a
tissue of nonsense. If we can draw the human head perfectly, and are
masters of its expression and its beauty, we have no business to cut it
off, and hang it up by the hair at the end of a garland. If we can draw
the human body in the perfection of its grace and movement, we have no
business to take away its limbs, and terminate it with a bunch of
leaves. Or rather our doing so will imply that there is something wrong
with us; that, if we can consent to use our best powers for such base
and vain trifling, there must be something wanting in the powers
themselves; and that, however skilful we may be, or however learned, we
are wanting both in the earnestness which can apprehend a noble truth,
and in the thoughtfulness which can feel a noble fear. No Divine terror
will ever be found in the work of the man who wastes a colossal strength
in elaborating toys; for the first lesson which that terror is sent to
teach us, is the value of the human soul, and the shortness of mortal
time.

§ L. And are we never, then, it will be asked, to possess a refined or
perfect ornamentation? Must all decoration be the work of the ignorant
and the rude? Not so; but exactly in proportion as the ignorance and
rudeness diminish, must the ornamentation become rational, and the
grotesqueness disappear. The noblest lessons may be taught in
ornamentation, the most solemn truths compressed into it. The Book of
Genesis, in all the fulness of its incidents, in all the depth of its
meaning, is bound within the leaf-borders of the gates of Ghiberti. But
Raphael's arabesque is mere elaborate idleness. It has neither meaning
nor heart in it; it is an unnatural and monstrous abortion.

§ LI. Now, this passing of the grotesque into higher art, as the mind of
the workman becomes informed with better knowledge, and capable of more
earnest exertion, takes place in two ways. Either, as his power
increases, he devotes himself more and more to the beauty which he now
feels himself able to express, and so the grotesqueness expands, and
softens into the beautiful, as in the above-named instance of the gates
of Ghiberti; or else, if the mind of the workman be naturally inclined
to gloomy contemplation, the imperfection or apathy of his work rises
into nobler terribleness, until we reach the point of the grotesque of
Albert Durer, where, every now and then, the playfulness or apathy of
the painter passes into perfect sublime. Take the Adam and Eve, for
instance. When he gave Adam a bough to hold, with a parrot on it, and a
tablet hung to it, with "Albertus Durer Noricus faciebat, 1504,"
thereupon, his mind was not in Paradise. He was half in play, half
apathetic with respect to his subject, thinking how to do his work well,
as a wise master-graver, and how to receive his just reward of fame. But
he rose into the true sublime in the head of Adam, and in the profound
truthfulness of every creature that fills the forest. So again in that
magnificent coat of arms, with the lady and the satyr, as he cast the
fluttering drapery hither and thither around the helmet, and wove the
delicate crown upon the woman's forehead, he was in a kind of play; but
there is none in the dreadful skull upon the shield. And in the "Knight
and Death," and in the dragons of the illustrations to the Apocalypse,
there is neither play nor apathy; but their grotesque is of the ghastly
kind which best illustrates the nature of death and sin. And this leads
us to the consideration of the second state of mind out of which the
noble grotesque is developed; that is to say, the temper of mockery.

§ LII. (B). Mockery, or Satire. In the former part of this chapter, when
I spoke of the kinds of art which were produced in the recreation of the
lower orders, I only spoke of forms of ornament, not of the expression
of satire or humor. But it seems probable, that nothing is so refreshing
to the vulgar mind as some exercise of this faculty, more especially on
the failings of their superiors; and that, wherever the lower orders are
allowed to express themselves freely, we shall find humor, more or less
caustic, becoming a principal feature in their work. The classical and
Renaissance manufacturers of modern times having silenced the
independent language of the operative, his humor and satire pass away in
the word-wit which has of late become the especial study of the group of
authors headed by Charles Dickens; all this power was formerly thrown
into noble art, and became permanently expressed in the sculptures of
the cathedral. It was never thought that there was anything discordant
or improper in such a position: for the builders evidently felt very
deeply a truth of which, in modern times, we are less cognizant; that
folly and sin are, to a certain extent, synonymous, and that it would be
well for mankind in general, if all could be made to feel that
wickedness is as contemptible as it is hateful. So that the vices were
permitted to be represented under the most ridiculous forms, and all the
coarsest wit of the workman to be exhausted in completing the
degradation of the creatures supposed to be subjected to them.

§ LIII. Nor were even the supernatural powers of evil exempt from this
species of satire. For with whatever hatred or horror the evil angels
were regarded, it was one of the conditions of Christianity that they
should also be looked upon as vanquished; and this not merely in their
great combat with the King of Saints, but in daily and hourly combats
with the weakest of His servants. In proportion to the narrowness of the
powers of abstract conception in the workman, the nobleness of the idea
of spiritual nature diminished, and the traditions of the encounters of
men with fiends in daily temptations were imagined with less terrific
circumstances, until the agencies which in such warfare were almost
always represented as vanquished with disgrace, became, at last, as much
the objects of contempt as of terror.

The superstitions which represented the devil as assuming various
contemptible forms of disguises in order to accomplish his purposes
aided this gradual degradation of conception, and directed the study of
the workman to the most strange and ugly conditions of animal form,
until at last, even in the most serious subjects, the fiends are oftener
ludicrous than terrible. Nor, indeed, is this altogether avoidable, for
it is not possible to express intense wickedness without some condition
of degradation. Malice, subtlety, and pride, in their extreme, cannot be
written upon noble forms; and I am aware of no effort to represent the
Satanic mind in the angelic form, which has succeeded in painting.
Milton succeeds only because he separately describes the movements of
the mind, and therefore leaves himself at liberty to make the form
heroic; but that form is never distinct enough to be painted. Dante, who
will not leave even external forms obscure, degrades them before he can
feel them to be demoniacal; so also John Bunyan: both of them, I think,
having firmer faith than Milton's in their own creations, and deeper
insight into the nature of sin. Milton makes his fiends too noble, and
misses the foulness, inconstancy, and fury of wickedness. His Satan
possesses some virtues, not the less virtues for being applied to evil
purpose. Courage, resolution, patience, deliberation in council, this
latter being eminently a wise and holy character, as opposed to the
"Insania" of excessive sin: and all this, if not a shallow and false, is
a smooth and artistical, conception. On the other hand, I have always
felt that there was a peculiar grandeur in the indescribable,
ungovernable fury of Dante's fiends, ever shortening its own powers, and
disappointing its own purposes; the deaf, blind, speechless, unspeakable
rage, fierce as the lightning, but erring from its mark or turning
senselessly against itself, and still further debased by foulness of
form and action. Something is indeed to be allowed for the rude feelings
of the time, but I believe all such men as Dante are sent into the world
at the time when they can do their work best; and that, it being
appointed for him to give to mankind the most vigorous realization
possible both of Hell and Heaven, he was born both in the country and at
the time which furnished the most stern opposition of Horror and Beauty,
and permitted it to be written in the clearest terms. And, therefore,
though there are passages in the "Inferno" which it would be impossible
for any poet now to write, I look upon it as all the more perfect for
them. For there can be no question but that one characteristic of
excessive vice is indecency, a general baseness in its thoughts and acts
concerning the body,[40] and that the full portraiture of it cannot be
given without marking, and that in the strongest lines, this tendency to
corporeal degradation; which, in the time of Dante, could be done
frankly, but cannot now. And, therefore, I think the twenty-first and
twenty-second books of the "Inferno" the most perfect portraitures of
fiendish nature which we possess; and at the same time, in their
mingling of the extreme of horror (for it seems to me that the silent
swiftness of the first demon, "con l'ali aperte e sovra i pie leggiero,"
cannot be surpassed in dreadfulness) with ludicrous actions and images,
they present the most perfect instances with which I am acquainted of
the terrible grotesque. But the whole of the "Inferno" is full of this
grotesque, as well as the "Faërie Queen;" and these two poems, together
with the works of Albert Durer, will enable the reader to study it in
its noblest forms, without reference to Gothic cathedrals.

§ LIV. Now, just as there are base and noble conditions of the apathetic
grotesque, so also are there of this satirical grotesque. The condition
which might be mistaken for it is that above described as resulting from
the malice of men given to pleasure, and in which the grossness and
foulness are in the workman as much as in his subject, so that he
chooses to represent vice and disease rather than virtue and beauty,
having his chief delight in contemplating them; though he still mocks at
them with such dull wit as may be in him, because, as Young has said
most truly,

  "'Tis not in folly not to scorn a fool."

§ LV. Now it is easy to distinguish this grotesque from its noble
counterpart, by merely observing whether any forms of beauty or dignity
are mingled with it or not; for, of course, the noble grotesque is only
employed by its master for good purposes, and to contrast with beauty:
but the base workman cannot conceive anything but what is base; and
there will be no loveliness in any part of his work, or, at the best, a
loveliness measured by line and rule, and dependent on legal shapes of
feature. But, without resorting to this test, and merely by examining
the ugly grotesque itself, it will be found that, if it belongs to the
base school, there will be, first, no Horror in it; secondly, no Nature
in it; and, thirdly, no Mercy in it.

§ LVI. I say, first, no Horror. For the base soul has no fear of sin,
and no hatred of it: and, however it may strive to make its work
terrible, there will be no genuineness in the fear; the utmost it can do
will be to make its work disgusting.

Secondly, there will be no Nature in it. It appears to be one of the
ends proposed by Providence in the appointment of the forms of the brute
creation, that the various vices to which mankind are liable should be
severally expressed in them so distinctly and clearly as that men could
not but understand the lesson; while yet these conditions of vice might,
in the inferior animal, be observed without the disgust and hatred which
the same vices would excite, if seen in men, and might be associated
with features of interest which would otherwise attract and reward
contemplation. Thus, ferocity, cunning, sloth, discontent, gluttony,
uncleanness, and cruelty are seen, each in its extreme, in various
animals; and are so vigorously expressed, that when men desire to
indicate the same vices in connexion with human forms, they can do it no
better than by borrowing here and there the features of animals. And
when the workman is thus led to the contemplation of the animal kingdom,
finding therein the expressions of vice which he needs, associated with
power, and nobleness, and freedom from disease, if his mind be of right
tone he becomes interested in this new study; and all noble grotesque
is, therefore, full of the most admirable rendering of animal character.
But the ignoble workman is capable of no interest of this kind; and,
being too dull to appreciate, and too idle to execute, the subtle and
wonderful lines on which the expression of the lower animal depends, he
contents himself with vulgar exaggeration, and leaves his work as false
as it is monstrous, a mass of blunt malice and obscene ignorance.

§ LVII. Lastly, there will be no Mercy in it. Wherever the satire of the
noble grotesque fixes upon human nature, it does so with much sorrow
mingled amidst its indignation: in its highest forms there is an
infinite tenderness, like that of the fool in Lear; and even in its more
heedless or bitter sarcasm, it never loses sight altogether of the
better nature of what it attacks, nor refuses to acknowledge its
redeeming or pardonable features. But the ignoble grotesque has no pity:
it rejoices in iniquity, and exists only to slander.

§ LVIII. I have not space to follow out the various forms of transition
which exist between the two extremes of great and base in the satirical
grotesque. The reader must always remember, that, although there is an
infinite distance between the best and worst, in this kind the interval
is filled by endless conditions more or less inclining to the evil or
the good; impurity and malice stealing gradually into the nobler forms,
and invention and wit elevating the lower, according to the countless
minglings of the elements of the human soul.

§ LIX. (C). Ungovernableness of the imagination. The reader is always to
keep in mind that if the objects of horror, in which the terrible
grotesque finds its materials, were contemplated in their true light,
and with the entire energy of the soul, they would cease to be
grotesque, and become altogether sublime; and that therefore it is some
shortening of the power, or the will, of contemplation, and some
consequent distortion of the terrible image in which the grotesqueness
consists. Now this distortion takes place, it was above asserted, in
three ways: either through apathy, satire, or ungovernableness of
imagination. It is this last cause of the grotesque which we have
finally to consider; namely, the error and wildness of the mental
impressions, caused by fear operating upon strong powers of imagination,
or by the failure of the human faculties in the endeavor to grasp the
highest truths.

§ LX. The grotesque which comes to all men in a disturbed dream is the
most intelligible example of this kind, but also the most ignoble; the
imagination, in this instance, being entirely deprived of all aid from
reason, and incapable of self-government. I believe, however, that the
noblest forms of imaginative power are also in some sort ungovernable,
and have in them something of the character of dreams; so that the
vision, of whatever kind, comes uncalled, and will not submit itself to
the seer, but conquers him, and forces him to speak as a prophet,
having no power over his words or thoughts.[41] Only, if the whole man
be trained perfectly, and his mind calm, consistent and powerful, the
vision which comes to him is seen as in a perfect mirror, serenely, and
in consistence with the rational powers; but if the mind be imperfect
and ill trained, the vision is seen as in a broken mirror, with strange
distortions and discrepancies, all the passions of the heart breathing
upon it in cross ripples, till hardly a trace of it remains unbroken. So
that, strictly speaking, the imagination is never governed; it is always
the ruling and Divine power: and the rest of the man is to it only as an
instrument which it sounds, or a tablet on which it writes; clearly and
sublimely if the wax be smooth and the strings true, grotesquely and
wildly if they are stained and broken. And thus the "Iliad," the
"Inferno," the "Pilgrim's Progress," the "Faërie Queen," are all of them
true dreams; only the sleep of the men to whom they came was the deep,
living sleep which God sends, with a sacredness in it, as of death, the
revealer of secrets.

§ LXI. Now, observe in this matter, carefully, the difference between a
dim mirror and a distorted one; and do not blame me for pressing the
analogy too far, for it will enable me to explain my meaning every way
more clearly. Most men's minds are dim mirrors, in which all truth is
seen, as St. Paul tells us, darkly: this is the fault most common and
most fatal; dulness of the heart and mistiness of sight, increasing to
utter hardness and blindness; Satan breathing upon the glass, so that if
we do not sweep the mist laboriously away, it will take no image. But,
even so far as we are able to do this, we have still the distortion to
fear, yet not to the same extent, for we can in some sort allow for the
distortion of an image, if only we can see it clearly. And the fallen
human soul, at its best, must be as a diminishing glass, and that a
broken one, to the mighty truths of the universe round it; and the wider
the scope of its glance, and the vaster the truths into which it obtains
an insight, the more fantastic their distortion is likely to be, as the
winds and vapors trouble the field of the telescope most when it reaches
farthest.

§ LXII. Now, so far as the truth is seen by the imagination[42] in its
wholeness and quietness, the vision is sublime; but so far as it is
narrowed and broken by the inconsistencies of the human capacity, it
becomes grotesque; and it would seem to be rare that any very exalted
truth should be impressed on the imagination without some grotesqueness
in its aspect, proportioned to the degree of _diminution of breadth_ in
the grasp which is given of it. Nearly all the dreams recorded in the
Bible,--Jacob's, Joseph's, Pharaoh's, Nebuchadnezzar's,--are grotesques;
and nearly the whole of the accessary scenery in the books of Ezekiel
and the Apocalypse. Thus, Jacob's dream revealed to him the ministry of
angels; but because this ministry could not be seen or understood by him
in its fulness, it was narrowed to him into a ladder between heaven and
earth, which was a grotesque. Joseph's two dreams were evidently
intended to be signs of the steadfastness of the Divine purpose towards
him, by possessing the clearness of special prophecy; yet were couched
in such imagery, as not to inform him prematurely of his destiny, and
only to be understood after their fulfilment. The sun, and moon, and
stars were at the period, and are indeed throughout the Bible, the
symbols of high authority. It was not revealed to Joseph that he should
be lord over all Egypt; but the representation of his family by symbols
of the most magnificent dominion, and yet as subject to him, must have
been afterwards felt by him as a distinctly prophetic indication of his
own supreme power. It was not revealed to him that the occasion of his
brethren's special humiliation before him should be their coming to buy
corn; but when the event took place, must he not have felt that there
was prophetic purpose in the form of the sheaves of wheat which first
imaged forth their subjection to him? And these two images of the sun
doing obeisance, and the sheaves bowing down,--narrowed and imperfect
intimations of great truth which yet could not be otherwise
conveyed,--are both grotesque. The kine of Pharaoh eating each other,
the gold and clay of Nebuchadnezzar's image, the four beasts full of
eyes, and other imagery of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse, are grotesques of
the same kind, on which I need not further insist.

§ LXIII. Such forms, however, ought perhaps to have been arranged under
a separate head, as Symbolical Grotesque; but the element of awe enters
into them so strongly, as to justify, for all our present purposes,
their being classed with the other varieties of terrible grotesque. For
even if the symbolic vision itself be not terrible, the sense of what
may be veiled behind it becomes all the more awful in proportion to the
insignificance or strangeness of the sign itself; and, I believe, this
thrill of mingled doubt, fear, and curiosity lies at the very root of
the delight which mankind take in symbolism. It was not an accidental
necessity for the conveyance of truth by pictures instead of words,
which led to its universal adoption wherever art was on the advance; but
the Divine fear which necessarily follows on the understanding that a
thing is other and greater than it seems; and which, it appears
probable, has been rendered peculiarly attractive to the human heart,
because God would have us understand that this is true not of invented
symbols merely, but of all things amidst which we live; that there is a
deeper meaning within them than eye hath seen, or ear hath heard; and
that the whole visible creation is a mere perishable symbol of things
eternal and true. It cannot but have been sometimes a subject of wonder
with thoughtful men, how fondly, age after age, the Church has cherished
the belief that the four living creatures which surrounded the
Apocalyptic throne were symbols of the four Evangelists, and rejoiced
to use those forms in its picture-teaching; that a calf, a lion, an
eagle, and a beast with a man's face, should in all ages have been
preferred by the Christian world, as expressive of Evangelistic power
and inspiration, to the majesty of human forms; and that quaint
grotesques, awkward and often ludicrous caricatures even of the animals
represented, should have been regarded by all men, not only with
contentment, but with awe, and have superseded all endeavors to
represent the characters and persons of the Evangelistic writers
themselves (except in a few instances, confined principally to works
undertaken without a definite religious purpose);--this, I say, might
appear more than strange to us, were it not that we ourselves share the
awe, and are still satisfied with the symbol, and that justly. For,
whether we are conscious of it or not, there is in our hearts, as we
gaze upon the brutal forms that have so holy a signification, an
acknowledgment that it was not Matthew, nor Mark, nor Luke, nor John, in
whom the Gospel of Christ was unsealed: but that the invisible things of
Him from the beginning of the creation are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made; that the whole world, and all
that is therein, be it low or high, great or small, is a continual
Gospel; and that as the heathen, in their alienation from God, changed
His glory into an image made like unto corruptible man, and to birds,
and four-footed boasts, the Christian, in his approach to God, is to
undo this work, and to change the corruptible things into the image of
His glory; believing that there is nothing so base in creation, but that
our faith may give it wings which shall raise us into companionship with
heaven; and that, on the other hand, there is nothing so great or so
goodly in creation, but that it is a mean symbol of the Gospel of
Christ, and of the things He has prepared for them that love Him.

§ LXIV. And it is easy to understand, if we follow out this thought,
how, when once the symbolic language was familiarized to the mind, and
its solemnity felt in all its fulness, there was no likelihood of
offence being taken at any repulsive or feeble characters in execution
or conception. There was no form so mean, no incident so commonplace,
but, if regarded in this light, it might become sublime; the more
vigorous the fancy and the more faithful the enthusiasm, the greater
would be the likelihood of their delighting in the contemplation of
symbols whose mystery was enhanced by apparent insignificance, or in
which the sanctity and majesty of meaning were contrasted with the
utmost uncouthness of external form: nor with uncouthness merely, but
even with every appearance of malignity or baseness; the beholder not
being revolted even by this, but comprehending that, as the seeming evil
in the framework of creation did not invalidate its Divine authorship,
so neither did the evil or imperfection in the symbol invalidate its
Divine message. And thus, sometimes, the designer at last became wanton
in his appeal to the piety of his interpreter, and recklessly poured out
the impurity and the savageness of his own heart, for the mere pleasure
of seeing them overlaid with the fine gold of the sanctuary, by the
religion of their beholder.

§ LXV. It is not, however, in every symbolical subject that the fearful
grotesque becomes embodied to the full. The element of distortion which
affects the intellect when dealing with subjects above its proper
capacity, is as nothing compared with that which it sustains from the
direct impressions of terror. It is the trembling of the human soul in
the presence of death which most of all disturbs the images on the
intellectual mirror, and invests them with the fitfulness and
ghastliness of dreams. And from the contemplation of death, and of the
pangs which follow his footsteps, arise in men's hearts the troop of
strange and irresistible superstitions which, more or less melancholy or
majestic according to the dignity of the mind they impress, are yet
never without a certain grotesqueness, following on the paralysis of the
reason and over-excitement of the fancy. I do not mean to deny the
actual existence of spiritual manifestations; I have never weighed the
evidence upon the subject; but with these, if such exist, we are not
here concerned. The grotesque which we are examining arises out of that
condition of mind which appears to follow naturally upon the
contemplation of death, and in which the fancy is brought into morbid
action by terror, accompanied by the belief in spiritual presence, and
in the possibility of spiritual apparition. Hence are developed its most
sublime, because its least voluntary, creations, aided by the
fearfulness of the phenomena of nature which are in any wise the
ministers of death, and primarily directed by the peculiar ghastliness
of expression in the skeleton, itself a species of terrible grotesque in
its relation to the perfect human frame.

§ LXVI. Thus, first born from the dusty and dreadful whiteness of the
charnel house, but softened in their forms by the holiest of human
affections, went forth the troop of wild and wonderful images, seen
through tears, that had the mastery over our Northern hearts for so many
ages. The powers of sudden destruction lurking in the woods and waters,
in the rocks and clouds;--kelpie and gnome, Lurlei and Hartz spirits;
the wraith and foreboding phantom; the spectra of second sight; the
various conceptions of avenging or tormented ghost, haunting the
perpetrator of crime, or expiating its commission; and the half
fictitious and contemplative, half visionary and believed images of the
presence of death itself, doing its daily work in the chambers of
sickness and sin, and waiting for its hour in the fortalices of strength
and the high places of pleasure;--these, partly degrading us by the
instinctive and paralyzing terror with which they are attended, and
partly ennobling us by leading our thoughts to dwell in the eternal
world, fill the last and the most important circle in that great kingdom
of dark and distorted power, of which we all must be in some sort the
subjects until mortality shall be swallowed up of life; until the waters
of the last fordless river cease to roll their untransparent volume
between us and the light of heaven, and neither death stand between us
and our brethren, nor symbols between us and our God.

§ LXVII. We have now, I believe, obtained a view approaching to
completeness of the various branches of human feeling which are
concerned in the developement of this peculiar form of art. It remains
for us only to note, as briefly as possible, what facts in the actual
history of the grotesque bear upon our immediate subject.

From what we have seen to be its nature, we must, I think, be led to one
most important conclusion; that wherever the human mind is healthy and
vigorous in all its proportions, great in imagination and emotion no
less than in intellect, and not overborne by an undue or hardened
preëminence of the mere reasoning faculties, there the grotesque will
exist in full energy. And, accordingly, I believe that there is no test
of greatness in periods, nations, or men, more sure than the
developement, among them or in them, of a noble grotesque, and no test
of comparative smallness or limitation, of one kind or another, more
sure than the absence of grotesque invention, or incapability of
understanding it. I think that the central man of all the world, as
representing in perfect balance the imaginative, moral, and intellectual
faculties, all at their highest, is Dante; and in him the grotesque
reaches at once the most distinct and the most noble developement to
which it was ever brought in the human mind. The two other greatest men
whom Italy has produced, Michael Angelo and Tintoret, show the same
element in no less original strength, but oppressed in the one by his
science, and in both by the spirit of the age in which they lived;
never, however, absent even in Michael Angelo, but stealing forth
continually in a strange and spectral way, lurking in folds of raiment
and knots of wild hair, and mountainous confusions of craggy limb and
cloudy drapery; and, in Tintoret, ruling the entire conceptions of his
greatest works to such a degree that they are an enigma or an offence,
even to this day, to all the petty disciples of a formal criticism. Of
the grotesque in our own Shakspeare I need hardly speak, nor of its
intolerableness to his French critics; nor of that of Æschylus and
Homer, as opposed to the lower Greek writers; and so I believe it will
be found, at all periods, in all minds of the first order.

§ LXVIII. As an index of the greatness of nations, it is a less certain
test, or, rather, we are not so well agreed on the meaning of the term
"greatness" respecting them. A nation may produce a great effect, and
take up a high place in the world's history, by the temporary enthusiasm
or fury of its multitudes, without being truly great; or, on the other
hand, the discipline of morality and common sense may extend its
physical power or exalt its well-being, while yet its creative and
imaginative powers are continually diminishing. And again: a people may
take so definite a lead over all the rest of the world in one direction,
as to obtain a respect which is not justly due to them if judged on
universal grounds. Thus the Greeks perfected the sculpture of the human
body; threw their literature into a disciplined form, which has given it
a peculiar power over certain conditions of modern mind; and were the
most carefully educated race that the world has seen; but a few years
hence, I believe, we shall no longer think them a greater people than
either the Egyptians or Assyrians.

§ LXIX. If, then, ridding ourselves as far as possible of prejudices
owing merely to the school-teaching which remains from the system of the
Renaissance, we set ourselves to discover in what races the human soul,
taken all in all, reached its highest magnificence, we shall find, I
believe, two great families of men, one of the East and South, the other
of the West and North: the one including the Egyptians, Jews, Arabians,
Assyrians, and Persians; the other, I know not whence derived, but
seeming to flow forth from Scandinavia, and filling the whole of Europe
with its Norman and Gothic energy. And in both these families, wherever
they are seen in their utmost nobleness, there the grotesque is
developed in its utmost energy; and I hardly know whether most to admire
the winged bulls of Nineveh, or the winged dragons of Verona.

§ LXX. The reader who has not before turned his attention to this
subject may, however, at first have some difficulty in distinguishing
between the noble grotesque of these great nations, and the barbarous
grotesque of mere savages, as seen in the work of the Hindoo and other
Indian nations; or, more grossly still, in that of the complete savage
of the Pacific islands; or if, as is to be hoped, he instinctively
feels the difference, he may yet find difficulty in determining wherein
that difference consists. But he will discover, on consideration, that
the noble grotesque _involves the true appreciation of beauty_, though
the mind may wilfully turn to other images or the hand resolutely stop
short of the perfection which it must fail, if it endeavored, to reach;
while the grotesque of the Sandwich islander involves no perception or
imagination of anything above itself. He will find that in the exact
proportion in which the grotesque results from an incapability of
perceiving beauty, it becomes savage or barbarous; and that there are
many stages of progress to be found in it even in its best times, much
truly savage grotesque occurring in the fine Gothic periods, mingled
with the other forms of the ignoble grotesque resulting from vicious
inclinations or base sportiveness. Nothing is more mysterious in the
history of the human mind, than the manner in which gross and ludicrous
images are mingled with the most solemn subjects in the work of the
middle ages, whether of sculpture or illumination; and although, in
great part, such incongruities are to be accounted for on the various
principles which I have above endeavored to define, in many instances
they are clearly the result of vice and sensuality. The general
greatness of seriousness of an age does not effect the restoration of
human nature; and it would be strange, if, in the midst of the art even
of the best periods, when that art was entrusted to myriads of workmen,
we found no manifestations of impiety, folly, or impurity.

§ LXXI. It needs only to be added that in the noble grotesque, as it is
partly the result of a morbid state of the imaginative power, that power
itself will be always seen in a high degree; and that therefore our
power of judging of the rank of a grotesque work will depend on the
degree in which we are in general sensible of the presence of invention.
The reader may partly test this power in himself by referring to the
Plate given in the opening of this chapter, in which, on the left, is a
piece of noble and inventive grotesque, a head of the lion-symbol of St.
Mark, from the Veronese Gothic; the other is a head introduced as a
boss on the foundation of the Palazzo Corner della Regina at Venice,
utterly devoid of invention, made merely monstrous by exaggerations of
the eyeballs and cheeks, and generally characteristic of that late
Renaissance grotesque of Venice, with which we are at present more
immediately concerned.[43]

§ LXXII. The developement of that grotesque took place under different
laws from those which regulate it in any other European city. For, great
as we have seen the Byzantine mind show itself to be in other
directions, it was marked as that of a declining nation by the absence
of the grotesque element; and, owing to its influence, the early
Venetian Gothic remained inferior to all other schools in this
particular character. Nothing can well be more wonderful than its
instant failure in any attempt at the representation of ludicrous or
fearful images, more especially when it is compared with the magnificent
grotesque of the neighboring city of Verona, in which the Lombard
influence had full sway. Nor was it until the last links of connexion
with Constantinople had been dissolved, that the strength of the
Venetian mind could manifest itself in this direction. But it had then a
new enemy to encounter. The Renaissance laws altogether checked its
imagination in architecture; and it could only obtain permission to
express itself by starting forth in the work of the Venetian painters,
filling them with monkeys and dwarfs, even amidst the most serious
subjects, and leading Veronese and Tintoret to the most unexpected and
wild fantasies of form and color.

§ LXXIII. We may be deeply thankful for this peculiar reserve of the
Gothic grotesque character to the last days of Venice. All over the rest
of Europe it had been strongest in the days of imperfect art;
magnificently powerful throughout the whole of the thirteenth century,
tamed gradually in the fourteenth and fifteenth, and expiring in the
sixteenth amidst anatomy and laws of art. But at Venice, it had not been
received when it was elsewhere in triumph, and it fled to the lagoons
for shelter when elsewhere it was oppressed. And it was arrayed by the
Venetian painters in robes of state, and advanced by them to such honor
as it had never received in its days of widest dominion; while, in
return, it bestowed upon their pictures that fulness, piquancy, decision
of parts, and mosaic-like intermingling of fancies, alternately
brilliant and sublime, which were exactly what was most needed for the
developement of their unapproachable color-power.

§ LXXIV. Yet, observe, it by no means follows that because the grotesque
does not appear in the art of a nation, the sense of it does not exist
in the national mind. Except in the form of caricature, it is hardly
traceable in the English work of the present day; but the minds of our
workmen are full of it, if we would only allow them to give it shape.
They express it daily in gesture and gibe, but are not allowed to do so
where it would be useful. In like manner, though the Byzantine influence
repressed it in the early Venetian architecture, it was always present
in the Venetian mind, and showed itself in various forms of national
custom and festival; _acted_ grotesques, full of wit, feeling, and
good-humor. The ceremony of the hat and the orange, described in the
beginning of this chapter, is one instance out of multitudes. Another,
more rude, and exceedingly characteristic, was that instituted in the
twelfth century in memorial of the submission of Woldaric, the patriarch
of Aquileia, who, having taken up arms against the patriarch of Grado,
and being defeated and taken prisoner by the Venetians, was sentenced,
not to death, but to send every year on "Fat Thursday" sixty-two large
loaves, twelve fat pigs, and a bull, to the Doge; the bull being
understood to represent the patriarch, and the twelve pigs his clergy:
and the ceremonies of the day consisting in the decapitation of these
representatives, and a distribution of their joints among the senators;
together with a symbolic record of the attack upon Aquileia, by the
erection of a wooden castle in the rooms of the Ducal Palace, which the
_Doge and the Senate_ attacked and demolished with clubs. As long as the
Doge and the Senate were truly kingly and noble, they were content to
let this ceremony be continued; but when they became proud and selfish,
and were destroying both themselves and the state by their luxury, they
found it inconsistent with their dignity, and it was abolished, as far
as the Senate was concerned, in 1549.[44]

§ LXXV. By these and other similar manifestations, the grotesque spirit
is traceable through all the strength of the Venetian people. But again:
it is necessary that we should carefully distinguish between it and the
spirit of mere levity. I said, in the fifth chapter, that the Venetians
were distinctively a serious people, serious, that is to say, in the
sense in which the English are a more serious people than the French;
though the habitual intercourse of our lower classes in London has a
tone of humor in it which I believe is untraceable in that of the
Parisian populace. It is one thing to indulge in playful rest, and
another to be devoted to the pursuit of pleasure: and gaiety of heart
during the reaction after hard labor, and quickened by satisfaction in
the accomplished duty or perfected result, is altogether compatible
with, nay, even in some sort arises naturally out of, a deep internal
seriousness of disposition; this latter being exactly the condition of
mind which, as we have seen, leads to the richest developements of the
playful grotesque; while, on the contrary, the continual pursuit of
pleasure deprives the soul of all alacrity and elasticity, and leaves it
incapable of happy jesting, capable only of that which is bitter, base,
and foolish. Thus, throughout the whole of the early career of the
Venetians, though there is much jesting, there is no levity; on the
contrary there is an intense earnestness both in their pursuit of
commercial and political successes, and in their devotion to
religion,[45] which led gradually to the formation of that highly
wrought mingling of immovable resolution with secret thoughtfulness,
which so strangely, sometimes so darkly, distinguishes the Venetian
character at the time of their highest power, when the seriousness was
left, but the conscientiousness destroyed. And if there be any one sign
by which the Venetian countenance, as it is recorded for us, to the very
life, by a school of portraiture which has never been equalled (chiefly
because no portraiture ever had subjects so noble),--I say, if there be
one thing more notable than another in the Venetian features, it is this
deep pensiveness and solemnity. In other districts of Italy, the dignity
of the heads which occur in the most celebrated compositions is clearly
owing to the feeling of the painter. He has visibly raised or idealized
his models, and appears always to be veiling the faults or failings of
the human nature around him, so that the best of his work is that which
has most perfectly taken the color of his own mind; and the least
impressive, if not the least valuable, that which appears to have been
unaffected and unmodified portraiture. But at Venice, all is exactly the
reverse of this. The tone of mind in the painter appears often in some
degree frivolous or sensual; delighting in costume, in domestic and
grotesque incident, and in studies of the naked form. But the moment he
gives himself definitely to portraiture, all is noble and grave; the
more literally true his work, the more majestic; and the same artist who
will produce little beyond what is commonplace in painting a Madonna or
an apostle, will rise into unapproachable sublimity when his subject is
a member of the Forty, or a Master of the Mint.

Such, then, were the general tone and progress of the Venetian mind, up
to the close of the seventeenth century. First, serious, religious, and
sincere; then, though serious still, comparatively deprived of
conscientiousness, and apt to decline into stern and subtle policy: in
the first case, the spirit of the noble grotesque not showing itself in
art at all, but only in speech and action; in the second case,
developing itself in painting, through accessories and vivacities of
composition, while perfect dignity was always preserved in portraiture.
A third phase rapidly developed itself.

§ LXXVI. Once more, and for the last time, let me refer the reader to
the important epoch of the death of the Doge Tomaso Mocenigo in 1423,
long ago indicated as the commencement of the decline of the Venetian
power. That commencement is marked, not merely by the words of the dying
Prince, but by a great and clearly legible sign. It is recorded, that on
the accession of his successor, Foscari, to the throne, "SI FESTEGGIO
DALLA CITTA UNO ANNO INTERO:" "The city kept festival for a whole year."
Venice had in her childhood sown, in tears, the harvest she was to reap
in rejoicing. She now sowed in laughter the seeds of death.

Thenceforward, year after year, the nation drank with deeper thirst from
the fountains of forbidden pleasure, and dug for springs, hitherto
unknown, in the dark places of the earth. In the ingenuity of
indulgence, in the varieties of vanity, Venice surpassed the cities of
Christendom, as of old she surpassed them in fortitude and devotion; and
as once the powers of Europe stood before her judgment-seat, to receive
the decisions of her justice, so now the youth of Europe assembled in
the halls of her luxury, to learn from her the arts of delight.

It is as needless, as it is painful, to trace the steps of her final
ruin. That ancient curse was upon her, the curse of the cities of the
plain, "Pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness." By the
inner burning of her own passions, as fatal as the fiery reign of
Gomorrah, she was consumed from her place among the nations; and her
ashes are choking the channels of the dead salt sea.


FOOTNOTES:

  [27] Mutinelli, Annali Urbani, lib. i. p. 24; and the Chronicle of
    1738, quoted by Galliciolli: "attrovandosi allora la giesia de Sta.
    Maria Formosa sola giesia del nome della gloriosa Vergine Maria."

  [28] Or from the brightness of the cloud, according to the Padre who
    arranged the "Memorie delle Chiese di Venezia," vol. iii. p. 7.
    Compare Corner, p. 42. This first church was built in 639.

  [29] Perhaps both Corner and the Padre founded their diluted
    information on the short sentence of Sansovino: "Finalmente, l'anno
    1075, fu ridotta a perfezione da Paolo Barbetta, sul modello del
    corpo di mezzo della chiesa di S. Marco." Sansovino, however, gives
    842, instead of 864, as the date of the first rebuilding.

  [30] Or at least for its principal families. Vide Appendix 8, "Early
    Venetian Marriages."

  [31] "Nazionale quasi la ceremonia, perciocche per essa nuovi
    difensori ad acquistar andava la patria, sostegni nuovi le leggi, la
    Liberta."--_Mutinelli._

  [32] "Vestita, _per antico uso_, di bianco, e con chiome sparse giù
    per le spalle, conteste con fila d'oro." "Dressed according to
    ancient usage in white, and with her hair thrown down upon her
    shoulders, interwoven with threads of gold." This was when she was
    first brought out of her chamber to be seen by the guests invited to
    the espousals. "And when the form of the espousal has been gone
    through, she is led, to the sound of pipes and trumpets, and other
    musical instruments, round the room, _dancing serenely all the time,
    and bowing herself before the guests_ (ballando placidamente, e
    facendo inchini ai convitati); and so she returns to her chamber:
    and when other guests have arrived, she again comes forth, and makes
    the circuit of the chamber. And this is repeated for an hour or
    somewhat more; and then, accompanied by many ladies who wait for
    her, she enters a gondola without its felze (canopy), and, seated on
    a somewhat raised seat covered with carpets, with a great number of
    gondolas following her, she goes to visit the monasteries and
    convents, wheresoever she has any relations."

  [33] Sansovino.

  [34] English, "Malmsey." The reader will find a most amusing account
    of the negotiations between the English and Venetians, touching the
    supply of London with this wine, in Mr. Brown's translation of the
    Giustiniani papers. See Appendix IX.

  [35] "XV. diebus et octo diebus ante festum Mariarum omni
    anno."--_Galliciolli._ The same precautions were taken before the
    feast of the Ascension.

  [36] Casa Vittura.

  [37] The keystone of the arch on its western side, facing the canal.

  [38] The inscriptions are as follows:

    To the left of the reader.

      "VINCENTIUS CAPELLUS MARITIMARUM
       RERUM PERITISSIMUS ET ANTIQUORUM
       LAUDIBUS PAR, TRIREMIUM ONERARIA
       RUM PRÆFECTUS, AB HENRICO VII. BRI
       TANNIÆ REGE INSIGNE DONATUS CLAS
       SIS LEGATUS V. IMP. DESIG. TER CLAS
       SEM DEDUXIT, COLLAPSAM NAVALEM DIS
       CIPLINAM RESTITUIT, AD ZACXINTHUM
       AURIÆ CÆSARIS LEGATO PRISCAM
       VENETAM VIRTUTEM OSTENDIT."

    To the right of the reader.

      "IN AMBRACIO SINU BARBARUSSUM OTTHO
       MANICÆ CLASSIS DUCEM INCLUSIT
       POSTRIDIE AD INTERNITIONEM DELETU
       RUS NISI FATA CHRISTIANIS ADVERSA
       VETUISSENT. IN RYZONICO SINU CASTRO NOVO
       EXPUGNATO DIVI MARCI PROCUR
       UNIVERSO REIP CONSENSU CREATUS
       IN PATRIA MORITUR TOTIUS CIVITATIS
       MOERORE, ANNO ÆTATIS LXXIV. MDCXLII. XIV. KAL SEPT."

  [39] The Love of God is, however, always shown by the predominance,
    or greater sum, of good, in the end; but never by the annihilation
    of evil. The modern doubts of eternal punishment are not so much the
    consequence of benevolence as of feeble powers of reasoning. Every
    one admits that God brings finite good out of finite evil. Why not,
    therefore, infinite good out of infinite evil?

  [40] Let the reader examine, with special reference to this subject,
    the general character of the language of Iago.

  [41] This opposition of art to inspiration is long and gracefully
    dwelt upon by Plato, in his "Phædrus," using, in the course of his
    argument, almost the words of St Paul: [Greek: kallion marturousin
    oi palaioi manian sôphrosynês tên ek Theou tês par anthrôpôn
    gignomenês]: "It is the testimony of the ancients, that _the madness
    which is of God is a nobler thing than the wisdom which is of men_;"
    and again, "He who sets himself to any work with which the Muses
    have to do," (i. e. to any of the fine arts,) "without madness,
    thinking that by art alone he can do his work sufficiently, will be
    found vain and incapable, and the work of temperance and rationalism
    will be thrust aside and obscured by that of inspiration." The
    passages to the same effect, relating especially to poetry, are
    innumerable in nearly all ancient writers; but in this of Plato, the
    entire compass of the fine arts is intended to be embraced.

    No one acquainted with other parts of my writings will suppose me to
    be an advocate of idle trust in the imagination. But it is in these
    days just as necessary to allege the supremacy of genius as the
    necessity of labor; for there never was, perhaps, a period in which
    the peculiar gift of the painter was so little discerned, in which
    so many and so vain efforts have been made to replace it by study
    and toil. This has been peculiarly the case with the German school,
    and there are few exhibitions of human error more pitiable than the
    manner in which the inferior members of it, men originally and for
    ever destitute of the painting faculty, force themselves into an
    unnatural, encumbered, learned fructification of tasteless fruit,
    and pass laborious lives in setting obscurely and weakly upon canvas
    the philosophy, if such it be, which ten minutes' work of a strong
    man would have put into healthy practice, or plain words. I know not
    anything more melancholy than the sight of the huge German cartoon,
    with its objective side, and subjective side; and mythological
    division, and symbolical division, and human and Divine division;
    its allegorical sense, and literal sense; and ideal point of view,
    and intellectual point of view; its heroism of well-made armor and
    knitted brows; its heroinism of graceful attitude and braided hair;
    its inwoven web of sentiment, and piety, and philosophy, and
    anatomy, and history, all profound: and twenty innocent dashes of
    the hand of one God-made painter, poor old Bassan or Bonifazio, were
    worth it all, and worth it ten thousand times over.

    Not that the sentiment or the philosophy is base in itself. They
    will make a good man, but they will not make a good painter,--no,
    nor the millionth part of a painter. They would have been good in
    the work and words of daily life; but they are good for nothing in
    the cartoon, if they are there alone. And the worst result of the
    system is the intense conceit into which it cultivates a weak mind.
    Nothing is so hopeless, so intolerable, as the pride of a foolish
    man who has passed through a process of thinking, so as actually to
    have found something out. He believes there is nothing else to be
    found out in the universe. Whereas the truly great man, on whom the
    Revelations rain till they bear him to the earth with their weight,
    lays his head in the dust, and speaks thence--often in broken
    syllables. Vanity is indeed a very equally divided inheritance among
    mankind; but I think that among the first persons, no emphasis is
    altogether so strong as that on the German _Ich_. I was once
    introduced to a German philosopher-painter before Tintoret's
    "Massacre of the Innocents." He looked at it superciliously, and
    said it "wanted to be restored." He had been himself several years
    employed in painting a "Faust" in a red jerkin and blue fire; which
    made Tintoret appear somewhat dull to him.

  [42] I have before stated ("Modern Painters" vol. ii.) that the
    first function of the imagination is the apprehension of ultimate
    truth.

  [43] Note especially, in connexion with what was advanced in Vol. II.
    respecting our English neatness of execution, how the base workman
    has cut the lines of the architecture neatly and precisely round the
    abominable head: but the noble workman has used his chisel like a
    painter's pencil, and sketched the glory with a few irregular lines,
    anything rather than circular; and struck out the whole head in the
    same frank and fearless way, leaving the sharp edges of the stone as
    they first broke, and flinging back the crest of hair from the
    forehead with half a dozen hammer-strokes, while the poor wretch who
    did the other was half a day in smoothing its vapid and vermicular
    curls.

  [44] The decree is quoted by Mutinelli, lib. i. p. 46.

  [45] See Appendix 9.




CHAPTER IV.

CONCLUSION.


§ I. I fear this chapter will be a rambling one, for it must be a kind
of supplement to the preceding pages, and a general recapitulation of
the things I have too imperfectly and feebly said.

The grotesques of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the nature
of which we examined in the last chapter, close the career of the
architecture of Europe. They were the last evidences of any feeling
consistent with itself, and capable of directing the efforts of the
builder to the formation of anything worthy the name of a style or
school. From that time to this, no resuscitation of energy has taken
place, nor does any for the present appear possible. How long this
impossibility may last, and in what direction with regard to art in
general, as well as to our lifeless architecture, our immediate efforts
may most profitably be directed, are the questions I would endeavor
briefly to consider in the present chapter.

§ II. That modern science, with all its additions to the comforts of
life, and to the fields of rational contemplation, has placed the
existing races of mankind on a higher platform than any that preceded
them, none can doubt for an instant; and I believe the position in which
we find ourselves is somewhat analogous to that of thoughtful and
laborious youth succeeding a restless and heedless infancy. Not long
ago, it was said to me by one of the masters of modern science: "When
men invented the locomotive, the child was learning to go; when they
invented the telegraph, it was learning to speak." He looked forward to
the manhood of mankind, as assuredly the nobler in proportion to the
slowness of its developement. What might not be expected from the prime
and middle strength of the order of existence whose infancy had lasted
six thousand years? And, indeed, I think this the truest, as well as the
most cheering, view that we can take of the world's history. Little
progress has been made as yet. Base war, lying policy, thoughtless
cruelty, senseless improvidence,--all things which, in nations, are
analogous to the petulance, cunning, impatience, and carelessness of
infancy,--have been, up to this hour, as characteristic of mankind as
they were in the earliest periods; so that we must either be driven to
doubt of human progress at all, or look upon it as in its very earliest
stage. Whether the opportunity is to be permitted us to redeem the hours
that we have lost; whether He, in whose sight a thousand years are as
one day, has appointed us to be tried by the continued possession of the
strange powers with which He has lately endowed us; or whether the
periods of childhood and of probation are to cease together, and the
youth of mankind is to be one which shall prevail over death, and bloom
for ever in the midst of a new heaven and a new earth, are questions
with which we have no concern. It is indeed right that we should look
for, and hasten, so far as in us lies, the coming of the Day of God; but
not that we should check any human efforts by anticipations of its
approach. We shall hasten it best by endeavoring to work out the tasks
that are appointed for us here; and, therefore, reasoning as if the
world were to continue under its existing dispensation, and the powers
which have just been granted to us were to be continued through myriads
of future ages.

§ III. It seems to me, then, that the whole human race, so far as their
own reason can be trusted, may at present be regarded as just emergent
from childhood; and beginning for the first time to feel their strength,
to stretch their limbs, and explore the creation around them. If we
consider that, till within the last fifty years, the nature of the
ground we tread on, of the air we breathe, and of the light by which we
see, were not so much as conjecturally conceived by us; that the
duration of the globe, and the races of animal life by which it was
inhabited, are just beginning to be apprehended; and that the scope of
the magnificent science which has revealed them, is as yet so little
received by the public mind, that presumption and ignorance are still
permitted to raise their voices against it unrebuked; that perfect
veracity in the representation of general nature by art has never been
attempted until the present day, and has in the present day been
resisted with all the energy of the popular voice;[46] that the simplest
problems of social science are yet so little understood, as that
doctrines of liberty and equality can be openly preached, and so
successfully as to affect the whole body of the civilized world with
apparently incurable disease; that the first principles of commerce were
acknowledged by the English Parliament only a few months ago, in its
free trade measures, and are still so little understood by the million,
that no nation dares to abolish its custom-houses;[47] that the simplest
principles of policy are still not so much as stated, far less received,
and that civilized nations persist in the belief that the subtlety and
dishonesty which they know to be ruinous in dealings between man and
man, are serviceable in dealings between multitude and multitude;
finally, that the scope of the Christian religion, which we have been
taught for two thousand years, is still so little conceived by us, that
we suppose the laws of charity and of self-sacrifice bear upon
individuals in all their social relations, and yet do not bear upon
nations in any of their political relations;--when, I say, we thus
review the depth of simplicity in which the human race are still
plunged with respect to all that it most profoundly concerns them to
know, and which might, by them, with most ease have been ascertained, we
can hardly determine how far back on the narrow path of human progress
we ought to place the generation to which we belong, how far the
swaddling clothes are unwound from us, and childish things beginning to
be put away.

On the other hand, a power of obtaining veracity in the representation
of material and tangible things, which, within certain limits and
conditions, is unimpeachable, has now been placed in the hands of all
men,[48] almost without labor. The foundation of every natural science
is now at last firmly laid, not a day passing without some addition of
buttress and pinnacle to their already magnificent fabric. Social
theorems, if fiercely agitated, are therefore the more likely to be at
last determined, so that they never can be matters of question more.
Human life has been in some sense prolonged by the increased powers of
locomotion, and an almost limitless power of converse. Finally, there is
hardly any serious mind in Europe but is occupied, more or less, in the
investigation of the questions which have so long paralyzed the strength
of religious feeling, and shortened the dominion of religious faith. And
we may therefore at least look upon ourselves as so far in a definite
state of progress, as to justify our caution in guarding against the
dangers incident to every period of change, and especially to that from
childhood into youth.

§ IV. Those dangers appear, in the main, to be twofold; consisting
partly in the pride of vain knowledge, partly in the pursuit of vain
pleasure. A few points are still to be noticed with respect to each of
these heads.

Enough, it might be thought, had been said already, touching the pride
of knowledge; but I have not yet applied the principles, at which we
arrived in the third chapter, to the practical questions of modern art.
And I think those principles, together with what were deduced from the
consideration of the nature of Gothic in the second volume, so necessary
and vital, not only with respect to the progress of art, but even to the
happiness of society, that I will rather run the risk of tediousness
than of deficiency, in their illustration and enforcement.

In examining the nature of Gothic, we concluded that one of the chief
elements of power in that, and in _all good_ architecture, was the
acceptance of uncultivated and rude energy in the workman. In examining
the nature of Renaissance, we concluded that its chief element of
weakness was that pride of knowledge which not only prevented all
rudeness in expression, but gradually quenched all energy which could
only be rudely expressed; nor only so, but, for the motive and matter of
the work itself, preferred science to emotion, and experience to
perception.

§ V. The modern mind differs from the Renaissance mind in that its
learning is more substantial and extended, and its temper more humble;
but its errors, with respect to the cultivation of art, are precisely
the same,--nay, as far as regards execution, even more aggravated. We
require, at present, from our general workmen, more perfect finish than
was demanded in the most skilful Renaissance periods, except in their
very finest productions; and our leading principles in teaching, and in
the patronage which necessarily gives tone to teaching, are, that the
goodness of work consists primarily in firmness of handling and accuracy
of science, that is to say, in hand-work and head-work; whereas
heart-work, which is the _one_ work we want, is not only independent of
both, but often, in great degree, inconsistent with either.

§ VI. Here, therefore, let me finally and firmly enunciate the great
principle to which all that has hitherto been stated is
subservient:--that art is valuable or otherwise, only as it expresses
the personality, activity, and living perception of a good and great
human soul; that it may express and contain this with little help from
execution, and less from science; and that if it have not this, if it
show not the vigor, perception, and invention of a mighty human spirit,
it is worthless. Worthless, I mean, as _art_; it may be precious in some
other way, but, as art, it is nugatory. Once let this be well understood
among us, and magnificent consequences will soon follow. Let me repeat
it in other terms, so that I may not be misunderstood. All art is great,
and good, and true, only so far as it is distinctively the work of
_manhood_ in its entire and highest sense; that is to say, not the work
of limbs and fingers, but of the soul, aided, according to her
necessities, by the inferior powers; and therefore distinguished in
essence from all products of those inferior powers unhelped by the soul.
For as a photograph is not a work of art, though it requires certain
delicate manipulations of paper and acid, and subtle calculations of
time, in order to bring out a good result; so, neither would a drawing
_like_ a photograph, made directly from nature, be a work of art,
although it would imply many delicate manipulations of the pencil and
subtle calculations of effects of color and shade. It is no more art[49]
to manipulate a camel's hair pencil, than to manipulate a china tray and
a glass vial. It is no more art to lay on color delicately, than to lay
on acid delicately. It is no more art to use the cornea and retina for
the reception of an image, than to use a lens and a piece of silvered
paper. But the moment that inner part of the man, or rather that entire
and only being of the man, of which cornea and retina, fingers and
hands, pencils and colors, are all the mere servants and
instruments;[50] that manhood which has light in itself, though the
eyeball be sightless, and can gain in strength when the hand and the
foot are hewn off and cast into the fire; the moment this part of the
man stands forth with its solemn "Behold, it is I," then the work
becomes art indeed, perfect in honor, priceless in value, boundless in
power.

§ VII. Yet observe, I do not mean to speak of the body and soul as
separable. The man is made up of both: they are to be raised and
glorified together, and all art is an expression of the one, by and
through the other. All that I would insist upon is, the necessity of the
whole man being in his work; the body _must_ be in it. Hands and habits
must be in it, whether we will or not; but the nobler part of the man
may often not be in it. And that nobler part acts principally in love,
reverence, and admiration, together with those conditions of thought
which arise out of them. For we usually fall into much error by
considering the intellectual powers as having dignity in themselves, and
separable from the heart; whereas the truth is, that the intellect
becomes noble and ignoble according to the food we give it, and the kind
of subjects with which it is conversant. It is not the reasoning power
which, of itself, is noble, but the reasoning power occupied with its
proper objects. Half of the mistakes of metaphysicians have arisen from
their not observing this; namely, that the intellect, going through the
same processes, is yet mean or noble according to the matter it deals
with, and wastes itself away in mere rotatory motion, if it be set to
grind straws and dust. If we reason only respecting words, or lines, or
any trifling and finite things, the reason becomes a contemptible
faculty; but reason employed on holy and infinite things, becomes
herself holy and infinite. So that, by work of the soul, I mean the
reader always to understand the work of the entire immortal creature,
proceeding from a quick, perceptive, and eager heart, perfected by the
intellect, and finally dealt with by the hands, under the direct
guidance of these higher powers.

§ VIII. And now observe, the first important consequence of our fully
understanding this preëminence of the soul, will be the due
understanding of that subordination of knowledge respecting which so
much has already been said. For it must be felt at once, that the
increase of knowledge, merely as such, does not make the soul larger or
smaller; that, in the sight of God, all the knowledge man can gain is as
nothing: but that the soul, for which the great scheme of redemption was
laid, be it ignorant or be it wise, is all in all; and in the activity,
strength, health, and well-being of this soul, lies the main difference,
in His sight, between one man and another. And that which is all in all
in God's estimate is also, be assured, all in all in man's labor; and to
have the heart open, and the eyes clear, and the emotions and thoughts
warm and quick, and not the knowing of this or the other fact, is the
state needed for all mighty doing in this world. And therefore finally,
for this, the weightiest of all reasons, let us take no pride in our
knowledge. We may, in a certain sense, be proud of being immortal; we
may be proud of being God's children; we may be proud of loving,
thinking, seeing, and of all that we are by no human teaching: but not
of what we have been taught by rote; not of the ballast and freight of
the ship of the spirit, but only of its pilotage, without which all the
freight will only sink it faster, and strew the sea more richly with
its ruin. There is not at this moment a youth of twenty, having received
what we moderns ridiculously call education, but he knows more of
everything, except the soul, than Plato or St. Paul did; but he is not
for that reason a greater man, or fitter for his work, or more fit to be
heard by others, than Plato or St. Paul. There is not at this moment a
junior student in our schools of painting, who does not know fifty times
as much about the art as Giotto did; but he is not for that reason
greater than Giotto; no, nor his work better, nor fitter for our
beholding. Let him go on to know all that the human intellect can
discover and contain in the term of a long life, and he will not be one
inch, one line, nearer to Giotto's feet. But let him leave his academy
benches, and, innocently, as one knowing nothing, go out into the
highways and hedges, and there rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep; and in the next world, among the companies of the
great and good, Giotto will give his hand to him, and lead him into
their white circle, and say, "This is our brother."

§ IX. And the second important consequence of our feeling the soul's
preëminence will be our understanding the soul's language, however
broken, or low, or feeble, or obscure in its words; and chiefly that
great symbolic language of past ages, which has now so long been
unspoken. It is strange that the same cold and formal spirit which the
Renaissance teaching has raised amongst us, should be equally dead to
the languages of imitation and of symbolism; and should at once disdain
the faithful rendering of real nature by the modern school of the
Pre-Raphaelites, and the symbolic rendering of imagined nature in the
work of the thirteenth century. But so it is; and we find the same body
of modern artists rejecting Pre-Raphaelitism because it is not ideal!
and thirteenth century work, because it is not real!--their own practice
being at once false and un-ideal, and therefore equally opposed to both.

§ X. It is therefore, at this juncture, of much importance to mark for
the reader the exact relation of healthy symbolism and of healthy
imitation; and, in order to do so, let us return to one of our Venetian
examples of symbolic art, to the central cupola of St. Mark's. On that
cupola, as has been already stated, there is a mosaic representing the
Apostles on the Mount of Olives, with an olive-tree separating each from
the other; and we shall easily arrive at our purpose, by comparing the
means which would have been adopted by a modern artist bred in the
Renaissance schools,--that is to say, under the influence of Claude and
Poussin, and of the common teaching of the present day,--with those
adopted by the Byzantine mosaicist to express the nature of these trees.

§ XI. The reader is doubtless aware that the olive is one of the most
characteristic and beautiful features of all Southern scenery. On the
slopes of the northern Apennines, olives are the usual forest timber;
the whole of the Val d'Arno is wooded with them, every one of its
gardens is filled with them, and they grow in orchard-like ranks out of
its fields of maize, or corn, or vine; so that it is physically
impossible, in most parts of the neighborhood of Florence, Pistoja,
Lucca, or Pisa, to choose any site of landscape which shall not owe its
leading character to the foliage of these trees. What the elm and oak
are to England, the olive is to Italy; nay, more than this, its presence
is so constant, that, in the case of at least four fifths of the
drawings made by any artist in North Italy, he must have been somewhat
impeded by branches of olive coming between him and the landscape. Its
classical associations double its importance in Greece; and in the Holy
Land the remembrances connected with it are of course more touching than
can ever belong to any other tree of the field. Now, for many years
back, at least one third out of all the landscapes painted by English
artists have been chosen from Italian scenery; sketches in Greece and in
the Holy Land have become as common as sketches on Hampstead Heath; our
galleries also are full of sacred subjects, in which, if any background
be introduced at all, the foliage of the olive ought to have been a
prominent feature.

And here I challenge the untravelled English reader to tell me what an
olive-tree is like?

§ XII. I know he cannot answer my challenge. He has no more idea of an
olive-tree than if olives grew only in the fixed stars. Let him meditate
a little on this one fact, and consider its strangeness, and what a
wilful and constant closing of the eyes to the most important truths it
indicates on the part of the modern artist. Observe, a want of
perception, not of science. I do not want painters to tell me any
scientific facts about olive-trees. But it had been well for them to
have felt and seen the olive-tree; to have loved it for Christ's sake,
partly also for the helmed Wisdom's sake which was to the heathen in
some sort as that nobler Wisdom which stood at God's right hand, when He
founded the earth and established the heavens. To have loved it, even to
the hoary dimness of its delicate foliage, subdued and faint of hue, as
if the ashes of the Gethsemane agony had been cast upon it for ever; and
to have traced, line by line, the gnarled writhing of its intricate
branches, and the pointed fretwork of its light and narrow leaves,
inlaid on the blue field of the sky, and the small rosy-white stars of
its spring blossoming, and the beads of sable fruit scattered by autumn
along its topmost boughs--the right, in Israel, of the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow,--and, more than all, the softness of the
mantle, silver grey, and tender like the down on a bird's breast, with
which, far away, it veils the undulation of the mountains;--these it had
been well for them to have seen and drawn, whatever they had left
unstudied in the gallery.

§ XIII. And if the reader would know the reason why this has not been
done (it is one instance only out of the myriads which might be given of
sightlessness in modern art), and will ask the artists themselves, he
will be informed of another of the marvellous contradictions and
inconsistencies in the base Renaissance art; for it will be answered
him, that it is not right, nor according to law, to draw trees so that
one should be known from another, but that trees ought to be generalized
into a universal idea of a tree: that is to say, that the very school
which carries its science in the representation of man down to the
dissection of the most minute muscle, refuses so much science to the
drawing of a tree as shall distinguish one species from another; and
also, while it attends to logic, and rhetoric, and perspective, and
atmosphere, and every other circumstance which is trivial, verbal,
external, or accidental, in what it either says or sees, it will _not_
attend to what is essential and substantial,--being intensely
solicitous, for instance, if it draws two trees, one behind the other,
that the farthest off shall be as much smaller as mathematics show that
it should be, but totally unsolicitous to show, what to the spectator is
a far more important matter, whether it is an apple or an orange tree.

§ XIV. This, however, is not to our immediate purpose. Let it be granted
that an idea of an olive-tree is indeed to be given us in a special
manner; how, and by what language, this idea is to be conveyed, are
questions on which we shall find the world of artists again divided; and
it was this division which I wished especially to illustrate by
reference to the mosaics of St. Mark's.

Now the main characteristics of an olive-tree are these. It has sharp
and slender leaves of a greyish green, nearly grey on the under surface,
and resembling, but somewhat smaller than, those of our common willow.
Its fruit, when ripe, is black and lustrous; but of course so small,
that, unless in great quantity, it is not conspicuous upon the tree. Its
trunk and branches are peculiarly fantastic in their twisting, showing
their fibres at every turn; and the trunk is often hollow, and even rent
into many divisions like separate stems, but the extremities are
exquisitely graceful, especially in the setting on of the leaves; and
the notable and characteristic effect of the tree in the distance is of
a rounded and soft mass or ball of downy foliage.

§ XV. Supposing a modern artist to address himself to the rendering of
this tree with his best skill: he will probably draw accurately the
twisting of the branches, but yet this will hardly distinguish the tree
from an oak: he will also render the color and intricacy of the foliage,
but this will only confuse the idea of an oak with that of a willow. The
fruit, and the peculiar grace of the leaves at the extremities, and the
fibrous structure of the stems, will all be too minute to be rendered
consistently with his artistical feeling of breadth, or with the amount
of labor which he considers it dexterous and legitimate to bestow upon
the work: but, above all, the rounded and monotonous form of the head of
the tree will be at variance with his ideas of "composition;" he will
assuredly disguise or break it, and the main points of the olive-tree
will all at last remain untold.

§ XVI. Now observe, the old Byzantine mosaicist begins his work at
enormous disadvantage. It is to be some one hundred and fifty feet above
the eye, in a dark cupola; executed not with free touches of the pencil,
but with square pieces of glass; not by his own hand, but by various
workmen under his superintendence; finally, not with a principal purpose
of drawing olive-trees, but mainly as a decoration of the cupola. There
is to be an olive-tree beside each apostle, and their stems are to be
the chief lines which divide the dome. He therefore at once gives up the
irregular twisting of the boughs hither and thither, but he will not
give up their fibres. Other trees have irregular and fantastic branches,
but the knitted cordage of fibres is the olive's own. Again, were he to
draw the leaves of their natural size, they would be so small that their
forms would be invisible in the darkness; and were he to draw them so
large as that their shape might be seen, they would look like laurel
instead of olive. So he arranges them in small clusters of five each,
nearly of the shape which the Byzantines give to the petals of the lily,
but elongated so as to give the idea of leafage upon a spray; and these
clusters,--his object always, be it remembered, being _decoration_ not
less than _representation_,--he arranges symmetrically on each side of
his branches, laying the whole on a dark ground most truly suggestive of
the heavy rounded mass of the tree, which, in its turn, is relieved
against the gold of the cupola. Lastly, comes the question respecting
the fruit. The whole power and honor of the olive is in its fruit; and,
unless that be represented, nothing is represented. But if the berries
were colored black or green, they would be totally invisible; if of
any other color, utterly unnatural, and violence would be done to the
whole conception. There is but one conceivable means of showing them,
namely to represent them as golden. For the idea of golden fruit of
various kinds was already familiar to the mind, as in the apples of the
Hesperides, without any violence to the distinctive conception of the
fruit itself.[51] So the mosaicist introduced small round golden berries
into the dark ground between each leaf, and his work was done.

[Illustration: Plate IV.
               Mosaics of Olive-tree and Flowers.]

§ XVII. On the opposite plate, the uppermost figure on the left is a
tolerably faithful representation of the general effect of one of these
decorative olive-trees; the figure on the right is the head of the tree
alone, showing the leaf clusters, berries, and _interlacing_ of the
boughs as they leave the stem. Each bough is connected with a separate
line of fibre in the trunk, and the junctions of the arms and stem are
indicated, down to the very root of the tree, with a truth in structure
which may well put to shame the tree anatomy of modern times.

§ XVIII. The white branching figures upon the serpentine band below are
two of the clusters of flowers which form the foreground of a mosaic in
the atrium. I have printed the whole plate in blue, because that color
approaches more nearly than black to the distant effect of the mosaics,
of which the darker portions are generally composed of blue, in greater
quantity than any other color. But the waved background in this
instance, is of various shades of blue and green alternately, with one
narrow black band to give it force; the whole being intended to
represent the distant effect and color of deep grass, and the wavy line
to _express its bending motion_, just as the same symbol is used to
represent the waves of water. Then the two white clusters are
representative of the distinctly visible herbage close to the
spectator, having buds and flowers of two kinds, springing in one case
out of the midst of twisted grass, and in the other out of their own
proper leaves; the clusters being kept each so distinctly symmetrical,
as to form, when set side by side, an ornamental border of perfect
architectural severity; and yet each cluster different from the next,
and every flower, and bud, and knot of grass, varied in form and
thought. The way the mosaic tesseræ are arranged, so as to give the
writhing of the grass blades round the stalks of the flowers, is
exceedingly fine.

The tree circles below are examples of still more severely conventional
forms, adopted, on principle, when the decoration is to be in white and
gold, instead of color; these ornaments being cut in white marble on the
outside of the church, and the ground laid in with gold, though
necessarily here represented, like the rest of the plate, in blue. And
it is exceedingly interesting to see how the noble workman, the moment
he is restricted to more conventional materials, retires into more
conventional forms, and reduces his various leafage into symmetry, now
nearly perfect; yet observe, in the central figure, where the symbolic
meaning of the vegetation beside the cross required it to be more
distinctly indicated, he has given it life and growth by throwing it
into unequal curves on the opposite sides.

§ XIX. I believe the reader will now see, that in these mosaics, which
the careless traveller is in the habit of passing by with contempt,
there is a depth of feeling and of meaning greater than in most of the
best sketches from nature of modern times; and, without entering into
any question whether these conventional representations are as good as,
under the required limitations, it was possible to render them, they are
at all events good enough completely to illustrate that mode of
symbolical expression which appeals altogether to thought, and in no
wise trusts to realization. And little as, in the present state of our
schools, such an assertion is likely to be believed, the fact is that
this kind of expression is the _only one allowable in noble art_.

§ XX. I pray the reader to have patience with me for a few moments. I do
not mean that no art is noble but Byzantine mosaic; but no art is noble
which in any wise depends upon direct imitation for its effect upon the
mind. This was asserted in the opening chapters of "Modern Painters,"
but not upon the highest grounds; the results at which we have now
arrived in our investigation of early art, will enable me to place it on
a loftier and firmer foundation.

§ XXI. We have just seen that all great art is the work of the whole
living creature, body and soul, and chiefly of the soul. But it is not
only _the work_ of the whole creature, it likewise _addresses_ the whole
creature. That in which the perfect being speaks, must also have the
perfect being to listen. I am not to spend my utmost spirit, and give
all my strength and life to my work, while you, spectator or hearer,
will give me only the attention of half your soul. You must be all mine,
as I am all yours; it is the only condition on which we can meet each
other. All your faculties, all that is in you of greatest and best, must
be awake in you, or I have no reward. The painter is not to cast the
entire treasure of his human nature into his labor, merely to please a
part of the beholder: not merely to delight his senses, not merely to
amuse his fancy, not merely to beguile him into emotion, not merely to
lead him into thought, but to do _all_ this. Senses, fancy, feeling,
reason, the whole of the beholding spirit, must be stilled in attention
or stirred with delight; else the laboring spirit has not done its work
well. For observe, it is not merely its _right_ to be thus met, face to
face, heart to heart; but it is its _duty_ to evoke its answering of the
other soul; its trumpet call must be so clear, that though the challenge
may by dulness or indolence be unanswered, there shall be no error as to
the meaning of the appeal; there must be a summons in the work, which it
shall be our own fault if we do not obey. We require this of it, we
beseech this of it. Most men do not know what is in them, till they
receive this summons from their fellows: their hearts die within them,
sleep settles upon them, the lethargy of the world's miasmata; there is
nothing for which they are so thankful as for that cry, "Awake, thou
that sleepest." And this cry must be most loudly uttered to their
noblest faculties; first of all to the imagination, for that is the most
tender, and the soonest struck into numbness by the poisoned air; so
that one of the main functions of art in its service to man, is to
arouse the imagination from its palsy, like the angel troubling the
Bethesda pool; and the art which does not do this is false to its duty,
and degraded in its nature. It is not enough that it be well imagined,
it must task the beholder also to imagine well; and this so
imperatively, that if he does not choose to rouse himself to meet the
work, he shall not taste it, nor enjoy it in any wise. Once that he is
well awake, the guidance which the artist gives him should be full and
authoritative: the beholder's imagination must not be suffered to take
its own way, or wander hither and thither; but neither must it be left
at rest; and the right point of realization, for any given work of art,
is that which will enable the spectator to complete it for himself, in
the exact way the artist would have him, but not that which will save
him the trouble of effecting the completion. So soon as the idea is
entirely conveyed, the artist's labor should cease; and every touch
which he adds beyond the point when, with the help of the beholder's
imagination, the story ought to have been told, is a degradation to his
work. So that the art is wrong, which either realizes its subject
completely, or fails in giving such definite aid as shall enable it to
be realized by the beholding imagination.

§ XXII. It follows, therefore, that the quantity of finish or detail
which may rightly be bestowed upon any work, depends on the number and
kind of ideas which the artist wishes to convey, much more than on the
amount of realization necessary to enable the imagination to grasp them.
It is true that the differences of judgment formed by one or another
observer are in great degree dependent on their unequal imaginative
powers, as well as their unequal efforts in following the artist's
intention; and it constantly happens that the drawing which appears
clear to the painter in whose mind the thought is formed, is slightly
inadequate to suggest it to the spectator. These causes of false
judgment, or imperfect achievement, must always exist, but they are of
no importance. For, in nearly every mind, the imaginative power, however
unable to act independently, is so easily helped and so brightly
animated by the most obscure suggestion, that there is no form of
artistical language which will not readily be seized by it, if once it
set itself intelligently to the task; and even without such effort there
are few hieroglyphics of which, once understanding that it is to take
them as hieroglyphics, it cannot make itself a pleasant picture.

§ XXIII. Thus, in the case of all sketches, etchings, unfinished
engravings, &c., no one ever supposes them to be imitations. Black
outlines on white paper cannot produce a deceptive resemblance of
anything; and the mind, understanding at once that it is to depend on
its own powers for great part of its pleasure, sets itself so actively
to the task that it can completely enjoy the rudest outline in which
meaning exists. Now, when it is once in this temper, the artist is
infinitely to be blamed who insults it by putting anything into his work
which is not suggestive: having summoned the imaginative power, he must
turn it to account and keep it employed, or it will run against him in
indignation. Whatever he does merely to realize and substantiate an idea
is impertinent; he is like a dull story-teller, dwelling on points which
the hearer anticipates or disregards. The imagination will say to him:
"I knew all that before; I don't want to be told that. Go on; or be
silent, and let me go on in my own way. I can tell the story better than
you."

Observe, then, whenever finish is given for the sake of realization, it
is wrong; whenever it is given for the sake of adding ideas it is right.
All true finish consists in the addition of ideas, that is to say, in
giving the imagination more food; for once well awaked, it is ravenous
for food: but the painter who finishes in order to substantiate takes
the food out of its mouth, and it will turn and rend him.

§ XXIV. Let us go back, for instance, to our olive grove,--or, lest the
reader should be tired of olives, let it be an oak copse,--and consider
the difference between the substantiating and the imaginative methods of
finish in such a subject. A few strokes of the pencil, or dashes of
color, will be enough to enable the imagination to conceive a tree; and
in those dashes of color Sir Joshua Reynolds would have rested, and
would have suffered the imagination to paint what more it liked for
itself, and grow oaks, or olives, or apples, out of the few dashes of
color at its leisure. On the other hand, Hobbima, one of the worst of
the realists, smites the imagination on the mouth, and bids it be
silent, while he sets to work to paint his oak of the right green, and
fill up its foliage laboriously with jagged touches, and furrow the bark
all over its branches, so as, if possible, to deceive us into supposing
that we are looking at a real oak; which, indeed, we had much better do
at once, without giving any one the trouble to deceive us in the matter.

§ XXV. Now, the truly great artist neither leaves the imagination to
itself, like Sir Joshua, nor insults it by realization, like Hobbima,
but finds it continual employment of the happiest kind. Having summoned
it by his vigorous first touches, he says to it: "Here is a tree for
you, and it is to be an oak. Now I know that you can make it green and
intricate for yourself, but that is not enough: an oak is not only green
and intricate, but its leaves have most beautiful and fantastic forms
which I am very sure you are not quite able to complete without help; so
I will draw a cluster or two perfectly for you, and then you can go on
and do all the other clusters. So far so good: but the leaves are not
enough; the oak is to be full of acorns, and you may not be quite able
to imagine the way they grow, nor the pretty contrast of their glossy
almond-shaped nuts with the chasing of their cups; so I will draw a
bunch or two of acorns for you, and you can fill up the oak with others
like them. Good: but that is not enough; it is to be a bright day in
summer, and all the outside leaves are to be glittering in the sunshine
as if their edges were of gold: I cannot paint this, but you can; so I
will really gild some of the edges nearest you,[52] and you can turn
the gold into sunshine, and cover the tree with it. Well done: but still
this is not enough; the tree is so full foliaged and so old that the
wood birds come in crowds to build there; they are singing, two or three
under the shadow of every bough. I cannot show you them all; but here is
a large one on the outside spray, and you can fancy the others inside."

§ XXVI. In this way the calls upon the imagination are multiplied as a
great painter finishes; and from these larger incidents he may proceed
into the most minute particulars, and lead the companion imagination to
the veins in the leaves and the mosses on the trunk, and the shadows of
the dead leaves upon the grass, but always multiplying thoughts, or
subjects of thought, never working for the sake of realization; the
amount of realization actually reached depending on his space, his
materials, and the nature of the thoughts he wishes to suggest. In the
sculpture of an oak-tree, introduced above an Adoration of the Magi on
the tomb of the Doge Marco Dolfino (fourteenth century), the sculptor
has been content with a few leaves, a single acorn, and a bird; while,
on the other hand, Millais' willow-tree with the robin, in the
background of his "Ophelia," or the foreground of Hunt's "Two Gentlemen
of Verona," carries the appeal to the imagination into particulars so
multiplied and minute, that the work nearly reaches realization. But it
does not matter how near realization the work may approach in its
fulness, or how far off it may remain in its slightness, so long as
realization is not the end proposed, but the informing one spirit of the
thoughts of another. And in this greatness and simplicity of purpose all
noble art is alike, however slight its means, or however perfect, from
the rudest mosaics of St. Mark's to the most tender finishing of the
"Huguenot" or the "Ophelia."

§ XXVII. Only observe, in this matter, that a greater degree of
realization is often allowed, for the sake of color, than would be right
without it. For there is not any distinction between the artists of the
inferior and the nobler schools more definite than this; that the first
_color for the sake of realization_, and the second _realize for the
sake of color_. I hope that, in the fifth chapter, enough has been said
to show the nobility of color, though it is a subject on which I would
fain enlarge whenever I approach it: for there is none that needs more
to be insisted upon, chiefly on account of the opposition of the persons
who have no eye for color, and who, being therefore unable to understand
that it is just as divine and distinct in its power as music (only
infinitely more varied in its harmonies), talk of it as if it were
inferior and servile with respect to the other powers of art;[53]
whereas it is so far from being this, that wherever it enters it must
take the mastery, and, whatever else is sacrificed for its sake, _it_,
at least, must be right. This is partly the case even with music: it is
at our choice, whether we will accompany a poem with music, or not; but,
if we do, the music _must_ be right, and neither discordant nor
inexpressive. The goodness and sweetness of the poem cannot save it, if
the music be harsh or false; but, if the music be right, the poem may be
insipid or inharmonious, and still saved by the notes to which it is
wedded. But this is far more true of color. If that be wrong, all is
wrong. No amount of expression or invention can redeem an ill-colored
picture; while, on the other hand, if the color be right, there is
nothing it will not raise or redeem; and, therefore, wherever color
enters at all, anything _may_ be sacrificed to it, and, rather than it
should be false or feeble, everything _must_ be sacrificed to it: so
that, when an artist touches color, it is the same thing as when a poet
takes up a musical instrument; he implies, in so doing, that he is a
master, up to a certain point, of that instrument, and can produce sweet
sound from it, and is able to fit the course and measure of his words to
its tones, which, if he be not able to do, he had better not have
touched it. In like manner, to add color to a drawing is to undertake
for the perfection of a visible music, which, if it be false, will
utterly and assuredly mar the whole work; if true, proportionately
elevate it, according to its power and sweetness. But, in no case ought
the color to be added in order to increase the realization. The drawing
or engraving is all that the imagination needs. To "paint" the subject
merely to make it more real, is only to insult the imaginative power and
to vulgarize the whole. Hence the common, though little understood
feeling, among men of ordinary cultivation, that an inferior sketch is
always better than a bad painting; although, in the latter, there may
verily be more skill than in the former. For the painter who has
presumed to touch color without perfectly understanding it, not for the
color's sake, nor because he loves it, but for the sake of completion
merely, has committed two sins against us; he has dulled the imagination
by not trusting it far enough, and then, in this languid state, he
oppresses it with base and false color; for all color that is not
lovely, is discordant; there is no mediate condition. So, therefore,
when it is permitted to enter at all, it must be with the
predetermination that, cost what it will, the color shall be right and
lovely: and I only wish that, in general, it were better understood that
a _painter's_ business is _to paint_, primarily; and that all
expression, and grouping, and conceiving, and what else goes to
constitute design, _are of less importance than color, in a colored
work_. And so they were always considered in the noble periods; and
sometimes all resemblance to nature whatever (as in painted windows,
illuminated manuscripts, and such other work) is sacrificed to the
brilliancy of color; sometimes distinctness of form to its richness, as
by Titian, Turner, and Reynolds; and, which is the point on which we are
at present insisting, sometimes, in the pursuit of its utmost
refinements on the surfaces of objects, an amount of realization becomes
consistent with noble art, which would otherwise be altogether
inadmissible, that is to say, which no great mind could otherwise have
either produced or enjoyed. The extreme finish given by the
Pre-Raphaelites is rendered noble chiefly by their love of color.

§ XXVIII. So then, whatever may be the means, or whatever the more
immediate end of any kind of art, all of it that is good agrees in this,
that it is the expression of one soul talking to another, and is
precious according to the greatness of the soul that utters it. And
consider what mighty consequences follow from our acceptance of this
truth! what a key we have herein given us for the interpretation of the
art of all time! For, as long as we held art to consist in any high
manual skill, or successful imitation of natural objects, or any
scientific and legalized manner of performance whatever, it was
necessary for us to limit our admiration to narrow periods and to few
men. According to our own knowledge and sympathies, the period chosen
might be different, and our rest might be in Greek statues, or Dutch
landscapes, or Italian Madonnas; but, whatever our choice, we were
therein captive, barred from all reverence but of our favorite masters,
and habitually using the language of contempt towards the whole of the
human race to whom it had not pleased Heaven to reveal the arcana of the
particular craftsmanship we admired, and who, it might be, had lived
their term of seventy years upon the earth, and fitted themselves
therein for the eternal world, without any clear understanding,
sometimes even with an insolent disregard, of the laws of perspective
and chiaroscuro.

But let us once comprehend the holier nature of the art of man, and
begin to look for the meaning of the spirit, however syllabled, and the
scene is changed; and we are changed also. Those small and dexterous
creatures whom once we worshipped, those fur-capped divinities with
sceptres of camel's hair, peering and poring in their one-windowed
chambers over the minute preciousness of the labored canvas; how are
they swept away and crushed into unnoticeable darkness! And in their
stead, as the walls of the dismal rooms that enclosed them, and us, are
struck by the four winds of Heaven, and rent away, and as the world
opens to our sight, lo! far back into all the depths of time, and forth
from all the fields that have been sown with human life, how the harvest
of the dragon's teeth is springing! how the companies of the gods are
ascending out of the earth! The dark stones that have so long been the
sepulchres of the thoughts of nations, and the forgotten ruins wherein
their faith lay charnelled, give up the dead that were in them; and
beneath the Egyptian ranks of sultry and silent rock, and amidst the dim
golden lights of the Byzantine dome, and out of the confused and cold
shadows of the Northern cloister, behold, the multitudinous souls come
forth with singing, gazing on us with the soft eyes of newly
comprehended sympathy, and stretching their white arms to us across the
grave, in the solemn gladness of everlasting brotherhood.

§ XXIX. The other danger to which, it was above said, we were primarily
exposed under our present circumstances of life, is the pursuit of vain
pleasure, that is to say, false pleasure; delight, which is not indeed
delight; as knowledge vainly accumulated, is not indeed knowledge. And
this we are exposed to chiefly in the fact of our ceasing to be
children. For the child does not seek false pleasure; its pleasures are
true, simple, and instinctive: but the youth is apt to abandon his early
and true delight for vanities,--seeking to be like men, and sacrificing
his natural and pure enjoyments to his pride. In like manner, it seems
to me that modern civilization sacrifices much pure and true pleasure to
various forms of ostentation from which it can receive no fruit.
Consider, for a moment, what kind of pleasures are open to human nature,
undiseased. Passing by the consideration of the pleasures of the higher
affections, which lie at the root of everything, and considering the
definite and practical pleasures of daily life, there is, first, the
pleasure of doing good; the greatest of all, only apt to be despised
from not being often enough tasted: and then, I know not in what order
to put them, nor does it matter,--the pleasure of gaining knowledge; the
pleasure of the excitement of imagination and emotion (or poetry and
passion); and, lastly, the gratification of the senses, first of the
eye, then of the ear, and then of the others in their order.

§ XXX. All these we are apt to make subservient to the desire of praise;
nor unwisely, when the praise sought is God's and the conscience's: but
if the sacrifice is made for man's admiration, and knowledge is only
sought for praise, passion repressed or affected for praise, and the
arts practised for praise, we are feeding on the bitterest apples of
Sodom, suffering always ten mortifications for one delight. And it seems
to me, that in the modern civilized world we make such sacrifice doubly:
first, by laboring for merely ambitious purposes; and secondly, which is
the main point in question, by being ashamed of simple pleasures, more
especially of the pleasure in sweet color and form, a pleasure evidently
so necessary to man's perfectness and virtue, that the beauty of color
and form has been given lavishly throughout the whole of creation, so
that it may become the food of all, and with such intricacy and subtlety
that it may deeply employ the thoughts of all. If we refuse to accept
the natural delight which the Deity has thus provided for us, we must
either become ascetics, or we must seek for some base and guilty
pleasures to replace those of Paradise, which we have denied ourselves.

Some years ago, in passing through some of the cells of the Grand
Chartreuse, noticing that the window of each apartment looked across the
little garden of its inhabitant to the wall of the cell opposite, and
commanded no other view, I asked the monk beside me, why the window was
not rather made on the side of the cell whence it would open to the
solemn fields of the Alpine valley. "We do not come here," he replied,
"to look at the mountains."

§ XXXI. The same answer is given, practically, by the men of this
century, to every such question; only the walls with which they enclose
themselves are those of pride, not of prayer. But in the middle ages it
was otherwise. Not, indeed, in landscape itself, but in the art which
can take the place of it, in the noble color and form with which they
illumined, and into which they wrought, every object around them that
was in any wise subjected to their power, they obeyed the laws of their
inner nature, and found its proper food. The splendor and fantasy even
of dress, which in these days we pretend to despise, or in which, if we
even indulge, it is only for the sake of vanity, and therefore to our
infinite harm, were in those early days studied for love of their true
beauty and honorableness, and became one of the main helps to dignity of
character, and courtesy of bearing. Look back to what we have been told
of the dress of the early Venetians, that it was so invented "that in
clothing themselves with it, they might clothe themselves also with
modesty and honor;"[54] consider what nobleness of expression there is
in the dress of any of the portrait figures of the great times, nay,
what perfect beauty, and more than beauty, there is in the folding of
the robe round the imagined form even of the saint or of the angel; and
then consider whether the grace of vesture be indeed a thing to be
despised. We cannot despise it if we would; and in all our highest
poetry and happiest thought we cling to the magnificence which in daily
life we disregard. The essence of modern romance is simply the return of
the heart and fancy to the things in which they naturally take pleasure;
and half the influence of the best romances, of Ivanhoe, or Marmion, or
the Crusaders, or the Lady of the Lake, is completely dependent upon the
accessaries of armor and costume. Nay, more than this, deprive the Iliad
itself of its costume, and consider how much of its power would be lost.
And that delight and reverence which we feel in, and by means of, the
mere imagination of these accessaries, the middle ages had in the vision
of them; the nobleness of dress exercising, as I have said, a perpetual
influence upon character, tending in a thousand ways to increase
dignity and self-respect, and together with grace of gesture, to induce
serenity of thought.

§ XXXII. I do not mean merely in its magnificence; the most splendid
time was not the best time. It was still in the thirteenth
century,--when, as we have seen, simplicity and gorgeousness were justly
mingled, and the "leathern girdle and clasp of bone" were worn, as well
as the embroidered mantle,--that the manner of dress seems to have been
noblest. The chain mail of the knight, flowing and falling over his form
in lapping waves of gloomy strength, was worn under full robes of one
color in the ground, his crest quartered on them, and their borders
enriched with subtle illumination. The women wore first a dress close to
the form in like manner, and then long and flowing robes, veiling them
up to the neck, and delicately embroidered around the hem, the sleeves,
and the girdle. The use of plate armor gradually introduced more
fantastic types; the nobleness of the form was lost beneath the steel;
the gradually increasing luxury and vanity of the age strove for
continual excitement in more quaint and extravagant devices; and in the
fifteenth century, dress reached its point of utmost splendor and fancy,
being in many cases still exquisitely graceful, but now, in its morbid
magnificence, devoid of all wholesome influence on manners. From this
point, like architecture, it was rapidly degraded; and sank through the
buff coat, and lace collar, and jack-boot, to the bag-wig, tailed coat,
and high-heeled shoes; and so to what it is now.

§ XXXIII. Precisely analogous to this destruction of beauty in dress,
has been that of beauty in architecture; its color, and grace, and
fancy, being gradually sacrificed to the base forms of the Renaissance,
exactly as the splendor of chivalry has faded into the paltriness of
fashion. And observe the form in which the necessary reaction has taken
place; necessary, for it was not possible that one of the strongest
instincts of the human race could be deprived altogether of its natural
food. Exactly in the degree that the architect withdrew from his
buildings the sources of delight which in early days they had so richly
possessed, demanding, in accordance with the new principles of taste,
the banishment of all happy color and healthy invention, in that degree
the minds of men began to turn to landscape as their only resource. The
picturesque school of art rose up to address those capacities of
enjoyment for which, in sculpture, architecture, or the higher walks of
painting, there was employment no more; and the shadows of Rembrandt,
and savageness of Salvator, arrested the admiration which was no longer
permitted to be rendered to the gloom or the grotesqueness of the Gothic
aisle. And thus the English school of landscape, culminating in Turner,
is in reality nothing else than a healthy effort to fill the void which
the destruction of Gothic architecture has left.

§ XXXIV. But the void cannot thus be completely filled; no, nor filled
in any considerable degree. The art of landscape-painting will never
become thoroughly interesting or sufficing to the minds of men engaged
in active life, or concerned principally with practical subjects. The
sentiment and imagination necessary to enter fully into the romantic
forms of art are chiefly the characteristics of youth; so that nearly
all men as they advance in years, and some even from their childhood
upwards, must be appealed to, if at all, by a direct and substantial
art, brought before their daily observation and connected with their
daily interests. No form of art answers these conditions so well as
architecture, which, as it can receive help from every character of mind
in the workman, can address every character of mind in the spectator;
forcing itself into notice even in his most languid moments, and
possessing this chief and peculiar advantage, that it is the property of
all men. Pictures and statues may be jealously withdrawn by their
possessors from the public gaze, and to a certain degree their safety
requires them to be so withdrawn; but the outsides of our houses belong
not so much to us as to the passer-by, and whatever cost and pains we
bestow upon them, though too often arising out of ostentation, have at
least the effect of benevolence.

§ XXXV. If, then, considering these things, any of my readers should
determine, according to their means, to set themselves to the revival
of a healthy school of architecture in England, and wish to know in few
words how this may be done, the answer is clear and simple. First, let
us cast out utterly whatever is connected with the Greek, Roman, or
Renaissance architecture, in principle or in form. We have seen above,
that the whole mass of the architecture, founded on Greek and Roman
models, which we have been in the habit of building for the last three
centuries, is utterly devoid of all life, virtue, honorableness, or
power of doing good. It is base, unnatural, unfruitful, unenjoyable, and
impious. Pagan in its origin, proud and unholy in its revival, paralyzed
in its old age, yet making prey in its dotage of all the good and living
things that were springing around it in their youth, as the dying and
desperate king, who had long fenced himself so strongly with the towers
of it, is said to have filled his failing veins with the blood of
children;[55] an architecture invented, as it seems, to make plagiarists
of its architects, slaves of its workmen, and Sybarites of its
inhabitants; an architecture in which intellect is idle, invention
impossible, but in which all luxury is gratified, and all insolence
fortified;--the first thing we have to do is to cast it out, and shake
the dust of it from our feet for ever. Whatever has any connexion with
the five orders, or with any one of the orders,--whatever is Doric, or
Ionic, or Tuscan, or Corinthian, or Composite, or in any way Grecized or
Romanized; whatever betrays the smallest respect for Vitruvian laws, or
conformity with Palladian work,--that we are to endure no more. To
cleanse ourselves of these "cast clouts and rotten rags" is the first
thing to be done in the court of our prison.

§ XXXVI. Then, to turn our prison into a palace is an easy thing. We
have seen above, that exactly in the degree in which Greek and Roman
architecture is lifeless, unprofitable, and unchristian, in that same
degree our own ancient Gothic is animated, serviceable, and faithful. We
have seen that it is flexible to all duty, enduring to all time,
instructive to all hearts, honorable and holy in all offices. It is
capable alike of all lowliness and all dignity, fit alike for cottage
porch or castle gateway; in domestic service familiar, in religious,
sublime; simple, and playful, so that childhood may read it, yet clothed
with a power that can awe the mightiest, and exalt the loftiest of human
spirits: an architecture that kindles every faculty in its workman, and
addresses every emotion in its beholder; which, with every stone that is
laid on its solemn walls, raises some human heart a step nearer heaven,
and which from its birth has been incorporated with the existence, and
in all its form is symbolical of the faith, of Christianity. In this
architecture let us henceforward build, alike the church, the palace,
and the cottage; but chiefly let us use it for our civil and domestic
buildings. These once ennobled, our ecclesiastical work will be exalted
together with them: but churches are not the proper scenes for
experiments in untried architecture, nor for exhibitions of unaccustomed
beauty. It is certain that we must often fail before we can again build
a natural and noble Gothic: let not our temples be the scenes of our
failures. It is certain that we must offend many deep-rooted prejudices,
before ancient Christian architecture[56] can be again received by all
of us: let not religion be the first source of such offence. We shall
meet with difficulties in applying Gothic architecture to churches,
which would in no wise affect the designs of civil buildings, for the
most beautiful forms of Gothic chapels are not those which are best
fitted for Protestant worship. As it was noticed in the second volume,
when speaking of the Cathedral of Torcello it seems not unlikely, that
as we study either the science of sound, or the practice of the early
Christians, we may see reason to place the pulpit generally at the
extremity of the apse or chancel; an arrangement entirely destructive of
the beauty of a Gothic church, as seen in existing examples, and
requiring modifications of its design in other parts with which we
should be unwise at present to embarrass ourselves; besides, that the
effort to introduce the style exclusively for ecclesiastical purposes,
excites against it the strong prejudices of many persons who might
otherwise be easily enlisted among its most ardent advocates. I am quite
sure, for instance, that if such noble architecture as has been employed
for the interior of the church just built in Margaret Street[57] had
been seen in a civil building, it would have decided the question with
many men at once; whereas, at present, it will be looked upon with fear
and suspicion, as the expression of the ecclesiastical principles of a
particular party. But, whether thus regarded or not, this church
assuredly decides one question conclusively, that of our present
capability of Gothic design. It is the first piece of architecture I
have seen, built in modern days, which is free from all signs of
timidity or incapacity. In general proportion of parts, in refinement
and piquancy of mouldings, above all, in force, vitality, and grace of
floral ornament, worked in a broad and masculine manner, it challenges
fearless comparison with the noblest work of any time. Having done this,
we may do anything; there need be no limits to our hope or our
confidence; and I believe it to be possible for us, not only to equal,
but far to surpass, in some respects, any Gothic yet seen in Northern
countries. In the introduction of figure-sculpture, we must, indeed, for
the present, remain utterly inferior, for we have no figures to study
from. No architectural sculpture was ever good for anything which did
not represent the dress and persons of the people living at the time;
and our modern dress will _not_ form decorations for spandrils and
niches. But in floral sculpture we may go far beyond what has yet been
done, as well as in refinement of inlaid work and general execution.
For, although the glory of Gothic architecture is to receive the rudest
work, it refuses not the best; and, when once we have been content to
admit the handling of the simplest workman, we shall soon be rewarded by
finding many of our simple workmen become cunning ones: and, with the
help of modern wealth and science, we may do things like Giotto's
campanile, instead of like our own rude cathedrals; but better than
Giotto's campanile, insomuch as we may adopt the pure and perfect forms
of the Northern Gothic, and work them out with the Italian refinement.
It is hardly possible at present to imagine what may be the splendor of
buildings designed in the forms of English and French thirteenth century
_surface_ Gothic, and wrought out with the refinement of Italian art in
the details, and with a deliberate resolution, since we cannot have
figure sculpture, to display in them the beauty of every flower and herb
of the English fields, each by each; doing as much for every tree that
roots itself in our rocks, and every blossom that drinks our summer
rains, as our ancestors did for the oak, the ivy, and the rose. Let this
be the object of our ambition, and let us begin to approach it, not
ambitiously, but in all humility, accepting help from the feeblest
hands; and the London of the nineteenth century may yet become as Venice
without her despotism, and as Florence without her dispeace.


FOOTNOTES:

  [46] In the works of Turner and the Pre-Raphaelites.

  [47] Observe, I speak of these various principles as self-evident,
    only under the present circumstances of the world, not as if they
    had always been so; and I call them now self-evident, not merely
    because they seem so to myself, but because they are felt to be so
    likewise by all the men in whom I place most trust. But granting
    that they are not so, then their very disputability proves the state
    of infancy above alleged, as characteristic of the world. For I do
    not suppose that any Christian reader will doubt the first great
    truth, that whatever facts or laws are important to mankind, God has
    made ascertainable by mankind; and that as the decision of all these
    questions is of vital importance to the race, that decision must
    have been long ago arrived at, unless they were still in a state of
    childhood.

  [48] I intended to have given a sketch in this place (above referred
    to) of the probable results of the daguerreotype and calotype within
    the next few years, in modifying the application of the engraver's
    art, but I have not had time to complete the experiments necessary
    to enable me to speak with certainty. Of one thing, however, I have
    little doubt, that an infinite service will soon be done to a large
    body of our engravers; namely, the making them draughtsmen (in black
    and white) on paper instead of steel.

  [49] I mean art in its highest sense. All that men do ingeniously is
    art, in one sense. In fact, we want a definition of the word "art"
    much more accurate than any in our minds at present. For, strictly
    speaking, there is no such thing as "fine" or "high" art. All _art_
    is a low and common thing, and what we indeed respect is not art at
    all, but _instinct_ or _inspiration_ expressed by the help of art.

  [50] "_Socrates_. This, then, was what I asked you; whether that
    which puts anything else to service, and the thing which is put to
    service by it, are always two different things?

    _Alcibiades._ I think so.

    _Socrates._ What shall we then say of the leather-cutter? Does he
    cut his leather with his instruments only, or with his hands also?

    _Alcibiades._ With his hands also.

    _Socrates._ Does he not use his eyes as well as his hands?

    _Alcibiades._ Yes.

    _Socrates._ And we agreed that the thing which uses and the thing
    which is used, were different things?

    _Alcibiades._ Yes.

    _Socrates._ Then the leather-cutter is not the same thing as his
    eyes or hands?

    _Alcibiades._ So it appears.

    _Socrates._ Does not, then, man make use of his whole body?

    _Alcibiades._ Assuredly.

    _Socrates._ Then the man is not the same thing as his body?

    _Alcibiades._ It seems so.

    _Socrates._ What, then, _is_ the man?

    _Alcibiades._ I know not."

    _Plato_, Alcibiades I.

  [51] Thus the grapes pressed by Excesse are partly golden (Spenser,
    book ii. cant. 12.):

            "Which did themselves amongst the leaves enfold,
             As lurking from the view of covetous guest,
             That the weake boughes, with so rich load opprest
             Did bow adowne as overburdened."

  [52] The reader must not suppose that the use of gold, in this manner,
    is confined to early art. Tintoret, the greatest master of pictorial
    effect that ever existed, has gilded the ribs of the fig-leaves in
    his "Resurrection," in the Scuola di San Rocco.

  [53] Nothing is more wonderful to me than to hear the pleasure of the
    eye, in color, spoken of with disdain as "sensual," while people
    exalt that of the ear in music. Do they really suppose the eye is a
    less noble bodily organ than the ear,--that the organ by which
    nearly all our knowledge of the external universe is communicated to
    us, and through which we learn the wonder and the love, can be less
    exalted in its own peculiar delight than the ear, which is only for
    the communication of the ideas which owe to the eye their very
    existence? I do not mean to depreciate music: let it be loved and
    reverenced as is just; only let the delight of the eye be reverenced
    more. The great power of music over the multitude is owing, not to
    its being less but _more_ sensual than color; it is so distinctly
    and so richly sensual, that it can be idly enjoyed; it is exactly at
    the point where the lower and higher pleasures of the senses and
    imagination are balanced; so that pure and great minds love it for
    its invention and emotion, and lower minds for its sensual power.

  [54] Vol. II. Appendix 7.

  [55] Louis the Eleventh. "In the month of March, 1481, Louis was
    seized with a fit of apoplexy at _St. Bénoit-du-lac-mort_, near
    Chinon. He remained speechless and bereft of reason three days; and
    then but very imperfectly restored, he languished in a miserable
    state.... To cure him," says a contemporary historian, "wonderful
    and terrible medicines were compounded. It was reported among the
    people that his physicians opened the veins of little children, and
    made him drink their blood, to correct the poorness of his
    own."--_Bussey's History of France._ London, 1850.

  [56] Observe, I call Gothic "Christian" architecture, not
    "ecclesiastical." There is a wide difference. I believe it is the
    only architecture which Christian men should build, but not at all
    an architecture necessarily connected with the services of their
    church.

  [57] Mr. Hope's Church, in Margaret Street, Portland Place. I do not
    altogether like the arrangements of color in the brickwork; but
    these will hardly attract the eye, where so much has been already
    done with precious and beautiful marble, and is yet to be done in
    fresco. Much will depend, however, upon the coloring of this latter
    portion. I wish that either Holman Hunt or Millais could be
    prevailed upon to do at least some of these smaller frescoes.




APPENDIX.


1. ARCHITECT OF THE DUCAL PALACE.

Popular tradition and a large number of the chroniclers ascribe the
building of the Ducal Palace to that Filippo Calendario who suffered
death for his share in the conspiracy of Faliero. He was certainly one
of the leading architects of the time, and had for several years the
superintendence of the works of the Palace; but it appears, from the
documents collected by the Abbé Cadorin, that the first designer of the
Palace, the man to whom we owe the adaptation of the Frari traceries to
civil architecture, was Pietro Baseggio, who is spoken of expressly as
"formerly the Chief Master of our New Palace,"[58] in the decree of
1361, quoted by Cadorin, and who, at his death, left Calendario his
executor. Other documents collected by Zanotto, in his work on "Venezia
e le sue Lagune," show that Calendario was for a long time at sea, under
the commands of the Signory, returning to Venice only three or four
years before his death; and that therefore the entire management of the
works of the Palace, in the most important period, must have been
entrusted to Baseggio.

It is quite impossible, however, in the present state of the Palace, to
distinguish one architect's work from another in the older parts; and I
have not in the text embarrassed the reader by any attempt at close
definition of epochs before the great junction of the Piazzetta Façade
with the older palace in the fifteenth century. Here, however, it is
necessary that I should briefly state the observations I was able to
make on the relative dates of the earlier portions.

In the description of the Fig-tree angle, given in the eighth chapter of
Vol. II., I said that it seemed to me somewhat earlier than that of the
Vine, and the reader might be surprised at the apparent opposition of
this statement to my supposition that the Palace was built gradually
round from the Rio Façade to the Piazzetta. But in the two great open
arcades there is no succession of work traceable; from the Vine angle to
the junction with the fifteenth century work, above and below, all seems
nearly of the same date, the only question being of the accidental
precedence of workmanship of one capital or another; and I think, from
its style, that the Fig-tree angle must have been first completed. But
in the upper stories of the Palace there are enormous differences of
style. On the Rio Façade, in the upper story, are several series of
massive windows of the third order, corresponding exactly in mouldings
and manner of workmanship to those of the chapter-house of the Frari,
and consequently carrying us back to a very early date in the fourteenth
century: several of the capitals of these windows, and two richly
sculptured string-courses in the wall below, are of Byzantine
workmanship, and in all probability fragments of the Ziani Palace. The
traceried windows on the Rio Façade, and the two eastern windows on the
Sea Façade, are all of the finest early fourteenth century work,
masculine and noble in their capitals and bases to the highest degree,
and evidently contemporary with the very earliest portions of the lower
arcades. But the moment we come to the windows of the Great Council
Chamber the style is debased. The mouldings are the same, but they are
coarsely worked, and the heads set amidst the leafage of the capitals
quite valueless and vile.

I have not the least doubt that these window-jambs and traceries were
restored after the great fire;[59] and various other restorations have
taken place since, beginning with the removal of the traceries from all
the windows except the northern one of the Sala del Scrutinio, behind
the Porta della Carta, where they are still left. I made out four
periods of restoration among these windows, each baser than the
preceding. It is not worth troubling the reader about them, but the
traveller who is interested in the subject may compare two of them in
the same window; the one nearer the sea of the two belonging to the
little room at the top of the Palace on the Piazzetta Façade, between
the Sala del Gran Consiglio and that of the Scrutinio. The seaward jamb
of that window is of the first, and the opposite jamb of the second,
period of these restorations. These are all the points of separation in
date which I could discover by internal evidence. But much more might be
made out by any Venetian antiquary whose time permitted him thoroughly
to examine any existing documents which allude to or describe the parts
of the Palace spoken of in the important decrees of 1340, 1342, and
1344; for the first of these decrees speaks of certain "columns looking
towards the Canal"[60] or sea, as then existing, and I presume these
columns to have been part of the Ziani Palace, corresponding to the part
of that palace on the Piazzetta where were the "red columns" between
which Calendario was executed; and a great deal more might be determined
by any one who would thoroughly unravel the obscure language of those
decrees.

Meantime, in order to complete the evidence respecting the main dates
stated in the text, I have collected here such notices of the building
of the Ducal Palace as appeared to me of most importance in the various
chronicles I examined. I could not give them all in the text, as they
repeat each other, and would have been tedious; but they will be
interesting to the antiquary, and it is to be especially noted in all of
them how the Palazzo _Vecchio_ is invariably distinguished, either
directly or by implication, from the Palazzo Nuovo. I shall first
translate the piece of the Zancarol Chronicle given by Cadorin, which
has chiefly misled the Venetian antiquaries. I wish I could put the rich
old Italian into old English, but must be content to lose its raciness,
as it is necessary that the reader should be fully acquainted with its
facts.

"It was decreed that none should dare to propose to the Signory of
Venice to ruin the _old_ palace and rebuild it new and more richly, and
there was a penalty of one thousand ducats against any one who should
break it. Then the Doge, wishing to set forward the public good, said to
the Signory, ... that they ought to rebuild the façades of the _old_
palace, and that it ought to be restored, to do honor to the nation: and
so soon as he had done speaking, the Avogadori demanded the penalty from
the Doge, for having disobeyed the law; and the Doge with ready mind
paid it, remaining in his opinion that the said fabric ought to be
built. And so, in the year 1422, on the 20th day of September, it was
passed in the Council of the Pregadi that the said new palace should be
begun, and the expense should be borne by the Signori del Sal; and so,
on the 24th day of March, 1424, it was begun to throw down the _old_
palace, and to build it anew."--_Cadorin_, p. 129.

The day of the month, and the council in which the decree was passed,
are erroneously given by this Chronicle. Cadorin has printed the words
of the decree itself, which passed in the Great Council on the 27th
September: and these words are, fortunately, much to our present
purpose. For as more than one façade is spoken of in the above extract,
the Marchese Selvatico was induced to believe that both the front to the
sea and that to the Piazzetta had been destroyed; whereas, the "façades"
spoken of are evidently those of the Ziani Palace. For the words of the
decree (which are much more trustworthy than those of the Chronicle,
even if there were any inconsistency between them) run thus: "Palatium
nostrum fabricetur et fiat in forma decora et convenienti, quod
respondeat _solemnissimo principio palatii nostri novi_." Thus the new
council chamber and façade to the sea are called the "most venerable
beginning of our _New_ Palace;" and the rest was ordered to be designed
in accordance with these, as was actually the case as far as the Porta
della Carta. But the Renaissance architects who thenceforward proceeded
with the fabric, broke through the design, and built everything else
according to their own humors.

The question may be considered as set at rest by these words of the
decree, even without any internal or any farther documentary evidence.
But rather for the sake of impressing the facts thoroughly on the
reader's mind, than of any additional proof, I shall quote a few more of
the best accredited Chronicles.

The passage given by Bettio, from the Sivos Chronicle, is a very
important parallel with that from the Zancarol above:

"Essendo molto vecchio, e quasi rovinoso el Palazzo sopra la piazza, fo
deliberato di far quella parte tutta da novo, et continuarla com' è
quella della Sala grande, et cosi il Lunedi 27 Marzo 1424 fu dato
principio a ruinare detto Palazzo vecchio dalla parte, ch' è verso
panateria cioè della Giustizia, ch' è nelli occhi di sopra le colonne
fino alla Chiesa et fo fatto anco la porta grande, com' è al presente,
con la sala che si addimanda la Libraria."[61]

We have here all the facts told us in so many words: the "old palace" is
definitely stated to have been "on the piazza," and it is to be rebuilt
"like the part of the great saloon." The very point from which the newer
buildings commenced is told us; but here the chronicler has carried his
attempt at accuracy too far. The point of junction is, as stated above,
at the third pillar beyond the medallion of Venice; and I am much at a
loss to understand what could have been the disposition of these three
pillars where they joined the Ziani Palace, and how they were connected
with the arcade of the inner cortile. But with these difficulties, as
they do not bear on the immediate question, it is of no use to trouble
the reader.

The next passage I shall give is from a Chronicle in the Marcian
Library, bearing title, "Supposta di Zancaruol;" but in which I could
not find the passage given by Cadorin from, I believe, a manuscript of
this Chronicle at Vienna. There occurs instead of it the following thus
headed:--

"Come _la parte nova_ del Palazzo fuo hedificata _novamente_.

"El Palazzo novo de Venesia quella parte che xe verso la Chiesia de S.
Marcho fuo prexo chel se fesse del 1422 e fosse pagado la spexa per li
officiali del sal. E fuo fatto per sovrastante G. Nicolo Barberigo cum
provision de ducati X doro al mexe e fuo fabricado e fatto nobelissimo.
Come fin ancho di el sta e fuo grande honor a la Signoria de Venesia e a
la sua Citta."

This entry, which itself bears no date, but comes between others dated
22nd July and 27th December, is interesting, because it shows the first
transition of the idea of _newness_, from the Grand Council Chamber to
the part built under Foscari. For when Mocenigo's wishes had been
fulfilled, and the old palace of Ziani had been destroyed, and another
built in its stead, the Great Council Chamber, which was "the new
palace" compared with Ziani's, became "the old palace" compared with
Foscari's; and thus we have, in the body of the above extract, the whole
building called "the new palace of Venice;" but in the heading of it, we
have "the new _part_ of the palace" applied to the part built by
Foscari, in contradistinction to the Council Chamber.

The next entry I give is important, because the writing of the MS. in
which it occurs, No. 53 in the Correr Museum, shows it to be probably
not later than the end of the fifteenth century:

"El palazo nuovo de Venixia zoe quella parte che se sora la piazza verso
la giesia di Miss. San Marcho del 1422 fo principiado, el qual fo fato e
finito molto belo, chome al presente se vede nobilissimo, et a la
fabricha de quello fo deputado Miss. Nicolo Barberigo, soprastante con
ducati dieci doro al mexe."

We have here the part built by Foscari distinctly called the Palazzo
Nuovo, as opposed to the Great Council Chamber, which had now completely
taken the position of the Palazzo Vecchio, and is actually so called by
Sansovino. In the copy of the Chronicle of Paolo Morosini, and in the
MSS. numbered respectively 57, 59, 74, and 76 in the Correr Museum, the
passage above given from No. 53 is variously repeated with slight
modifications and curtailments; the entry in the Morosini Chronicle
being headed, "Come fu principiato il palazo che guarda sopra la piaza
grande di S. Marco," and proceeding in the words, "El Palazo Nuovo di
Venetia, cioè quella parte che e sopra la piaza," &c., the writers being
cautious, in all these instances, to _limit their statement_ to the part
facing the Piazza, that no reader might suppose the Council Chamber to
have been built or begun at the same time; though, as long as to the end
of the sixteenth century, we find the Council Chamber still included in
the expression "Palazzo Nuovo." Thus, in the MS. No. 75 in the Correr
Museum, which is about that date, we have "Del 1422, a di 20 Settembre
fu preso nel consegio grando de dover _compir_ el Palazo Novo, e dovesen
fare la spessa li officialli del Sal (61. M. 2. B.)." And, so long as
this is the case, the "Palazzo Vecchio" always means the Ziani Palace.
Thus, in the next page of this same MS. we have "a di 27 Marzo (1424 by
context) fo principia a butar zosso, el _Palazzo Vecchio_ per refarlo da
novo, e poi se he" (and so it is done); and in the MS. No. 81, "Del
1424, fo gittado zoso el _Palazzo Vecchio_ per refarlo de nuovo, a di 27
Marzo." But in the time of Sansovino the Ziani Palace was quite
forgotten; the Council Chamber was then the _old_ palace, and Foscari's
part was the new. His account of the "Palazzo Publico" will now be
perfectly intelligible; but, as the work itself is easily accessible, I
shall not burden the reader with any farther extracts, only noticing
that the chequering of the façade with red and white marbles, which he
ascribes to Foscari, may or may not be of so late a date, as there is
nothing in the style of the work which can be produced as evidence.


2. THEOLOGY OF SPENSER.

The following analysis of the first books of the "Faërie Queen," may be
interesting to readers who have been in the habit of reading the noble
poem too hastily to connect its parts completely together; and may
perhaps induce them to more careful study of the rest of the poem.

The Redcrosse Knight is Holiness,--the "Pietas" of St. Mark's, the
"Devotio" of Orcagna,--meaning, I think, in general, Reverence and Godly
Fear.

This Virtue, in the opening of the book, has Truth (or Una) at its side,
but presently enters the Wandering Wood, and encounters the serpent
Error; that is to say, Error in her universal form, the first enemy of
Reverence and Holiness; and more especially Error as founded on
learning; for when Holiness strangles her,

  "Her vomit _full of bookes and papers was_,
   With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke."

Having vanquished this first open and palpable form of Error, as
Reverence and Religion must always vanquish it, the Knight encounters
Hypocrisy, or Archimagus; Holiness cannot detect Hypocrisy, but
believes him, and goes home with him; whereupon Hypocrisy succeeds in
separating Holiness from Truth; and the Knight (Holiness) and Lady
(Truth) go forth separately from the house of Archimagus.

Now observe: the moment Godly Fear, or Holiness, is separated from
Truth, he meets Infidelity, or the Knight Sans Foy; Infidelity having
Falsehood, or Duesa, riding behind him. The instant the Redcrosse Knight
is aware of the attack of Infidelity, he

  "Gan fairly couch his speare, and towards ride."

He vanquishes and slays Infidelity; but is deceived by his companion,
Falsehood, and takes her for his lady: thus showing the condition of
Religion, when, after being attacked by Doubt, and remaining victorious,
it is nevertheless seduced, by any form of Falsehood, to pay reverence
where it ought not. This, then, is the first fortune of Godly Fear
separated from Truth. The poet then returns to Truth, separated from
Godly Fear. She is immediately attended by a lion, or Violence, which
makes her dreaded wherever she comes; and when she enters the mart of
Superstition, this Lion tears Kirkrapine in pieces: showing how Truth,
separated from Godliness, does indeed put an end to the abuses of
Superstition, but does so violently and desperately. She then meets
again with Hypocrisy, whom she mistakes for her own lord, or Godly Fear,
and travels a little way under his guardianship (Hypocrisy thus not
unfrequently appearing to defend the Truth), until they are both met by
Lawlessness, or the Knight Sans Loy, whom Hypocrisy cannot resist.
Lawlessness overthrows Hypocrisy, and seizes upon Truth, first slaying
her lion attendant: showing that the first aim of licence is to destroy
the force and authority of Truth. Sans Loy then takes Truth captive, and
bears her away. Now this Lawlessness is the "unrighteousness," or
"adikia," of St. Paul; and his bearing Truth away captive, is a type of
those "who hold the truth in unrighteousness,"--that is to say,
generally, of men who, knowing what is true, make the truth give way to
their own purposes, or use it only to forward them, as is the case with
so many of the popular leaders of the present day. Una is then delivered
from Sans Loy by the satyrs, to show that Nature, in the end, must work
out the deliverance of the truth, although, where it has been captive to
Lawlessness, that deliverance can only be obtained through Savageness,
and a return to barbarism. Una is then taken from among the satyrs by
Satyrane, the son of a satyr and a "lady myld, fair Thyamis," (typifying
the early steps of renewed civilization, and its rough and hardy
character "nousled up in life and manners wilde,") who, meeting again
with Sans Loy, enters instantly into rough and prolonged combat with
him: showing how the early organization of a hardy nation must be
wrought out through much discouragement from Lawlessness. This contest
the poet leaving for the time undecided, returns to trace the adventures
of the Redcrosse Knight, or Godly Fear, who, having vanquished
Infidelity, presently is led by Falsehood to the house of Pride: thus
showing how religion, separated from truth, is first tempted by doubts
of God, and then by the pride of life. The description of this house of
Pride is one of the most elaborate and noble pieces in the poem; and
here we begin to get at the proposed system of Virtues and Vices. For
Pride, as queen, has six other vices yoked in her chariot; namely,
first, Idleness, then Gluttony, Lust, Avarice, Envy, and Anger, all
driven on by "Sathan, with a smarting whip in hand." From these lower
vices and their company, Godly Fear, though lodging in the house of
Pride, holds aloof; but he is challenged, and has a hard battle to fight
with Sans Joy, the brother of Sans Foy: showing, that though he has
conquered Infidelity, and does not give himself up to the allurements of
Pride, he is yet exposed, so long as he dwells in her house, to distress
of mind and loss of his accustomed rejoicing before God. He, however,
having partly conquered Despondency, or Sans Joy, Falsehood goes down to
Hades, in order to obtain drugs to maintain the power or life of
Despondency; but, meantime, the Knight leaves the house of Pride:
Falsehood pursues and overtakes him, and finds him by a fountain side,
of which the waters are

                           "Dull and slow,
  And all that drinke thereof do faint and feeble grow."

Of which the meaning is, that Godly Fear, after passing through the
house of Pride, is exposed to drowsiness and feebleness of watch; as,
after Peter's boast, came Peter's sleeping, from weakness of the flesh,
and then, last of all, Peter's fall. And so it follows: for the
Redcrosse Knight, being overcome with faintness by drinking of the
fountain, is thereupon attacked by the giant Orgoglio, overcome and
thrown by him into a dungeon. This Orgoglio is Orgueil, or Carnal Pride;
not the pride of life, spiritual and subtle, but the common and vulgar
pride in the power of this world: and his throwing the Redcrosse Knight
into a dungeon, is a type of the captivity of true religion under the
temporal power of corrupt churches, more especially of the Church of
Rome; and of its gradually wasting away in unknown places, while carnal
pride has the preëminence over all things. That Spenser means,
especially, the pride of the Papacy, is shown by the 16th stanza of the
book; for there the giant Orgoglio is said to have taken Duessa, or
Falsehood, for his "deare," and to have set upon her head a triple
crown, and endowed her with royal majesty, and made her to ride upon a
seven-headed beast.

In the meantime, the dwarf, the attendant of the Redcrosse Knight, takes
his arms, and finding Una tells her of the captivity of her lord. Una,
in the midst of her mourning, meets Prince Arthur, in whom, as Spenser
himself tells us, is set forth generally Magnificence; but who, as is
shown by the choice of the hero's name, is more especially the
magnificence, or literally, "great doing" of the kingdom of England.
This power of England, going forth with Truth, attacks Orgoglio, or the
Pride of Papacy, slays him; strips Duessa, or Falsehood, naked; and
liberates the Redcrosse Knight. The magnificent and well-known
description of Despair follows, by whom the Redcrosse Knight is hard
bested, on account of his past errors and captivity, and is only saved
by Truth, who, perceiving him to be still feeble, brings him to the
house of Coelia, called, in the argument of the canto, Holiness, but
properly, Heavenly Grace, the mother of the Virtues. Her "three
daughters, well up-brought," are Faith, Hope, and Charity. Her porter is
Humility; because Humility opens the door of Heavenly Grace. Zeal and
Reverence are her chamberlains, introducing the new comers to her
presence; her groom, or servant, is Obedience; and her physician,
Patience. Under the commands of Charity, the matron Mercy rules over
her hospital, under whose care the Knight is healed of his sickness; and
it is to be especially noticed how much importance Spenser, though never
ceasing to chastise all hypocrisies and mere observances of form,
attaches to true and faithful _penance_ in effecting this cure. Having
his strength restored to him, the Knight is trusted to the guidance of
Mercy, who, leading him forth by a narrow and thorny way, first
instructs him in the seven works of Mercy, and then leads him to the
hill of Heavenly Contemplation; whence, having a sight of the New
Jerusalem, as Christian of the Delectable Mountains, he goes forth to
the final victory over Satan, the old serpent, with which the book
closes.


3. AUSTRIAN GOVERNMENT IN ITALY.

I cannot close these volumes without expressing my astonishment and
regret at the facility with which the English allow themselves to be
misled by any representations, however openly groundless or ridiculous,
proceeding from the Italian Liberal party, respecting the present
administration of the Austrian Government. I do not choose here to enter
into any political discussion, or express any political opinion; but it
is due to justice to state the simple facts which came under my notice
during my residence in Italy. I was living at Venice through two entire
winters, and in the habit of familiar association both with Italians and
Austrians, my own antiquarian vocations rendering such association
possible without exciting the distrust of either party. During this
whole period, I never once was able to ascertain, from any liberal
Italian, that he had a single _definite_ ground of complaint against the
Government. There was much general grumbling and vague discontent; but I
never was able to bring one of them to the point, or to discover what it
was that they wanted, or in what way they felt themselves injured; nor
did I ever myself witness an instance of oppression on the part of the
Government, though several of much kindness and consideration. The
indignation of those of my own countrymen and countrywomen whom I
happened to see during their sojourn in Venice was always vivid, but by
no means large in its grounds. English ladies on their first arrival
invariably began the conversation with the same remark: "What a
dreadful thing it was to be ground under the iron heel of despotism!"
Upon closer inquiries it always appeared that being "ground under the
heel of despotism" was a poetical expression for being asked for one's
passport at San Juliano, and required to fetch it from San Lorenzo, full
a mile and a quarter distant. In like manner, travellers, after two or
three days' residence in the city, used to return with pitiful
lamentations over "the misery of the Italian people." Upon inquiring
what instances they had met with of this misery, it invariably turned
out that their gondoliers, after being paid three times their proper
fare, had asked for something to drink, and had attributed the fact of
their being thirsty to the Austrian Government. The misery of the
Italians consists in having three festa days a week, and doing in their
days of exertion about one fourth as much work as an English laborer.

There is, indeed, much true distress occasioned by the measures which
the Government is sometimes compelled to take in order to repress
sedition; but the blame of this lies with those whose occupation is the
excitement of sedition. So also there is much grievous harm done to
works of art by the occupation of the country by so large an army; but
for the mode in which that army is quartered, the Italian municipalities
are answerable, not the Austrians. Whenever I was shocked by finding, as
above-mentioned at Milan, a cloister, or a palace, occupied by soldiery,
I always discovered, on investigation, that the place had been given by
the municipality; and that, beyond requiring that lodging for a certain
number of men should be found in such and such a quarter of the town,
the Austrians had nothing to do with the matter. This does not, however,
make the mischief less: and it is strange, if we think of it, to see
Italy, with all her precious works of art, made a continual
battle-field; as if no other place for settling their disputes could be
found by the European powers, than where every random shot may destroy
what a king's ransom cannot restore.[62] It is exactly as if the
tumults in Paris could he settled no otherwise than by fighting them out
in the Gallery of the Louvre.


4. DATE OF THE PALACES OF THE BYZANTINE RENAISSANCE.

In the sixth article of the Appendix to the first volume, the question
of the date of the Casa Dario and Casa Trevisan was deferred until I
could obtain from my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, to whom the former palace
once belonged, some more distinct data respecting this subject than I
possessed myself.

Speaking first of the Casa Dario, he says: "Fontana dates it from about
the year 1450, and considers it the earliest specimen of the
architecture founded by Pietro Lombardo, and followed by his sons,
Tullio and Antonio. In a Sanuto autograph miscellany, purchased by me
long ago, and which I gave to St. Mark's Library, are two letters from
Giovanni Dario, dated 10th and 11th July, 1485, in the neighborhood of
Adrianople; where the Turkish camp found itself, and Bajazet II.
received presents from the Soldan of Egypt, from the Schah of the Indies
(query Grand Mogul), and from the King of Hungary: of these matters,
Dario's letters give many curious details. Then, in the _printed_
Malipiero Annals, page 136 (which err, I think, by a year), the
Secretary Dario's negotiations at the Porte are alluded to; and in date
of 1484 he is stated to have returned to Venice, having quarrelled with
the Venetian bailiff at Constantinople: the annalist adds, that
'Giovanni Dario was a native of Candia, and that the Republic was so
well satisfied with him for having concluded peace with Bajazet, that he
received, as a gift from his country, an estate at Noventa, in the
Paduan territory, worth 1500 ducats, and 600 ducats in cash for the
dower of one of his daughters.' These largesses probably enabled him to
build his house about the year 1486, and are doubtless hinted at in the
inscription, which I restored A.D. 1837; _it had no date_, and ran thus,
URBIS . GENIO . JOANNES . DARIVS. In the Venetian history of Paolo
Morosini, page 594, it is also mentioned, that Giovanni Dario was,
moreover, the Secretary who concluded the peace between Mahomet, the
conqueror of Constantinople, and Venice, A.D. 1478; but, unless he build
his house by proxy, that date has nothing to do with it; and in my mind,
the fact of the present, and the inscription, warrant one's dating it
1486, and not 1450.

"The Trevisan-Cappello House, in Canonica, was once the property (A.D.
1578) of a Venetian dame, fond of cray-fish, according to a letter of
hers in the archives, whereby she thanks one of her lovers for some
which he had sent her from Treviso to Florence, of which she was then
Grand Duchess. Her name has perhaps found its way into the English
annuals. Did you ever hear of Bianca Cappello? She bought that house of
the Trevisana family, by whom Selva (in Cicognara) and Fontana
(following Selva) say it was ordered of the Lombardi, at the
commencement of the sixteenth century: but the inscription on its
façade, thus,

  SOLI  | |  HONOR. ET
  DEO   | |  GLORIA.

reminding one both of the Dario House, and of the words NON NOBIS DOMINE
inscribed on the façade of the Loredano Vendramin Palace at S. Marcuola
(now the property of the Duchess of Berri), of which Selva found proof
in the Vendramin Archives that it was commenced by Sante Lombardo, A.D.
1481, is in favor of its being classed among the works of the fifteenth
century."


5. RENAISSANCE SIDE OF DUCAL PALACE.

In passing along the Rio del Palazzo the traveller ought especially to
observe the base of the Renaissance building, formed by alternately
depressed and raised pyramids, the depressed portions being _casts_ of
the projecting ones, which are truncated on the summits. The work cannot
be called rustication, for it is cut as sharply and delicately as a
piece of ivory, but it thoroughly answers the end which rustication
proposes, and misses: it gives the base of the building a look of
crystalline hardness, actually resembling, and that very closely, the
appearance presented by the fracture of a piece of cap quartz; while yet
the light and shade of its alternate recesses and projections are so
varied as to produce the utmost possible degree of delight to the eye,
attainable by a geometrical pattern so simple. Yet, with all this high
