  The sound of minster bells.

  The fat earth feed thy branchy root,
  That under deeply strikes!
  The northern morning o'er thee shoot
  High up, in silver spikes!

  Nor ever lightning char thy grain,
  But, rolling as in sleep,
  Low thunders bring the mellow rain,
  That makes thee broad and deep!

  And hear me swear a solemn oath,
  That only by thy side
  Will I to Olive plight my troth,
  And gain her for my bride.

  And when my marriage morn may fall,
  She, Dryad-like, shall wear
  Alternate leaf and acorn-ball
  In wreath about her hair.

  And I will work in prose and rhyme,
  And praise thee more in both
  Than bard has honour'd beech or lime,
  Or that Thessalian growth, [6]

  In which the swarthy ringdove sat,
  And mystic sentence spoke;
  And more than England honours that,
  Thy famous brother-oak,

  Wherein the younger Charles abode
  Till all the paths were dim,
  And far below the Roundhead rode,
  And humm'd a surly hymn.

[Footnote 1: Spence is a larder and buttery. In the 'Promptorium
Parverum it is defined as "cellarium promptuarium".]

[Footnote 2: Cf. Burns' "godly laces," 'To the Unco Righteous'.]

[Footnote 3: All editions previous to 1853 have 'staid'.]

[Footnote 4: The phrase is Marvell's. 'Cf. To his Coy Mistress' (a
favourite poem of Tennyson's), "my vegetable loves should grow".]

[Footnote 5: 1842 to 1850. "For, ah! the Dryad-days were brief.]

[Footnote 6: A reference to the oracular oaks of Dodona which was, of
course, in Epirus, but the Ancients believed, no doubt erroneously, that
there was another Dodona in Thessaly. See the article "Dodona" in
Smith's 'Dict. of Greek and Roman Geography'.]








LOVE AND DUTY

Published first in 1842.

Whether this beautiful poem is autobiographical and has reference to the
compulsory separation of Tennyson and Miss Emily Sellwood, afterwards
his wife, in 1840, it is impossible for this editor to say, as Lord
Tennyson in his 'Life' of his father is silent on the subject.


  Of love that never found his earthly close,
  What sequel? Streaming eyes and breaking hearts?
  Or all the same as if he had not been?
  Not so. Shall Error in the round of time
  Still father Truth? O shall the braggart shout [1]
  For some blind glimpse of freedom work itself
  Thro' madness, hated by the wise, to law
  System and empire? Sin itself be found
  The cloudy porch oft opening on the Sun?
  And only he, this wonder, dead, become
  Mere highway dust? or year by year alone
  Sit brooding in the ruins of a life,
  Nightmare of youth, the spectre of himself!
  If this were thus, if this, indeed, were all,
  Better the narrow brain, the stony heart,
  The staring eye glazed o'er with sapless days,
  The long mechanic pacings to and fro,
  The set gray life, and apathetic end.
  But am I not the nobler thro' thy love?
  O three times less unworthy! likewise thou
  Art more thro' Love, and greater than thy years.
  The Sun will run his orbit, and the Moon
  Her circle. Wait, and Love himself will bring
  The drooping flower of knowledge changed to fruit
  Of wisdom. [2] Wait: my faith is large in Time,
  And that which shapes it to some perfect end.
  Will some one say, then why not ill for good?
  Why took ye not your pastime? To that man
  My work shall answer, since I knew the right
  And did it; for a man is not as God,
  But then most Godlike being most a man.--
  So let me think 'tis well for thee and me--
  Ill-fated that I am, what lot is mine
  Whose foresight preaches peace, my heart so slow
  To feel it! For how hard it seem'd to me,
  When eyes, love-languid thro' half-tears, would dwell
  One earnest, earnest moment upon mine,
  Then not to dare to see! when thy low voice,
  Faltering, would break its syllables, to keep
  My own full-tuned,--hold passion in a leash,
  And not leap forth and fall about thy neck,
  And on thy bosom, (deep-desired relief!)
  Rain out the heavy mist of tears, that weigh'd
  Upon my brain, my senses, and my soul!
  For love himself took part against himself
  To warn us off, and Duty loved of Love--
  O this world's curse--beloved but hated--came Like
  Death betwixt thy dear embrace and mine,
  And crying, "Who is this? behold thy bride,"
  She push'd me from thee.

                          If the sense is hard
  To alien ears, I did not speak to these--
  No, not to thee, but to thyself in me:
  Hard is my doom and thine: thou knowest it all.
  Could Love part thus? was it not well to speak,
  To have spoken once? It could not but be well.
  The slow sweet hours that bring us all things good, [3]
  The slow sad hours that bring us all things ill,
  And all good things from evil, brought the night
  In which we sat together and alone,
  And to the want, that hollow'd all the heart,
  Gave utterance by the yearning of an eye,
  That burn'd upon its object thro' such tears
  As flow but once a life. The trance gave way
  To those caresses, when a hundred times
  In that last kiss, which never was the last,
  Farewell, like endless welcome, lived and died.
  Then follow'd counsel, comfort and the words
  That make a man feel strong in speaking truth;
  Till now the dark was worn, and overhead
  The lights of sunset and of sunrise mix'd
  In that brief night; the summer night, that paused
  Among her stars to hear us; stars that hung
  Love-charm'd to listen: all the wheels of Time
  Spun round in station, but the end had come.
  O then like those, who clench [4] their nerves to rush
  Upon their dissolution, we two rose,
  There-closing like an individual life--
  In one blind cry of passion and of pain,
  Like bitter accusation ev'n to death,
  Caught up the whole of love and utter'd it,
  And bade adieu for ever. Live--yet live--
  Shall sharpest pathos blight us, knowing all
  Life needs for life is possible to will--
  Live happy; tend thy flowers; be tended by
  My blessing! Should my Shadow cross thy thoughts
  Too sadly for their peace, remand it thou
  For calmer hours to Memory's darkest hold, [5]
  If not to be forgotten--not at once--
  Not all forgotten. Should it cross thy dreams,
  O might it come like one that looks content,
  With quiet eyes unfaithful to the truth,
  And point thee forward to a distant light,
  Or seem to lift a burthen from thy heart
  And leave thee frëer, till thou wake refresh'd,
  Then when the first low matin-chirp hath grown
  Full quire, and morning driv'n her plow of pearl [6]
  Far furrowing into light the mounded rack,
  Beyond the fair green field and eastern sea.


[Footnote 1: As this passage is a little obscure, it may not be
superfluous to point out that "shout" is a substantive.]

[Footnote 2: The distinction between "knowledge" and "wisdom" is a
favourite one with Tennyson. See 'In Memoriam', cxiv.; 'Locksley
Hall', 141, and for the same distinction see Cowper, 'Task',
vi., 88-99.]

[Footnote 3: Suggested by Theocritus, 'Id'., xv., 104-5.]

[Footnote 4: 1842 to 1845. O then like those, that clench.]

[Footnote 5: Pathos, in the Greek sense, "suffering". All editions up to
and including 1850 have a small "s" and a small "m" for Shadow and
Memory, and read thus:--

  Too sadly for their peace, so put it back
  For calmer hours in memory's darkest hold,
  If unforgotten! should it cross thy dreams,
  So might it come, etc.]


[Footnote 6: 'Cf. Princess', iii.:--

  Morn in the white wake of the morning star
  Came furrowing all the orient into gold,

and with both cf. Greene, 'Orlando Furioso', i., 2:--

  Seest thou not Lycaon's son?
  The hardy plough-swain unto mighty Jove
  Hath _trac'd his silver furrows in the heaven_,

which in its turn is borrowed from Ariosto, 'Orl. Fur.', xx.,
lxxxii.:--

  Apena avea Licaonia prole
  Per li solchi del ciel volto
  L'aratro.]







THE GOLDEN YEAR

This poem was first published in the fourth edition of the poems 1846.
No alterations were made in it after 1851. The poem had a message for
the time at which it was written. The country was in a very troubled
state. The contest between the Protectionists and Free-traders was at
its acutest stage. The Maynooth endowment and the "godless colleges" had
brought into prominence questions of the gravest moment in religion and
education, while the Corn Bill and the Coercion Bill had inflamed the
passions of party politicians almost to madness. Tennyson, his son tells
us, entered heartily into these questions, believing that the remedies
for these distempers lay in the spread of education, a more catholic
spirit in the press, a partial adoption of Free Trade principles, and
union as far as possible among the different sections of Christianity.


  Well, you shall have that song which Leonard wrote:
  It was last summer on a tour in Wales:
  Old James was with me: we that day had been
  Up Snowdon; and I wish'd for Leonard there,
  And found him in Llanberis: [1] then we crost
  Between the lakes, and clamber'd half-way up
  The counterside; and that same song of his
  He told me; for I banter'd him, and swore
  They said he lived shut up within himself,
  A tongue-tied Poet in the feverous days,
  That, setting the _how much_ before the _how_,
  Cry, like the daughters of the horseleech, "Give, [2]
  Cram us with all," but count not me the herd!
  To which "They call me what they will," he said:
  "But I was born too late: the fair new forms,
  That float about the threshold of an age,
  Like truths of Science waiting to be caught--
  Catch me who can, and make the catcher crown'd--
  Are taken by the forelock. Let it be.
  But if you care indeed to listen, hear
  These measured words, my work of yestermorn.
  "We sleep and wake and sleep, but all things move;
  The Sun flies forward to his brother Sun;
  The dark Earth follows wheel'd in her ellipse;
  And human things returning on themselves
  Move onward, leading up the golden year.
  "Ah, tho' the times, when some new thought can bud,
  Are but as poets' seasons when they flower,
  Yet seas, that daily gain upon the shore, [3]
  Have ebb and flow conditioning their march,
  And slow and sure comes up the golden year.
  "When wealth no more shall rest in mounded heaps,
  But smit with freer light shall slowly melt
  In many streams to fatten lower lands,
  And light shall spread, and man be liker man
  Thro' all the season of the golden year.
  "Shall eagles not be eagles? wrens be wrens?
  If all the world were falcons, what of that?
  The wonder of the eagle were the less,
  But he not less the eagle. Happy days
  Roll onward, leading up the golden year.
  "Fly happy happy sails and bear the Press;
  Fly happy with the mission of the Cross;
  Knit land to land, and blowing havenward
  With silks, and fruits, and spices, clear of toll,
  Enrich the markets of the golden year.
  "But we grow old! Ah! when shall all men's good
  Be each man's rule, and universal Peace
  Lie like a shaft of light across the land,
  And like a lane of beams athwart the sea,
  Thro' all the circle of the golden year?"
  Thus far he flow'd, and ended; whereupon
  "Ah, folly!" in mimic cadence answer'd James--
  "Ah, folly! for it lies so far away.
  Not in our time, nor in our children's time,
  'Tis like the second world to us that live;
  'Twere all as one to fix our hopes on Heaven
  As on this vision of the golden year."
  With that he struck his staff against the rocks
  And broke it,--James,--you know him,--old, but full
  Of force and choler, and firm upon his feet,
  And like an oaken stock in winter woods,
  O'erflourished with the hoary clematis:
  Then added, all in heat: "What stuff is this!
  Old writers push'd the happy season back,--
  The more fools they,--we forward: dreamers both:
  You most, that in an age, when every hour
  Must sweat her sixty minutes to the death,
  Live on, God love us, as if the seedsman, rapt
  Upon the teeming harvest, should not dip [4]
  His hand into the bag: but well I know
  That unto him who works, and feels he works,
  This same grand year is ever at the doors."
  He spoke; and, high above, I heard them blast
  The steep slate-quarry, and the great echo flap
  And buffet round the hills from bluff to bluff.



[Footnote 1: 1846 to 1850.

  And joined him in Llanberis; and that same song
  He told me, etc.]


[Footnote 2: Proverbs xxx. 15:

  "The horseleach hath two daughters, crying,
  Give, give".]


[Footnote 3: 1890. Altered to "Yet oceans daily gaining on the land".]

[Footnote 4: 'Selections', 1865. Plunge.]







ULYSSES

First published in 1842, no alterations were made in it subsequently.

This noble poem, which is said to have induced Sir Robert Peel to give
Tennyson his pension, was written soon after Arthur Hallam's death,
presumably therefore in 1833. "It gave my feeling," Tennyson said to his
son, "about the need of going forward and braving the struggle of life
perhaps more simply than anything in 'In Memoriam'." It is not the
'Ulysses' of Homer, nor was it suggested by the 'Odyssey'. The germ, the
spirit and the sentiment of the poem are from the twenty-sixth canto of
Dante's 'Inferno', where Ulysses in the Limbo of the Deceivers speaks
from the flame which swathes him. I give a literal version of the
passage:--

  "Neither fondness for my son nor reverence for my aged sire nor the
  due love which ought to have gladdened Penelope could conquer in me
  the ardour which I had to become experienced in the world and in human
  vice and worth. I put out into the deep open sea with but one ship and
  with that small company which had not deserted me.... I and my
  companions were old and tardy when we came to that narrow pass where
  Hercules assigned his landmarks. 'O brothers,' I said, 'who through a
  hundred thousand dangers have reached the West deny not to this the
  brief vigil of your senses that remain, experience of the unpeopled
  world beyond the sun. Consider your origin, ye were not formed to live
  like Brutes but to follow virtue and knowledge.... Night already saw
  the other pole with all its stars and ours so low that it rose not
  from the ocean floor'"

  ('Inferno', xxvi., 94-126).

But if the germ is here the expansion is Tennyson's; he has added
elaboration and symmetry, fine touches, magical images and magical
diction. There is nothing in Dante which answers to--

  Yet all experience is an arch wherethro'
  Gleams that untravell'd world, whose margin fades
  For ever and for ever when I move.

or

  It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
  It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,
  And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.

Of these lines well does Carlyle say what so many will feel: "These
lines do not make me weep, but there is in me what would till whole
Lacrymatorics as I read".


  It little profits that an idle king,
  By this still hearth, among these barren crags,
  Match'd with an aged wife, I mete and dole
  Unequal laws unto a savage race,
  That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me.
  I cannot rest from travel: I will drink
  Life to the lees: all times I have enjoy'd
  Greatly, have suffer'd greatly, both with those
  That loved me, and alone; on shore, and when
  Thro' scudding drifts the rainy Hyades [1]
  Vext the dim sea: I am become a name;
  For always roaming with a hungry heart
  Much have I seen and known; cities of men
  And manners, climates, councils, governments, [2]
  Myself not least, but honour'd of them all;
  And drunk delight of battle with my peers,
  Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy.
  I am a part of all that I have met;
  Yet all experience is an arch wherethro'
  Gleams that untravell'd world, whose margin fades
  For ever and for ever when I move.
  How dull it is to pause, to make an end, [3]
  To rust unburnish'd, not to shine in use!
  As tho' to breathe were life. Life piled on life
  Were all too little, and of one to me
  Little remains: but every hour is saved
  From that eternal silence, something more,
  A bringer of new things; and vile it were
  For some three suns to store and hoard myself,
  And this gray spirit yearning in desire
  To follow knowledge, like a sinking star,
  Beyond the utmost bound of human thought.

  This is my son, mine own Telemachus, [4]
  To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle--
  Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil
  This labour, by slow prudence to make mild
  A rugged people, and thro' soft degrees
  Subdue them to the useful and the good.
  Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere
  Of common duties, decent not to fail
  In offices of tenderness, and pay
  Meet adoration to my household gods,
  When I am gone. He works his work, I mine.
  There lies the port: the vessel puffs her sail:
  There gloom the dark broad seas. My mariners,
  Souls that have toil'd and wrought, and thought with me--
  That ever with a frolic welcome took
  The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed
  Free hearts, free foreheads--you and I are old;
  Old age hath yet his honour and his toil;
  Death closes all; but something ere the end,
  Some work of noble note, may yet be done,
  Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods.
  The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks:
  The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep
  Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,
  'Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
  Push off, and sitting well in order smite
  The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
  To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
  Of all the western stars, until I die.
  It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
  It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, [5]
  And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.
  Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho'
  We are not now that strength which in old days
  Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;
  One equal temper of heroic hearts,
  Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
  To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.



[Footnote 1: Virgil, 'Æn'., i., 748, and iii., 516.]

[Footnote 2: 'Odyssey', i., 1-4.]

[Footnote 3: 'Cf'. Shakespeare, 'Troilus and Cressida':--

  Perseverance, dear, my lord,
  Keeps honour bright: To have done, is to hang
  Quite out of fashion, like a rusty nail
  In monumental mockery.]


[Footnote 4: How admirably has Tennyson touched off the character of the
Telemachus of the 'Odyssey'.]

[Footnote 5: The Happy Isles, the 'Fortunatæ Insulæ' of the Romans and
the

  [Greek: ai t_on Makar_on naesoi]

of the Greeks, have been identified by geographers as those islands in
the Atlantic off the west coast of Africa; some take them to mean the
Canary Islands, the Madeira group and the Azores, while they may have
included the Cape de Verde Islands as well. What seems certain is that
these places with their soft delicious climate and lovely scenery gave
the poets an idea of a happy abode for departed spirits, and so the
conception of the _Elysian Fields_. The _loci classici_ on these abodes
are Homer, Odyssey, iv., 563 _seqq_.:--

  [Greek: alla s' es Elysion pedion kai peirata gaiaes athanatoi
  pempsousin, hothi xanthos Rhadamanthus tae per rhaeistae biotae pelei
  anthr_opoisin, ou niphetos, out' ar cheim_on polus, oute pot' ombros
  all' aiei Zephuroio ligu pneiontas aaetas _okeanos aniaesin
  anapsuchein anthr_opous.

  [But the Immortals will convey thee to the Elysian plain and the
  world's limits where is Rhadamanthus of the golden hair, where life is
  easiest for man; no snow is there, no nor no great storm, nor any
  rain, but always ocean sendeth forth the shrilly breezes of the West
  to cool and refresh men],

and Pindar, 'Olymp'., ii., 178 'seqq'., compared with the splendid
fragment at the beginning of the 'Dirges'. Elysium was afterwards placed
in the netherworld, as by Virgil. Thus, as so often the suggestion was
from the facts of geography, the rest soon became an allegorical myth,
and to attempt to identify and localise "the Happy Isles" is as great an
absurdity as to attempt to identify and localise the island of
Shakespeare's 'Tempest'.]








LOCKSLEY HALL

First published in 1842, and no alterations were made in it subsequently
to the edition of 1850; except that in the Selections published in 1865
in the third stanza the reading was "half in ruin" for "in the
distance". This poem, as Tennyson explained, was not autobiographic but
purely imaginary, "representing young life, its good side, its
deficiences and its yearnings". The poem, he added, was written in
Trochaics because the elder Hallam told him that the English people
liked that metre. The hero is a sort of preliminary sketch of the hero
in 'Maud', the position and character of each being very similar: both
are cynical and querulous, and break out into tirades against their kind
and society; both have been disappointed in love, and both find the same
remedy for their afflictions by mixing themselves with action and
becoming "one with their kind".

'Locksley Hall' was suggested, as Tennyson acknowledged, by Sir William
Jones' translation of the old Arabian Moâllakât, a collection from the
works of pre-Mahommedan poets. See Sir William Jones' works, quarto
edition, vol. iv., pp. 247-57. But only one of these poems, namely the
poem of Amriolkais, could have immediately influenced him. In this the
poet supposes himself attended on a journey by a company of friends, and
they pass near a place where his mistress had lately lived, but from
which her tribe had then removed. He desires them to stop awhile, that
he may weep over the deserted remains of her tent. They comply with his
request, but exhort him to show more strength of mind, and urge two
topics of consolation, namely, that he had before been equally unhappy
and that he had enjoyed his full share of pleasures. Thus by the
recollection of his past delights his imagination is kindled and his
grief suspended. But Tennyson's chief indebtedness is rather in the
oriental colouring given to his poem, chiefly in the sentiment and
imagery. Thus in the couplet--

    Many a night I saw the Pleiads rising through the mellow shade
    Glitter like a swarm of fireflies tangl'd in a silver braid,

we are reminded of "It was the hour when the Pleiads appeared in the
firmament like the folds of a silken sash variously decked with gems".


  Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet 'tis early morn:
  Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the bugle horn.

  'Tis the place, and all around it, [1] as of old, the curlews call,
  Dreary gleams [2] about the moorland flying over Locksley Hall;

  Locksley Hall, that in the distance overlooks the sandy tracts,
  And the hollow ocean-ridges roaring into cataracts.

  Many a night from yonder ivied casement, ere I went to rest,
  Did I look on great Orion sloping slowly to the West.

  Many a night I saw the Pleiads, rising thro' the mellow shade,
  Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid.

  Here about the beach I wander'd, nourishing a youth sublime
  With the fairy tales of science, and the long result of Time;

  When the centuries behind me like a fruitful land reposed;
  When I clung to all the present for the promise that it closed:

  When I dipt into the future far as human eye could see;
  Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be.--

  In the Spring a fuller crimson comes upon the robin's [3] breast;
  In the Spring the wanton lapwing gets himself another crest;

  In the Spring a livelier iris changes on the burnish'd dove;
  In the Spring a young man's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love.

  Then her cheek was pale and thinner than should be for one so young,
  And her eyes on all my motions with a mute observance hung.

  And I said, "My cousin Amy, speak, and speak the truth to me,
  Trust me, cousin, all the current of my being sets to thee."

  On her pallid cheek and forehead came a colour and a light,
  As I have seen the rosy red flushing in the northern night.

  And she turn'd--her bosom shaken with a sudden storm of sighs--
  All the spirit deeply dawning in the dark of hazel eyes--

  Saying, "I have hid my feelings, fearing they should do me wrong";
  Saying, "Dost thou love me, cousin?" weeping, "I have loved thee
    long".

  Love took up the glass of Time, and turn'd it in his glowing hands;
  Every moment, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden sands. [4]

  Love took up the harp of Life, and smote on all the chords with might;
  Smote the chord of Self, that, trembling, pass'd in music out of
    sight.

  Many a morning on the moorland did we hear the copses ring,
  And her whisper throng'd my pulses with the fulness of the Spring.

  Many an evening by the waters did we watch the stately ships,
  And our spirits rush'd together at the touching of the lips. [5]

  O my cousin, shallow-hearted! O my Amy, mine no more!
  O the dreary, dreary moorland! O the barren, barren shore!

  Falser than all fancy fathoms, falser than all songs have sung,
  Puppet to a father's threat, and servile to a shrewish tongue!

  Is it well to wish thee happy?--having known me--to decline
  On a range of lower feelings and a narrower heart than mine!

  Yet it shall be: thou shalt lower to his level day by day,
  What is fine within thee growing coarse to sympathise with clay.

  As the husband is, the wife is: thou art mated with a clown,
  And the grossness of his nature will have weight to drag thee down.

  He will hold thee, when his passion shall have spent its novel force,
  Something better than his dog, a little dearer than his horse.

  What is this? his eyes are heavy: think not they are glazed with wine.
  Go to him: it is thy duty: kiss him: take his hand in thine.

  It may be my lord is weary, that his brain is overwrought:
  Soothe him with thy finer fancies, touch him with thy lighter thought.

  He will answer to the purpose, easy things to understand--
  Better thou wert dead before me, tho' I slew thee with my hand!

  Better thou and I were lying, hidden from the heart's disgrace,
  Roll'd in one another's arms, and silent in a last embrace.

  Cursed be the social wants that sin against the strength of youth!
  Cursed be the social lies that warp us from the living truth!

  Cursed be the sickly forms that err from honest Nature's rule!
  Cursed be the gold that gilds the straiten'd forehead of the fool!

  Well--'tis well that I should bluster!--Hadst thou less unworthy
    proved--
  Would to God--for I had loved thee more than ever wife was loved.

  Am I mad, that I should cherish that which bears but bitter fruit?
  I will pluck it from my bosom, tho' my heart be at the root.

  Never, tho' my mortal summers to such length of years should come
  As the many-winter'd crow that leads the clanging rookery home. [6]

  Where is comfort? in division of the records of the mind?
  Can I part her from herself, and love her, as I knew her, kind?

  I remember one that perish'd: sweetly did she speak and move:
  Such a one do I remember, whom to look it was to love.

  Can I think of her as dead, and love her for the love she bore?
  No--she never loved me truly: love is love for evermore.

  Comfort? comfort scorn'd of devils! this is truth the poet sings,
  That a sorrow's crown of sorrow [7] is remembering happier things.

  Drug thy memories, lest thou learn it, lest thy heart be put to proof,
  In the dead unhappy night, and when the rain is on the roof.

  Like a dog, he hunts in dreams, and thou art staring at the wall,
  Where the dying night-lamp flickers, and the shadows rise and fall.

  Then a hand shall pass before thee, pointing to his drunken sleep,
  To thy widow'd marriage-pillows, to the tears that thou wilt weep.

  Thou shalt hear the "Never, never," whisper'd by the phantom years,
  And a song from out the distance in the ringing of thine ears;

  And an eye shall vex thee, looking ancient kindness on thy pain.
  Turn thee, turn thee on thy pillow: get thee to thy rest again.

  Nay, but Nature brings thee solace; for a tender voice will cry,
  'Tis a purer life than thine; a lip to drain thy trouble dry.

  Baby lips will laugh me down: my latest rival brings thee rest.
  Baby fingers, waxen touches, press me from the mother's breast.

  O, the child too clothes the father with a dearness not his due.
  Half is thine and half is his: it will be worthy of the two.

  O, I see thee old and formal, fitted to thy petty part,
  With a little hoard of maxims preaching down a daughter's heart.

  "They were dangerous guides the feelings--she herself was not exempt--
  Truly, she herself had suffer'd"--Perish in thy self-contempt!

  Overlive it--lower yet--be happy! wherefore should I care,
  I myself must mix with action, lest I wither by despair.

  What is that which I should turn to, lighting upon days like these?
  Every door is barr'd with gold, and opens but to golden keys.

  Every gate is throng'd with suitors, all the markets overflow.
  I have but an angry fancy: what is that which I should do?

  I had been content to perish, falling on the foeman's ground,
  When the ranks are roll'd in vapour, and the winds are laid with
    sound.

  But the jingling of the guinea helps the hurt that Honour feels,
  And the nations do but murmur, snarling at each other's heels.

  Can I but relive in sadness? I will turn that earlier page.
  Hide me from my deep emotion, O thou wondrous Mother-Age!

  Make me feel the wild pulsation that I felt before the strife,
  When I heard my days before me, and the tumult of my life;

  Yearning for the large excitement that the coming years would yield,
  Eager-hearted as a boy when first he leaves his father's field,

  And at night along the dusky highway near and nearer drawn,
  Sees in heaven the light of London flaring like a dreary dawn; [8]

  And his spirit leaps within him to be gone before him then,
  Underneath the light he looks at, in among the throngs of men;

  Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new:
  That which they have done but earnest of the things that they shall
    do:

  For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see,
  Saw the vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be; [9]

  Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails,
  Pilots of the purple twilight, dropping down with costly bales; [10]

  Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rain'd a ghastly dew
  From the nations' airy navies grappling in the central blue; [10]

  Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rushing warm,
  With the standards of the peoples plunging thro' the thunderstorm;
    [10]

  Till the war-drum throbbed no longer, and the battle-flags were furl'd
  In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world. [10]

  There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe,
  And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law.

  So I triumph'd, ere my passion sweeping thro' me left me dry,
  Left me with the palsied heart, and left me with the jaundiced eye;

  Eye, to which all order festers, all things here are out of joint,
  Science moves, but slowly slowly, creeping on from point to point:

  Slowly comes a hungry people, as a lion, creeping nigher, [11]
  Glares at one that nods and winks behind a slowly-dying fire.

  Yet I doubt not thro' the ages one increasing purpose runs,
  And the thoughts of men are widen'd with the process of the suns.

  What is that to him that reaps not harvest of his youthful joys,
  Tho' the deep heart of existence beat for ever like a boy's?

  Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers, and I linger on the shore,
  And the individual withers, and the world is more and more.

  Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers, and he bears a laden breast,
  Full of sad experience, moving toward the stillness of his rest.

  Hark, my merry comrades call me, sounding on the bugle-horn,
  They to whom my foolish passion were a target for their scorn:

  Shall it not be scorn to me to harp on such a moulder'd string?
  I am shamed thro' all my nature to have loved so slight a thing.

  Weakness to be wroth with weakness! woman's pleasure, woman's pain--
    [12]
  Nature made them blinder motions bounded in a shallower brain:

  Woman is the lesser man, and all thy passions, match'd with mine,
  Are as moonlight unto sunlight, and as water unto wine--

  Here at least, where nature sickens, nothing. Ah, for some retreat
  Deep in yonder shining Orient, where my life began to beat;

  Where in wild Mahratta-battle fell my father evil-starr'd;--
  I was left a trampled orphan, and a selfish uncle's ward.

  Or to burst all links of habit--there to wander far away,
  On from island unto island at the gateways of the day.

  Larger constellations burning, mellow moons and happy skies,
  Breadths of tropic shade and palms in cluster, knots of Paradise. [13]

  Never comes the trader, never floats an European flag,
  Slides the bird o'er lustrous woodland, swings the trailer [14] from
    the crag;

  Droops the heavy-blossom'd bower, hangs the heavy-fruited tree--
  Summer isles of Eden lying in dark-purple spheres of sea.

  There methinks would be enjoyment more than in this march of mind,
  In the steamship, in the railway, in the thoughts that shake mankind.

  There the passions cramp'd no longer shall have scope and
    breathing-space;
  I will take some savage woman, she shall rear my dusky race.

  Iron-jointed, supple-sinew'd, they shall dive, and they shall run,
  Catch the wild goat by the hair, and hurl their lances in the sun;

  Whistle back the parrot's call, and leap the rainbows of the brooks.
  Not with blinded eyesight poring over miserable books--

  Fool, again the dream, the fancy! but I _know_ my words are wild,
  But I count the gray barbarian lower than the Christian child.

  _I_, to herd with narrow foreheads, vacant of our glorious gains, [15]
  Like a beast with lower pleasures, like a beast with lower pains!

  Mated with a squalid savage--what to me were sun or clime?
  I the heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time--

  I that rather held it better men should perish one by one,
  Than that earth should stand at gaze like Joshua's moon in Ajalon!

  Not in vain the distance beacons. Forward, forward let us range.
  Let the great world spin [16] for ever down the ringing grooves [17]
    of change.

  Thro' the shadow of the globe [18] we sweep into the younger day:
  Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay. [19]

  Mother-Age (for mine I knew not) help me as when life begun:
  Rift the hills, and roll the waters, flash the lightnings, weigh the
    Sun--[20]

  O, I see the crescent promise of my spirit hath not set.
  Ancient founts of inspiration well thro' all my fancy yet.

  Howsoever these things be, a long farewell to Locksley Hall!
  Now for me the woods may wither, now for me the roof-tree fall.

  Comes a vapour from the margin, blackening over heath and holt,
  Cramming all the blast before it, in its breast a thunderbolt.

  Let it fall on Locksley Hall, with rain or hail, or fire or snow;
  For the mighty wind arises, roaring seaward, and I go.



[Footnote 1: 1842. And round the gables.]

[Footnote 2: "Gleams," it appears, is a Lincolnshire word for the cry of
the curlew, and so by removing the comma after call we get an
interpretation which perhaps improves the sense and certainly gets rid
of a very un-Tennysonian cumbrousness in the second line. But Tennyson
had never, he said, heard of that meaning of "gleams," adding he wished
he had. He meant nothing more in the passage than "to express the flying
gleams of light across a dreary moorland when looking at it under
peculiarly dreary circumstances". See for this, 'Life', iii., 82.]

[Footnote 3: 1842 and all up to and including 1850 have a capital 'R' to
robin.]

[Footnote 4: Cf. W. R. Spencer ('Poems', p. 166):--

  What eye with clear account remarks
  The ebbing of his glass,
  When all its sands are diamond sparks
  That dazzle as they pass.

But this is of course in no way parallel to Tennyson's subtly beautiful
image, which he himself pronounced to be the best simile he had ever
made.]


[Footnote 5: Cf. Guarini, 'Pastor Fido':--

  Ma i colpi di due labbre innamorate
  Quando a ferir si va bocca con bocca,
  ... ove l' un alma e l'altra Corre.]


[Footnote 6: Cf. Horace's 'Annosa Cornix', Odes III., xvii., 13.]

[Footnote 7: The reference is to Dante, 'Inferno', v. 121-3:--

  Nessun maggior dolore
  Che ricordarsi del tempo felice
  Nella miseria.

For the pedigree and history of this see the present editor's
'Illustrations of Tennyson', p. 63.]


[Footnote 8: The epithet "dreary" shows that Tennyson preferred
realistic picturesqueness to dramatic propriety.]

[Footnote 9: See the introductory note to 'The Golden Year'.]

[Footnote 10: See the introductory note to 'The Golden Year'.]

[Footnote 11: Tennyson said that this simile was suggested by a passage
in 'Pringle's Travels;' the incident only is described, and with
thrilling vividness, by Pringle; but its application in simile is
Tennyson's. See 'A Narrative of a Residence in South Africa', by Thomas
Pringle, p. 39:

  "The night was extremely dark and the rain fell so heavily that in
  spite of the abundant supply of dry firewood, which we had luckily
  provided, it was not without difficulty that we could keep one
  watchfire burning.... About midnight we were suddenly roused by the
  roar of a lion close to our tents. It was so loud and tremendous that
  for the moment I actually thought that a thunderstorm had burst upon
  us.... We roused up the half-extinguished fire to a roaring blaze ...
  this unwonted display probably daunted our grim visitor, for he gave
  us no further trouble that night."]


[Footnote 12: With this 'cf'. Leopardi, 'Aspasia', 53-60:--

  Non cape in quelle
  Anguste fronti ugual concetto. E male
  Al vivo sfolgora di quegli sguardi
  Spera l'uomo ingannato, e mal chiede
  Sensi profondi, sconosciuti, è molto
  Più che virili, in chi dell' uomo al tutto
  Da natura è minor. Che se più molli
  E più tenui le membra, essa la mente
  Men capace e men forte anco riceve.]


[Footnote 13: One wonders Tennyson could have had the heart to excise the
beautiful couplet which in his MS. followed this stanza.

  All about a summer ocean, leagues on leagues of golden calm,
  And within melodious waters rolling round the knolls of palm.]


[Footnote 14: 1842 and all up to and inclusive of 1850. Droops the
trailer. This is one of Tennyson's many felicitous corrections. In the
monotonous, motionless splendour of a tropical landscape the smallest
movement catches the eye, the flight of a bird, the gentle waving of the
trailer stirred by the breeze from the sea.]

[Footnote 15: 'Cf'. Shakespeare, "foreheads villainously low".]

[Footnote 16: 1842. Peoples spin.]

[Footnote 17: Tennyson tells us that when he travelled by the first train
from Liverpool to Manchester in 1830 it was night and he thought that
the wheels ran in a groove, hence this line.]

[Footnote 18: 1842. The world.]

[Footnote 19: Cathay, the old name for China.]

[Footnote 20: 'Cf'. Tasso, 'Gems', ix., st. 91:--

  Nuova nube di polve ecco vicina
  Che fulgori in grembo tiene.

  (Lo! a fresh cloud of dust is near which
  Carries in its breast thunderbolts.)]








GODIVA


First published in 1842. No alteration was made in any subsequent
edition.

The poem was written in 1840 when Tennyson was returning from Coventry
to London, after his visit to Warwickshire in that year. The Godiva
pageant takes place in that town at the great fair on Friday in Trinity
week. Earl Leofric was the Lord of Coventry in the reign of Edward the
Confessor, and he and his wife Godiva founded a magnificent Benedictine
monastery at Coventry. The first writer who mentions this legend is
Matthew of Westminster, who wrote in 1307, that is some 250 years after
Leofric's time, and what authority he had for it is not known. It is
certainly not mentioned by the many preceding writers who have left
accounts of Leofric and Godiva (see Gough's edition of Camden's
'Britannia', vol. ii., p. 346, and for a full account of the legend see
W. Reader, 'The History and Description of Coventry Show Fair, with the
History of Leofric and Godiva'). With Tennyson's should be compared
Moultrie's beautiful poem on the same subject, and Landor's Imaginary
Conversation between Leofric and Godiva.

  [1] _I waited for the train at Coventry;
  I hung with grooms and porters on the bridge,
  To match the three tall spires; [2] and there I shaped
  The city's ancient legend into this:_
  Not only we, the latest seed of Time,
  New men, that in the flying of a wheel
  Cry down the past, not only we, that prate
  Of rights and wrongs, have loved the people well,
  And loathed to see them overtax'd; but she
  Did more, and underwent, and overcame,
  The woman of a thousand summers back,
  Godiva, wife to that grim Earl, who ruled
  In Coventry: for when he laid a tax
  Upon his town, and all the mothers brought
  Their children, clamouring, "If we pay, we starve!"
  She sought her lord, and found him, where he strode
  About the hall, among his dogs, alone,
  His beard a foot before him, and his hair
  A yard behind. She told him of their tears,
  And pray'd him, "If they pay this tax, they starve".
  Whereat he stared, replying, half-amazed,
  "You would not let your little finger ache
  For such as _these?_"--"But I would die," said she.
  He laugh'd, and swore by Peter and by Paul;
  Then fillip'd at the diamond in her ear;
  "O ay, ay, ay, you talk!"--"Alas!" she said,
  "But prove me what it is I would not do."
  And from a heart as rough as Esau's hand,
  He answer'd, "Ride you naked thro' the town,
  And I repeal it"; and nodding as in scorn,
  He parted, with great strides among his dogs.
  So left alone, the passions of her mind,
  As winds from all the compass shift and blow,
  Made war upon each other for an hour,
  Till pity won. She sent a herald forth,
  And bad him cry, with sound of trumpet, all
  The hard condition; but that she would loose
  The people: therefore, as they loved her well,
  From then till noon no foot should pace the street,
  No eye look down, she passing; but that all
  Should keep within, door shut, and window barr'd.
  Then fled she to her inmost bower, and there
  Unclasp'd the wedded eagles of her belt,
  The grim Earl's gift; but ever at a breath
  She linger'd, looking like a summer moon
  Half-dipt in cloud: anon she shook her head,
  And shower'd the rippled ringlets to her knee;
  Unclad herself in haste; adown the stair
  Stole on; and, like a creeping sunbeam, slid
  From pillar unto pillar, until she reach'd
  The gateway; there she found her palfrey trapt
  In purple blazon'd with armorial gold.
  Then she rode forth, clothed on with chastity:
  The deep air listen'd round her as she rode,
  And all the low wind hardly breathed for fear.
  The little wide-mouth'd heads upon the spout
  Had cunning eyes to see: the barking cur
  Made her cheek flame: her palfrey's footfall shot
  Light horrors thro' her pulses: the blind walls
  Were full of chinks and holes; and overhead
  Fantastic gables, crowding, stared: but she
  Not less thro' all bore up, till, last, she saw
  The white-flower'd elder-thicket from the field
  Gleam thro' the Gothic archways [3]in the wall.
  Then she rode back cloth'd on with chastity:
  And one low churl, [4] compact of thankless earth,
  The fatal byword of all years to come,
  Boring a little auger-hole in fear,
  Peep'd--but his eyes, before they had their will,
  Were shrivell'd into darkness in his head,
  And dropt before him. So the Powers, who wait
  On noble deeds, cancell'd a sense misused;
  And she, that knew not, pass'd: and all at once,
  With twelve great shocks of sound, the shameless noon
  Was clash'd and hammer'd from a hundred towers, [5]
  One after one: but even then she gain'd
  Her bower; whence reissuing, robed and crown'd,
  To meet her lord, she took the tax away,
  And built herself an everlasting name.


[Footnote 1: These four lines are not in the privately printed volume of
1842, but were added afterwards.]

[Footnote 2: St. Michael's, Trinity, and St. John.]

[Footnote 3: 1844. Archway.]

[Footnote 4: His effigy is still to be seen, protruded from an upper
window in High Street, Coventry.]

[Footnote 5: A most poetical licence. Thirty-two towers are the very
utmost allowed by writers on ancient Coventry.]






THE TWO VOICES


First published in 1842, though begun as early as 1833 and in course of
composition in 1834. See Spedding's letter dated 19th September, 1834.
Its original title was 'The Thoughts of a Suicide'. No alterations were
made in the poem after 1842.

It adds interest to this poem to know that it is autobiographical. It
was written soon after the death of Arthur Hallam when Tennyson's
depression was deepest. "When I wrote 'The Two Voices' I was so utterly
miserable, a burden to myself and to my family, that I said, 'Is life
worth anything?'" It is the history--as Spedding put it--of the
agitations, the suggestions and counter-suggestions of a mind sunk in
hopeless despondency, and meditating self-destruction, together with the
manner of its recovery to a more healthy condition. We have two
singularly interesting parallels to it in preceding poetry. The one is
in the third book of Lucretius (830-1095), where the arguments for
suicide are urged, not merely by the poet himself, but by arguments
placed by him in the mouth of Nature herself, and urged with such
cogency that they are said to have induced one of his editors and
translators, Creech, to put an end to his life. The other is in Spenser,
in the dialogue between Despair and the Red Cross Knight, where Despair
puts the case for self-destruction, and the Red Cross Knight rebuts the
arguments ('Faerie Queene', I. ix., st. xxxviii.-liv.).


  A still small voice spake unto me,
  "Thou art so full of misery,
  Were it not better not to be?"

  Then to the still small voice I said;
  "Let me not cast in endless shade
  What is so wonderfully made".

  To which the voice did urge reply;
  "To-day I saw the dragon-fly
  Come from the wells where he did lie.

  "An inner impulse rent the veil
  Of his old husk: from head to tail
  Came out clear plates of sapphire mail.

  "He dried his wings: like gauze they grew:
  Thro' crofts and pastures wet with dew
  A living flash of light he flew."

  I said, "When first the world began
  Young Nature thro' five cycles ran,
  And in the sixth she moulded man.

  "She gave him mind, the lordliest
  Proportion, and, above the rest,
  Dominion in the head and breast."

  Thereto the silent voice replied;
  "Self-blinded are you by your pride:
  Look up thro' night: the world is wide.

  "This truth within thy mind rehearse,
  That in a boundless universe
  Is boundless better, boundless worse.

  "Think you this mould of hopes and fears
  Could find no statelier than his peers
  In yonder hundred million spheres?"

  It spake, moreover, in my mind:
  "Tho' thou wert scatter'd to the wind,
  Yet is there plenty of the kind".

  Then did my response clearer fall:
  "No compound of this earthly ball
  Is like another, all in all".

  To which he answer'd scoffingly;
  "Good soul! suppose I grant it thee,
  Who'll weep for thy deficiency?

  "Or will one beam [1] be less intense,
  When thy peculiar difference
  Is cancell'd in the world of sense?"

  I would have said, "Thou canst not know,"
  But my full heart, that work'd below,
  Rain'd thro' my sight its overflow.

  Again the voice spake unto me:
  "Thou art so steep'd in misery,
  Surely 'twere better not to be.

  "Thine anguish will not let thee sleep,
  Nor any train of reason keep:
  Thou canst not think, but thou wilt weep."

  I said, "The years with change advance:
  If I make dark my countenance,
  I shut my life from happier chance.

  "Some turn this sickness yet might take,
  Ev'n yet." But he: "What drug can make
  A wither'd palsy cease to shake?"

  I wept, "Tho' I should die, I know
  That all about the thorn will blow
  In tufts of rosy-tinted snow;

  "And men, thro' novel spheres of thought
  Still moving after truth long sought,
  Will learn new things when I am not."

  "Yet," said the secret voice, "some time,
  Sooner or later, will gray prime
  Make thy grass hoar with early rime.

  "Not less swift souls that yearn for light,
  Rapt after heaven's starry flight,
  Would sweep the tracts of day and night.

  "Not less the bee would range her cells,
  The furzy prickle fire the dells,
  The foxglove cluster dappled bells."

  I said that "all the years invent;
  Each month is various to present
  The world with some development.

  "Were this not well, to bide mine hour,
  Tho' watching from a ruin'd tower
  How grows the day of human power?"

  "The highest-mounted mind," he said,
  "Still sees the sacred morning spread
  The silent summit overhead.

  "Will thirty seasons render plain
  Those lonely lights that still remain,
  Just breaking over land and main?

  "Or make that morn, from his cold crown
  And crystal silence creeping down,
  Flood with full daylight glebe and town?

  "Forerun thy peers, thy time, and let
  Thy feet, millenniums hence, be set
  In midst of knowledge, dream'd not yet.

  "Thou hast not gain'd a real height,
  Nor art thou nearer to the light,
  Because the scale is infinite.

  "'Twere better not to breathe or speak,
  Than cry for strength, remaining weak,
  And seem to find, but still to seek.

  "Moreover, but to seem to find
  Asks what thou lackest, thought resign'd,
  A healthy frame, a quiet mind."

  I said, "When I am gone away,
  'He dared not tarry,' men will say,
  Doing dishonour to my clay."

  "This is more vile," he made reply,
  "To breathe and loathe, to live and sigh,
  Than once from dread of pain to die.

  "Sick art thou--a divided will
  Still heaping on the fear of ill
  The fear of men, a coward still.

  "Do men love thee? Art thou so bound
  To men, that how thy name may sound
  Will vex thee lying underground?

  "The memory of the wither'd leaf
  In endless time is scarce more brief
  Than of the garner'd Autumn-sheaf.

  "Go, vexed Spirit, sleep in trust;
  The right ear, that is fill'd with dust,
  Hears little of the false or just."

  "Hard task, to pluck resolve," I cried,
  "From emptiness and the waste wide
  Of that abyss, or scornful pride!

  "Nay--rather yet that I could raise
  One hope that warm'd me in the days
  While still I yearn'd for human praise.

  "When, wide in soul, and bold of tongue,
  Among the tents I paused and sung,
  The distant battle flash'd and rung.

  "I sung the joyful Paean clear,
  And, sitting, burnish'd without fear
  The brand, the buckler, and the spear--

  "Waiting to strive a happy strife,
  To war with falsehood to the knife,
  And not to lose the good of life--

  "Some hidden principle to move,
  To put together, part and prove,
  And mete the bounds of hate and love--

  "As far as might be, to carve out
  Free space for every human doubt,
  That the whole mind might orb about--

  "To search thro' all I felt or saw,
  The springs of life, the depths of awe,
  And reach the law within the law:

  "At least, not rotting like a weed,
  But, having sown some generous seed,
  Fruitful of further thought and deed,

  "To pass, when Life her light withdraws,
  Not void of righteous self-applause,
  Nor in a merely selfish cause--

  "In some good cause, not in mine own,
  To perish, wept for, honour'd, known,
  And like a warrior overthrown;

  "Whose eyes are dim with glorious tears,
  When, soil'd with noble dust, he hears
  His country's war-song thrill his ears:

  "Then dying of a mortal stroke,
  What time the foeman's line is broke.
  And all the war is roll'd in smoke." [2]

  "Yea!" said the voice, "thy dream was good,
  While thou abodest in the bud.
  It was the stirring of the blood.

  "If Nature put not forth her power [2]
  About the opening of the flower,
  Who is it that could live an hour?

  "Then comes the check, the change, the fall.
  Pain rises up, old pleasures pall.
  There is one remedy for all.

  "Yet hadst thou, thro' enduring pain,
  Link'd month to month with such a chain
  Of knitted purport, all were vain.

  "Thou hadst not between death and birth
  Dissolved the riddle of the earth.
  So were thy labour little worth.

  "That men with knowledge merely play'd,
  I told thee--hardly nigher made,
  Tho' scaling slow from grade to grade;

  "Much less this dreamer, deaf and blind,
  Named man, may hope some truth to find,
  That bears relation to the mind.

  "For every worm beneath the moon
  Draws different threads, and late and soon
  Spins, toiling out his own cocoon.

  "Cry, faint not: either Truth is born
  Beyond the polar gleam forlorn,
  Or in the gateways of the morn.

  "Cry, faint not, climb: the summits slope
  Beyond the furthest nights of hope,
  Wrapt in dense cloud from base to cope.

  "Sometimes a little corner shines,
  As over rainy mist inclines
  A gleaming crag with belts of pines.

  "I will go forward, sayest thou,
  I shall not fail to find her now.
  Look up, the fold is on her brow.

  "If straight thy track, or if oblique,
  Thou know'st not. Shadows thou dost strike,
  Embracing cloud, Ixion-like;

  "And owning but a little more
  Than beasts, abidest lame and poor,
  Calling thyself a little lower

  "Than angels. Cease to wail and brawl!
  Why inch by inch to darkness crawl?
  There is one remedy for all."

  "O dull, one-sided voice," said I,
  "Wilt thou make everything a lie,
  To flatter me that I may die?

  "I know that age to age succeeds,
  Blowing a noise of tongues and deeds,
  A dust of systems and of creeds.

  "I cannot hide that some have striven,
  Achieving calm, to whom was given
  The joy that mixes man with Heaven:

  "Who, rowing hard against the stream,
  Saw distant gates of Eden gleam,
  And did not dream it was a dream";

  "But heard, by secret transport led, [3]
  Ev'n in the charnels of the dead,
  The murmur of the fountain-head--

  "Which did accomplish their desire,--
  Bore and forbore, and did not tire,
  Like Stephen, an unquenched fire.

  "He heeded not reviling tones,
  Nor sold his heart to idle moans,
  Tho' cursed and scorn'd, and bruised with stones:

  "But looking upward, full of grace,
  He pray'd, and from a happy place
  God's glory smote him on the face."

  The sullen answer slid betwixt:
  "Not that the grounds of hope were fix'd,
  The elements were kindlier mix'd." [4]

  I said, "I toil beneath the curse,
  But, knowing not the universe,
  I fear to slide from bad to worse. [5]

  "And that, in seeking to undo
  One riddle, and to find the true,
  I knit a hundred others new:

  "Or that this anguish fleeting hence,
  Unmanacled from bonds of sense,
  Be fix'd and froz'n to permanence:

  "For I go, weak from suffering here;
  Naked I go, and void of cheer:
  What is it that I may not fear?"

  "Consider well," the voice replied,
  "His face, that two hours since hath died;
  Wilt thou find passion, pain or pride?

  "Will he obey when one commands?
  Or answer should one press his hands?
  He answers not, nor understands.

  "His palms are folded on his breast:
  There is no other thing express'd
  But long disquiet merged in rest.

  "His lips are very mild and meek:
  Tho' one should smite him on the cheek,
  And on the mouth, he will not speak.

  "His little daughter, whose sweet face
  He kiss'd, taking his last embrace,
  Becomes dishonour to her race--

  "His sons grow up that bear his name,
  Some grow to honour, some to shame,--
  But he is chill to praise or blame. [6]

  "He will not hear the north wind rave,
  Nor, moaning, household shelter crave
  From winter rains that beat his grave.

  "High up the vapours fold and swim:
  About him broods the twilight dim:
  The place he knew forgetteth him."

  "If all be dark, vague voice," I said,
  "These things are wrapt in doubt and dread,
  Nor canst thou show the dead are dead.

  "The sap dries up: the plant declines. [7]
  A deeper tale my heart divines.
  Know I not Death? the outward signs?

  "I found him when my years were few;
  A shadow on the graves I knew,
  And darkness in the village yew.

  "From grave to grave the shadow crept:
  In her still place the morning wept:
  Touch'd by his feet the daisy slept.

  "The simple senses crown'd his head: [8]
  'Omega! thou art Lord,' they
  said; 'We find no motion in the dead.'

  "Why, if man rot in dreamless ease,
  Should that plain fact, as taught by these,
  Not make him sure that he shall cease?

  "Who forged that other influence,
  That heat of inward evidence,
  By which he doubts against the sense?

  "He owns the fatal gift of eyes, [9]
  That read his spirit blindly wise,
  Not simple as a thing that dies.

  "Here sits he shaping wings to fly:
  His heart forebodes a mystery:
  He names the name Eternity.

  "That type of Perfect in his mind
  In Nature can he nowhere find.
  He sows himself in every wind.

  "He seems to hear a Heavenly Friend,
  And thro' thick veils to apprehend
  A labour working to an end.

  "The end and the beginning vex
  His reason: many things perplex,
  With motions, checks, and counterchecks.

  "He knows a baseness in his blood
  At such strange war with something good,
  He may not do the thing he would.

  "Heaven opens inward, chasms yawn.
  Vast images in glimmering dawn,
  Half shown, are broken and withdrawn.

  "Ah! sure within him and without,
  Could his dark wisdom find it out,
  There must be answer to his doubt.

  "But thou canst answer not again.
  With thine own weapon art thou slain,
  Or thou wilt answer but in vain.

  "The doubt would rest, I dare not solve.
  In the same circle we revolve.
  Assurance only breeds resolve."

  As when a billow, blown against,
  Falls back, the voice with which I fenced
  A little ceased, but recommenced.

  "Where wert thou when thy father play'd
  In his free field, and pastime made,
  A merry boy in sun and shade?

  "A merry boy they called him then.
  He sat upon the knees of men
  In days that never come again,

  "Before the little ducts began
  To feed thy bones with lime, and ran
  Their course, till thou wert also man:

  "Who took a wife, who rear'd his race,
  Whose wrinkles gather'd on his face,
  Whose troubles number with his days:

  "A life of nothings, nothing-worth,
  From that first nothing ere his birth
  To that last nothing under earth!"

  "These words," I said, "are like the rest,
  No certain clearness, but at best
  A vague suspicion of the breast:

  "But if I grant, thou might'st defend
  The thesis which thy words intend--
  That to begin implies to end;

  "Yet how should I for certain hold, [10]
  Because my memory is so cold,
  That I first was in human mould?

  "I cannot make this matter plain,
  But I would shoot, howe'er in vain,
  A random arrow from the brain.

  "It may be that no life is found,
  Which only to one engine bound
  Falls off, but cycles always round.

  "As old mythologies relate,
  Some draught of Lethe might await
  The slipping thro' from state to state.

  "As here we find in trances, men
  Forget the dream that happens then,
  Until they fall in trance again.

  "So might we, if our state were such
  As one before, remember much,
  For those two likes might meet and touch. [11]

  "But, if I lapsed from nobler place,
  Some legend of a fallen race
  Alone might hint of my disgrace;

  "Some vague emotion of delight
  In gazing up an Alpine height,
  Some yearning toward the lamps of night.

  "Or if thro' lower lives I came--
  Tho' all experience past became
  Consolidate in mind and frame--

  "I might forget my weaker lot;
  For is not our first year forgot?
  The haunts of memory echo not.

  "And men, whose reason long was blind,
  From cells of madness unconfined, [12]
  Oft lose whole years of darker mind.

  "Much more, if first I floated free,
  As naked essence, must I be
  Incompetent of memory:

  "For memory dealing but with time,
  And he with matter, could she climb
  Beyond her own material prime?

  "Moreover, something is or seems,
  That touches me with mystic gleams,
  Like glimpses of forgotten dreams--

  "Of something felt, like something here;
  Of something done, I know not where;
  Such as no language may declare."

  The still voice laugh'd. "I talk," said he,
  "Not with thy dreams.
  Suffice it thee Thy pain is a reality."

  "But thou," said I, "hast miss'd thy mark,
  Who sought'st to wreck my mortal ark,
  By making all the horizon dark.

  "Why not set forth, if I should do
  This rashness, that which might ensue
  With this old soul in organs new?

  "Whatever crazy sorrow saith,
  No life that breathes with human breath
  Has ever truly long'd for death.

  "'Tis life, whereof our nerves are scant,
  Oh life, not death, for which we pant;
  More life, and fuller, that I want."

  I ceased, and sat as one forlorn.
  Then said the voice, in quiet scorn,
  "Behold it is the Sabbath morn".

  And I arose, and I released
  The casement, and the light increased
  With freshness in the dawning east.

  Like soften'd airs that blowing steal,
  When meres begin to uncongeal,
  The sweet church bells began to peal.

  On to God's house the people prest:
  Passing the place where each must rest,
  Each enter'd like a welcome guest.

  One walk'd between his wife and child,
  With measur'd footfall firm and mild,
  And now and then he gravely smiled.

  The prudent partner of his blood
  Lean'd on him, faithful, gentle, good, [13]
  Wearing the rose of womanhood.

  And in their double love secure,
  The little maiden walk'd demure,
  Pacing with downward eyelids pure.

  These three made unity so sweet,
  My frozen heart began to beat,
  Remembering its ancient heat.

  I blest them, and they wander'd on:
  I spoke, but answer came there none:
  The dull and bitter voice was gone.

  A second voice was at mine ear,
  A little whisper silver-clear,
  A murmur, "Be of better cheer".

  As from some blissful neighbourhood,
  A notice faintly understood,
  "I see the end, and know the good".

  A little hint to solace woe,
  A hint, a whisper breathing low,
  "I may not speak of what I know".

  Like an Aeolian harp that wakes
  No certain air, but overtakes
  Far thought with music that it makes:

  Such seem'd the whisper at my side:
  "What is it thou knowest, sweet voice?" I cried.
  "A hidden hope," the voice replied:

  So heavenly-toned, that in that hour
  From out my sullen heart a power
  Broke, like the rainbow from the shower,

  To feel, altho' no tongue can prove
  That every cloud, that spreads above
  And veileth love, itself is love.

  And forth into the fields I went,
  And Nature's living motion lent
  The pulse of hope to discontent.

  I wonder'd at the bounteous hours,
  The slow result of winter showers:
  You scarce could see the grass for flowers.

  I wonder'd, while I paced along:
  The woods were fill'd so full with song,
  There seem'd no room for sense of wrong.

  So variously seem'd all things wrought, [14]
  I marvell'd how the mind was brought
  To anchor by one gloomy thought;

  And wherefore rather I made choice
  To commune with that barren voice,
  Than him that said, "Rejoice! rejoice!"


[Footnote 1: The insensibility of Nature to man's death has been the
eloquent theme of many poets. 'Cf'. Byron, 'Lara', canto ii. 'ad init'.,
and Matthew Arnold, 'The Youth of Nature'.]

[Footnote 2: 'Cf. Palace of Art', "the riddle of the painful earth".]

[Footnote 3: 'Seq'. The reference is to Acts of the Apostles vii.
54-60.]

[Footnote 4: Suggested by Shakespeare, 'Julius Cæsar', Act v., Sc.
5:--

  and _the elements_
  So mix'd in' him that Nature, etc.]


[Footnote 5: An excellent commentary on this is Clough's

  _Perché pensa, pensando vecchia_.]


[Footnote 6: 'Cf'. Job xiv. 21:

  "His sons come to honour, and he knowcth it not; and they are brought
  low, but he perceiveth it not of them."]


[Footnote 7: So Bishop Butler, 'Analogy', ch. i.:

  "We cannot argue _from the reason of the thing_ that death is the
  destruction of living agents because we know not at all what death is
  in itself, but only some of its effects".]


[Footnote 8: So Milton, enfolding this idea of death, 'Paradise
Lost', ii., 672-3:--

  What seemed his head
  The _likeness_ of a kingly crown had on.]


[Footnote 9: 'Cf'. Plato, 'Phaedo', x.:--

  [Greek: ara echei alaetheian tina opsis te kai akoae tois anthr_opois.
  Ae ta ge toiauta kai oi poiaetai haemin aei thrulousin oti out
  akouomen akribes ouden oute or_omen]

  "Have sight and hearing any truth in them? Are they not, as poets are
  always telling us, inaccurate witnesses?"

The proper commentary on the whole of this passage is Plato
'passim', but the 'Phaedo' particularly, 'cf. Republic',
vii., viii. and xiv.-xv.]


[Footnote 10: An allusion to the myth that when souls are sent to occupy
a body again they drink of Lethe that they may forget their previous
existence. See the famous passage towards the end of the tenth book of
Plato's 'Republic':

  "All persons are compelled to drink a certain quantity of the water,
  but those who are not preserved by prudence drink more than the
  quantity, and each as he drinks forgets everything".

So Milton, 'Paradise Lost', ii., 582-4.]


[Footnote 11: The best commentary on this will be found in Herbert
Spencer's 'Psychology'.]

[Footnote 12: Compare with this Tennyson's first sonnet ('Works', Globe
Edition, 25), and the lines in the 'Ancient Sage' in the 'Passion of the
Past' ('Id'., 551). 'Cf'. too the lines in Wordsworth's ode on
'Intimations of Immortality':--

  But there's a tree, of many one,
  A single field which I have looked upon,
  Both of them speak of something that is gone;
  The pansy at my feet
  Doth the same tale repeat.

For other remarkable illustrations of this see the present writer's
'Illustrations of Tennyson', p. 38.]


[Footnote 13: 'Cf'. Coleridge, 'Ancient Mariner, iv'.:--

  "O happy living things ... I blessed them
  The self-same moment I could pray."

There is a close parallel between the former and the latter state
described here and in Coleridge's mystic allegory; in both cases the
sufferers "wake to love," the curse falling off them when they can
"bless".]


[Footnote 14: 1884. And all so variously wrought (with semi-colon instead
of full stop at the end of the preceding line).]







THE DAY-DREAM

First published in 1842, but written in 1835. In it is incorporated,
though with several alterations, 'The Sleeping Beauty', published among
the poems of 1830, but excised in subsequent editions. Half extravaganza
and half apologue, like the 'Midsummer Night's Dream', this delightful
poem may be safely left to deliver its own message and convey its own
meaning. It is an excellent illustration of the truth of Tennyson's own
remark: "Poetry is like shot silk with many glancing colours. Every
reader must find his own interpretation according to his ability, and
according to his sympathy with the poet."

  PROLOGUE

  (No alteration has been made in the Prologue since 1842.)


    O, Lady Flora, let me speak:
    A pleasant hour has past away
    While, dreaming on your damask cheek,
    The dewy sister-eyelids lay.

    As by the lattice you reclined,
    I went thro' many wayward moods
    To see you dreaming--and, behind,
    A summer crisp with shining woods.
    And I too dream'd, until at last
    Across my fancy, brooding warm,
    The reflex of a legend past,
    And loosely settled into form.
    And would you have the thought I had,
    And see the vision that I saw,
    Then take the broidery-frame, and add
    A crimson to the quaint Macaw,
    And I will tell it. Turn your face,
    Nor look with that too-earnest eye--
    The rhymes are dazzled from their place,
    And order'd words asunder fly.



  THE SLEEPING PALACE


  (No alteration since 1851.)


    1

    The varying year with blade and sheaf
    Clothes and reclothes the happy plains;
    Here rests the sap within the leaf,
    Here stays the blood along the veins.
    Faint shadows, vapours lightly curl'd,
    Faint murmurs from the meadows come,
    Like hints and echoes of the world
    To spirits folded in the womb.


    2

    Soft lustre bathes the range of urns
    On every slanting terrace-lawn.
    The fountain to his place returns
    Deep in the garden lake withdrawn.
    Here droops the banner on the tower,
    On the hall-hearths the festal fires,
    The peacock in his laurel bower,
    The parrot in his gilded wires.


    3

    Roof-haunting martins warm their eggs:
    In these, in those the life is stay'd.
    The mantles from the golden pegs
    Droop sleepily: no sound is made,
    Not even of a gnat that sings.
    More like a picture seemeth all
    Than those old portraits of old kings,
    That watch the sleepers from the wall.


    4

    Here sits the Butler with a flask
    Between his knees, half-drain'd; and there
    The wrinkled steward at his task,
    The maid-of-honour blooming fair:
    The page has caught her hand in his:
    Her lips are sever'd as to speak:
    His own are pouted to a kiss:
    The blush is fix'd upon her cheek.


    5

    Till all the hundred summers pass,
    The beams, that thro' the Oriel shine,
    Make prisms in every carven glass,
    And beaker brimm'd with noble wine.
    Each baron at the banquet sleeps,
    Grave faces gather'd in a ring.
    His state the king reposing keeps.
    He must have been a jovial king. [1]


    6

    All round a hedge upshoots, and shows
    At distance like a little wood;
    Thorns, ivies, woodbine, misletoes,
    And grapes with bunches red as blood;
    All creeping plants, a wall of green
    Close-matted, bur and brake and briar,
    And glimpsing over these, just seen,
    High up, the topmost palace-spire.


    7

    When will the hundred summers die,
    And thought and time be born again,
    And newer knowledge, drawing nigh,
    Bring truth that sways the soul of men?
    Here all things in there place remain,
    As all were order'd, ages since.
    Come, Care and Pleasure, Hope and Pain,
    And bring the fated fairy Prince.


[Footnote 1: All editions up to and including 1851:--He must have been
a jolly king.]



  THE SLEEPING BEAUTY


  (First printed in 1830, but does not reappear again till 1842. No
  alteration since 1842.)


    1

    Year after year unto her feet,
    She lying on her couch alone,
    Across the purpled coverlet,
    The maiden's jet-black hair has grown, [1]
    On either side her tranced form
    Forth streaming from a braid of pearl:
    The slumbrous light is rich and warm,
    And moves not on the rounded curl.


    2

    The silk star-broider'd [2] coverlid
    Unto her limbs itself doth mould
    Languidly ever; and, amid
    Her full black ringlets downward roll'd,
    Glows forth each softly-shadow'd arm,
    With bracelets of the diamond bright:
    Her constant beauty doth inform
    Stillness with love, and day with light.


    3

    She sleeps: her breathings are not heard
    In palace chambers far apart. [3]
    The fragrant tresses are not stirr'd
    That lie upon her charmed heart.
    She sleeps: on either hand [4] upswells
    The gold-fringed pillow lightly prest:
    She sleeps, nor dreams, but ever dwells
    A perfect form in perfect rest.



[Footnote 1: 1830.

  The while she slumbereth alone,
  _Over_ the purple coverlet,
  The maiden's jet-black hair hath grown.]


[Footnote 2: 1830. Star-braided.]

[Footnote 3: A writer in 'Notes and Queries', February, 1880, asks
whether these lines mean that the lovely princess did _not_ snore
so loud that she could be heard from one end of the palace to the other
and whether it would not have detracted from her charms had that state
of things been habitual. This brings into the field Dr. Gatty and other
admirers of Tennyson, who, it must be owned, are not very successful in
giving a satisfactory reply.]

[Footnote 4: 1830. Side.]




  THE ARRIVAL


  (No alteration after 1853.)


    1

    All precious things, discover'd late,
    To those that seek them issue forth;
    For love in sequel works with fate,
    And draws the veil from hidden worth.
    He travels far from other skies
    His mantle glitters on the rocks--
    A fairy Prince, with joyful eyes,
    And lighter footed than the fox.


    2

    The bodies and the bones of those
    That strove in other days to pass,
    Are wither'd in the thorny close,
    Or scatter'd blanching on [1] the grass.
    He gazes on the silent dead:
    "They perish'd in their daring deeds."
    This proverb flashes thro' his head,
    "The many fail: the one succeeds".


    3

    He comes, scarce knowing what he seeks:
    He breaks the hedge: he enters there:
    The colour flies into his cheeks:
    He trusts to light on something fair;
    For all his life the charm did talk
    About his path, and hover near
    With words of promise in his walk,
    And whisper'd voices at his ear. [2]


    4

    More close and close his footsteps wind;
    The Magic Music [3] in his heart
    Beats quick and quicker, till he find
    The quiet chamber far apart.
    His spirit flutters like a lark,
    He stoops--to kiss her--on his knee.
    "Love, if thy tresses be so dark,
    How dark those hidden eyes must be!



[Footnote 1: 1842 to 1851. In.]

[Footnote 2: All editions up to and including 1850. In his ear.]

[Footnote 3: All editions up to and including 1851. Not capitals in
magic music.]





  THE REVIVAL


  No alteration after 1853.


    1

    A touch, a kiss! the charm was snapt.
    There rose a noise of striking clocks,
    And feet that ran, and doors that clapt,
    And barking dogs, and crowing cocks;
    A fuller light illumined all,
    A breeze thro' all the garden swept,
    A sudden hubbub shook the hall,
    And sixty feet the fountain leapt.


    2

    The hedge broke in, the banner blew,
    The butler drank, the steward scrawl'd,
    The fire shot up, the martin flew,
    The parrot scream'd, the peacock squall'd,
    The maid and page renew'd their strife,
    The palace bang'd, and buzz'd and clackt,
    And all the long-pent stream of life
    Dash'd downward in a cataract.


    3

    And last with these [1] the king awoke,
    And in his chair himself uprear'd,
    And yawn'd, and rubb'd his face, and spoke,
    "By holy rood, a royal beard!
    How say you? we have slept, my lords,
    My beard has grown into my lap."
    The barons swore, with many words,
    'Twas but an after-dinner's nap.


    4

    "Pardy," return'd the king, "but still
    My joints are something [2] stiff or so.
    My lord, and shall we pass the bill
    I mention'd half an hour ago?"
    The chancellor, sedate and vain,
    In courteous words return'd reply:
    But dallied with his golden chain,
    And, smiling, put the question by.



[Footnote 1: 1842 to 1851. And last of all.]

[Footnote 2: 1863. Somewhat.]




  THE DEPARTURE


  (No alteration since 1842.)


    1

    And on her lover's arm she leant,
    And round her waist she felt it fold,
    And far across the hills they went
    In that new world which is the old:
    Across the hills and far away
    Beyond their utmost purple rim,
    And deep into the dying day
    The happy princess follow'd him.


    2

    "I'd sleep another hundred years,
    O love, for such another kiss;"
    "O wake for ever, love," she hears,
    "O love, 'twas such as this and this."
    And o'er them many a sliding star,
    And many a merry wind was borne,
    And, stream'd thro' many a golden bar,
    The twilight melted into morn.


    3

    "O eyes long laid in happy sleep!"
    "O happy sleep, that lightly fled!"
    "O happy kiss, that woke thy sleep!"
    "O love, thy kiss would wake the dead!"
    And o'er them many a flowing range
    Of vapour buoy'd the crescent-bark,
    And, rapt thro' many a rosy change,
    The twilight died into the dark.


    4

    "A hundred summers! can it be?
    And whither goest thou, tell me where?"
    "O seek my father's court with me!
    For there are greater wonders there."
    And o'er the hills, and far away
    Beyond their utmost purple rim,
    Beyond the night across the day,
    Thro' all the world she follow'd him.




  MORAL

  (No alteration since 1842.)


    1

    So, Lady Flora, take my lay,
    And if you find no moral there,
    Go, look in any glass and say,
    What moral is in being fair.
    Oh, to what uses shall we put
    The wildweed-flower that simply blows?
    And is there any moral shut
    Within the bosom of the rose?


    2

    But any man that walks the mead,
    In bud or blade, or bloom, may find,
    According as his humours lead,
    A meaning suited to his mind.
    And liberal applications lie
    In Art like Nature, dearest friend; [1]
    So 'twere to cramp its use, if I
    Should hook it to some useful end.


[Foonote 1: So Wordsworth:--

  O Reader! had you in your mind
  Such stores as silent thought can bring,
  O gentle Reader! you would find
  A tale in everything.

--'Simon Lee'.]








  L'ENVOI


  (No alteration since 1843 except in numbering the stanzas.)

    1

    You shake your head. A random string
    Your finer female sense offends.
    Well--were it not a pleasant thing
    To fall asleep with all one's friends;
    To pass with all our social ties
    To silence from the paths of men;
    And every hundred years to rise
    And learn the world, and sleep again;
    To sleep thro' terms of mighty wars,
    And wake on science grown to more,
    On secrets of the brain, the stars,
    As wild as aught of fairy lore;
    And all that else the years will show,
    The Poet-forms of stronger hours,
    The vast Republics that may grow,
    The Federations and the Powers;
    Titanic forces taking birth
    In divers seasons, divers climes;
    For we are Ancients of the earth,
    And in the morning of the times.


    2

    So sleeping, so aroused from sleep
    Thro' sunny decads new and strange,
    Or gay quinquenniads would we reap
    The flower and quintessence of change.


    3

    Ah, yet would I--and would I might!
    So much your eyes my fancy take--
    Be still the first to leap to light
    That I might kiss those eyes awake!
    For, am I right or am I wrong,
    To choose your own you did not care;
    You'd have 'my' moral from the song,
    And I will take my pleasure there:
    And, am I right or am I wrong,
    My fancy, ranging thro' and thro',
    To search a meaning for the song,
    Perforce will still revert to you;
    Nor finds a closer truth than this
    All-graceful head, so richly curl'd,
    And evermore a costly kiss
    The prelude to some brighter world.



    4

    For since the time when Adam first
    Embraced his Eve in happy hour,
    And every bird of Eden burst
    In carol, every bud to flower,
    What eyes, like thine, have waken'd hopes?
    What lips, like thine, so sweetly join'd?
    Where on the double rosebud droops
    The fullness of the pensive mind;
    Which all too dearly self-involved, [1]
    Yet sleeps a dreamless sleep to me;
    A sleep by kisses undissolved,
    That lets thee [2] neither hear nor see:
    But break it. In the name of wife,
    And in the rights that name may give,
    Are clasp'd the moral of thy life,
    And that for which I care to live.


[Foonote 1: 1842. The pensive mind that, self-involved.]

[Foonote 2: 1842. Which lets thee.]



  EPILOGUE


  (No alteration since 1842.)

    So, Lady Flora, take my lay,
    And, if you find a meaning there,
    O whisper to your glass, and say,
    "What wonder, if he thinks me fair?"
    What wonder I was all unwise,
    To shape the song for your delight
    Like long-tail'd birds of Paradise,
    That float thro' Heaven, and cannot light?
    Or old-world trains, upheld at court
    By Cupid-boys of blooming hue--
    But take it--earnest wed with sport,
    And either sacred unto you.







AMPHION


First published in 1842. No alteration since 1850.

In this humorous allegory the poet bewails his unhappy lot on having
fallen on an age so unpropitious to poetry, contrasting it with the
happy times so responsive to his predecessors who piped to a world
prepared to dance to their music. However, he must toil and be satisfied
if he can make a little garden blossom.


  My father left a park to me,
  But it is wild and barren,
  A garden too with scarce a tree
  And waster than a warren:
  Yet say the neighbours when they call,
  It is not bad but good land,
  And in it is the germ of all
  That grows within the woodland.

  O had I lived when song was great
  In days of old Amphion, [1]
  And ta'en my fiddle to the gate,
  Nor cared for seed or scion!
  And had I lived when song was great,
  And legs of trees were limber,
  And ta'en my fiddle to the gate,
  And fiddled in the timber!

  'Tis said he had a tuneful tongue,
  Such happy intonation,
  Wherever he sat down and sung
  He left a small plantation;
  Wherever in a lonely grove
  He set up his forlorn pipes,
  The gouty oak began to move,
  And flounder into hornpipes.

  The mountain stirr'd its bushy crown,
  And, as tradition teaches,
  Young ashes pirouetted down
  Coquetting with young beeches;
  And briony-vine and ivy-wreath
  Ran forward to his rhyming,
  And from the valleys underneath
  Came little copses climbing.

  The linden broke her ranks and rent
  The woodbine wreathes that bind her,
  And down the middle, buzz! she went,
  With all her bees behind her. [2]
  The poplars, in long order due,
  With cypress promenaded,
  The shock-head willows two and two
  By rivers gallopaded.

  The birch-tree swang her fragrant hair,
  The bramble cast her berry,
  The gin within the juniper
  Began to make him merry.

  Came wet-shot alder from the wave,
  Came yews, a dismal coterie;
  Each pluck'd his one foot from the grave,
  Poussetting with a sloe-tree:
  Old elms came breaking from the vine,
  The vine stream'd out to follow,
  And, sweating rosin, plump'd the pine
  From many a cloudy hollow.

  And wasn't it a sight to see
  When, ere his song was ended,
  Like some great landslip, tree by tree,
  The country-side descended;
  And shepherds from the mountain-caves
  Look'd down, half-pleased, half-frighten'd,
  As dash'd about the drunken leaves
  The random sunshine lighten'd!

  Oh, nature first was fresh to men,
  And wanton without measure;
  So youthful and so flexile then,
  You moved her at your pleasure.
  Twang out, my fiddle! shake the twigs!
  And make her dance attendance;
  Blow, flute, and stir the stiff-set sprigs,
  And scirrhous roots and tendons.

  'Tis vain! in such a brassy age
  I could not move a thistle;
  The very sparrows in the hedge
  Scarce answer to my whistle;
  Or at the most, when three-parts-sick
  With strumming and with scraping,
  A jackass heehaws from the rick,
  The passive oxen gaping.

  But what is that I hear? a sound
  Like sleepy counsel pleading:
  O Lord!--'tis in my neighbour's ground,
  The modern Muses reading.
  They read Botanic Treatises.
  And works on Gardening thro' there,
  And Methods of transplanting trees
  To look as if they grew there.

  The wither'd Misses! how they prose
  O'er books of travell'd seamen,
  And show you slips of all that grows
  From England to Van Diemen.
  They read in arbours clipt and cut,
  And alleys, faded places,
  By squares of tropic summer shut
  And warm'd in crystal cases.

  But these, tho' fed with careful dirt,
  Are neither green nor sappy;
  Half-conscious of the garden-squirt,
  The spindlings look unhappy, [3]
  Better to me the meanest weed
  That blows upon its mountain,
  The vilest herb that runs to seed
  Beside its native fountain.

  And I must work thro' months of toil,
  And years of cultivation,
  Upon my proper patch of soil
  To grow my own plantation.
  I'll take the showers as they fall,
  I will not vex my bosom:
  Enough if at the end of all
  A little garden blossom.


[Foonote 1: Amphion was no doubt capable of performing all the feats
here attributed to him, but there is no record of them; he appears to
have confined himself to charming the stones into their places when
Thebes was being built. Tennyson seems to have confounded him with
Orpheus.]

[Footnote 2: Till 1857 these four lines ran thus:--

  The birch-tree swang her fragrant hair,
  The bramble cast her berry.
  The gin within the juniper
  Began to make him merry.]


[Footnote 3: All editions up to and including 1850. The poor things look
unhappy.]







ST. AGNES


This exquisite little poem was first published in 1837 in the
'Keepsake', an annual edited by Lady Emmeline Stuart Wortley, and was
included in the edition of 1842. No alteration has been made in it since
1842.

In 1857 the title was altered from "St. Agnes" to "St. Agnes' Eve," thus
bringing it near to Keats' poem, which certainly influenced Tennyson in
writing it, as a comparison of the opening of the two poems will show.
The saint from whom the poem takes its name was a young girl of thirteen
who suffered martyrdom in the reign of Diocletian: she is a companion to
Sir Galahad.


  Deep on the convent-roof the snows
  Are sparkling to the moon:
  My breath to heaven like vapour goes:
  May my soul follow soon!
  The shadows of the convent-towers
  Slant down the snowy sward,
  Still creeping with the creeping hours
  That lead me to my Lord:
  Make Thou [1] my spirit pure and clear
  As are the frosty skies,
  Or this first snowdrop of the year
  That in [2] my bosom lies.

  As these white robes are soiled and dark,
  To yonder shining ground;
  As this pale taper's earthly spark,
  To yonder argent round;
  So shows my soul before the Lamb,
  My spirit before Thee;
  So in mine earthly house I am,
  To that I hope to be.
  Break up the heavens, O Lord! and far,
  Thro' all yon starlight keen,
  Draw me, thy bride, a glittering star,
  In raiment white and clean.

  He lifts me to the golden doors;
  The flashes come and go;
  All heaven bursts her starry floors,
  And strows [3] her lights below,
  And deepens on and up! the gates
  Roll back, and far within
  For me the Heavenly Bridegroom waits, [4]
  To make me pure of sin. [5]
  The sabbaths of Eternity,
  One sabbath deep and wide--
  A light upon the shining sea--
  The Bridegroom [6] with his bride!


[Footnote 1: In 'Keepsake': not capital in Thou.]

[Footnote 2: In 'Keepsake': On.]

[Footnote 3: In 'Keepsake': Strews.]

[Footnote 4: In 'Keepsake': not capitals in Heavenly and Bridegroom.]

[Footnote 5: In 'Keepsake': To wash me pure from sin.]

[Footnote 6: In 'Keepsake': capital in Bridegroom.]








SIR GALAHAD

Published in 1842. No alteration has been made in it since. This poem
may be regarded as a prelude to 'The Holy Grail'. The character of
Galahad is deduced principally from the seventeenth book of the 'Morte
d'Arthur'. In the twenty-second chapter of that book St. Joseph of
Arimathea says to him: "Thou hast resembled me in two things in that
thou hast seen the marvels of the sangreal, and in that thou has been a
clean maiden".


  My good blade carves the casques of men,
  My tough lance thrusteth sure,
  My strength is as the strength of ten,
  Because my heart is pure.

  The shattering trumpet shrilleth high,
  The hard brands shiver on the steel,
  The splinter'd spear-shafts crack and fly,
  The horse and rider reel:

  They reel, they roll in clanging lists,
  And when the tide of combat stands,
  Perfume and flowers fall in showers,
  That lightly rain from ladies' hands.

  How sweet are looks that ladies bend
  On whom their favours fall!
  For them I battle till the end,
  To save from shame and thrall:
  But all my heart is drawn above,
  My knees are bow'd in crypt and shrine:
  I never felt the kiss of love,
  Nor maiden's hand in mine.
  More bounteous aspects on me beam,
  Me mightier transports move and thrill;
  So keep I fair thro' faith and prayer
  A virgin heart in work and will.

  When down the stormy crescent goes,
  A light before me swims,
  Between dark stems the forest glows,
  I hear a noise of hymns:
  Then by some secret shrine I ride;
  I hear a voice, but none are there;
  The stalls are void, the doors are wide,
  The tapers burning fair.
  Fair gleams the snowy altar-cloth,
  The silver vessels sparkle clean,
  The shrill bell rings, the censer swings,
  And solemn chaunts resound between.

  Sometimes on lonely mountain-meres
  I find a magic bark;
  I leap on board: no helmsman steers:
  I float till all is dark.
  A gentle sound, an awful light!
  Three angels bear the holy Grail:
  With folded feet, in stoles of white,
  On sleeping wings they sail.
  Ah, blessed vision! blood of God!
  My spirit beats her mortal bars,
  As down dark tides the glory slides,
  And star-like mingles with the stars.

  When on my goodly charger borne
  Thro' dreaming towns I go,
  The cock crows ere the Christmas morn,
  The streets are dumb with snow.
  The tempest crackles on the leads,
  And, ringing, spins from brand and mail;
  But o'er the dark a glory spreads,
  And gilds the driving hail.
  I leave the plain, I climb the height;
  No branchy thicket shelter yields;
  But blessed forms in whistling storms
  Fly o'er waste fens and windy fields.

  A maiden knight--to me is given
  Such hope, I know not fear;
  I yearn to breathe the airs of heaven
  That often meet me here.
  I muse on joy that will not cease,
  Pure spaces clothed in living beams,
  Pure lilies of eternal peace,
  Whose odours haunt my dreams;
  And, stricken by an angel's hand,
  This mortal armour that I wear,
  This weight and size, this heart and eyes,
  Are touch'd, are turn'd to finest air.

  The clouds are broken in the sky,
  And thro' the mountain-walls
  A rolling organ-harmony
  Swells up, and shakes and falls.
  Then move the trees, the copses nod,
  Wings flutter, voices hover clear:
  "O just and faithful knight of God!
  Ride on! the prize is near".
  So pass I hostel, hall, and grange;
  By bridge and ford, by park and pale,
  All-arm'd I ride, whate'er betide,
  Until I find the holy Grail.









EDWARD GRAY

First published in 1842 but written in or before 1840. See 'Life', i.,
209. Not altered since.


  Sweet Emma Moreland of yonder town
  Met me walking on yonder way,
  "And have you lost your heart?" she said;
  "And are you married yet, Edward Gray?"

  Sweet Emma Moreland spoke to me:
  Bitterly weeping I turn'd away:
  "Sweet Emma Moreland, love no more
  Can touch the heart of Edward Gray.

  "Ellen Adair she loved me well,
  Against her father's and mother's will:
  To-day I sat for an hour and wept,
  By Ellen's grave, on the windy hill.

  "Shy she was, and I thought her cold;
  Thought her proud, and fled over the sea;
  Fill'd I was with folly and spite,
  When Ellen Adair was dying for me.

  "Cruel, cruel the words I said!
  Cruelly came they back to-day:
  'You're too slight and fickle,' I said,
  'To trouble the heart of Edward Gray'.

  "There I put my face in the grass--
  Whisper'd, 'Listen to my despair:
  I repent me of all I did:
  Speak a little, Ellen Adair!'

  "Then I took a pencil, and wrote
  On the mossy stone, as I lay,
  'Here lies the body of Ellen Adair;
  And here the heart of Edward Gray!'

  "Love may come, and love may go,
  And fly, like a bird, from tree to tree:
  But I will love no more, no more,
  Till Ellen Adair come back to me.

  "Bitterly wept I over the stone:
  Bitterly weeping I turn'd away;
  There lies the body of Ellen Adair!
  And there the heart of Edward Gray!"







WILL WATERPROOF'S LYRICAL MONOLOGUE

MADE AT THE COCK

First published 1842. The final text was that of 1853, which has not
been altered since, except that in stanza 29 the two "we's" in the first
line and the "thy" in the third line are not in later editions
italicised. The Cock Tavern, No. 201 Fleet Street, on the north side of
Fleet Street, stood opposite the Temple and was of great antiquity,
going back nearly 300 years. Strype, bk. iv., h. 117, describes it as "a
noted public-house," and Pepys' 'Diary', 23rd April, 1668, speaks of
himself as having been "mighty merry there". The old carved
chimney-piece was of the age of James I., and the gilt bird over the
portal was the work of Grinling Gibbons. When Tennyson wrote this poem
it was the favourite resort of templars, journalists and literary people
generally, as it had long been. But the old place is now a thing of the
past. On the evening of 10th April, 1886, it closed its doors for ever
after an existence of nearly 300 years. There is an admirable
description of it, signed A. J. M., in 'Notes and Queries', seventh
series, vol. i., 442-6. I give a short extract:

  "At the end of a long room beyond the skylight which, except a feeble
  side window, was its only light in the daytime, was a door that led
  past a small lavatory and up half a dozen narrow steps to the kitchen,
  one of the strangest and grimmest old kitchens you ever saw. Across a
  mighty hatch, thronged with dishes, you looked into it and beheld
  there the white-jacketed man-cook, served by his two robust and
  red-armed kitchen maids. For you they were preparing chops, pork chops
  in winter, lamb chops in spring, mutton chops always, and steaks and
  sausages, and kidneys and potatoes, and poached eggs and Welsh
  rabbits, and stewed cheese, the special glory of the house. That was
  the 'menu' and men were the only guests. But of late years, as
  innovations often precede a catastrophe, two new things were
  introduced, vegetables and women. Both were respectable and both were
  good, but it was felt, especially by the virtuous Smurthwaite, that
  they were 'de trop' in a place so masculine and so carnivorous."





  O plump head-waiter at The Cock,
  To which I most resort,
  How goes the time? 'Tis five o'clock.
  Go fetch a pint of port:
  But let it not be such as that
  You set before chance-comers,
  But such whose father-grape grew fat
  On Lusitanian summers.

  No vain libation to the Muse,
  But may she still be kind,
  And whisper lovely words, and use
  Her influence on the mind,
  To make me write my random rhymes,
  Ere they be half-forgotten;
  Nor add and alter, many times,
  Till all be ripe and rotten.

  I pledge her, and she comes and dips
  Her laurel in the wine,
  And lays it thrice upon my lips,
  These favour'd lips of mine;
  Until the charm have power to make
  New life-blood warm the bosom,
  And barren commonplaces break
  In full and kindly [1] blossom.

  I pledge her silent at the board;
  Her gradual fingers steal
  And touch upon the master-chord
  Of all I felt and feel.
  Old wishes, ghosts of broken plans,
  And phantom hopes assemble;
  And that child's heart within the man's
  Begins to move and tremble.

  Thro' many an hour of summer suns
  By many pleasant ways,
  Against its fountain upward runs
  The current of my days: [2]
  I kiss the lips I once have kiss'd;
  The gas-light wavers dimmer;
  And softly, thro' a vinous mist,
  My college friendships glimmer.

  I grow in worth, and wit, and sense,
  Unboding critic-pen,
  Or that eternal want of pence,
  Which vexes public men,
  Who hold their hands to all, and cry
  For that which all deny them--
  Who sweep the crossings, wet or dry,
  And all the world go by them.

  Ah yet, tho' [3] all the world forsake,
  Tho' [3] fortune clip my wings,
  I will not cramp my heart, nor take
  Half-views of men and things.
  Let Whig and Tory stir their blood;
  There must be stormy weather;
  But for some true result of good
  All parties work together.

  Let there be thistles, there are grapes;
  If old things, there are new;
  Ten thousand broken lights and shapes,
  Yet glimpses of the true.
  Let raffs be rife in prose and rhyme,
  We lack not rhymes and reasons,
  As on this whirligig of Time [4]
  We circle with the seasons.

  This earth is rich in man and maid;
  With fair horizons bound:
  This whole wide earth of light and shade
  Comes out, a perfect round.
  High over roaring Temple-bar,
  And, set in Heaven's third story,
  I look at all things as they are,
  But thro' a kind of glory.

  Head-waiter, honour'd by the guest
  Half-mused, or reeling-ripe,
  The pint, you brought me, was the best
  That ever came from pipe.
  But tho' [3] the port surpasses praise,
  My nerves have dealt with stiffer.
  Is there some magic in the place?
  Or do my peptics differ?

  For since I came to live and learn,
  No pint of white or red
  Had ever half the power to turn
  This wheel within my head,

  Which bears a season'd brain about,
  Unsubject to confusion,
  Tho' [3] soak'd and saturate, out and out,
  Thro' every convolution.

  For I am of a numerous house,
  With many kinsmen gay,
  Where long and largely we carouse
  As who shall say me nay:
  Each month, a birthday coming on,
  We drink defying trouble,
  Or sometimes two would meet in one,
  And then we drank it double;

  Whether the vintage, yet unkept,
  Had relish, fiery-new,
  Or, elbow-deep in sawdust, slept,
  As old as Waterloo;
  Or stow'd (when classic Canning died)
  In musty bins and chambers,
  Had cast upon its crusty side
  The gloom of ten Decembers.

  The Muse, the jolly Muse, it is!
  She answer'd to my call,
  She changes with that mood or this,
  Is all-in-all to all:
  She lit the spark within my throat,
  To make my blood run quicker,
  Used all her fiery will, and smote
  Her life into the liquor.

  And hence this halo lives about
  The waiter's hands, that reach
  To each his perfect pint of stout,
  His proper chop to each.
  He looks not like the common breed
  That with the napkin dally;
  I think he came like Ganymede,
  From some delightful valley.

  The Cock was of a larger egg
  Than modern poultry drop,
  Stept forward on a firmer leg,
  And cramm'd a plumper crop;
  Upon an ampler dunghill trod,
  Crow'd lustier late and early,
  Sipt wine from silver, praising God,
  And raked in golden barley.

  A private life was all his joy,
  Till in a court he saw
  A something-pottle-bodied boy,
  That knuckled at the taw:
  He stoop'd and clutch'd him, fair and good,
  Flew over roof and casement:
  His brothers of the weather stood
  Stock-still for sheer amazement.

  But he, by farmstead, thorpe and spire,
  And follow'd with acclaims,
  A sign to many a staring shire,
  Came crowing over Thames.
  Right down by smoky Paul's they bore,
  Till, where the street grows straiter, [5]
  One fix'd for ever at the door,
  And one became head-waiter.

  But whither would my fancy go?
  How out of place she makes
  The violet of a legend blow
  Among the chops and steaks!
  'Tis but a steward of the can,
  One shade more plump than common;
  As just and mere a serving-man
  As any born of woman.

  I ranged too high: what draws me down
  Into the common day?
  Is it the weight of that half-crown,
  Which I shall have to pay?

  For, something duller than at first,
  Nor wholly comfortable,
  I sit (my empty glass reversed),
  And thrumming on the table:

  Half-fearful that, with self at strife
  I take myself to task;
  Lest of the fullness of my life
  I leave an empty flask:
  For I had hope, by something rare,
  To prove myself a poet;
  But, while I plan and plan, my hair
  Is gray before I know it.

  So fares it since the years began,
  Till they be gather'd up;
  The truth, that flies the flowing can,
  Will haunt the vacant cup:
  And others' follies teach us not,
  Nor much their wisdom teaches;
  And most, of sterling worth, is what
  Our own experience preaches.

  Ah, let the rusty theme alone!
  We know not what we know.
  But for my pleasant hour, 'tis gone,
  'Tis gone, and let it go.
  'Tis gone: a thousand such have slipt
  Away from my embraces,
  And fall'n into the dusty crypt
  Of darken'd forms and faces.

  Go, therefore, thou! thy betters went
  Long since, and came no more;
  With peals of genial clamour sent
  From many a tavern-door,
  With twisted quirks and happy hits,
  From misty men of letters;
  The tavern-hours of mighty wits--
  Thine elders and thy betters.

  Hours, when the Poet's words and looks
  Had yet their native glow:
  Not yet the fear of little books
  Had made him talk for show:
  But, all his vast heart sherris-warm'd,
  He flash'd his random speeches;
  Ere days, that deal in ana, swarm'd
  His literary leeches.

  So mix for ever with the past,
  Like all good things on earth!
  For should I prize thee, couldst thou last,
  At half thy real worth?
  I hold it good, good things should pass:
  With time I will not quarrel:
  It is but yonder empty glass
  That makes me maudlin-moral.

  Head-waiter of the chop-house here,
  To which I most resort,
  I too must part: I hold thee dear
  For this good pint of port.
  For this, thou shalt from all things suck
  Marrow of mirth and laughter;
  And, wheresoe'er thou move, good luck
  Shall fling her old shoe after.

  But thou wilt never move from hence,
  The sphere thy fate allots:
  Thy latter days increased with pence
  Go down among the pots:
  Thou battenest by the greasy gleam
  In haunts of hungry sinners,
  Old boxes, larded with the steam
  Of thirty thousand dinners.

  _We_ fret, _we_ fume, would shift our skins,
  Would quarrel with our lot;
  _Thy_ care is, under polish'd tins,
  To serve the hot-and-hot;
  To come and go, and come again,
  Returning like the pewit,
  And watch'd by silent gentlemen,
  That trifle with the cruet.

  Live long, ere from thy topmost head
  The thick-set hazel dies;
  Long, ere the hateful crow shall tread
  The corners of thine eyes:
  Live long, nor feel in head or chest
  Our changeful equinoxes,
  Till mellow Death, like some late guest,
  Shall call thee from the boxes.

  But when he calls, and thou shalt cease
  To pace the gritted floor,
  And, laying down an unctuous lease
  Of life, shalt earn no more;
  No carved cross-bones, the types of Death,
  Shall show thee past to Heaven:
  But carved cross-pipes, and, underneath,
  A pint-pot neatly graven.


[Footnote 1: 1842 and all previous to 1853. To full and kindly.]

[Footnote 2: All previous to 1853:--

  Like Hezekiah's, backward runs
  The shadow of my days.]


[Footnote 3: All previous to 1853. Though.]

[Footnote 4: The expression is Shakespeare's, 'Twelfth Night', v., i.,

  "and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges".]


[Footnote 5: 1842 to 1843. With motion less or greater.]




TO----

AFTER READING A LIFE AND LETTERS

Originally published in the 'Examiner' for 24th March, 1849; then in the
sixth edition of the poems, 1850, with the second part of the title and
the alterations noted. When reprinted in 1851 one more slight alteration
was made. It has not been altered since. The work referred to was
Moncton Milne's (afterwards Lord Houghton) 'Letters and Literary Remains
of Keats' published in 1848, and the person to whom the poem may have
been addressed was Tennyson's brother Charles, afterwards Charles
Tennyson Turner, to the facts of whose life and to whose character it
would exactly apply. See Napier,'Homes and Haunts of Tennyson', 48-50.
But Sir Franklin Lushington tells me that it was most probably addressed
to some imaginary person, as neither he nor such of Tennyson's surviving
friends as he kindly consulted for me are able to identify the person.


  You might have won the Poet's name
  If such be worth the winning now,
  And gain'd a laurel for your brow
  Of sounder leaf than I can claim;
  But you have made the wiser choice,
  A life that moves to gracious ends
  Thro' troops of unrecording friends,
  A deedful life, a silent voice:

  And you have miss'd the irreverent doom
  Of those that wear the Poet's crown:
  Hereafter, neither knave nor clown
  Shall hold their orgies at your tomb.

  For now the Poet cannot die
  Nor leave his music as of old,
  But round him ere he scarce be cold
  Begins the scandal and the cry:

  "Proclaim the faults he would not show:
  Break lock and seal: betray the trust:
  Keep nothing sacred: 'tis but just
  The many-headed beast should know".

  Ah, shameless! for he did but sing.
  A song that pleased us from its worth;
  No public life was his on earth,
  No blazon'd statesman he, nor king.

  He gave the people of his best:
  His worst he kept, his best he gave.
  My Shakespeare's curse on [1] clown and knave
  Who will not let his ashes rest!

  Who make it seem more sweet [2] to be
  The little life of bank and brier,
  The bird that pipes his lone desire
  And dies unheard within his tree,

  Than he that warbles long and loud
  And drops at Glory's temple-gates,
  For whom the carrion vulture waits
  To tear his heart before the crowd!


[Footnote 1: In Examiner and in 1850. My curse upon the.]

[Footnote 2: In Examiner. Sweeter seem. For the sentiment 'cf'. Goethe:--

  Ich singe, wie der Vogel singt
  Der in den Zweigen wohnet;
  Das Lied das aus dem Seele dringt
  Ist Lohn, der reichlich lohnet.

--'Der Sänger'.]








TO E. L.,

ON HIS TRAVELS IN GREECE

This was first printed in 1853. It has not been altered since. The poem
was addressed to Edward Lear, the landscape painter, and refers to his
travels.


  Illyrian woodlands, echoing falls
  Of water, sheets of summer glass,
  The long divine Peneian pass, [1]
  The vast Akrokeraunian walls, [2]

  Tomohrit, [3] Athos, all things fair,
  With such a pencil, such a pen,
  You shadow forth to distant men,
  I read and felt that I was there:

  And trust me, while I turn'd the page,
  And track'd you still on classic ground,
  I grew in gladness till I found
  My spirits in the golden age.

  For me the torrent ever pour'd
  And glisten'd--here and there alone
  The broad-limb'd Gods at random thrown
  By fountain-urns;-and Naiads oar'd

  A glimmering shoulder under gloom
  Of cavern pillars; on the swell
  The silver lily heaved and fell;
  And many a slope was rich in bloom

  From him that on the mountain lea
  By dancing rivulets fed his flocks,
  To him who sat upon the rocks,
  And fluted to the morning sea.


[Footnote 1:  'Cf'. Lear's description of Tempe:

  "It is not a vale, it is a narrow pass, and although extremely
  beautiful on account of the precipitous rocks on each side, the Peneus
  flowing deep in the midst between the richest overhanging plane woods,
  still its character is distinctly that of a ravine."

--'Journal', 409.]


[Footnote 2: The Akrokeraunian walls: the promontory now called Glossa.]

[Footnote 3: Tomóhr, Tomorit, or Tomohritt is a lofty mountain in
Albania not far from Elbassan. Lear's account of it is very graphic:

  "That calm blue plain with Tomóhr in the midst like an azure island in
  a boundless sea haunts my mind's eye and varies the present with the
  past".]








LADY CLARE

First published 1842. After 1851 no alterations were made.

This poem was suggested by Miss Ferrier's powerful novel 'The
Inheritance'. A comparison with the plot of Miss Ferrier's novel will
show with what tact and skill Tennyson has adapted the tale to his
ballad. Thomas St. Clair, youngest son of the Earl of Rossville, marries
a Miss Sarah Black, a girl of humble and obscure birth. He dies, leaving
a widow and as is supposed a daughter, Gertrude, who claim the
protection of Lord Rossville, as the child is heiress presumptive to the
earldom. On Lord Rossville's death she accordingly becomes Countess of
Rossville. She has two lovers, both distant connections, Colonel Delmour
and Edward Lyndsay. At last it is discovered that she was not the
daughter of Thomas St. Clair and her supposed mother, but of one Marion
La Motte and Jacob Leviston, and that Mrs. St. Clair had adopted her
when a baby and passed her off as her own child, that she might succeed
to the title. Meanwhile Delmour by the death of his elder brother
succeeds to the title and estates forfeited by the detected foundling,
but instead of acting as Tennyson's Lord Ronald does, he repudiates her
and marries a duchess. But her other lover Lyndsay is true to her and
marries her. Delmour not long afterwards dies without issue, and Lyndsay
succeeds to the title, Gertrude then becoming after all Countess of
Rossville. In details Tennyson follows the novel sometimes very closely.
Thus the "single rose," the poor dress, the bitter exclamation about her
being a beggar born, are from the novel.

The 1842 and all editions up to and including 1850 begin with the
following stanza and omit stanza 2:--



  Lord Ronald courted Lady Clare,
  I trow they did not part in scorn;
  Lord Ronald, her cousin, courted her
  And they will wed the morrow morn.


  It was the time when lilies blow,
  And clouds are highest up in air,
  Lord Ronald brought a lily-white doe
  To give his cousin Lady Clare.

  I trow they did not part in scorn:
  Lovers long-betroth'd were they:
  They two will wed the morrow morn!
  God's blessing on the day!

  "He does not love me for my birth,
  Nor for my lands so broad and fair;
  He loves me for my own true worth,
  And that is well," said Lady Clare.

  In there came old Alice the nurse,
  Said, "Who was this that went from thee?"
  "It was my cousin," said Lady Clare,
  "To-morrow he weds with me."

  "O God be thank'd!" said Alice the nurse,
  "That all comes round so just and fair:
  Lord Ronald is heir of all your lands,
  And you are not the Lady Clare."

  "Are ye out of your mind, my nurse, my nurse?"
  Said Lady Clare, "that ye speak so wild";
  "As God's above," said Alice the nurse,
  "I speak the truth: you are my child.

  "The old Earl's daughter died at my breast;
  I speak the truth, as I live by bread!
  I buried her like my own sweet child,
  And put my child in her stead."

  "Falsely, falsely have ye done,
  O mother," she said, "if this be true,
  To keep the best man under the sun
  So many years from his due."

  "Nay now, my child," said Alice the nurse,
  "But keep the secret for your life,
  And all you have will be Lord Ronald's,
  When you are man and wife."

  "If I'm a beggar born," she said,
  "I will speak out, for I dare not lie.
  Pull off, pull off, the broach [1] of gold,
  And fling the diamond necklace by."

  "Nay now, my child," said Alice the nurse,
  "But keep the secret all ye can."
  She said, "Not so: but I will know
  If there be any faith in man".

  "Nay now, what faith?" said Alice the nurse,
  "The man will cleave unto his right."
  "And he shall have it," the lady replied,
  "Tho' [2] I should die to-night."

  "Yet give one kiss to your mother dear!
  Alas, my child, I sinn'd for thee."
  "O mother, mother, mother," she said,
  "So strange it seems to me.

  "Yet here's a kiss for my mother dear,
  My mother dear, if this be so,
  And lay your hand upon my head,
  And bless me, mother, ere I go."

  She clad herself in a russet gown,
  She was no longer Lady Clare:
  She went by dale, and she went by down,
  With a single rose in her hair.

  The lily-white doe Lord Ronald had brought
  Leapt up from where she lay,
  Dropt her head in the maiden's hand,
  And follow'd her all the way. [3]

  Down stept Lord Ronald from his tower:
  "O Lady Clare, you shame your worth!
  Why come you drest like a village maid,
  That are the flower of the earth?"

  "If I come drest like a village maid,
  I am but as my fortunes are:
  I am a beggar born," she said, [4]
  "And not the Lady Clare."

  "Play me no tricks," said Lord Ronald,
  "For I am yours in word and in deed.
  Play me no tricks," said Lord Ronald,
  "Your riddle is hard to read."

  O and proudly stood she up!
  Her heart within her did not fail:
  She look'd into Lord Ronald's eyes,
  And told him all her nurse's tale.

  He laugh'd a laugh of merry scorn:
  He turn'd, and kiss'd her where she stood:
  "If you are not the heiress born,
  And I," said he, "the next in blood--

  "If you are not the heiress born,
  And I," said he, "the lawful heir,
  We two will wed to-morrow morn,
  And you shall still be Lady Clare."


[Footnote 1: All up to and including 1850. Brooch.]

[Footnote 2: All up to and including 1850. Though.]

[Footnote 3: The stanza beginning "The lily-white doe" is omitted in
1842 and 1843, and in the subsequent editions up to and including 1850
begins "A lily-white doe".]

[Footnote 4: In a letter addressed to Tennyson the late Mr. Peter Bayne
ventured to object to the dramatic propriety of Lady Clare speaking of
herself as "a beggar born". Tennyson defended it by saying: "You make no
allowance for the shock of the fall from being Lady Clare to finding
herself the child of a nurse". But the expression is Miss Ferrier's: "Oh
that she had suffered me to remain the beggar I was born"; and again to
her lover: "You have loved an impostor and a beggar".]











THE LORD OF BURLEIGH

Written, as we learn from 'Life', i., 182, by 1835. First published in
1842. No alteration since with the exception of "tho'" for "though".

This poem tells the well-known story of Sarah Hoggins who married under
the circumstances related in the poem. She died in January, 1797,
sinking, so it was said, but without any authority for such a statement,
under the burden of an honour "unto which she was not born". The story
is that Henry Cecil, heir presumptive to his uncle, the ninth Earl of
Exeter, was staying at Bolas, a rural village in Shropshire, where he
met Sarah Hoggins and married her. They lived together at Bolas, where
the two eldest of his children were born, for two years before he came
into the title. She bore him two other children after she was Countess
of Exeter, dying at Burleigh House near Stamford at the early age of
twenty-four. The obituary notice runs thus: "January, 1797. At Burleigh
House near Stamford, aged twenty-four, to the inexpressible surprise and
concern of all acquainted with her, the Right Honbl. Countess of
Exeter." For full information about this romantic incident see Walford's
'Tales of Great Families', first series, vol. i., 65-82, and two
interesting papers signed W. O. Woodall in 'Notes and Queries', seventh
series, vol. xii., 221-23; 'ibid.', 281-84, and Napier's 'Homes and
Haunts of Tennyson', 104-111.


  In her ear he whispers gaily,
  "If my heart by signs can tell,
  Maiden, I have watch'd thee daily,
  And I think thou lov'st me well".
  She replies, in accents fainter,
  "There is none I love like thee".
  He is but a landscape-painter,
  And a village maiden she.
  He to lips, that fondly falter,
  Presses his without reproof:
  Leads her to the village altar,
  And they leave her father's roof.
  "I can make no marriage present;
  Little can I give my wife.
  Love will make our cottage pleasant,
  And I love thee more than life."
  They by parks and lodges going
  See the lordly castles stand:
  Summer woods, about them blowing,
  Made a murmur in the land.
  From deep thought himself he rouses,
  Says to her that loves him well,
  "Let us see these handsome houses
  Where the wealthy nobles dwell".
  So she goes by him attended,
  Hears him lovingly converse,
  Sees whatever fair and splendid
  Lay betwixt his home and hers;
  Parks with oak and chestnut shady,
  Parks and order'd gardens great,
  Ancient homes of lord and lady,
  Built for pleasure and for state.
  All he shows her makes him dearer:
  Evermore she seems to gaze
  On that cottage growing nearer,
  Where they twain will spend their days.
  O but she will love him truly!
  He shall have a cheerful home;
  She will order all things duly,
  When beneath his roof they come.
  Thus her heart rejoices greatly,
  Till a gateway she discerns
  With armorial bearings stately,
  And beneath the gate she turns;
  Sees a mansion more majestic
  Than all those she saw before:
  Many a gallant gay domestic
  Bows before him at the door.
  And they speak in gentle murmur,
  When they answer to his call,
  While he treads with footstep firmer,
  Leading on from hall to hall.
  And, while now she wonders blindly,
  Nor the meaning can divine,
  Proudly turns he round and kindly,
  "All of this is mine and thine".
  Here he lives in state and bounty,
  Lord of Burleigh, fair and free,
  Not a lord in all the county
  Is so great a lord as he.
  All at once the colour flushes
  Her sweet face from brow to chin:
  As it were with shame she blushes,
  And her spirit changed within.
  Then her countenance all over
  Pale again as death did prove:
  But he clasp'd her like a lover,
  And he cheer'd her soul with love.
  So she strove against her weakness,
  Tho' at times her spirits sank:
  Shaped her heart with woman's meekness
  To all duties of her rank:
  And a gentle consort made he,
  And her gentle mind was such
  That she grew a noble lady,
  And the people loved her much.
  But a trouble weigh'd upon her,
  And perplex'd her, night and morn,
  With the burthen of an honour
  Unto which she was not born.
  Faint she grew, and ever fainter,
  As she murmur'd "Oh, that he
  Were once more that landscape-painter
  Which did win my heart from me!"
  So she droop'd and droop'd before him,
  Fading slowly from his side:
  Three fair children first she bore him,
  Then before her time she died.
  Weeping, weeping late and early,
  Walking up and pacing down,
  Deeply mourn'd the Lord of Burleigh,
  Burleigh-house by Stamford-town.
  And he came to look upon her,
  And he look'd at her and said,
  "Bring the dress and put it on her,
  That she wore when she was wed".
  Then her people, softly treading,
  Bore to earth her body, drest
  In the dress that she was wed in,
  That her spirit might have rest.







SIR LAUNCELOT AND QUEEN GUINEVERE

A FRAGMENT

First published in 1842. Not altered since 1853.

See for what may have given the hint for this fragment _Morte D'Arthur_,
bk. xix., ch. i., and bk. xx., ch. i., and _cf. Coming of Arthur:_--

    And Launcelot pass'd away among the flowers,
    For then was latter April, and return'd
    Among the flowers in May with Guinevere.



  Like souls that balance joy and pain,
  With tears and smiles from heaven again
  The maiden Spring upon the plain
  Came in a sun-lit fall of rain.
  In crystal vapour everywhere
  Blue isles of heaven laugh'd between,
  And, far in forest-deeps unseen,
  The topmost elm-tree [1] gather'd green
  From draughts of balmy air.

  Sometimes the linnet piped his song:
  Sometimes the throstle whistled strong:
  Sometimes the sparhawk, wheel'd along,
  Hush'd all the groves from fear of wrong:
  By grassy capes with fuller sound
  In curves the yellowing river ran,
  And drooping chestnut-buds began
  To spread into the perfect fan,
  Above the teeming ground.

  Then, in the boyhood of the year,
  Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere
  Rode thro' the coverts of the deer,
  With blissful treble ringing clear.
  She seem'd a part of joyous Spring:
  A gown of grass-green silk she wore,
  Buckled with golden clasps before;
  A light-green tuft of plumes she bore
  Closed in a golden ring.

  Now on some twisted ivy-net,
  Now by some tinkling rivulet,
  In mosses mixt [2] with violet
  Her cream-white mule his pastern set:
  And fleeter now [3] she skimm'd the plains
  Than she whose elfin prancer springs
  By night to eery warblings,
  When all the glimmering moorland rings
  With jingling bridle-reins.

  As she fled fast thro' sun and shade,
  The happy winds upon her play'd,
  Blowing the ringlet from the braid:
  She look'd so lovely, as she sway'd
  The rein with dainty finger-tips,
  A man had given all other bliss,
  And all his worldly worth for this,
  To waste his whole heart in one kiss
  Upon her perfect lips.


[Footnote 1: Up to 1848. Linden.]

[Footnote 2: All editions up to and including 1850. On mosses thick.]

[Footnote 3: 1842 to 1851. And now more fleet,]








A FAREWELL

First published in 1842. Not altered since 1843.

This poem was dedicated to the brook at Somersby described in the 'Ode
to Memory' and referred to so often in 'In Memoriam'. Possibly it may
have been written in 1837 when the Tennysons left Somersby. 'Cf. In
Memoriam', sect. ci.

  Flow down, cold rivulet, to the sea,
  Thy tribute wave deliver:
  No more by thee my steps shall be,
  For ever and for ever.

  Flow, softly flow, by lawn and lea,
  A rivulet then a river:
  No where by thee my steps shall be,
  For ever and for ever.

  But here will sigh thine alder tree,
  And here thine aspen shiver;
  And here by thee will hum the bee,
  For ever and for ever.

  A thousand suns [1] will stream on thee,
  A thousand moons will quiver;
  But not by thee my steps shall be,
  For ever and for ever.


[Footnote 1: 1842. A hundred suns.]








THE BEGGAR MAID

First published in 1842, not altered since.

Suggested probably by the fine ballad in Percy's _Reliques_, first
series, book ii., ballad vi.


  Her arms across her breast she laid;
  She was more fair than words can say:
  Bare-footed came the beggar maid
  Before the king Cophetua.
  In robe and crown the king stept down,
  To meet and greet her on her way;
  "It is no wonder," said the lords,
  "She is more beautiful than day".

  As shines the moon in clouded skies,
  She in her poor attire was seen:
  One praised her ancles, one her eyes,
  One her dark hair and lovesome mien:
  So sweet a face, such angel grace,
  In all that land had never been:
  Cophetua sware a royal oath:
  "This beggar maid shall be my queen!"







THE VISION OF SIN

First published in 1842. No alteration made in it after 1851, except in
the insertion of a couplet afterwards omitted.

This remarkable poem may be regarded as a sort of companion poem to 'The
Palace of Art'; the one traces the effect of callous indulgence in mere
intellectual and aesthetic pleasures, the other of profligate indulgence
in the grosser forms of sensual enjoyment. At first all is ecstasy and
intoxication, then comes satiety, and all that satiety brings in its
train, cynicism, pessimism, the drying up of the very springs of life.
"The body chilled, jaded and ruined, the cup of pleasure drained to the
dregs, the senses exhausted of their power to enjoy, the spirit of its
wish to aspire, nothing left but loathing, craving and rottenness." See
Spedding in 'Edinburgh Review' for April, 1843. The poem concludes by
leaving as an answer to the awful question, "can there be final
salvation for the poor wretch?" a reply undecipherable by man, and dawn
breaking in angry splendour. The best commentary on the poem would be
Byron's lyric: "There's not a joy the world can give like that it takes
away," and 'Don Juan'; biography and daily life are indeed full of
comments on the truth of this fine allegory.


  1

  I had a vision when the night was late:
  A youth came riding toward a palace-gate.
  He rode a horse with wings, that would have flown, [1]
  But that his heavy rider kept him down.
  And from the palace came a child of sin,
  And took him by the curls, and led him in,
  Where sat a company with heated eyes,
  Expecting when a fountain should arise:
  A sleepy light upon their brows and lips--
  As when the sun, a crescent of eclipse,
  Dreams over lake and lawn, and isles and capes--
  Suffused them, sitting, lying, languid shapes,
  By heaps of gourds, and skins of wine, and piles of grapes.


  2

  Then methought I heard a mellow sound,
  Gathering up from all the lower ground; [2]
  Narrowing in to where they sat assembled
  Low voluptuous music winding trembled,
  Wov'n in circles: they that heard it sigh'd,
  Panted hand in hand with faces pale,
  Swung themselves, and in low tones replied;
  Till the fountain spouted, showering wide
  Sleet of diamond-drift and pearly hail;
  Then the music touch'd the gates and died;
  Rose again from where it seem'd to fail,
  Storm'd in orbs of song, a growing gale;
  Till thronging in and in, to where they waited,
  As 'twere a hundred-throated nightingale,
  The strong tempestuous treble throbb'd and palpitated;
  Ran into its giddiest whirl of sound,
  Caught the sparkles, and in circles,
  Purple gauzes, golden hazes, liquid mazes,
  Flung the torrent rainbow round:
  Then they started from their places,
  Moved with violence, changed in hue,
  Caught each other with wild grimaces,
  Half-invisible to the view,
  Wheeling with precipitate paces
  To the melody, till they flew,
  Hair, and eyes, and limbs, and faces,
  Twisted hard in fierce embraces,
  Like to Furies, like to Graces,
  Dash'd together in blinding dew:
  Till, kill'd with some luxurious agony,
  The nerve-dissolving melody
  Flutter'd headlong from the sky.


  3

  And then I look'd up toward a mountain-tract,
  That girt the region with high cliff and lawn:
  I saw that every morning, far withdrawn
  Beyond the darkness and the cataract,
  God made himself an awful rose of dawn, [3]
  Unheeded: and detaching, fold by fold,
  From those still heights, and, slowly drawing near,
  A vapour heavy, hueless, formless, cold,
  Came floating on for many a month and year,
  Unheeded: and I thought I would have spoken,
  And warn'd that madman ere it grew too late:
  But, as in dreams, I could not. Mine was broken,
  When that cold vapour touch'd the palace-gate,
  And link'd again. I saw within my head
  A gray and gap-tooth'd man as lean as death,
  Who slowly rode across a wither'd heath,
  And lighted at a ruin'd inn, and said:


  4

  "Wrinkled ostler, grim and thin!
  Here is custom come your way;
  Take my brute, and lead him in,
  Stuff his ribs with mouldy hay.

  "Bitter barmaid, waning fast!
  See that sheets are on my bed;
  What! the flower of life is past:
  It is long before you wed.

  "Slip-shod waiter, lank and sour,
  At the Dragon on the heath!
  Let us have a quiet hour,
  Let us hob-and-nob with Death.

  "I am old, but let me drink;
  Bring me spices, bring me wine;
  I remember, when I think,
  That my youth was half divine.

  "Wine is good for shrivell'd lips,
  When a blanket wraps the day,
  When the rotten woodland drips,
  And the leaf is stamp'd in clay.

  "Sit thee down, and have no shame,
  Cheek by jowl, and knee by knee:
  What care I for any name?
  What for order or degree?

  "Let me screw thee up a peg:
  Let me loose thy tongue with wine:
  Callest thou that thing a leg?
  Which is thinnest? thine or mine?

  "Thou shalt not be saved by works:
  Thou hast been a sinner too:
  Ruin'd trunks on wither'd forks,
  Empty scarecrows, I and you!

  "Fill the cup, and fill the can:
  Have a rouse before the morn:
  Every moment dies a man,
  Every moment one is born. [4]

  "We are men of ruin'd blood;
  Therefore comes it we are wise.
  Fish are we that love the mud.
  Rising to no fancy-flies.

  "Name and fame! to fly sublime
  Thro' the courts, the camps, the schools,
  Is to be the ball of Time,
  Bandied by the hands of fools.

  "Friendship!--to be two in one--
  Let the canting liar pack!
  Well I know, when I am gone,
  How she mouths behind my back.

  "Virtue!--to be good and just--
  Every heart, when sifted well,
  Is a clot of warmer dust,
  Mix'd with cunning sparks of hell.

  "O! we two as well can look
  Whited thought and cleanly life
  As the priest, above his book
  Leering at his neighbour's wife.

  "Fill the cup, and fill the can:
  Have a rouse before the morn:
  Every moment dies a man,
  Every moment one is born. [4]

  "Drink, and let the parties rave:
  They are fill'd with idle spleen;
  Rising, falling, like a wave,
  For they know not what they mean.

  "He that roars for liberty
  Faster binds a tyrant's [5] power;
  And the tyrant's cruel glee
  Forces on the freer hour.

  "Fill the can, and fill the cup:
  All the windy ways of men
  Are but dust that rises up,
  And is lightly laid again.

  "Greet her with applausive breath,
  Freedom, gaily doth she tread;
  In her right a civic wreath,
  In her left a human head.

  "No, I love not what is new;
  She is of an ancient house:
  And I think we know the hue
  Of that cap upon her brows.

  "Let her go! her thirst she slakes
  Where the bloody conduit runs:
  Then her sweetest meal she makes
  On the first-born of her sons.

  "Drink to lofty hopes that cool--
  Visions of a perfect State:
  Drink we, last, the public fool,
  Frantic love and frantic hate.

  "Chant me now some wicked stave,
  Till thy drooping courage rise,
  And the glow-worm of the grave
  Glimmer in thy rheumy eyes.

  "Fear not thou to loose thy tongue;
  Set thy hoary fancies free;
  What is loathsome to the young
  Savours well to thee and me.

  "Change, reverting to the years,
  When thy nerves could understand
  What there is in loving tears,
  And the warmth of hand in hand.

  "Tell me tales of thy first love--
  April hopes, the fools of chance;
  Till the graves begin to move,
  And the dead begin to dance.

  "Fill the can, and fill the cup:
  All the windy ways of men
  Are but dust that rises up,
  And is lightly laid again.

  "Trooping from their mouldy dens
  The chap-fallen circle spreads:
  Welcome, fellow-citizens,
  Hollow hearts and empty heads!

  "You are bones, and what of that?
  Every face, however full,
  Padded round with flesh and fat,
  Is but modell'd on a skull.

  "Death is king, and Vivat Rex!
  Tread a measure on the stones,
  Madam--if I know your sex,
  From the fashion of your bones.

  "No, I cannot praise the fire
  In your eye--nor yet your lip:
  All the more do I admire
  Joints of cunning workmanship.

  "Lo! God's likeness--the ground-plan--
  Neither modell'd, glazed, or framed:
  Buss me thou rough sketch of man,
  Far too naked to be shamed!

  "Drink to Fortune, drink to Chance,
  While we keep a little breath!
  Drink to heavy Ignorance!
  Hob-and-nob with brother Death!

  "Thou art mazed, the night is long,
  And the longer night is near:
  What! I am not all as wrong
  As a bitter jest is dear.

  "Youthful hopes, by scores, to all,
  When the locks are crisp and curl'd;
  Unto me my maudlin gall
  And my mockeries of the world.

  "Fill the cup, and fill the can!
  Mingle madness, mingle scorn!
  Dregs of life, and lees of man:
  Yet we will not die forlorn."


  5

  The voice grew faint: there came a further change:
  Once more uprose the mystic mountain-range:
  Below were men and horses pierced with worms,
  And slowly quickening into lower forms;
  By shards and scurf of salt, and scum of dross,
  Old plash of rains, and refuse patch'd with moss,
  Then some one spake [6]: "Behold! it was a crime
  Of sense avenged by sense that wore with time".
  [7] Another said: "The crime of sense became
  The crime of malice, and is equal blame".
  And one: "He had not wholly quench'd his power;
  A little grain of conscience made him sour".
  At last I heard a voice upon the slope
  Cry to the summit, "Is there any hope?"
  To which an answer peal'd from that high land.
  But in a tongue no man could understand;
  And on the glimmering limit far withdrawn
  God made Himself an awful rose of dawn. [8]


[Footnote 1: A reference to the famous passage in the 'Phoedrus' where
Plato compares the soul to a chariot drawn by the two-winged steeds.]

Footnote 2: Imitated apparently from the dance in Shelley's 'Triumph of
Life':--

  The wild dance maddens in the van; and those
  ...
  Mix with each other in tempestuous measure
  To savage music, wilder as it grows.

  They, tortur'd by their agonising pleasure,
  Convuls'd, and on the rapid whirlwinds spun
  ...
  Maidens and youths fling their wild arms in air.
  As their feet twinkle, etc.]


[Footnote 3: See footnote to last line.]

[Footnote 4: All up to and including 1850 read:--

  Every _minute_ dies a man,
  Every _minute_ one is born.

Mr. Babbage, the famous mathematician, is said to have addressed the
following letter to Tennyson in reference to this couplet:--

  "I need hardly point out to you that this calculation would tend to
  keep the sum total of the world's population in a state of perpetual
  equipoise, whereas it is a]**[Footnote: well-known fact that the said
  sum total is constantly on the increase. I would therefore take the
  liberty of suggesting that, in the next edition of your excellent
  poem, the erroneous calculation to which I refer should be corrected
  as follows:--

    Every moment dies a man,
    And one and a sixteenth is born.

  I may add that the exact figures are 1.167, but something must, of
  course, be conceded to the laws of metre."]


[Footnote 5: 1842 and 1843. The tyrant's.]

[Footnote 6: 1842. Said.]

[Footnote 7: In the Selection published in 1865 Tennyson here inserted a
couplet which he afterwards omitted:--

  Another answer'd: "But a crime of sense!"
  "Give him new nerves with old experience."]


[Footnote 8: In Professor Tyndall's reminiscences of Tennyson, inserted
in Tennyson's 'Life', he says he once asked him for some
explanation of this line, and the poet's reply was:

  "The power of explaining such concentrated expressions of the
  imagination was very different from that of writing them".

And on another occasion he said very happily:

  "Poetry is like shot silk with many glancing colours. Every reader
  must find his own interpretation, according to his ability, and
  according to his sympathy with the poet".

Poetry in its essential forms always suggests infinitely more than it
expresses, and at once inspires and kindles the intelligence which is to
comprehend it; if that intelligence, which is perhaps only another name
for sympathy, does not exist, then, in Byron's happy sarcasm:--

  "The gentle readers wax unkind,
  And, not so studious for the poet's ease,
  Insist on knowing what he 'means', a hard
  And hapless situation for a bard".

Possibly Tennyson may have had in his mind Keats's line:--

"There was an awful rainbow once in heaven"]







COME NOT, WHEN I AM DEAD...

First published in 'The Keepsake' for 1851.

  Come not, when I am dead,
  To drop thy foolish tears upon my grave,
  To trample round my fallen head,
  And vex the unhappy dust thou wouldst not save.
  There let the wind sweep and the plover cry;
  But thou, go by. [1]

  Child, if it were thine error or thy crime
  I care no longer, being all unblest:
  Wed whom thou wilt, but I am sick of Time, [2]
  And I desire to rest.
  Pass on, weak heart, and leave me where I lie:
  Go by, go by.


[Footnote 1: 'The Keepsake':--But go thou by.]

[Footnote 2: 'The Keepsake' has a small 't' for Time.]








THE EAGLE

{FRAGMENT}

First published in 1851. It has not been altered.


  He clasps the crag with hooked hands;
  Close to the sun in lonely lands,
  Ring'd with the azure world, he stands.

  The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls; [1]
  He watches from his mountain walls,
  And like a thunderbolt he falls.


[Footnote 1: One of Tennyson's most magically descriptive lines; nothing
could exceed the vividness of the words "wrinkled" and "crawls" here.]








MOVE EASTWARD, HAPPY EARTH...

First published in 1842.

  Move eastward, happy earth, and leave
  Yon orange sunset waning slow:
  From fringes of the faded eve,
  O, happy planet, eastward go;
  Till over thy dark shoulder glow
  Thy silver sister-world, and rise
  To glass herself in dewy eyes
  That watch me from the glen below.

  Ah, bear me with thee, smoothly [1] borne,
  Dip forward under starry light,
  And move me to my marriage-morn,
  And round again to happy night.


[Footnote 1: 1842 to 1853. Lightly.]







BREAK, BREAK, BREAK...

First published in 1842. No alteration.

This exquisite poem was composed in a very different scene from that to
which it refers, namely in "a Lincolnshire lane at five o'clock in the
morning between blossoming hedges". See 'Life of Tennyson', vol. i., p.
223.

  Break, break, break,
  On thy cold gray stones, O Sea!
  And I would that my tongue could utter
  The thoughts that arise in me.

  O well for the fisherman's boy,
  That he shouts with his sister at play!
  O well for the sailor lad,
  That he sings in his boat on the bay!

  And the stately ships go on
  To their haven under the hill;
  But O for the touch of a vanish'd hand,
  And the sound of a voice that is still!

  Break, break, break,
  At the foot of thy crags, O Sea!
  But the tender grace of a day that is dead
  Will never come back to me.






THE POET'S SONG

First published in 1842.

  The rain had fallen, the Poet arose,
  He pass'd by the town and out of the street,
  A light wind blew from the gates of the sun,
  And waves of shadow went over the wheat,
  And he sat him down in a lonely place,
  And chanted a melody loud and sweet,
  That made the wild-swan pause in her cloud,
  And the lark drop down at his feet.

  The swallow stopt as he hunted the bee, [1]
  The snake slipt under a spray,
  The wild hawk stood with the down on his beak,
  And stared, with his foot on the prey,
  And the nightingale thought, "I have sung many songs,
  But never a one so gay,
  For he sings of what the world will be
  When the years have died away".


[Footnote 1: 1889, Fly.]






APPENDIX

The Poems published in MDCCCXXX and in MDCCCXXXIII which were
temporarily or finally suppressed.




POEMS PUBLISHED IN MDCCCXXX


ELEGIACS

Reprinted in Collected Works among 'Juvenilia', with title
altered to 'Leonine Elegiacs'. The only alterations made in the
text were "wood-dove" for "turtle," and the substitution of "or" for
"and" in the last line but one.

  Lowflowing breezes are roaming the broad valley dimm'd in the
    gloaming:
  Thoro' the black-stemm'd pines only the far river shines.
  Creeping thro' blossomy rushes and bowers of rose-blowing bushes,
  Down by the poplar tall rivulets babble and fall.
  Barketh the shepherd-dog cheerily; the grasshopper carolleth clearly;
  Deeply the turtle coos; shrilly the owlet halloos;
  Winds creep; dews fell chilly: in her first sleep earth breathes
    stilly:
  Over the pools in the burn watergnats murmur and mourn.
  Sadly the far kine loweth: the glimmering water outfloweth:
  Twin peaks shadow'd with pine slope to the dark hyaline.
  Lowthroned Hesper is stayed between the two peaks; but the Naiad
  Throbbing in mild unrest holds him beneath in her breast.

  The ancient poetess singeth, that Hesperus all things bringeth,
  Smoothing the wearied mind: bring me my love, Rosalind.
  Thou comest morning and even; she cometh not morning or even.
  False-eyed Hesper, unkind, where is my sweet Rosalind?




THE "HOW" AND THE "WHY"


  I am any man's suitor,
  If any will be my tutor:
  Some say this life is pleasant,
  Some think it speedeth fast:
  In time there is no present,
  In eternity no future,
  In eternity no past.
  We laugh, we cry, we are born, we die,
  Who will riddle me the _how_ and the _why_?

  The bulrush nods unto its brother,
  The wheatears whisper to each other:
  What is it they say? What do they there?
  Why two and two make four? Why round is not square?
  Why the rocks stand still, and the light clouds fly?
  Why the heavy oak groans, and the white willows sigh?
  Why deep is not high, and high is not deep?
  Whether we wake, or whether we sleep?
  Whether we sleep, or whether we die?
  How you are you? Why I am I?
  Who will riddle me the _how_ and the _why_?

  The world is somewhat; it goes on somehow;
  But what is the meaning of _then_ and _now_?
  I feel there is something; but how and what?
  I know there is somewhat; but what and why?
  I cannot tell if that somewhat be I.

  The little bird pipeth, "why? why?"
  In the summerwoods when the sun falls low
  And the great bird sits on the opposite bough,
  And stares in his face and shouts, "how? how?"
  And the black owl scuds down the mellow twilight,
  And chaunts, "how? how?" the whole of the night.

  Why the life goes when the blood is spilt?
  What the life is? where the soul may lie?
  Why a church is with a steeple built;
  And a house with a chimneypot?
  Who will riddle me the how and the what?
  Who will riddle me the what and the why?







SUPPOSED CONFESSIONS

OF A SECOND-RATE SENSITIVE MIND NOT IN UNITY WITH ITSELF

There has been only one important alteration made in this poem, when it
was reprinted among the 'Juvenilia' in 1871, and that was the
suppression of the verses beginning "A grief not uninformed and dull" to
"Indued with immortality" inclusive, and the substitution of "rosy" for
"waxen". Capitals are in all cases inserted in the reprint where the
Deity is referred to, "through" is altered into "thro'" all through the
poem, and hyphens are inserted in the double epithets. No further
alterations were made in the edition of 1830.

  Oh God! my God! have mercy now.
  I faint, I fall. Men say that thou
  Didst die for me, for such as _me_,
  Patient of ill, and death, and scorn,
  And that my sin was as a thorn
  Among the thorns that girt thy brow,
  Wounding thy soul.--That even now,
  In this extremest misery
  Of ignorance, I should require
  A sign! and if a bolt of fire
  Would rive the slumbrous summernoon
  While I do pray to thee alone,
  Think my belief would stronger grow!
  Is not my human pride brought low?
  The boastings of my spirit still?
  The joy I had in my freewill
  All cold, and dead, and corpse-like grown?
  And what is left to me, but thou,
  And faith in thee? Men pass me by;
  Christians with happy countenances--
  And children all seem full of thee!
  And women smile with saint-like glances
  Like thine own mother's when she bow'd
  Above thee, on that happy morn
  When angels spake to men aloud,
  And thou and peace to earth were born.
  Goodwill to me as well as all--
  I one of them: my brothers they:
  Brothers in Christ--a world of peace
  And confidence, day after day;
  And trust and hope till things should cease,
  And then one Heaven receive us all.
  How sweet to have a common faith!
  To hold a common scorn of death!
  And at a burial to hear
  The creaking cords which wound and eat
  Into my human heart, whene'er
  Earth goes to earth, with grief, not fear,
  With hopeful grief, were passing sweet!

  A grief not uninformed, and dull
  Hearted with hope, of hope as full
  As is the blood with life, or night
  And a dark cloud with rich moonlight.
  To stand beside a grave, and see
  The red small atoms wherewith we
  Are built, and smile in calm, and say--
  "These little moles and graves shall be
  Clothed on with immortality
  More glorious than the noon of day--
  All that is pass'd into the flowers
  And into beasts and other men,
  And all the Norland whirlwind showers
  From open vaults, and all the sea
  O'er washes with sharp salts, again
  Shall fleet together all, and be
  Indued with immortality."

  Thrice happy state again to be
  The trustful infant on the knee!
  Who lets his waxen fingers play
  About his mother's neck, and knows
  Nothing beyond his mother's eyes.
  They comfort him by night and day;
  They light his little life alway;
  He hath no thought of coming woes;
  He hath no care of life or death,
  Scarce outward signs of joy arise,
  Because the Spirit of happiness
  And perfect rest so inward is;
  And loveth so his innocent heart,
  Her temple and her place of birth,
  Where she would ever wish to dwell,
  Life of the fountain there, beneath
  Its salient springs, and far apart,
  Hating to wander out on earth,
  Or breathe into the hollow air,
  Whose dullness would make visible
  Her subtil, warm, and golden breath,
  Which mixing with the infant's blood,
  Fullfills him with beatitude.
  Oh! sure it is a special care
  Of God, to fortify from doubt,
  To arm in proof, and guard about
  With triple-mailed trust, and clear
  Delight, the infant's dawning year.

  Would that my gloomed fancy were
  As thine, my mother, when with brows
  Propped on thy knees, my hands upheld
  In thine, I listen'd to thy vows,
  For me outpour'd in holiest prayer--
  For me unworthy!--and beheld
  Thy mild deep eyes upraised, that knew
  The beauty and repose of faith,
  And the clear spirit shining through.
  Oh! wherefore do we grow awry
  From roots which strike so deep? why dare
  Paths in the desert? Could not I
  Bow myself down, where thou hast knelt,
  To th' earth--until the ice would melt
  Here, and I feel as thou hast felt?
  What Devil had the heart to scathe
  Flowers thou hadst rear'd--to brush the dew
  From thine own lily, when thy grave
  Was deep, my mother, in the clay?
  Myself? Is it thus? Myself? Had I
  So little love for thee? But why
  Prevail'd not thy pure prayers? Why pray
  To one who heeds not, who can save
  But will not? Great in faith, and strong
  Against the grief of circumstance
  Wert thou, and yet unheard. What if
  Thou pleadest still, and seest me drive
  Thro' utter dark a fullsailed skiff,
  Unpiloted i' the echoing dance
  Of reboant whirlwinds, stooping low
  Unto the death, not sunk! I know
  At matins and at evensong,
  That thou, if thou were yet alive,
  In deep and daily prayers wouldst strive
  To reconcile me with thy God.
  Albeit, my hope is gray, and cold
  At heart, thou wouldest murmur still--
  "Bring this lamb back into thy fold,
  My Lord, if so it be thy will".
  Wouldst tell me I must brook the rod,
  And chastisement of human pride;
  That pride, the sin of devils, stood
  Betwixt me and the light of God!
  That hitherto I had defied
  And had rejected God--that grace
  Would drop from his o'erbrimming love,
  As manna on my wilderness,
  If I would pray--that God would move
  And strike the hard hard rock, and thence,
  Sweet in their utmost bitterness,
  Would issue tears of penitence
  Which would keep green hope's life. Alas!
  I think that pride hath now no place
  Nor sojourn in me. I am void,
  Dark, formless, utterly destroyed.

  Why not believe then? Why not yet
  Anchor thy frailty there, where man
  Hath moor'd and rested? Ask the sea
  At midnight, when the crisp slope waves
  After a tempest, rib and fret
  The broadimbasèd beach, why he
  Slumbers not like a mountain tarn?
  Wherefore his ridges are not curls
  And ripples of an inland mere?
  Wherefore he moaneth thus, nor can
  Draw down into his vexed pools
  All that blue heaven which hues and paves
  The other? I am too forlorn,
  Too shaken: my own weakness fools
  My judgment, and my spirit whirls,
  Moved from beneath with doubt and fear.

  "Yet" said I, in my morn of youth,
  The unsunned freshness of my strength,
  When I went forth in quest of truth,
  "It is man's privilege to doubt,
  If so be that from doubt at length,
  Truth may stand forth unmoved of change,
  An image with profulgent brows,
  And perfect limbs, as from the storm
  Of running fires and fluid range
  Of lawless airs, at last stood out
  This excellence and solid form
  Of constant beauty. For the Ox
  Feeds in the herb, and sleeps, or fills
  The horned valleys all about,
  And hollows of the fringed hills
  In summerheats, with placid lows
  Unfearing, till his own blood flows
  About his hoof. And in the flocks
  The lamb rejoiceth in the year,
  And raceth freely with his fere,
  And answers to his mother's calls
  From the flower'd furrow. In a time,
  Of which he wots not, run short pains
  Through his warm heart; and then, from whence
  He knows not, on his light there falls
  A shadow; and his native slope,
  Where he was wont to leap and climb,
  Floats from his sick and filmed eyes,
  And something in the darkness draws
  His forehead earthward, and he dies.
  Shall man live thus, in joy and hope
  As a young lamb, who cannot dream,
  Living, but that he shall live on?
  Shall we not look into the laws
  Of life and death, and things that seem,
  And things that be, and analyse
  Our double nature, and compare
  All creeds till we have found the one,
  If one there be?" Ay me! I fear
  All may not doubt, but everywhere
  Some must clasp Idols. Yet, my God,
  Whom call I Idol? Let thy dove
  Shadow me over, and my sins
  Be unremembered, and thy love
  Enlighten me. Oh teach me yet
  Somewhat before the heavy clod
  Weighs on me, and the busy fret
  Of that sharpheaded worm begins
  In the gross blackness underneath.

  O weary life! O weary death!
  O spirit and heart made desolate!
  O damnéd vacillating state!







THE BURIAL OF LOVE

  His eyes in eclipse,
  Pale cold his lips,
  The light of his hopes unfed,
  Mute his tongue,
  His bow unstrung
  With the tears he hath shed,
  Backward drooping his graceful head,

  Love is dead;
  His last arrow is sped;
  He hath not another dart;
  Go--carry him to his dark deathbed;
  Bury him in the cold, cold heart--
  Love is dead.

  Oh, truest love! art thou forlorn,
  And unrevenged? thy pleasant wiles
  Forgotten, and thine innocent joy?
  Shall hollowhearted apathy,
  The cruellest form of perfect scorn,
  With languor of most hateful smiles,
  For ever write
  In the withered light
  Of the tearless eye,
  An epitaph that all may spy?
  No! sooner she herself shall die.

  For her the showers shall not fall,
  Nor the round sun that shineth to all;
  Her light shall into darkness change;
  For her the green grass shall not spring,
  Nor the rivers flow, nor the sweet birds sing,
  Till Love have his full revenge.






TO--

  Sainted Juliet! dearest name!
  If to love be life alone,
  Divinest Juliet,
  I love thee, and live; and yet
  Love unreturned is like the fragrant flame
  Folding the slaughter of the sacrifice
  Offered to gods upon an altarthrone;
  My heart is lighted at thine eyes,
  Changed into fire, and blown about with sighs.






SONG


  I

  I' the glooming light
  Of middle night
  So cold and white,
  Worn Sorrow sits by the moaning wave;
  Beside her are laid
  Her mattock and spade,
  For she hath half delved her own deep grave.
  Alone she is there:
  The white clouds drizzle: her hair falls loose;
  Her shoulders are bare;
  Her tears are mixed with the bearded dews.


  II

  Death standeth by;
  She will not die;
  With glazed eye
  She looks at her grave: she cannot sleep;
  Ever alone
  She maketh her moan:
  She cannot speak; she can only weep;
  For she will not hope.
  The thick snow falls on her flake by flake,
  The dull wave mourns down the slope,
  The world will not change, and her heart will not break.






SONG

  The lintwhite and the throstlecock
  Have voices sweet and clear;
  All in the bloomed May.
  They from the blosmy brere
  Call to the fleeting year,
  If that he would them hear
  And stay. Alas! that one so beautiful
  Should have so dull an ear.


  II

  Fair year, fair year, thy children call,
  But thou art deaf as death;
  All in the bloomèd May.
  When thy light perisheth
  That from thee issueth,
  Our life evanisheth: Oh! stay.
  Alas! that lips so cruel-dumb
  Should have so sweet a breath!


  III

  Fair year, with brows of royal love
  Thou comest, as a king,
  All in the bloomèd May.
  Thy golden largess fling,
  And longer hear us sing;
  Though thou art fleet of wing,
  Yet stay. Alas! that eyes so full of light
  Should be so wandering!


  IV

  Thy locks are all of sunny sheen
  In rings of gold yronne, [1]
  All in the bloomèd May,
  We pri'thee pass not on;
  If thou dost leave the sun,
  Delight is with thee gone, Oh! stay.
  Thou art the fairest of thy feres,
  We pri'thee pass not on.


[Footnote 1: His crispè hair in ringis was yronne.--Chaucer, _Knight's
Tale._ (Tennyson's note.)]








SONG


  I

  Every day hath its night:
  Every night its morn:
  Thorough dark and bright
  Wingèd hours are borne;
  Ah! welaway!

  Seasons flower and fade;
  Golden calm and storm
  Mingle day by day.
  There is no bright form
  Doth not cast a shade--
  Ah! welaway!


  II

  When we laugh, and our mirth
  Apes the happy vein,
  We're so kin to earth,
  Pleasaunce fathers pain--
  Ah! welaway!
  Madness laugheth loud:
  Laughter bringeth tears:
  Eyes are worn away
  Till the end of fears
  Cometh in the shroud,
  Ah! welaway!


  III

  All is change, woe or weal;
  Joy is Sorrow's brother;
  Grief and gladness steal
  Symbols of each other;
  Ah! welaway!
  Larks in heaven's cope
  Sing: the culvers mourn
  All the livelong day.
  Be not all forlorn;
  Let us weep, in hope--
  Ah! welaway!







NOTHING WILL DIE

Reprinted without any important alteration among the 'Juvenilia' in
1871 and onward. No change made except that "through" is spelt "thro',"
and in the last line "and" is substituted for "all".


  When will the stream be aweary of flowing
  Under my eye?
  When will the wind be aweary of blowing
  Over the sky?
  When will the clouds be aweary of fleeting?
  When will the heart be aweary of beating?
  And nature die?
  Never, oh! never, nothing will die?
  The stream flows,
  The wind blows,
  The cloud fleets,
  The heart beats,
  Nothing will die.

  Nothing will die;
  All things will change
  Through eternity.
  'Tis the world's winter;
  Autumn and summer
  Are gone long ago;
  Earth is dry to the centre,
  But spring, a new comer,
  A spring rich and strange,
  Shall make the winds blow
  Round and round,
  Through and through,
  Here and there,
  Till the air
  And the ground
  Shall be filled with life anew.

  The world was never made;
  It will change, but it will not fade.
  So let the wind range;
  For even and morn
  Ever will be
  Through eternity.
  Nothing was born;
  Nothing will die;
  All things will change.







ALL THINGS WILL DIE

Reprinted among 'Juvenilia' in 1872 and onward, without alteration.


  Clearly the blue river chimes in its flowing
  Under my eye;
  Warmly and broadly the south winds are blowing
  Over the sky.
  One after another the white clouds are fleeting;
  Every heart this May morning in joyance is beating
  Full merrily;
  Yet all things must die.
  The stream will cease to flow;
  The wind will cease to blow;
  The clouds will cease to fleet;
  The heart will cease to beat;
  For all things must die.

  All things must die.
  Spring will come never more.
  Oh! vanity!
  Death waits at the door.
  See! our friends are all forsaking
  The wine and the merrymaking.
  We are called--we must go.
  Laid low, very low,
  In the dark we must lie.
  The merry glees are still;
  The voice of the bird
  Shall no more be heard,
  Nor the wind on the hill.
  Oh! misery!
  Hark! death is calling
  While I speak to ye,
  The jaw is falling,
  The red cheek paling,
  The strong limbs failing;
  Ice with the warm blood mixing;
  The eyeballs fixing.
  Nine times goes the passing bell:
  Ye merry souls, farewell.
  The old earth
  Had a birth,
  As all men know,
  Long ago.
  And the old earth must die.
  So let the warm winds range,
  And the blue wave beat the shore;
  For even and morn
  Ye will never see
  Through eternity.
  All things were born.
  Ye will come never more,
  For all things must die.







HERO TO LEANDER

  Oh go not yet, my love,
  The night is dark and vast;
  The white moon is hid in her heaven above,
  And the waves climb high and fast.
  Oh! kiss me, kiss me, once again,
  Lest thy kiss should be the last.
  Oh kiss me ere we part;
  Grow closer to my heart.
  My heart is warmer surely than the bosom of the main.

  Oh joy! 0 bliss of blisses!
  My heart of hearts art thou.
  Come bathe me with thy kisses,
  My eyelids and my brow.
  Hark how the wild rain hisses,
  And the loud sea roars below.

  Thy heart beats through thy rosy limbs
  So gladly doth it stir;
  Thine eye in drops of gladness swims.
  I have bathed thee with the pleasant myrrh;
  Thy locks are dripping balm;
  Thou shalt not wander hence to-night,
  I'll stay thee with my kisses.
  To-night the roaring brine
  Will rend thy golden tresses;
  The ocean with the morrow light
  Will be both blue and calm;
  And the billow will embrace thee with a kiss as soft as mine.

  No western odours wander
  On the black and moaning sea,
  And when thou art dead, Leander,
  My soul must follow thee!
  Oh go not yet, my love
  Thy voice is sweet and low;
  The deep salt wave breaks in above
  Those marble steps below.
  The turretstairs are wet
  That lead into the sea.
  Leander! go not yet.
  The pleasant stars have set:
  Oh! go not, go not yet,
  Or I will follow thee.





THE MYSTIC

  Angels have talked with him, and showed him thrones:
  Ye knew him not: he was not one of ye,
  Ye scorned him with an undiscerning scorn;
  Ye could not read the marvel in his eye,
  The still serene abstraction; he hath felt
  The vanities of after and before;
  Albeit, his spirit and his secret heart
  The stern experiences of converse lives,
  The linked woes of many a fiery change
  Had purified, and chastened, and made free.
  Always there stood before him, night and day,
  Of wayward vary colored circumstance,
  The imperishable presences serene
  Colossal, without form, or sense, or sound,
  Dim shadows but unwaning presences
  Fourfaced to four corners of the sky;
  And yet again, three shadows, fronting one,
  One forward, one respectant, three but one;
  And yet again, again and evermore,
  For the two first were not, but only seemed,
  One shadow in the midst of a great light,
  One reflex from eternity on time,
  One mighty countenance of perfect calm,
  Awful with most invariable eyes.
  For him the silent congregated hours,
  Daughters of time, divinely tall, beneath
  Severe and youthful brows, with shining eyes
  Smiling a godlike smile (the innocent light
  Of earliest youth pierced through and through with all
  Keen knowledges of low-embowed eld)
  Upheld, and ever hold aloft the cloud
  Which droops low hung on either gate of life,
  Both birth and death; he in the centre fixt,
  Saw far on each side through the grated gates
  Most pale and clear and lovely distances.
  He often lying broad awake, and yet
  Remaining from the body, and apart
  In intellect and power and will, hath heard
  Time flowing in the middle of the night,
  And all things creeping to a day of doom.
  How could ye know him? Ye were yet within
  The narrower circle; he had wellnigh reached
  The last, with which a region of white flame,
  Pure without heat, into a larger air
  Upburning, and an ether of black blue,
  Investeth and ingirds all other lives.






THE GRASSHOPPER


  I

  Voice of the summerwind,
  Joy of the summerplain,
  Life of the summerhours,
  Carol clearly, bound along.
  No Tithon thou as poets feign
  (Shame fall 'em they are deaf and blind)
  But an insect lithe and strong,
  Bowing the seeded summerflowers.
  Prove their falsehood and thy quarrel,
  Vaulting on thine airy feet.
  Clap thy shielded sides and carol,
  Carol clearly, chirrup sweet.
  Thou art a mailed warrior in youth and strength complete;
  Armed cap-a-pie,
  Full fair to see;
  Unknowing fear,
  Undreading loss,
  A gallant cavalier
  'Sans peur et sans reproche,'
  In sunlight and in shadow,
  The Bayard of the meadow.


  II

  I would dwell with thee,
  Merry grasshopper,
  Thou art so glad and free,
  And as light as air;
  Thou hast no sorrow or tears,
  Thou hast no compt of years,
  No withered immortality,
  But a short youth sunny and free.
  Carol clearly, bound along,
  Soon thy joy is over,
  A summer of loud song,
  And slumbers in the clover.
  What hast thou to do with evil
  In thine hour of love and revel,
  In thy heat of summerpride,
  Pushing the thick roots aside
  Of the singing flowered grasses,
  That brush thee with their silken tresses?
  What hast thou to do with evil,
  Shooting, singing, ever springing
  In and out the emerald glooms,
  Ever leaping, ever singing,
  Lighting on the golden blooms?






LOVE, PRIDE AND FORGETFULNESS

  Ere yet my heart was sweet Love's tomb,
  Love laboured honey busily.
  I was the hive and Love the bee,
  My heart the honey-comb.
  One very dark and chilly night
  Pride came beneath and held a light.

  The cruel vapours went through all,
  Sweet Love was withered in his cell;
  Pride took Love's sweets, and by a spell,
  Did change them into gall;
  And Memory tho' fed by Pride
  Did wax so thin on gall,
  Awhile she scarcely lived at all,
  What marvel that she died?







CHORUS

In an unpublished drama written very early.

  The varied earth, the moving heaven,
  The rapid waste of roving sea,
  The fountainpregnant mountains riven
  To shapes of wildest anarchy,
  By secret fire and midnight storms
  That wander round their windy cones,
  The subtle life, the countless forms
  Of living things, the wondrous tones
  Of man and beast are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.

  The day, the diamonded light,
  The echo, feeble child of sound,
  The heavy thunder's griding might,
  The herald lightning's starry bound,
  The vocal spring of bursting bloom,
  The naked summer's glowing birth,
  The troublous autumn's sallow gloom,
  The hoarhead winter paving earth
  With sheeny white, are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.

  Each sun which from the centre flings
  Grand music and redundant fire,
  The burning belts, the mighty rings,
  The murmurous planets' rolling choir,
  The globefilled arch that, cleaving air,
  Lost in its effulgence sleeps,
  The lawless comets as they glare,
  And thunder thro' the sapphire deeps
  In wayward strength, are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.






LOST HOPE

  You cast to ground the hope which once was mine,
  But did the while your harsh decree deplore,
  Embalming with sweet tears the vacant shrine,
  My heart, where Hope had been and was no more.

  So on an oaken sprout
  A goodly acorn grew;
  But winds from heaven shook the acorn out,
  And filled the cup with dew.





THE TEARS OF HEAVEN

  Heaven weeps above the earth all night till morn,
  In darkness weeps, as all ashamed to weep,
  Because the earth hath made her state forlorn
  With selfwrought evils of unnumbered years,
  And doth the fruit of her dishonour reap.
  And all the day heaven gathers back her tears
  Into her own blue eyes so clear and deep,
  And showering down the glory of lightsome day,
  Smiles on the earth's worn brow to win her if she may.






LOVE AND SORROW

  O Maiden, fresher than the first green leaf
  With which the fearful springtide flecks the lea,
  Weep not, Almeida, that I said to thee
  That thou hast half my heart, for bitter grief
  Doth hold the other half in sovranty.
  Thou art my heart's sun in love's crystalline:
  Yet on both sides at once thou canst not shine:
  Thine is the bright side of my heart, and thine
  My heart's day, but the shadow of my heart,
  Issue of its own substance, my heart's night
  Thou canst not lighten even with 'thy' light,
  All powerful in beauty as thou art.
  Almeida, it my heart were substanceless,
  Then might thy rays pass thro' to the other side,
  So swiftly, that they nowhere would abide,
  But lose themselves in utter emptiness.
  Half-light, half-shadow, let my spirit sleep;
  They never learnt to love who never knew to weep.







TO A LADY SLEEPING

  O Thou whose fringed lids I gaze upon,
  Through whose dim brain the winged dreams are borne,
  Unroof the shrines of clearest vision,
  In honour of the silverflecked morn:
  Long hath the white wave of the virgin light
  Driven back the billow of the dreamful dark.
  Thou all unwittingly prolongest night,
  Though long ago listening the poised lark,
  With eyes dropt downward through the blue serene,
  Over heaven's parapets the angels lean.







SONNET

  Could I outwear my present state of woe
  With one brief winter, and indue i' the spring
  Hues of fresh youth, and mightily outgrow
  The wan dark coil of faded suffering--
  Forth in the pride of beauty issuing
  A sheeny snake, the light of vernal bowers,
  Moving his crest to all sweet plots of flowers
  And watered vallies where the young birds sing;
  Could I thus hope my lost delights renewing,
  I straightly would commend the tears to creep
  From my charged lids; but inwardly I weep:
  Some vital heat as yet my heart is wooing:
  This to itself hath drawn the frozen rain
  From my cold eyes and melted it again.







SONNET

  Though Night hath climbed her peak of highest noon,
  And bitter blasts the screaming autumn whirl,
  All night through archways of the bridged pearl
  And portals of pure silver walks the moon.
  Wake on, my soul, nor crouch to agony,
  Turn cloud to light, and bitterness to joy,
  And dross to gold with glorious alchemy,
  Basing thy throne above the world's annoy.
  Reign thou above the storms of sorrow and ruth
  That roar beneath; unshaken peace hath won thee:
  So shalt thou pierce the woven glooms of truth;
  So shall the blessing of the meek be on thee;
  So in thine hour of dawn, the body's youth,
  An honourable old shall come upon thee.






SONNET

  Shall the hag Evil die with child of Good,
  Or propagate again her loathed kind,
  Thronging the cells of the diseased mind,
  Hateful with hanging cheeks, a withered brood,
  Though hourly pastured on the salient blood?
  Oh! that the wind which bloweth cold or heat
  Would shatter and o'erbear the brazen beat
  Of their broad vans, and in the solitude
  Of middle space confound them, and blow back
  Their wild cries down their cavernthroats, and slake
  With points of blastborne hail their heated eyne!
  So their wan limbs no more might come between
  The moon and the moon's reflex in the night;
  Nor blot with floating shades the solar light.







SONNET

  The pallid thunderstricken sigh for gain,
  Down an ideal stream they ever float,
  And sailing on Pactolus in a boat,
  Drown soul and sense, while wistfully they strain
  Weak eyes upon the glistering sands that robe
  The understream. The wise could he behold
  Cathedralled caverns of thick-ribbed gold
  And branching silvers of the central globe,
  Would marvel from so beautiful a sight
  How scorn and ruin, pain and hate could flow:
  But Hatred in a gold cave sits below,
  Pleached with her hair, in mail of argent light
  Shot into gold, a snake her forehead clips
  And skins the colour from her trembling lips.







LOVE


  I

  Thou, from the first, unborn, undying love,
  Albeit we gaze not on thy glories near,
  Before the face of God didst breathe and move,
  Though night and pain and ruin and death reign here.
  Thou foldest, like a golden atmosphere,
  The very throne of the eternal God:
  Passing through thee the edicts of his fear
  Are mellowed into music, borne abroad
  By the loud winds, though they uprend the sea,
  Even from his central deeps: thine empery
  Is over all: thou wilt not brook eclipse;
  Thou goest and returnest to His Lips
  Like lightning: thou dost ever brood above
  The silence of all hearts, unutterable Love.


  II

  To know thee is all wisdom, and old age
  Is but to know thee: dimly we behold thee
  Athwart the veils of evil which enfold thee.
  We beat upon our aching hearts with rage;
  We cry for thee: we deem the world thy tomb.
  As dwellers in lone planets look upon
  The mighty disk of their majestic sun,
  Hollowed in awful chasms of wheeling gloom,
  Making their day dim, so we gaze on thee.
  Come, thou of many crowns, white-robed love,
  Oh! rend the veil in twain: all men adore thee;
  Heaven crieth after thee; earth waileth for thee:
  Breathe on thy winged throne, and it shall move
  In music and in light o'er land and sea.


  III

  And now--methinks I gaze upon thee now,
  As on a serpent in his agonies
  Awestricken Indians; what time laid low
  And crushing the thick fragrant reeds he lies,
  When the new year warm breathed on the earth,
  Waiting to light him with his purple skies,
  Calls to him by the fountain to uprise.
  Already with the pangs of a new birth
  Strain the hot spheres of his convulsed eyes,
  And in his writhings awful hues begin
  To wander down his sable sheeny sides,
  Like light on troubled waters: from within
  Anon he rusheth forth with merry din,
  And in him light and joy and strength abides;
  And from his brows a crown of living light
  Looks through the thickstemmed woods by day and night.





THE KRAKEN

Reprinted without alteration, except in the spelling of "antient," among
'Juvenilia' in 1871 and onward.

  Below the thunders of the upper deep;
  Far, far beneath in the abysmal sea,
  His antient, dreamless, uninvaded sleep
  The Kraken sleepeth: faintest sunlights flee
  About his shadowy sides: above him swell
  Huge sponges of millennial growth and height;
  And far away into the sickly light,
  From many a wondrous grot and secret cell
  Unnumber'd and enormous polypi
  Winnow with giant arms the slumbering green.
  There hath he lain for ages and will lie
  Battening upon huge seaworms in his sleep,
  Until the latter fire shall heat the deep;
  Then once by man and angels to be seen,
  In roaring he shall rise and on the surface die.






ENGLISH WAR SONG

  Who fears to die? Who fears to die?
  Is there any here who fears to die
  He shall find what he fears, and none shall grieve
  For the man who fears to die;
  But the withering scorn of the many shall cleave
  To the man who fears to die.

  Chorus.--
           Shout for England!
           Ho! for England!
           George for England!
           Merry England!
           England for aye!

  The hollow at heart shall crouch forlorn,
  He shall eat the bread of common scorn;
  It shall be steeped in the salt, salt tear,
  Shall be steeped in his own salt tear:
  Far better, far better he never were born
  Than to shame merry England here.

  Chorus.--Shout for England! etc.

  There standeth our ancient enemy;
  Hark! he shouteth--the ancient enemy!
  On the ridge of the hill his banners rise;
  They stream like fire in the skies;
  Hold up the Lion of England on high
  Till it dazzle and blind his eyes.

  Chorus.--Shout for England! etc.

  Come along! we alone of the earth are free;
  The child in our cradles is bolder than he;
  For where is the heart and strength of slaves?
  Oh! where is the strength of slaves?
  He is weak! we are strong; he a slave, we are free;
  Come along! we will dig their graves.

  Chorus.--Shout for England! etc.

  There standeth our ancient enemy;
  Will he dare to battle with the free?
  Spur along! spur amain! charge to the fight:
  Charge! charge to the fight!
  Hold up the Lion of England on high!
  Shout for God and our right!

  Chorus.-Shout for England! etc.







NATIONAL SONG

  There is no land like England
  Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no hearts like English hearts,
  Such hearts of oak as they be.
  There is no land like England
  Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no men like Englishmen,
  So tall and bold as they be.

  Chorus. For the French the Pope may shrive 'em,
          For the devil a whit we heed 'em,
          As for the French, God speed 'em
          Unto their hearts' desire,
          And the merry devil drive 'em
          Through the water and the fire.

          Our glory is our freedom,
          We lord it o'er the sea;
          We are the sons of freedom,
          We are free.

  There is no land like England,
  Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no wives like English wives,
  So fair and chaste as they be.
  There is no land like England,
  Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no maids like English maids,
  So beautiful as they be.

  Chorus.--For the French, etc.






DUALISMS

  Two bees within a chrystal flowerbell rocked
  Hum a lovelay to the westwind at noontide.
  Both alike, they buzz together,
  Both alike, they hum together
  Through and through the flowered heather.

  Where in a creeping cove the wave unshocked
  Lays itself calm and wide,
  Over a stream two birds of glancing feather
  Do woo each other, carolling together.
  Both alike, they glide together
  Side by side;
  Both alike, they sing together,
  Arching blue-glossed necks beneath the purple weather.

  Two children lovelier than Love, adown the lea are singing,
  As they gambol, lilygarlands ever stringing:
  Both in blosmwhite silk are frockèd:
  Like, unlike, they roam together
  Under a summervault of golden weather;
  Like, unlike, they sing together
  Side by side,
  Mid May's darling goldenlockèd,
  Summer's tanling diamondeyed.






WE ARE FREE

Reprinted among 'Juvenilia' in 1871 and onward without alteration,
except that it is printed as two stanzas.

  The winds, as at their hour of birth,
  Leaning upon the ridged sea,
  Breathed low around the rolling earth
  With mellow preludes, "We are Free";
  The streams through many a lilied row,
  Down-carolling to the crispèd sea,
  Low-tinkled with a bell-like flow
  Atween the blossoms, "We are free".



[Greek: Oi Rheontes]

  I

  All thoughts, all creeds, all dreams are true,
  All visions wild and strange;
  Man is the measure of all truth
  Unto himself. All truth is change:
  All men do walk in sleep, and all
  Have faith in that they dream:
  For all things are as they seem to all,
  And all things flow like a stream.


  II

  There is no rest, no calm, no pause,
  Nor good nor ill, nor light nor shade,
  Nor essence nor eternal laws:
  For nothing is, but all is made.
  But if I dream that all these are,
  They are to me for that I dream;
  For all things are as they seem to all,
  And all things flow like a stream.


Argal--This very opinion is only true relatively to the flowing
philosophers. (Tennyson's note.)







POEMS OF MDCCCXXXIII



"MINE BE THE STRENGTH OF SPIRIT..."

Reprinted without any alteration, except that Power is spelt with a
small p, among the _Juvenilia_ in 1871 and onward.


  Mine be the strength of spirit, full and free,
  Like some broad river rushing down alone,
  With the selfsame impulse wherewith he was thrown
  From his loud fount upon the echoing lea:--
  Which with increasing might doth forward flee
  By town, and tower, and hill, and cape, and isle,
  And in the middle of the green salt sea
  Keeps his blue waters fresh for many a mile.
  Mine be the Power which ever to its sway
  Will win the wise at once, and by degrees
  May into uncongenial spirits flow;
  Even as the great gulfstream of Florida
  Floats far away into the Northern Seas
  The lavish growths of Southern Mexico.







TO--

When this poem was republished among the _Juvenilia_ in 1871 several
alterations were made in it. For the first stanza was substituted the
following:--

  My life is full of weary days,
  But good things have not kept aloof,
  Nor wander'd into other ways:
  I have not lack'd thy mild reproof,
  Nor golden largess of thy praise.

The second began "And now shake hands". In the fourth stanza for "sudden
laughters" of the jay was substituted the felicitous "sudden scritches,"
and the sixth and seventh stanzas were suppressed.


  I

  All good things have not kept aloof
  Nor wandered into other ways:
  I have not lacked thy mild reproof,
  Nor golden largess of thy praise.
  But life is full of weary days.


  II

  Shake hands, my friend, across the brink
  Of that deep grave to which I go:
  Shake hands once more: I cannot sink
  So far--far down, but I shall know
  Thy voice, and answer from below.


  III

  When in the darkness over me
  The fourhanded mole shall scrape,
  Plant thou no dusky cypresstree,
  Nor wreathe thy cap with doleful crape,
  But pledge me in the flowing grape.


  IV

  And when the sappy field and wood
  Grow green beneath the showery gray,
  And rugged barks begin to bud,
  And through damp holts newflushed with May,
  Ring sudden laughters of the Jay,


  V

  Then let wise Nature work her will,
  And on my clay her darnels grow;
  Come only, when the days are still,
  And at my headstone whisper low,
  And tell me if the woodbines blow.

  VI

  If thou art blest, my mother's smile
  Undimmed, if bees are on the wing:
  Then cease, my friend, a little while,
  That I may hear the throstle sing
  His bridal song, the boast of spring.


  VII

  Sweet as the noise in parchèd plains
  Of bubbling wells that fret the stones,
  (If any sense in me remains)
  Thy words will be: thy cheerful tones
  As welcome to my crumbling bones.






BUONAPARTE

Reprinted without any alteration among 'Early Sonnets' in 1872, and
unaltered since.


  He thought to quell the stubborn hearts of oak,
  Madman!--to chain with chains, and bind with bands
  That island queen who sways the floods and lands
  From Ind to Ind, but in fair daylight woke,
  When from her wooden walls, lit by sure hands,
  With thunders and with lightnings and with smoke,
  Peal after peal, the British battle broke,
  Lulling the brine against the Coptic sands.
  We taught him lowlier moods, when Elsinore
  Heard the war moan along the distant sea,
  Rocking with shatter'd spars, with sudden fires
  Flamed over: at Trafalgar yet once more
  We taught him: late he learned humility
  Perforce, like those whom Gideon school'd with briers.







SONNET

I

  Oh, Beauty, passing beauty! sweetest Sweet!
  How canst thou let me waste my youth in sighs?
  I only ask to sit beside thy feet.
  Thou knowest I dare not look into thine eyes,
  Might I but kiss thy hand! I dare not fold
  My arms about thee--scarcely dare to speak.
  And nothing seems to me so wild and bold,
  As with one kiss to touch thy blessed cheek.
  Methinks if I should kiss thee, no control
  Within the thrilling brain could keep afloat
  The subtle spirit. Even while I spoke,
  The bare word KISS hath made my inner soul
  To tremble like a lutestring, ere the note
  Hath melted in the silence that it broke.


II

Reprinted in 1872 among 'Early Sonnets' with two alterations, "If I
were loved" for "But were I loved," and "tho'" for "though".

  But were I loved, as I desire to be,
  What is there in the great sphere of the earth,
  And range of evil between death and birth,
  That I should fear--if I were loved by thee?
  All the inner, all the outer world of pain
  Clear Love would pierce and cleave, if thou wert mine,
  As I have heard that, somewhere in the main,
  Fresh water-springs come up through bitter brine.
  'Twere joy, not fear, clasped hand in hand with thee,
  To wait for death--mute--careless of all ills,
  Apart upon a mountain, though the surge
  Of some new deluge from a thousand hills
  Flung leagues of roaring foam into the gorge
  Below us, as far on as eye could see.






THE HESPERIDES

    Hesperus and his daughters three
    That sing about the golden tree.

    (Comus).


  The Northwind fall'n, in the newstarred night
  Zidonian Hanno, voyaging beyond
  The hoary promontory of Soloë
  Past Thymiaterion, in calmèd bays,
  Between the Southern and the Western Horn,
  Heard neither warbling of the nightingale,
  Nor melody o' the Lybian lotusflute
  Blown seaward from the shore; but from a slope
  That ran bloombright into the Atlantic blue,
  Beneath a highland leaning down a weight
  Of cliffs, and zoned below with cedarshade,
  Came voices, like the voices in a dream,
  Continuous, till he reached the other sea.






SONG


  I

  The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
  Guard it well, guard it warily,
  Singing airily,
  Standing about the charmèd root.
  Round about all is mute,
  As the snowfield on the mountain-peaks,
  As the sandfield at the mountain-foot.
  Crocodiles in briny creeks
  Sleep and stir not: all is mute.
  If ye sing not, if ye make false measure,
  We shall lose eternal pleasure,
  Worth eternal want of rest.
  Laugh not loudly: watch the treasure
  Of the wisdom of the West.
  In a corner wisdom whispers.
  Five and three
  (Let it not be preached abroad) make an awful mystery.
  For the blossom unto three-fold music bloweth;
  Evermore it is born anew;
  And the sap to three-fold music floweth,
  From the root
  Drawn in the dark,
  Up to the fruit,
  Creeping under the fragrant bark,
  Liquid gold, honeysweet thro' and thro'.
  Keen-eyed Sisters, singing airily,
  Looking warily
  Every way,
  Guard the apple night and day,
  Lest one from the East come and take it away.


  II

  Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, ever and aye,
  Looking under silver hair with a silver eye.
  Father, twinkle not thy stedfast sight;
  Kingdoms lapse, and climates change, and races die;
  Honour comes with mystery;
  Hoarded wisdom brings delight.
  Number, tell them over and number
  How many the mystic fruittree holds,
  Lest the redcombed dragon slumber
  Rolled together in purple folds.
  Look to him, father, lest he wink, and the golden apple be stol'n away,
  For his ancient heart is drunk with over-watchings night and day,
  Round about the hallowed fruit tree curled--
  Sing away, sing aloud evermore in the wind, without stop,
  Lest his scalèd eyelid drop, For he is older than the world.
  If he waken, we waken,
  Rapidly levelling eager eyes.
  If he sleep, we sleep,
  Dropping the eyelid over the eyes.
  If the golden apple be taken
  The world will be overwise.
  Five links, a golden chain, are we,
  Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
  Bound about the golden tree.


  III

  Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, night and day,
  Lest the old wound of the world be healed,
  The glory unsealed,
  The golden apple stol'n away,
  And the ancient secret revealed.
  Look from west to east along:
  Father, old Himala weakens,
  Caucasus is bold and strong.
  Wandering waters unto wandering waters call;
  Let them clash together, foam and fall.
  Out of watchings, out of wiles,
  Comes the bliss of secret smiles.
  All things are not told to all,
  Half-round the mantling night is drawn,
  Purplefringed with even and dawn.
  Hesper hateth Phosphor, evening hateth morn.


  IV

  Every flower and every fruit the redolent breath
  Of this warm seawind ripeneth,
  Arching the billow in his sleep;
  But the landwind wandereth,
  Broken by the highland-steep,
  Two streams upon the violet deep:
  For the western sun and the western star,
  And the low west wind, breathing afar,
  The end of day and beginning of night
  Make the apple holy and bright,
  Holy and bright, round and full, bright and blest,
  Mellowed in a land of rest;
  Watch it warily day and night;
  All good things are in the west,
  Till midnoon the cool east light
  Is shut out by the round of the tall hillbrow;
  But when the fullfaced sunset yellowly
  Stays on the flowering arch of the bough,
  The luscious fruitage clustereth mellowly,
  Goldenkernelled, goldencored,
  Sunset-ripened, above on the tree,
  The world is wasted with fire and sword,
  But the apple of gold hangs over the sea,
  Five links, a golden chain, are we,
  Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
  Daughters three,
  Bound about
  All round about
  The gnarled bole of the charmèd tree,
  The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
  Guard it well, guard it warily,
  Watch it warily,
  Singing airily,
  Standing about the charmed root.






ROSALIND

Not reprinted till 1884 when it was unaltered, as it has remained since:
but the poem appended and printed by Tennyson (in the footnote) has not
been reprinted.

  My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
  My frolic falcon, with bright eyes,
  Whose free delight, from any height of rapid flight,
  Stoops at all game that wing the skies,
  My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
  My bright-eyed, wild-eyed falcon, whither,
  Careless both of wind and weather,
  Whither fly ye, what game spy ye,
  Up or down the streaming wind?


  II

  The quick lark's closest-carolled strains,
  The shadow rushing up the sea,
  The lightningflash atween the rain,
  The sunlight driving down the lea,
  The leaping stream, the very wind,
  That will not stay, upon his way,
  To stoop the cowslip to the plains,
  Is not so clear and bold and free
  As you, my falcon Rosalind.
  You care not for another's pains,
  Because you are the soul of joy,
  Bright metal all without alloy.
  Life shoots and glances thro' your veins,
  And flashes off a thousand ways,
  Through lips and eyes in subtle rays.
  Your hawkeyes are keen and bright,
  Keen with triumph, watching still
  To pierce me through with pointed light;
  And oftentimes they flash and glitter
  Like sunshine on a dancing rill,
  And your words are seeming-bitter,
  Sharp and few, but seeming-bitter
  From excess of swift delight.


  III

  Come down, come home, my Rosalind,
  My gay young hawk, my Rosalind:
  Too long you keep the upper skies;
  Too long you roam, and wheel at will;
  But we must hood your random eyes,
  That care not whom they kill,
  And your cheek, whose brilliant hue
  Is so sparkling fresh to view,
  Some red heath-flower in the dew,
  Touched with sunrise. We must bind
  And keep you fast, my Rosalind,
  Fast, fast, my wild-eyed Rosalind,
  And clip your wings, and make you love:
  When we have lured you from above,
  And that delight of frolic flight, by day or night,
  From North to South;
  We'll bind you fast in silken cords,
  And kiss away the bitter words
  From off your rosy mouth. [1]


[Footnote 1: Perhaps the following lines may be allowed to stand as a
separate poem; originally they made part of the text, where they were
manifestly superfluous:--

    My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
    Bold, subtle, careless Rosalind,
    Is one of those who know no strife
    Of inward woe or outward fear;
    To whom the slope and stream of life,
    The life before, the life behind,
    In the ear, from far and near,
    Chimeth musically clear.
    My falconhearted Rosalind,
    Fullsailed before a vigorous wind,
    Is one of those who cannot weep
    For others' woes, but overleap
    All the petty shocks and fears
    That trouble life in early years,
    With a flash of frolic scorn
    And keen delight, that never falls
    Away from freshness, self-upborne
    With such gladness, as, whenever
    The freshflushing springtime calls
    To the flooding waters cool,
    Young fishes, on an April morn,
    Up and down a rapid river,
    Leap the little waterfalls
    That sing into the pebbled pool.
    My happy falcon, Rosalind;
    Hath daring fancies of her own,
    Fresh as the dawn before the day,
    Fresh as the early seasmell blown
    Through vineyards from an inland bay.
    My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
    Because no shadow on you falls
    Think you hearts are tennis balls
    To play with, wanton Rosalind?]







SONG

  Who can say
  Why To-day
  To-morrow will be yesterday?
  Who can tell
  Why to smell
  The violet, recalls the dewy prime
  Of youth and buried time?
  The cause is nowhere found in rhyme.



KATE

Reprinted without alteration among the 'Juvenilia' in 1895.


  I know her by her angry air,
  Her brightblack eyes, her brightblack hair,
  Her rapid laughters wild and shrill,
  As laughter of the woodpecker
  From the bosom of a hill.
  'Tis Kate--she sayeth what she will;
  For Kate hath an unbridled tongue,
  Clear as the twanging of a harp.
  Her heart is like a throbbing star.
  Kate hath a spirit ever strung
  Like a new bow, and bright and sharp
  As edges of the scymetar.
  Whence shall she take a fitting mate?
  For Kate no common love will feel;
  My woman-soldier, gallant Kate,
  As pure and true as blades of steel.

  Kate saith "the world is void of might".
  Kate saith "the men are gilded flies".
  Kate snaps her fingers at my vows;
  Kate will not hear of lover's sighs.
  I would I were an armèd knight,
  Far famed for wellwon enterprise,
  And wearing on my swarthy brows
  The garland of new-wreathed emprise:
  For in a moment I would pierce
  The blackest files of clanging fight,
  And strongly strike to left and right,
  In dreaming of my lady's eyes.
  Oh! Kate loves well the bold and fierce;
  But none are bold enough for Kate,
  She cannot find a fitting mate.







SONNET

Written, on hearing of the outbreak of the Polish Insurrection.


  Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afar
  The hosts to battle: be not bought and sold.
  Arise, brave Poles, the boldest of the bold;
  Break through your iron shackles--fling them far.
  O for those days of Piast, ere the Czar
  Grew to this strength among his deserts cold;
  When even to Moscow's cupolas were rolled
  The growing murmurs of the Polish war!
  Now must your noble anger blaze out more
  Than when from Sobieski, clan by clan,
  The Moslem myriads fell, and fled before--
  Than when Zamoysky smote the Tartar Khan,
  Than earlier, when on the Baltic shore
  Boleslas drove the Pomeranian.







POLAND

Reprinted without alteration in 1872, except the removal of italics in
"now" among the 'Early Sonnets'.


  How long, O God, shall men be ridden down,
  And trampled under by the last and least
  Of men? The heart of Poland hath not ceased
  To quiver, tho' her sacred blood doth drown
  The fields; and out of every smouldering town
  Cries to Thee, lest brute Power be increased,
  Till that o'ergrown Barbarian in the East
  Transgress his ample bound to some new crown:--
  Cries to thee, "Lord, how long shall these things be?
  How long this icyhearted Muscovite
  Oppress the region?" Us, O Just and Good,
  Forgive, who smiled when she was torn in three;
  Us, who stand now, when we should aid the right--
  A matter to be wept with tears of blood!



TO--

Reprinted without alteration as first of the 'Early Sonnets' in
1872; subsequently in the twelfth line "That tho'" was substituted for
"Altho'," and the last line was altered to--

  "And either lived in either's heart and speech,"

and "hath" was not italicised.


  As when with downcast eyes we muse and brood,
  And ebb into a former life, or seem
  To lapse far back in some confused dream
  To states of mystical similitude;
  If one but speaks or hems or stirs his chair,
  Ever the wonder waxeth more and more,
  So that we say, "All this hath been before,
  All this _hath_ been, I know not when or where".
  So, friend, when first I look'd upon your face,
  Our thought gave answer each to each, so true--
  Opposed mirrors each reflecting each--
  Altho' I knew not in what time or place,
  Methought that I had often met with you,
  And each had lived in the other's mind and speech.







O DARLING ROOM


  I

  O darling room, my heart's delight,
  Dear room, the apple of my sight,
  With thy two couches soft and white,
  There is no room so exquisite,
  No little room so warm and bright,
  Wherein to read, wherein to write.


  II

  For I the Nonnenwerth have seen,
  And Oberwinter's vineyards green,
  Musical Lurlei; and between
  The hills to Bingen have I been,
  Bingen in Darmstadt, where the Rhene
  Curves towards Mentz, a woody scene.


  III

  Yet never did there meet my sight,
  In any town, to left or right,
  A little room so exquisite,
  With two such couches soft and white;
  Not any room so warm and bright,
  Wherein to read, wherein to write.






TO CHRISTOPHER NORTH

  You did late review my lays,
  Crusty Christopher;
  You did mingle blame and praise,
  Rusty Christopher.
  When I learnt from whom it came,
  I forgave you all the blame,
  Musty Christopher;
  I could _not_ forgive the praise,
  Fusty Christopher.






THE SKIPPING ROPE

This silly poem was first published in the edition of 1842, and was
retained unaltered till 1851, when it was finally suppressed.


  Sure never yet was Antelope
  Could skip so lightly by,
  Stand off, or else my skipping-rope
  Will hit you in the eye.
  How lightly whirls the skipping-rope!
  How fairy-like you fly!
  Go, get you gone, you muse and mope--
  I hate that silly sigh.
  Nay, dearest, teach me how to hope,
  Or tell me how to die.
  There, take it, take my skipping-rope,
  And hang yourself thereby.





TIMBUCTOO

A POEM WHICH OBTAINED THE CHANCELLOR'S MEDAL AT THE 'Cambridge
Commencement' M.DCCCXXIX BY A. TENNYSON Of Trinity College.

Printed in the Cambridge 'Chronicle and Journal' for Friday, 10th July,
1839, and at the University Press by James Smith, among the 'Profusiones
Academicae Praemiis annuis dignatae, et in Curiâ Cantabrigiensi
Recitatae Comitiis Maximis' A.D. M.DCCCXXIX. Reprinted in an edition of
the 'Cambridge Prize Poems' from 1813 to 1858 inclusive, by Messrs.
Macmillan in 1859, but without any alteration, except in punctuation and
the substitution of small letters for capitals where the change was
appropriate; and again in 1893 in the appendix to the reprint of the
'Poems by Two Brothers'.

    Deep in that lion-haunted island lies
    A mystic city, goal of enterprise.

    (Chapman.)


  I stood upon the Mountain which o'erlooks
  The narrow seas, whose rapid interval
  Parts Afric from green Europe, when the Sun
  Had fall'n below th' Atlantick, and above
  The silent Heavens were blench'd with faery light,
  Uncertain whether faery light or cloud,
  Flowing Southward, and the chasms of deep, deep blue
  Slumber'd unfathomable, and the stars
  Were flooded over with clear glory and pale.
  I gaz'd upon the sheeny coast beyond,
  There where the Giant of old Time infixed
  The limits of his prowess, pillars high
  Long time eras'd from Earth: even as the sea
  When weary of wild inroad buildeth up
  Huge mounds whereby to stay his yeasty waves.
  And much I mus'd on legends quaint and old
  Which whilome won the hearts of all on Earth
  Toward their brightness, ev'n as flame draws air;
  But had their being in the heart of Man
  As air is th' life of flame: and thou wert then
  A center'd glory--circled Memory,
  Divinest Atalantis, whom the waves
  Have buried deep, and thou of later name
  Imperial Eldorado roof'd with gold:
  Shadows to which, despite all shocks of Change,
  All on-set of capricious Accident,
  Men clung with yearning Hope which would not die.
  As when in some great City where the walls
  Shake, and the streets with ghastly faces throng'd
  Do utter forth a subterranean voice,
  Among the inner columns far retir'd
  At midnight, in the lone Acropolis.
  Before the awful Genius of the place
  Kneels the pale Priestess in deep faith, the while
  Above her head the weak lamp dips and winks
  Unto the fearful summoning without:
  Nathless she ever clasps the marble knees,
  Bathes the cold hand with tears, and gazeth on
  Those eyes which wear no light but that wherewith
  Her phantasy informs them. Where are ye
  Thrones of the Western wave, fair Islands green?
  Where are your moonlight halls, your cedarn glooms,
  The blossoming abysses of your hills?
  Your flowering Capes and your gold-sanded bays
  Blown round with happy airs of odorous winds?
  Where are the infinite ways which, Seraph-trod,
  Wound thro' your great Elysian solitudes,
  Whose lowest depths were, as with visible love,
  Fill'd with Divine effulgence, circumfus'd,
  Flowing between the clear and polish'd stems,
  And ever circling round their emerald cones
  In coronals and glories, such as gird
  The unfading foreheads of the Saints in Heaven?
  For nothing visible, they say, had birth
  In that blest ground but it was play'd about
  With its peculiar glory. Then I rais'd
  My voice and cried "Wide Afric, doth thy Sun
  Lighten, thy hills enfold a City as fair
  As those which starr'd the night o' the Elder World?
  Or is the rumour of thy Timbuctoo
  A dream as frail as those of ancient Time?"
  A curve of whitening, flashing, ebbing light!
  A rustling of white wings! The bright descent
  Of a young Seraph! and he stood beside me
  There on the ridge, and look'd into my face
  With his unutterable, shining orbs,
  So that with hasty motion I did veil
  My vision with both hands, and saw before me
  Such colour'd spots as dance athwart the eyes
  Of those that gaze upon the noonday Sun.
  Girt with a Zone of flashing gold beneath
  His breast, and compass'd round about his brow
  With triple arch of everchanging bows,
  And circled with the glory of living light
  And alternation of all hues, he stood.

  "O child of man, why muse you here alone
  Upon the Mountain, on the dreams of old
  Which fill'd the Earth with passing loveliness,
  Which flung strange music on the howling winds,
  And odours rapt from remote Paradise?
  Thy sense is clogg'd with dull mortality,
  Thy spirit fetter'd with the bond of clay:
  Open thine eye and see." I look'd, but not
  Upon his face, for it was wonderful
  With its exceeding brightness, and the light
  Of the great angel mind which look'd from out
  The starry glowing of his restless eyes.
  I felt my soul grow mighty, and my spirit
  With supernatural excitation bound
  Within me, and my mental eye grew large
  With such a vast circumference of thought,
  That in my vanity I seem'd to stand
  Upon the outward verge and bound alone
  Of full beautitude. Each failing sense
  As with a momentary flash of light
  Grew thrillingly distinct and keen. I saw
  The smallest grain that dappled the dark Earth,
  The indistinctest atom in deep air,
  The Moon's white cities, and the opal width
  Of her small glowing lakes, her silver heights
  Unvisited with dew of vagrant cloud,
  And the unsounded, undescended depth
  Of her black hollows. The clear Galaxy
  Shorn of its hoary lustre, wonderful,
  Distinct and vivid with sharp points of light
  Blaze within blaze, an unimagin'd depth
  And harmony of planet-girded Suns
  And moon-encircled planets, wheel in wheel,
  Arch'd the wan Sapphire. Nay, the hum of men,
  Or other things talking in unknown tongues,
  And notes of busy life in distant worlds
  Beat like a far wave on my anxious ear.
  A maze of piercing, trackless, thrilling thoughts
  Involving and embracing each with each
  Rapid as fire, inextricably link'd,
  Expanding momently with every sight
  And sound which struck the palpitating sense,
  The issue of strong impulse, hurried through
  The riv'n rapt brain: as when in some large lake
  From pressure of descendant crags, which lapse
  Disjointed, crumbling from their parent slope
  At slender interval, the level calm
  Is ridg'd with restless and increasing spheres
  Which break upon each other, each th' effect
  Of separate impulse, but more fleet and strong
  Than its precursor, till the eye in vain
  Amid the wild unrest of swimming shade
  Dappled with hollow and alternate rise
  Of interpenetrated arc, would scan
  Definite round.

                  I know not if I shape
  These things with accurate similitude
  From visible objects, for but dimly now,
  Less vivid than a half-forgotten dream,
  The memory of that mental excellence
  Comes o'er me, and it may be I entwine
  The indecision of my present mind
  With its past clearness, yet it seems to me
  As even then the torrent of quick thought
  Absorbed me from the nature of itself
  With its own fleetness. Where is he that borne
  Adown the sloping of an arrowy stream,
  Could link his shallop to the fleeting edge,
  And muse midway with philosophic calm
  Upon the wondrous laws which regulate
  The fierceness of the bounding element?
  My thoughts which long had grovell'd in the slime
  Of this dull world, like dusky worms which house
  Beneath unshaken waters, but at once
  Upon some earth-awakening day of spring
  Do pass from gloom to glory, and aloft
  Winnow the purple, bearing on both sides
  Double display of starlit wings which burn
  Fanlike and fibred, with intensest bloom:
  E'en so my thoughts, ere while so low, now felt
  Unutterable buoyancy and strength
  To bear them upward through the trackless fields
  Of undefin'd existence far and free.

  Then first within the South methought I saw
  A wilderness of spires, and chrystal pile
  Of rampart upon rampart, dome on dome,
  Illimitable range of battlement
  On battlement, and the Imperial height
  Of Canopy o'ercanopied.

                          Behind,
  In diamond light, upsprung the dazzling Cones
  Of Pyramids, as far surpassing Earth's
  As Heaven than Earth is fairer. Each aloft
  Upon his narrow'd Eminence bore globes
  Of wheeling suns, or stars, or semblances
  Of either, showering circular abyss
  Of radiance. But the glory of the place
  Stood out a pillar'd front of burnish'd gold
  Interminably high, if gold it were
  Or metal more ethereal, and beneath
  Two doors of blinding brilliance, where no gaze
  Might rest, stood open, and the eye could scan
  Through length of porch and lake and boundless hall,
  Part of a throne of fiery flame, where from
  The snowy skirting of a garment hung,
  And glimpse of multitudes of multitudes
  That minister'd around it--if I saw
  These things distinctly, for my human brain
  Stagger'd beneath the vision, and thick night
  Came down upon my eyelids, and I fell.

  With ministering hand he rais'd me up;
  Then with a mournful and ineffable smile,
  Which but to look on for a moment fill'd
  My eyes with irresistible sweet tears,
  In accents of majestic melody,
  Like a swol'n river's gushings in still night
  Mingled with floating music, thus he spake:

  "There is no mightier Spirit than I to sway
  The heart of man: and teach him to attain
  By shadowing forth the Unattainable;
  And step by step to scale that mighty stair
  Whose landing-place is wrapt about with clouds
  Of glory of Heaven. [1] With earliest Light of Spring,
  And in the glow of sallow Summertide,
  And in red Autumn when the winds are wild
  With gambols, and when full-voiced Winter roofs
  The headland with inviolate white snow,
  I play about his heart a thousand ways,
  Visit his eyes with visions, and his ears
  With harmonies of wind and wave and wood--
  Of winds which tell of waters, and of waters
  Betraying the close kisses of the wind--
  And win him unto me: and few there be
  So gross of heart who have not felt and known
  A higher than they see: They with dim eyes
  Behold me darkling. Lo! I have given thee
  To understand my presence, and to feel
  My fullness; I have fill'd thy lips with power.
  I have rais'd thee nigher to the Spheres of Heaven,
  Man's first, last home: and thou with ravish'd sense
  Listenest the lordly music flowing from
  Th'illimitable years. I am the Spirit,
  The permeating life which courseth through
  All th' intricate and labyrinthine veins
  Of the great vine of Fable, which, outspread
  With growth of shadowing leaf and clusters rare,
  Reacheth to every corner under Heaven,
  Deep-rooted in the living soil of truth:
  So that men's hopes and fears take refuge in
  The fragrance of its complicated glooms
  And cool impleached twilights. Child of Man,
  See'st thou yon river, whose translucent wave,
  Forth issuing from darkness, windeth through
  The argent streets o' the City, imaging
  The soft inversion of her tremulous Domes.
  Her gardens frequent with the stately Palm,
  Her Pagods hung with music of sweet bells.
  Her obelisks of ranged Chrysolite,
  Minarets and towers? Lo! how he passeth by,
  And gulphs himself in sands, as not enduring
  To carry through the world those waves, which bore
  The reflex of my City in their depths.
  Oh City! Oh latest Throne! where I was rais'd
  To be a mystery of loveliness
  Unto all eyes, the time is well nigh come
  When I must render up this glorious home
  To keen 'Discovery': soon yon brilliant towers
  Shall darken with the waving of her wand;
  Darken, and shrink and shiver into huts,
  Black specks amid a waste of dreary sand,
  Low-built, mud-wall'd, Barbarian settlement,
  How chang'd from this fair City!"

                                    Thus far the Spirit:
  Then parted Heavenward on the wing: and I
  Was left alone on Calpe, and the Moon
  Had fallen from the night, and all was dark!


[Footnote 1: Be ye perfect even as your Father in Heaven is perfect.]







BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE POEMS OF 1842.


1830. Poems, chiefly Lyrical, by Alfred Tennyson. London: Effingham
      Wilson, 1830.

1832. Poems by Alfred Tennyson. London: Edward Moxon, 1833 (published at
      the end of 1832).

1837. In the 'Keepsake', an Annual, appears the poem "St. Agnes' Eve,"
      afterwards republished in the Poems of 1842, as "St. Agnes".

1842. 'Morte d'Arthur, Dora, and other Idyls'. (Privately printed for
      the Author.)

1842. Poems. In 2 vols. By Alfred Tennyson. London: Edward Moxon, Dover
      Street, 1842.

1843. 'Id'. 2 vols. Second Edition, 1843.

1845. 'Id'. Third Edition, 1845.

1846. 'Id'. Fourth Edition, 1846.

1848. 'Id.' Fifth Edition, 1848.

1849. In the 'Examiner' for 24th March, 1849, appeared the poem "To----,
      after reading a Life and Letters," republished in the Sixth Edition of
the Poems.

1850. Poems. 2 vols. Sixth Edition, 1850.

1851. In the 'Keepsake' appeared the verses: "Come not when I am Dead,"
      reprinted in the Seventh Edition of the Poems.

1851. Poems. Seventh Edition. London: Edward Moxon, 1851. i vol.

1853. 'Id'. Eighth Edition, 1853. i vol.

1857. Poems by Alfred Tennyson, Poet Laureate. With engraving of bust by
      Woolner, and illustrations by Thomas Creswick, John Everett
      Millais, William Holman Hunt, William Macready, John Calcott
      Horsley, Dante Gabriel Rosetti, Clarkson Stanfield, and Daniel
      Maclise. Pp. xiii., 375. London: Edward Moxon, 1857. 8vo.

1862. Poems MDCCCXXX, MDCCCXXXIII. Privately printed. This was
      suppressed by an injunction in Chancery. It was compiled and
      edited by Mr. Dykes Campbell for Camden Hotten.

1863. Poems by Alfred Tennyson, D.C.L. I vol. Edward Moxon, 1863.
      (Recorded as being the Fifteenth Edition, but I have not seen any
      Edition between 1857 and this one.)

1865. A selection from the works of Alfred Tennyson. Poet Laureate.
      (Moxon's Miniature Poets.) Edward Moxon & Co., 1865. Containing
      several minor alterations, and an additional couplet in the
      "Vision of Sin".

1869. Pocket Edition of Complete Poems. Strahan, 1869. (I have not seen
      this, but it is entered in the London Catalogue.)

1870. 'Id'. Post-Octavo, 1870 (entered in the London Catalogue).

1871. Miniature or Cabinet Edition of the Complete Works of Alfred
      Tennyson, printed by Whittaker, Strahan & Co., 1871.

1871. Complete Works. Edited by A. C. Loffalt. Rotterdam: 12mo, 1871.

1872. Imperial Library Edition of the Works of Alfred Tennyson. In 6
      vols. Strahan & Co., 1872.

1874-7. The Works of Alfred Tennyson. Cabinet edition in 10 vols.
        H.S.King. London: 1874-1877.

1875. The Poetical Works of Alfred Tennyson. 6 vols. H. S. King.
      1875-77.

1875. The Author's Edition in 4 vols. Henry S. King & Co. 1875.

1877. The Works of Alfred Tennyson. H. S. King. 7 vols. 1877, and in the
      same year by the same publisher the completion of the Miniature
      Edition.

1881. The Works of Alfred Tennyson. With portrait and illustrations,
      1881. C. Kegan Paul & Co.

1884. The Works of Alfred Tennyson. Macmillan & Co., 1884. In the same
      year a school edition in four parts by the same publishers.

1885. The Poetical Works of Alfred Tennyson. Complete Edition. New York:
      T. Y. Cowell & Co., 1885.

1886. The Poetical Works of Alfred Tennyson. In 10 vols. Macmillan &
      Co., 1886.

1886-91. The Poetical Works of Alfred Tennyson. 12 vols. (The dramatic
         works in 4 vols.) 16 vols. 1886-91.

1889. The Works of Alfred Tennyson. London: Macmillan & Co., 1889.

1890. The Poetical Works of Alfred Tennyson. Pocket Edition, without the
      plays. London: Macmillan & Co., 1890.

1890. Selections. Edited by Rowe and Webb (frequently reprinted).

1891. Complete Works, i vol. Reprinted ten times between this date and
      November, 1899.

1891. Poetical Works. Miniature Edition. 12 vols.

1891. Tennyson for the Young, i vol. With introduction and notes by
      Alfred Ainger, reprinted six times between this date and 1899.

1893. Poems. Illustrated. I vol. (This contains the poems and
      illustrations of the Illustrated Edition published in 1857.)

1894. The Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Poet Laureate, with last
      alterations, etc. London: Macmillan & Co., 1894.

1895. The Poetical Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson (without the plays).
      (The People's Edition.) London: Macmillan & Co., 1895.

1896. 'Id.' Pocket Edition.

1898. The Life and Works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson. (Edition de Luxe.) 12
      vols. Macmillan & Co., 1898.

1899. The Works of Alfred Tennyson. 8 vols.

1899. Poetical Works of Alfred Lord Tennyson. Globe Edition. Macmillan.
      This Edition was supplied to Messrs. Warne and published by them
      as the Albion Edition.

1899. Poems including 'In Memoriam'. Popular Edition, 1 vol.






THE LAST TOURNAMENT

BY

ALFRED TENNYSON, D.C.L.,

POET-LAUREATE

AUTHOR'S EDITION

FROM ADVANCE SHEETS

This poem forms one of the "Idyls of the King." Its place
is between "Pelleas" and "Guinevere."

BY ALFRED TENNYSON,

POET LAUREATE

   Dagonet, the fool, whom Gawain in his moods
 Had made mock-knight of Arthur's Table Round,
 At Camelot, high above the yellowing woods,
 Danced like a wither'd leaf before the Hall.
 And toward him from the Hall, with harp in hand,
 And from the crown thereof a carcanet
 Of ruby swaying to and fro, the prize
 Of Tristram in the jousts of yesterday,
 Came Tristram, saying, "Why skip ye so, Sir Fool?"

   For Arthur and Sir Lancelot riding once
 Far down beneath a winding wall of rock
 Heard a child wail. A stump of oak half-dead,
 From roots like some black coil of carven snakes
 Clutch'd at the crag, and started thro' mid-air
 Bearing an eagle's nest: and thro' the tree
 Rush'd ever a rainy wind, and thro' the wind
 Pierced ever a child's cry: and crag and tree
 Scaling, Sir Lancelot from the perilous nest,
 This ruby necklace thrice around her neck,
 And all unscarr'd from beak or talon, brought
 A maiden babe; which Arthur pitying took,
 Then gave it to his Queen to rear: the Queen
 But coldly acquiescing, in her white arms
 Received, and after loved it tenderly,
 And named it Nestling; so forgot herself
 A moment, and her cares; till that young life
 Being smitten in mid-heaven with mortal cold
 Past from her; and in time the carcanet
 Vext her with plaintive memories of the child:
 So she, delivering it to Arthur, said,
 "Take thou the jewels of this dead innocence,
 And make them, an thou wilt, a tourney-prize."

   To whom the King, "Peace to thine eagle-borne
 Dead nestling, and this honor after death,
 Following thy will! but, O my Queen, I muse
 Why ye not wear on arm, or neck, or zone,
 Those diamonds that I rescued from the tarn,
 And Lancelot won, methought, for thee to wear."

   "Would rather ye had let them fall," she cried,
 "Plunge and be lost--ill-fated as they were,
 A bitterness to me!--ye look amazed,
 Not knowing they were lost as soon as given--
 Slid from my hands, when I was leaning out
 Above the river--that unhappy child
 Past in her barge: but rosier luck will go
 With these rich jewels, seeing that they came
 Not from the skeleton of a brother-slayer,
 But the sweet body of a maiden babe.
 Perchance--who knows?--the purest of thy knights
 May win them for the purest of my maids."

   She ended, and the cry of a great jousts
 With trumpet-blowings ran on all the ways
 From Camelot in among the faded fields
 To furthest towers; and everywhere the knights
 Arm'd for a day of glory before the King.

   But on the hither side of that loud morn
 Into the hall stagger'd, his visage ribb'd
 From ear to ear with dogwhip-weals, his nose
 Bridge-broken, one eye out, and one hand off,
 And one with shatter'd fingers dangling lame,
 A churl, to whom indignantly the King,
 "My churl, for whom Christ died, what evil beast
 Hath drawn his claws athwart thy face? or fiend?
 Man was it who marr'd Heaven's image in thee thus?"

   Then, sputtering thro' the hedge of splinter'd teeth,
 Yet strangers to the tongue, and with blunt stump
 Pitch-blacken'd sawing the air, said the maim'd churl,
 "He took them and he drave them to his tower--
 Some hold he was a table-knight of thine--
 A hundred goodly ones--the Red Knight, he--

 "Lord, I was tending swine, and the Red Knight
 Brake in upon me and drave them to his tower;
 And when I call'd upon thy name as one
 That doest right by gentle and by churl,
 Maim'd me and maul'd, and would outright have slain,
 Save that he sware me to a message, saying--
 'Tell thou the King and all his liars, that I
 Have founded my Round Table in the North,
 And whatsoever his own knights have sworn
 My knights have sworn the counter to it--and say
 My tower is full of harlots, like his court,
 But mine are worthier, seeing they profess
 To be none other than themselves--and say
 My knights are all adulterers like his own,
 But mine are truer, seeing they profess
 To be none other; and say his hour is come,
 The heathen are upon him, his long lance
 Broken, and his Excalibur a straw.'"

   Then Arthur turn'd to Kay the seneschal,
 "Take thou my churl, and tend him curiously
 Like a king's heir, till all his hurts be whole.
 The heathen--but that ever-climbing wave,
 Hurl'd back again so often in empty foam,
 Hath lain for years at rest--and renegades,
 Thieves, bandits, leavings of confusion, whom
 The wholesome realm is purged of otherwhere,--
 Friends, thro' your manhood and your fealty,--now
 Make their last head like Satan in the North.
 My younger knights, new-made, in whom your flower
 Waits to be solid fruit of golden deeds,
 Move with me toward their quelling, which achieved,
 The loneliest ways are safe from shore to shore.
 But thou, Sir Lancelot, sitting in my place
 Enchair'd to-morrow, arbitrate the field;
 For wherefore shouldst thou care to mingle with it,
 Only to yield my Queen her own again?
 Speak, Lancelot, thou art silent: is it well?"

        *       *       *       *       *

   Thereto Sir Lancelot answer'd, "It is well:
 Yet better if the King abide, and leave
 The leading of his younger knights to me.
 Else, for the King has will'd it, it is well."

         *       *       *       *       *

   Then Arthur rose and Lancelot follow'd him,
 And while they stood without the doors, the King
 Turn'd to him saying, "Is it then so well?
 Or mine the blame that oft I seem as he
 Of whom was written, 'a sound is in his ears'--
 The foot that loiters, bidden go,--the glance
 That only seems half-loyal to command,--
 A manner somewhat fall'n from reverence--
 Or have I dream'd the bearing of our knights
 Tells of a manhood ever less and lower?
 Or whence the fear lest this my realm, uprear'd,
 By noble deeds at one with noble vows,
 From flat confusion and brute violences,
 Reel back into the beast, and be no more?"

        *       *       *       *       *

   He spoke, and taking all his younger knights,
 Down the slope city rode, and sharply turn'd
 North by the gate. In her high bower the Queen,
 Working a tapestry, lifted up her head,
 Watch'd her lord pass, and knew not that she sigh'd.
 Then ran across her memory the strange rhyme
 Of bygone Merlin, "Where is he who knows?
 From the great deep to the great deep he goes."

        *       *       *       *       *

   But when the morning of a tournament,
 By these in earnest those in mockery call'd
 The Tournament of the Dead Innocence,
 Brake with a wet wind blowing, Lancelot,
 Round whose sick head all night, like birds of prey,
 The words of Arthur flying shriek'd, arose,
 And down a streetway hung with folds of pure
 White samite, and by fountains running wine,
 Where children sat in white with cups of gold,
 Moved to the lists, and there, with slow sad steps
 Ascending, fill'd his double-dragon'd chair.

        *       *       *       *       *

   He glanced and saw the stately galleries,
 Dame, damsel, each thro' worship of their Queen
 White-robed in honor of the stainless child,
 And some with scatter'd jewels, like a bank
 Of maiden snow mingled with sparks of fire.
 He lookt but once, and veil'd his eyes again.

         *       *       *       *       *

   The sudden trumpet sounded as in a dream
 To ears but half-awaked, then one low roll
 Of Autumn thunder, and the jousts began:
 And ever the wind blew, and yellowing leaf
 And gloom and gleam, and shower and shorn plume
 Went down it. Sighing weariedly, as one
 Who sits and gazes on a faded fire,
 When all the goodlier guests are past away,
 Sat their great umpire, looking o'er the lists.
 He saw the laws that ruled the tournament
 Broken, but spake not; once, a knight cast down
 Before his throne of arbitration cursed
 The dead babe and the follies of the King;
 And once the laces of a helmet crack'd,
 And show'd him, like a vermin in its hole,
 Modred, a narrow face: anon he heard
 The voice that billow'd round the barriers roar
 An ocean-sounding welcome to one knight,
 But newly-enter'd, taller than the rest,
 And armor'd all in forest green, whereon
 There tript a hundred tiny silver deer,
 And wearing but a holly-spray for crest,
 With ever-scattering berries, and on shield
 A spear, a harp, a bugle--Tristram--late
 From overseas in Brittany return'd,
 And marriage with a princess of that realm,
 Isolt the White--Sir Tristram of the Woods--
 Whom Lancelot knew, had held sometime with pain
 His own against him, and now yearn'd to shake
 The burthen off his heart in one full shock
 With Tristram ev'n to death: his strong hands gript
 And dinted the gilt dragons right and left,
 Until he groan'd for wrath--so many of those,
 That ware their ladies' colors on the casque,
 Drew from before Sir Tristram to the bounds,
 And there with gibes and nickering mockeries
 Stood, while he mutter'd, "Craven chests! O shame!
 What faith have these in whom they sware to love?
 The glory of our Round Table is no more."

        *       *       *       *       *

   So Tristram won, and Lancelot gave, the gems,
 Not speaking other word than "Hast thou won?
 Art thou the purest, brother? See, the hand
 Wherewith thou takest this is red!" to whom
 Tristram, half plagued by Lancelot's languorous mood,
 Made answer, "Ay, but wherefore toss me this
 Like a dry bone cast to some hungry hound?
 Let be thy fair Queen's fantasy. Strength of heart
 And might of limb, but mainly use and skill,
 Are winners in this pastime of our King.
 My hand--belike the lance hath dript upon it--
 No blood of mine, I trow; but O chief knight,
 Right arm of Arthur in the battlefield,
 Great brother, thou nor I have made the world;
 Be happy in thy fair Queen as I in mine."
 And Tristram round the gallery made his horse
 Caracole; then bow'd his homage, bluntly saying,
 "Fair damsels, each to him who worships each
 Sole Queen of Beauty and of love, behold
 This day my Queen of Beauty is not here."
 Then most of these were mute, some anger'd, one
 Murmuring "All courtesy is dead," and one,
 "The glory of our Round Table is no more."

   Then fell thick rain, plume droopt and mantle clung,
 And pettish cries awoke, and the wan day
 Went glooming down in wet and weariness:
 But under her black brows a swarthy dame
 Laught shrilly, crying "Praise the patient saints,
 Our one white day of Innocence hath past,
 Tho' somewhat draggled at the skirt. So be it.
 The snowdrop only, flow'ring thro' the year,
 Would make the world as blank as wintertide.
 Come--let us comfort their sad eyes, our Queen's
 And Lancelot's, at this night's solemnity
 With all the kindlier colors of the field."

        *       *       *       *       *

   So dame and damsel glitter'd at the feast
 Variously gay: for he that tells the tale
 Liken'd them, saying "as when an hour of cold
 Falls on the mountain in midsummer snows,
 And all the purple slopes of mountain flowers
 Pass under white, till the warm hour returns
 With veer of wind, and all are flowers again;"
 So dame and damsel cast the simple white,
 And glowing in all colors, the live grass,
 Rose-campion, bluebell, kingcup, poppy, glanced
 About the revels, and with mirth so loud
 Beyond all use, that, half-amazed, the Queen,
 And wroth at Tristram and the lawless jousts,
 Brake up their sports, then slowly to her bower
 Parted, and in her bosom pain was lord.

        *       *       *       *       *

   And little Dagonet on the morrow morn,
 High over all the yellowing Autumn-tide,
 Danced like a wither'd leaf before the hall.
 Then Tristram saying, "Why skip ye so, Sir Fool?"
 Wheel'd round on either heel, Dagonet replied,
 "Belike for lack of wiser company;
 Or being fool, and seeing too much wit
 Makes the world rotten, why, belike I skip
 To know myself the wisest knight of all."
 "Ay, fool," said Tristram, "but 'tis eating dry
 To dance without a catch, a roundelay
 To dance to." Then he twangled on his harp,
 And while he twangled little Dagonet stood,
 Quiet as any water-sodden log
 Stay'd in the wandering warble of a brook;
 But when the twangling ended, skipt again;
 Then being ask'd, "Why skipt ye not, Sir Fool?"
 Made answer, "I had liefer twenty years
 Skip to the broken music of my brains
 Than any broken music ye can make."
 Then Tristram, waiting for the quip to come,
 "Good now, what music have I broken, fool?"
 And little Dagonet, skipping, "Arthur, the king's;
 For when thou playest that air with Queen Isolt,
 Thou makest broken music with thy bride,
 Her daintier namesake down in Brittany--
 And so thou breakest Arthur's music too."
 "Save for that broken music in thy brains,
 Sir Fool," said Tristram, "I would break thy head.
 Fool, I came late, the heathen wars were o'er,
 The life had flown, we sware but by the shell--
 I am but a fool to reason with a fool
 Come, thou art crabb'd and sour: but lean me down,
 Sir Dagonet, one of thy long asses' ears,
 And hearken if my music be not true.

   "'Free love--free field--we love but while we may:
 The woods are hush'd, their music is no more:
 The leaf is dead, the yearning past away:
 New leaf, new life--the days of frost are o'er:
 New life, new love to suit the newer day:
 New loves are sweet as those that went before:
 Free love,--free field--we love but while we may.'

   "Ye might have moved slow-measure to my tune,
 Not stood stockstill. I made it in the woods,
 And found it ring as true as tested gold."

   But Dagonet with one foot poised in his hand,
 "Friend, did ye mark that fountain yesterday
 Made to run wine?--but this had run itself
 All out like a long life to a sour end--
 And them that round it sat with golden cups
 To hand the wine to whomsoever came--
 The twelve small damosels white as Innocence,

   "In honor of poor Innocence the babe,
 Who left the gems which Innocence the Queen
 Lent to the King, and Innocence the King
 Gave for a prize--and one of those white slips
 Handed her cup and piped, the pretty one,
 'Drink, drink, Sir Fool,' and thereupon I drank,
 Spat--pish--the cup was gold, the draught was mud."
 And Tristram, "Was it muddier than thy gibes?
 Is all the laughter gone dead out of thee?--
 Not marking how the knighthood mock thee, fool--
 'Fear God: honor the king--his one true knight--
 Sole follower of the vows'--for here be they
 Who knew thee swine enow before I came,
 Smuttier than blasted grain: but when the King
 Had made thee fool, thy vanity so shot up
 It frighted all free fool from out thy heart;
 Which left thee less than fool, and less than swine,
 A naked aught--yet swine I hold thee still,
 For I have flung thee pearls, and find thee swine."

   And little Dagonet mincing with his feet,
 "Knight, an ye fling those rubies round my neck
 In lieu of hers, I'll hold thou hast some touch
 Of music, since I care not for thy pearls.
 Swine? I have wallow'd, I have wash'd--the world
 Is flesh and shadow--I have had my day.
 The dirty nurse, Experience, in her kind
 Hath foul'd me--an I wallow'd, then I wash'd--
 I have had my day and my philosophies--
 And thank the Lord I am King Arthur's fool.
 Swine, say ye? swine, goats, asses, rams and geese
 Troop'd round a Paynim harper once, who thrumm'd
 On such a wire as musically as thou
 Some such fine song--but never a king's fool."

   And Tristram, "Then were swine, goats, asses, geese
 The wiser fools, seeing thy Paynim bard
 Had such a mastery of his mystery
 That he could harp his wife up out of Hell."

   Then Dagonet, turning on the ball of his foot,
 "And whither harp'st thou thine? down! and thyself
 Down! and two more: a helpful harper thou,
 That harpest downward! Dost thou know the star
 We call the harp of Arthur up in heaven?"

   And Tristram, "Ay, Sir Fool, for when our King
 Was victor wellnigh day by day, the knights,
 Glorying in each new glory, set his name
 High on all hills, and in the signs of heaven."

   And Dagonet answer'd, "Ay, and when the land
 Was freed, and the Queen false, ye set yourself
 To babble about him, all to show your wit--
 And whether he were king by courtesy,
 Or king by right--and so went harping down
 The black king's highway, got so far, and grew
 So witty, that ye play'd at ducks and drakes
 With Arthur's vows on the great lake of fire.
 Tuwhoo! do ye see it? do ye see the star?"
 "Nay, fool," said Tristram, "not in open day."
 And Dagonet, "Nay, nor will: I see it and hear.
 It makes a silent music up in heaven,
 And I, and Arthur and the angels hear,
 And then we skip." "Lo, fool," he said, "ye talk
 Fool's treason: is the king thy brother fool?"
 Then little Dagonet clapt his hands and shrill'd,
 "Ay, ay, my brother fool, the king of fools*!
 Conceits himself as God that he can make
 Figs out of thistles, silk from bristles, milk
 From burning spurge, honey from hornet-combs,
 And men from beasts.--Long live the king of fools!"

   And down the city Dagonet danced away.
 But thro' the slowly-mellowing avenues
 And solitary passes of the wood
 Rode Tristram toward Lyonesse and the west.
 Before him fled the face of Queen Isolt
 With ruby-circled neck, but evermore
 Past, as a rustle or twitter in the wood
 Made dull his inner, keen his outer eye
 For all that walk'd, or crept, or perched, or flew.
 Anon the face, as, when a gust hath blown,
 Unruffling waters re-collect the shape
 Of one that in them sees himself, return'd;
 But at the slot or fewmets of a deer,
 Or ev'n a fall'n feather, vanish'd again.

   So on for all that day from lawn to lawn
 Thro' many a league-long bower he rode. At length
 A lodge of intertwisted beechen-boughs
 Furze-cramm'd, and bracken-rooft, the which himself
 Built for a summer day with Queen Isolt
 Against a shower, dark in the golden grove
 Appearing, sent his fancy back to where
 She lived a moon in that low lodge with him:
 Till Mark her lord had past, the Cornish king,
 With six or seven, when Tristram was away,
 And snatch'd her thence; yet dreading worse than shame
 Her warrior Tristram, spake not any word,
 But bode his hour, devising wretchedness.

   And now that desert lodge to Tristram lookt
 So sweet, that, halting, in he past, and sank
 Down on a drift of foliage random-blown;
 But could not rest for musing how to smooth
 And sleek his marriage over to the Queen.
 Perchance in lone Tintagil far from all
 The tonguesters of the court she had not heard.
 But then what folly had sent him overseas
 After she left him lonely here? a name?
 Was it the name of one in Brittany,
 Isolt, the daughter of the King? "Isolt
 Of the white hands" they call'd her: the sweet name
 Allured him first, and then the maid herself,
 Who served him well with those white hands of hers,
 And loved him well, until himself had thought
 He loved her also, wedded easily,
 But left her all as easily, and return'd.
 The black-blue Irish hair and Irish eyes
 Had drawn him home--what marvel? then he laid
 His brows upon the drifted leaf and dream'd.

   He seem'd to pace the strand of Brittany
 Between Isolt of Britain and his bride,
 And show'd them both the ruby-chain, and both
 Began to struggle for it, till his Queen
 Graspt it so hard, that all her hand was red.
 Then cried the Breton, "Look, her hand is red!
 These be no rubies, this is frozen blood,
 And melts within her hand--her hand is hot
 With ill desires, but this I gave thee, look,
 Is all as cool and white as any flower."
 Follow'd a rush of eagle's wings, and then
 A whimpering of the spirit of the child,
 Because the twain had spoil'd her carcanet.

   He dream'd; but Arthur with a hundred spears
 Rode far, till o'er the illimitable reed,
 And many a glancing plash and sallowy isle,
 The wide-wing'd sunset of the misty marsh
 Glared on a huge machicolated tower
 That stood with open doors, whereout was roll'd
 A roar of riot, as from men secure
 Amid their marshes, ruffians at their ease
 Among their harlot-brides, an evil song.
 "Lo there," said one of Arthur's youth, for there,
 High on a grim dead tree before the tower,
 A goodly brother of The Table Round
 Swung by the neck: and on the boughs a shield
 Showing a shower of blood in a field noir,
 And therebeside a horn, inflamed the knights
 At that dishonor done the gilded spur,
 Till each would clash the shield, and blow the horn.
 But Arthur waved them back: alone he rode.
 Then at the dry harsh roar of the great horn,
 That sent the face of all the marsh aloft

   An ever upward-rushing storm and cloud
 Of shriek and plume, the Red Knight heard, and all,
 Even to tipmost lance and topmost helm,
 In blood-red armor sallying, howl'd to the King,
 "The teeth of Hell flay bare and gnash thee flat!--
 Lo! art thou not that eunuch-hearted King
 Who fain had clipt free manhood from the world--
 The woman-worshipper? Yea, God's curse, and I!
 Slain was the brother of my paramour
 By a knight of thine, and I that heard her whine
 And snivel, being eunuch-hearted too,
 Sware by the scorpion-worm that twists in hell,
 And stings itself to everlasting death,
 To hang whatever knight of thine I fought
 And tumbled. Art thou King?--Look to thy life!"
 He ended: Arthur knew the voice; the face
 Wellnigh was helmet-hidden, and the name
 Went wandering somewhere darkling in his mind.
 And Arthur deign'd not use of word or sword,
 But let the drunkard, as he stretch'd from horse
 To strike him, overbalancing his bulk,
 Down from the causeway heavily to the swamp
 Fall, as the crest of some slow-arching wave
 Heard in dead night along that table-shore
 Drops flat, and after the great waters break
 Whitening for half a league, and thin themselves
 Far over sands marbled with moon and cloud.
 From less and less to nothing; thus he fell
 Head-heavy, while the knights, who watch'd him, roar'd
 And shouted and leapt down upon the fall'n;
 There trampled out his face from being known,
 And sank his head in mire, and slimed themselves:
 Nor heard the King for their own cries, but sprang
 Thro' open doors, and swording right and left
 Men, women, on their sodden faces, hurl'd
 The tables over and the wines, and slew
 Till all the rafters rang with woman-yells,
 And all the pavement stream'd with massacre:
 Then, yell with yell echoing, they fired the tower,
 Which half that autumn night, like the live North,
 Red-pulsing up thro' Alioth and Alcor,
 Made all above it, and a hundred meres
 About it, as the water Moab saw
 Come round by the East, and out beyond them flush'd
 The long low dune, and lazy-plunging sea.

   So all the ways were safe from shore to shore,
 But in the heart of Arthur pain was lord.
 Then out of Tristram waking the red dream
 Fled with a shout, and that low lodge return'd,
 Mid-forest, and the wind among the boughs.
 He whistled his good warhorse left to graze
 Among the forest greens, vaulted upon him,
 And rode beneath an ever-showering leaf,
 Till one lone woman, weeping near a cross,
 Stay'd him, "Why weep ye?" "Lord," she said, "my man
 Hath left me or is dead;" whereon he thought--
 "What an she hate me now? I would not this.
 What an she love me still? I would not that.
 I know not what I would"--but said to her,--
 "Yet weep not thou, lest, if thy mate return,
 He find thy favor changed and love thee not"--
 Then pressing day by day thro' Lyonesse
 Last in a roky hollow, belling, heard
 The hounds of Mark, and felt the goodly hounds
 Yelp at his heart, but, turning, past and gain'd
 Tintagil, half in sea, and high on land,
 A crown of towers.

   Down in a casement sat,
 A low sea-sunset glorying round her hair
 And glossy-throated grace, Isolt the Queen.
 And when she heard the feet of Tristram grind
 The spiring stone that scaled about her tower,
 Flush'd, started, met him at the doors, and there
 Belted his body with her white embrace,
 Crying aloud, "Not Mark--not Mark, my soul!
 The footstep flutter'd me at first: not he:
 Catlike thro' his own castle steals my Mark,
 But warrior-wise thou stridest through his halls
 Who hates thee, as I him--ev'n to the death.
 My soul, I felt my hatred for my Mark
 Quicken within me, and knew that thou wert nigh."
 To whom Sir Tristram smiling, "I am here.
 Let be thy Mark, seeing he is not thine."

   And drawing somewhat backward she replied,
 "Can he be wrong'd who is not ev'n his own,
 But save for dread of thee had beaten me,
 Scratch'd, bitten, blinded, marr'd me somehow--Mark?
 What rights are his that dare not strike for them?
 Not lift a hand--not, tho' he found me thus!
 But hearken, have ye met him? hence he went
 To-day for three days' hunting--as he said--
 And so returns belike within an hour.
 Mark's way, my soul!--but eat not thou with him,
 Because he hates thee even more than fears;
 Nor drink: and when thou passest any wood
 Close visor, lest an arrow from the bush
 Should leave me all alone with Mark and hell.
 My God, the measure of my hate for Mark
 Is as the measure of my love for thee."

   So, pluck'd one way by hate and one by love,
 Drain'd of her force, again she sat, and spake
 To Tristram, as he knelt before her, saying,
 "O hunter, and O blower of the horn,
 Harper, and thou hast been a rover too,
 For, ere I mated with my shambling king,
 Ye twain had fallen out about the bride
 Of one--his name is out of me--the prize,
 If prize she were--(what marvel--she could see)--
 Thine, friend; and ever since my craven seeks
 To wreck thee villanously: but, O Sir Knight,
 What dame or damsel have ye kneeled to last?"

   And Tristram, "Last to my Queen Paramount,
 Here now to my Queen Paramount of love,
 And loveliness, ay, lovelier than when first
 Her light feet fell on our rough Lyonesse,
 Sailing from Ireland."

   Softly laugh'd Isolt,
 "Flatter me not, for hath not our great Queen
 My dole of beauty trebled?" and he said,
 "Her beauty is her beauty, and thine thine,
 And thine is more to me--soft, gracious, kind--
 Save when thy Mark is kindled on thy lips
 Most gracious; but she, haughty, ev'n to him,
 Lancelot; for I have seen him wan enow
 To make one doubt if ever the great Queen
 Have yielded him her love."

   To whom Isolt,
 "Ah then, false hunter and false harper, thou
 Who brakest thro' the scruple of my bond,
 Calling me thy white hind, and saying to me
 That Guinevere had sinned against the highest,
 And I--misyoked with such a want of man--
 That I could hardly sin against the lowest."

   He answer'd, "O my soul, be comforted!
 If this be sweet, to sin in leading-strings,
 If here be comfort, and if ours be sin,
 Crown'd warrant had we for the crowning sin
 That made us happy: but how ye greet me--fear
 And fault and doubt--no word of that fond tale--
 Thy deep heart-yearnings, thy sweet memories
 Of Tristram in that year he was away."

   And, saddening on the sudden, spake Isolt,
 "I had forgotten all in my strong joy
 To see thee--yearnings?--ay! for, hour by hour,
 Here in the never-ended afternoon,
 O sweeter than all memories of thee,
 Deeper than any yearnings after thee
 Seem'd those far-rolling, westward-smiling seas,
 Watched from this tower. Isolt of Britain dash'd
 Before Isolt of Brittany on the strand,
 Would that have chill'd her bride-kiss? Wedded her?
 Fought in her father's battles? wounded there?
 The King was all fulfill'd with gratefulness,
 And she, my namesake of the hands, that heal'd
 Thy hurt and heart with unguent and caress--
 Well--can I wish her any huger wrong
 Than having known thee? her too hast thou left
 To pine and waste in those sweet memories?
 O were I not my Mark's, by whom all men
 Are noble, I should hate thee more than love."

   And Tristram, fondling her light hands, replied,
 "Grace, Queen, for being loved: she loved me well.
 Did I love her? the name at least I loved.
 Isolt?--I fought his battles, for Isolt!
 The night was dark; the true star set. Isolt!
 The name was ruler of the dark----Isolt?
 Care not for her! patient, and prayerful, meek,
 Pale-blooded, she will yield herself to God."
 And Isolt answer'd, "Yea, and why not I?
 Mine is the larger need, who am not meek,
 Pale-blooded, prayerful. Let me tell thee now.
 Here one black, mute midsummer night I sat
 Lonely, but musing on thee, wondering where,
 Murmuring a light song I had heard thee sing,
 And once or twice I spake thy name aloud.
 Then flash'd a levin-brand; and near me stood,
 In fuming sulphur blue and green, a fiend--
 Mark's way to steal behind one in the dark--
 For there was Mark: 'He has wedded her,' he said,
 Not said, but hiss'd it: then this crown of towers
 So shook to such a roar of all the sky,
 That here in utter dark I swoon'd away,
 And woke again in utter dark, and cried,
 'I will flee hence and give myself to God'--
 And thou wert lying in thy new leman's arms."

   Then Tristram, ever dallying with her hand,
 "May God be with thee, sweet, when old and gray,
 And past desire!" a saying that anger'd her.
 "'May God be with thee, sweet, when thou art old,
 And sweet no more to me!' I need Him now.
 For when had Lancelot utter'd aught so gross
 Ev'n to the swineherd's malkin in the mast?
 The greater man, the greater courtesy.
 But thou, thro' ever harrying thy wild beasts--
 Save that to touch a harp, tilt with a lance
 Becomes thee well--art grown wild beast thyself.
 How darest thou, if lover, push me even
 In fancy from thy side, and set me far
 In the gray distance, half a life away,
 Her to be loved no more? Unsay it, unswear!
 Flatter me rather, seeing me so weak,
 Broken with Mark and hate and solitude,
 Thy marriage and mine own, that I should suck
 Lies like sweet wines: lie to me: I believe.
 Will ye not lie? not swear, as there ye kneel,
 And solemnly as when ye sware to him,
 The man of men, our King--My God, the power
 Was once in vows when men believed the King!
 They lied not then, who sware, and thro' their vows
 The King prevailing made his realm:--I say,
 Swear to me thou wilt love me ev'n when old,
 Gray-haired, and past desire, and in despair."

   Then Tristram, pacing moodily up and down,
 "Vows! did ye keep the vow ye made to Mark
 More than I mine? Lied, say ye? Nay, but learnt,
 The vow that binds too strictly snaps itself--
 My knighthood taught me this--ay, being snapt--
 We run more counter to the soul thereof
 Than had we never sworn. I swear no more.
 I swore to the great King, and am forsworn.
 For once--ev'n to the height--I honor'd him.
 'Man, is he man at all?' methought, when first
 I rode from our rough Lyonesse, and beheld
 That victor of the Pagan throned in hall--
 His hair, a sun that ray'd from off a brow
 Like hillsnow high in heaven, the steel-blue eyes,
 The golden beard that clothed his lips with light--
 Moreover, that weird legend of his birth,
 With Merlin's mystic babble about his end,
 Amazed me; then, his foot was on a stool
 Shaped as a dragon; he seem'd to me no man,
 But Michael trampling Satan; so I sware,
 Being amazed: but this went by--the vows!
 O ay--the wholesome madness of an hour--
 They served their use, their time; for every knight
 Believed himself a greater than himself,
 And every follower eyed him as a God;
 Till he, being lifted up beyond himself,
 Did mightier deeds than elsewise he had done,
 And so the realm was made; but then their vows--
 First mainly thro' that sullying of our Queen--
 Began to gall the knighthood, asking whence
 Had Arthur right to bind them to himself?
 Dropt down from heaven? wash'd up from out the deep?
 They fail'd to trace him thro' the flesh and blood
 Of our old Kings: whence then? a doubtful lord
 To bind them by inviolable vows,
 Which flesh and blood perforce would violate:
 For feel this arm of mine--the tide within
 Red with free chase and heather-scented air,
 Pulsing full man; can Arthur make me pure
 As any maiden child? lock up my tongue
 From uttering freely what I freely hear?
 Bind me to one? The great world laughs at it.
 And worldling of the world am I, and know
 The ptarmigan that whitens ere his hour
 Wooes his own end; we are not angels here
 Nor shall be: vows--I am woodman of the woods,
 And hear the garnet-headed yaffingale
 Mock them: my soul, we love but while we may;
 And therefore is my love so large for thee,
 Seeing it is not bounded save by love."

   Here ending, he moved toward her, and she said,
 "Good: an I turn'd away my love for thee
 To some one thrice as courteous as thyself--
 For courtesy wins woman all as well
 As valor may--but he that closes both
 Is perfect, he is Lancelot--taller indeed,
 Rosier, and comelier, thou--but say I loved
 This knightliest of all knights, and cast thee back
 Thine own small saw 'We love but while we may,'
 Well then, what answer?"

   He that while she spake,
 Mindful of what he brought to adorn her with,
 The jewels, had let one finger lightly touch
 The warm white apple of her throat, replied,
 "Press this a little closer, sweet, until--
 Come, I am hunger'd and half-anger'd--meat,
 Wine, wine--and I will love thee to the death,
 And out beyond into the dream to come."

   So then, when both were brought to full accord,
 She rose, and set before him all he will'd;
 And after these had comforted the blood
 With meats and wines, and satiated their hearts--
 Now talking of their woodland paradise,
 The deer, the dews, the fern, the founts, the lawns;
 Now mocking at the much ungainliness,
 And craven shifts, and long crane legs of Mark--
 Then Tristram laughing caught the harp, and sang:

   "Ay, ay, O ay--the winds that bend the brier!
 A star in heaven, a star within the mere!
 Ay, ay, O ay--a star was my desire,
 And one was far apart, and one was near:
 Ay, ay, O ay--the winds that bow the grass!
 And one was water and one star was fire,
 And one will ever shine and one will pass.
 Ay, ay, O ay--the winds that move the mere."

   Then in the light's last glimmer Tristram show'd
 And swung the ruby carcanet. She cried,
 "The collar of some order, which our King
 Hath newly founded, all for thee, my soul,
 For thee, to yield thee grace beyond thy peers."
 "Not so, my Queen," he said, "but the red fruit
 Grown on a magic oak-tree in mid-heaven,
 And won by Tristram as a tourney-prize,
 And hither brought by Tristram for his last
 Love-offering and peace-offering unto thee."

   He rose, he turn'd, and flinging round her neck,
 Claspt it; but while he bow'd himself to lay
 Warm kisses in the hollow of her throat,
 Out of the dark, just as the lips had touch'd,
 Behind him rose a shadow and a shriek--
 "Mark's way," said Mark, and clove him thro' the brain.

   That night came Arthur home, and while he climb'd,
 All in a death-dumb autumn-dripping gloom,
 The stairway to the hall, and look'd and saw
 The great Queen's bower was dark,--about his feet
 A voice clung sobbing till he question'd it,
 "What art thou?" and the voice about his feet
 Sent up an answer, sobbing, "I am thy fool,
 And I shall never make thee smile again."



THE PRINCESS

by Alfred Lord Tennyson




PROLOGUE


   Sir Walter Vivian all a summer's day
   Gave his broad lawns until the set of sun
   Up to the people:  thither flocked at noon
   His tenants, wife and child, and thither half
   The neighbouring borough with their Institute
   Of which he was the patron.  I was there
   From college, visiting the son,--the son
   A Walter too,--with others of our set,
   Five others:  we were seven at Vivian-place.

        And me that morning Walter showed the house,
   Greek, set with busts:  from vases in the hall
   Flowers of all heavens, and lovelier than their names,
   Grew side by side; and on the pavement lay
   Carved stones of the Abbey-ruin in the park,
   Huge Ammonites, and the first bones of Time;
   And on the tables every clime and age
   Jumbled together; celts and calumets,
   Claymore and snowshoe, toys in lava, fans
   Of sandal, amber, ancient rosaries,
   Laborious orient ivory sphere in sphere,
   The cursed Malayan crease, and battle-clubs
   From the isles of palm:  and higher on the walls,
   Betwixt the monstrous horns of elk and deer,
   His own forefathers' arms and armour hung.

        And 'this' he said 'was Hugh's at Agincourt;
   And that was old Sir Ralph's at Ascalon:
   A good knight he! we keep a chronicle
   With all about him'--which he brought, and I
   Dived in a hoard of tales that dealt with knights,
   Half-legend, half-historic, counts and kings
   Who laid about them at their wills and died;
   And mixt with these, a lady, one that armed
   Her own fair head, and sallying through the gate,
   Had beat her foes with slaughter from her walls.

        'O miracle of women,' said the book,
   'O noble heart who, being strait-besieged
   By this wild king to force her to his wish,
   Nor bent, nor broke, nor shunned a soldier's death,
   But now when all was lost or seemed as lost--
   Her stature more than mortal in the burst
   Of sunrise, her arm lifted, eyes on fire--
   Brake with a blast of trumpets from the gate,
   And, falling on them like a thunderbolt,
   She trampled some beneath her horses' heels,
   And some were whelmed with missiles of the wall,
   And some were pushed with lances from the rock,
   And part were drowned within the whirling brook:
   O miracle of noble womanhood!'

        So sang the gallant glorious chronicle;
   And, I all rapt in this, 'Come out,' he said,
   'To the Abbey: there is Aunt Elizabeth
   And sister Lilia with the rest.'  We went
   (I kept the book and had my finger in it)
   Down through the park:  strange was the sight to me;
   For all the sloping pasture murmured, sown
   With happy faces and with holiday.
   There moved the multitude, a thousand heads:
   The patient leaders of their Institute
   Taught them with facts.  One reared a font of stone
   And drew, from butts of water on the slope,
   The fountain of the moment, playing, now
   A twisted snake, and now a rain of pearls,
   Or steep-up spout whereon the gilded ball
   Danced like a wisp:  and somewhat lower down
   A man with knobs and wires and vials fired
   A cannon:  Echo answered in her sleep
   From hollow fields:  and here were telescopes
   For azure views; and there a group of girls
   In circle waited, whom the electric shock
   Dislinked with shrieks and laughter:  round the lake
   A little clock-work steamer paddling plied
   And shook the lilies:  perched about the knolls
   A dozen angry models jetted steam:
   A petty railway ran:  a fire-balloon
   Rose gem-like up before the dusky groves
   And dropt a fairy parachute and past:
   And there through twenty posts of telegraph
   They flashed a saucy message to and fro
   Between the mimic stations; so that sport
   Went hand in hand with Science; otherwhere
   Pure sport; a herd of boys with clamour bowled
   And stumped the wicket; babies rolled about
   Like tumbled fruit in grass; and men and maids
   Arranged a country dance, and flew through light
   And shadow, while the twangling violin
   Struck up with Soldier-laddie, and overhead
   The broad ambrosial aisles of lofty lime
   Made noise with bees and breeze from end to end.

        Strange was the sight and smacking of the time;
   And long we gazed, but satiated at length
   Came to the ruins.  High-arched and ivy-claspt,
   Of finest Gothic lighter than a fire,
   Through one wide chasm of time and frost they gave
   The park, the crowd, the house; but all within
   The sward was trim as any garden lawn:
   And here we lit on Aunt Elizabeth,
   And Lilia with the rest, and lady friends
   From neighbour seats:  and there was Ralph himself,
   A broken statue propt against the wall,
   As gay as any.  Lilia, wild with sport,
   Half child half woman as she was, had wound
   A scarf of orange round the stony helm,
   And robed the shoulders in a rosy silk,
   That made the old warrior from his ivied nook
   Glow like a sunbeam:  near his tomb a feast
   Shone, silver-set; about it lay the guests,
   And there we joined them:  then the maiden Aunt
   Took this fair day for text, and from it preached
   An universal culture for the crowd,
   And all things great; but we, unworthier, told
   Of college:  he had climbed across the spikes,
   And he had squeezed himself betwixt the bars,
   And he had breathed the Proctor's dogs; and one
   Discussed his tutor, rough to common men,
   But honeying at the whisper of a lord;
   And one the Master, as a rogue in grain
   Veneered with sanctimonious theory.
        But while they talked, above their heads I saw
   The feudal warrior lady-clad; which brought
   My book to mind:  and opening this I read
   Of old Sir Ralph a page or two that rang
   With tilt and tourney; then the tale of her
   That drove her foes with slaughter from her walls,
   And much I praised her nobleness, and 'Where,'
   Asked Walter, patting Lilia's head (she lay
   Beside him) 'lives there such a woman now?'

        Quick answered Lilia 'There are thousands now
   Such women, but convention beats them down:
   It is but bringing up; no more than that:
   You men have done it:  how I hate you all!
   Ah, were I something great!  I wish I were
   Some might poetess, I would shame you then,
   That love to keep us children!  O I wish
   That I were some great princess, I would build
   Far off from men a college like a man's,
   And I would teach them all that men are taught;
   We are twice as quick!'  And here she shook aside
   The hand that played the patron with her curls.

        And one said smiling 'Pretty were the sight
   If our old halls could change their sex, and flaunt
   With prudes for proctors, dowagers for deans,
   And sweet girl-graduates in their golden hair.
   I think they should not wear our rusty gowns,
   But move as rich as Emperor-moths, or Ralph
   Who shines so in the corner; yet I fear,
   If there were many Lilias in the brood,
   However deep you might embower the nest,
   Some boy would spy it.'
                          At this upon the sward
   She tapt her tiny silken-sandaled foot:
   'That's your light way; but I would make it death
   For any male thing but to peep at us.'

        Petulant she spoke, and at herself she laughed;
   A rosebud set with little wilful thorns,
   And sweet as English air could make her, she:
   But Walter hailed a score of names upon her,
   And 'petty Ogress', and 'ungrateful Puss',
   And swore he longed at college, only longed,
   All else was well, for she-society.
   They boated and they cricketed; they talked
   At wine, in clubs, of art, of politics;
   They lost their weeks; they vext the souls of deans;
   They rode; they betted; made a hundred friends,
   And caught the blossom of the flying terms,
   But missed the mignonette of Vivian-place,
   The little hearth-flower Lilia.  Thus he spoke,
   Part banter, part affection.
                               'True,' she said,
   'We doubt not that.  O yes, you missed us much.
   I'll stake my ruby ring upon it you did.'

        She held it out; and as a parrot turns
   Up through gilt wires a crafty loving eye,
   And takes a lady's finger with all care,
   And bites it for true heart and not for harm,
   So he with Lilia's.  Daintily she shrieked
   And wrung it.  'Doubt my word again!' he said.
   'Come, listen! here is proof that you were missed:
   We seven stayed at Christmas up to read;
   And there we took one tutor as to read:
   The hard-grained Muses of the cube and square
   Were out of season:  never man, I think,
   So mouldered in a sinecure as he:
   For while our cloisters echoed frosty feet,
   And our long walks were stript as bare as brooms,
   We did but talk you over, pledge you all
   In wassail; often, like as many girls--
   Sick for the hollies and the yews of home--
   As many little trifling Lilias--played
   Charades and riddles as at Christmas here,
   And _what's my thought_ and _when_ and _where_ and _how_,
   As here at Christmas.'
                         She remembered that:
   A pleasant game, she thought:  she liked it more
   Than magic music, forfeits, all the rest.
   But these--what kind of tales did men tell men,
   She wondered, by themselves?
                               A half-disdain
   Perched on the pouted blossom of her lips:
   And Walter nodded at me; '_He_ began,
   The rest would follow, each in turn; and so
   We forged a sevenfold story.  Kind? what kind?
   Chimeras, crotchets, Christmas solecisms,
   Seven-headed monsters only made to kill
   Time by the fire in winter.'
                               'Kill him now,
   The tyrant! kill him in the summer too,'
   Said Lilia; 'Why not now?' the maiden Aunt.
   'Why not a summer's as a winter's tale?
   A tale for summer as befits the time,
   And something it should be to suit the place,
   Heroic, for a hero lies beneath,
   Grave, solemn!'
                  Walter warped his mouth at this
   To something so mock-solemn, that I laughed
   And Lilia woke with sudden-thrilling mirth
   An echo like a ghostly woodpecker,
   Hid in the ruins; till the maiden Aunt
   (A little sense of wrong had touched her face
   With colour) turned to me with 'As you will;
   Heroic if you will, or what you will,
   Or be yourself you hero if you will.'

        'Take Lilia, then, for heroine' clamoured he,
   'And make her some great Princess, six feet high,
   Grand, epic, homicidal; and be you
   The Prince to win her!'
                          'Then follow me, the Prince,'
   I answered, 'each be hero in his turn!
   Seven and yet one, like shadows in a dream.--
   Heroic seems our Princess as required--
   But something made to suit with Time and place,
   A Gothic ruin and a Grecian house,
   A talk of college and of ladies' rights,
   A feudal knight in silken masquerade,
   And, yonder, shrieks and strange experiments
   For which the good Sir Ralph had burnt them all--
   This _were_ a medley! we should have him back
   Who told the "Winter's tale" to do it for us.
   No matter:  we will say whatever comes.
   And let the ladies sing us, if they will,
   From time to time, some ballad or a song
   To give us breathing-space.'
                               So I began,
   And the rest followed:  and the women sang
   Between the rougher voices of the men,
   Like linnets in the pauses of the wind:
   And here I give the story and the songs.




I



   A prince I was, blue-eyed, and fair in face,
   Of temper amorous, as the first of May,
   With lengths of yellow ringlet, like a girl,
   For on my cradle shone the Northern star.

        There lived an ancient legend in our house.
   Some sorcerer, whom a far-off grandsire burnt
   Because he cast no shadow, had foretold,
   Dying, that none of all our blood should know
   The shadow from the substance, and that one
   Should come to fight with shadows and to fall.
   For so, my mother said, the story ran.
   And, truly, waking dreams were, more or less,
   An old and strange affection of the house.
   Myself too had weird seizures, Heaven knows what:
   On a sudden in the midst of men and day,
   And while I walked and talked as heretofore,
   I seemed to move among a world of ghosts,
   And feel myself the shadow of a dream.
   Our great court-Galen poised his gilt-head cane,
   And pawed his beard, and muttered 'catalepsy'.
   My mother pitying made a thousand prayers;
   My mother was as mild as any saint,
   Half-canonized by all that looked on her,
   So gracious was her tact and tenderness:
   But my good father thought a king a king;
   He cared not for the affection of the house;
   He held his sceptre like a pedant's wand
   To lash offence, and with long arms and hands
   Reached out, and picked offenders from the mass
   For judgment.
                Now it chanced that I had been,
   While life was yet in bud and blade, bethrothed
   To one, a neighbouring Princess:  she to me
   Was proxy-wedded with a bootless calf
   At eight years old; and still from time to time
   Came murmurs of her beauty from the South,
   And of her brethren, youths of puissance;
   And still I wore her picture by my heart,
   And one dark tress; and all around them both
   Sweet thoughts would swarm as bees about their queen.

        But when the days drew nigh that I should wed,
   My father sent ambassadors with furs
   And jewels, gifts, to fetch her:  these brought back
   A present, a great labour of the loom;
   And therewithal an answer vague as wind:
   Besides, they saw the king; he took the gifts;
   He said there was a compact; that was true:
   But then she had a will; was he to blame?
   And maiden fancies; loved to live alone
   Among her women; certain, would not wed.

        That morning in the presence room I stood
   With Cyril and with Florian, my two friends:
   The first, a gentleman of broken means
   (His father's fault) but given to starts and bursts
   Of revel; and the last, my other heart,
   And almost my half-self, for still we moved
   Together, twinned as horse's ear and eye.

        Now, while they spake, I saw my father's face
   Grow long and troubled like a rising moon,
   Inflamed with wrath:  he started on his feet,
   Tore the king's letter, snowed it down, and rent
   The wonder of the loom through warp and woof
   From skirt to skirt; and at the last he sware
   That he would send a hundred thousand men,
   And bring her in a whirlwind:  then he chewed
   The thrice-turned cud of wrath, and cooked his spleen,
   Communing with his captains of the war.

        At last I spoke.  'My father, let me go.
   It cannot be but some gross error lies
   In this report, this answer of a king,
   Whom all men rate as kind and hospitable:
   Or, maybe, I myself, my bride once seen,
   Whate'er my grief to find her less than fame,
   May rue the bargain made.'  And Florian said:
   'I have a sister at the foreign court,
   Who moves about the Princess; she, you know,
   Who wedded with a nobleman from thence:
   He, dying lately, left her, as I hear,
   The lady of three castles in that land:
   Through her this matter might be sifted clean.'
   And Cyril whispered:  'Take me with you too.'
   Then laughing 'what, if these weird seizures come
   Upon you in those lands, and no one near
   To point you out the shadow from the truth!
   Take me:  I'll serve you better in a strait;
   I grate on rusty hinges here:'  but 'No!'
   Roared the rough king, 'you shall not; we ourself
   Will crush her pretty maiden fancies dead
   In iron gauntlets:  break the council up.'

        But when the council broke, I rose and past
   Through the wild woods that hung about the town;
   Found a still place, and plucked her likeness out;
   Laid it on flowers, and watched it lying bathed
   In the green gleam of dewy-tasselled trees:
   What were those fancies? wherefore break her troth?
   Proud looked the lips:  but while I meditated
   A wind arose and rushed upon the South,
   And shook the songs, the whispers, and the shrieks
   Of the wild woods together; and a Voice
   Went with it, 'Follow, follow, thou shalt win.'

        Then, ere the silver sickle of that month
   Became her golden shield, I stole from court
   With Cyril and with Florian, unperceived,
   Cat-footed through the town and half in dread
   To hear my father's clamour at our backs
   With Ho! from some bay-window shake the night;
   But all was quiet:  from the bastioned walls
   Like threaded spiders, one by one, we dropt,
   And flying reached the frontier:  then we crost
   To a livelier land; and so by tilth and grange,
   And vines, and blowing bosks of wilderness,
   We gained the mother city thick with towers,
   And in the imperial palace found the king.

        His name was Gama; cracked and small his voice,
   But bland the smile that like a wrinkling wind
   On glassy water drove his cheek in lines;
   A little dry old man, without a star,
   Not like a king:  three days he feasted us,
   And on the fourth I spake of why we came,
   And my bethrothed.  'You do us, Prince,' he said,
   Airing a snowy hand and signet gem,
   'All honour.  We remember love ourselves
   In our sweet youth:  there did a compact pass
   Long summers back, a kind of ceremony--
   I think the year in which our olives failed.
   I would you had her, Prince, with all my heart,
   With my full heart:  but there were widows here,
   Two widows, Lady Psyche, Lady Blanche;
   They fed her theories, in and out of place
   Maintaining that with equal husbandry
   The woman were an equal to the man.
   They harped on this; with this our banquets rang;
   Our dances broke and buzzed in knots of talk;
   Nothing but this; my very ears were hot
   To hear them:  knowledge, so my daughter held,
   Was all in all:  they had but been, she thought,
   As children; they must lose the child, assume
   The woman:  then, Sir, awful odes she wrote,
   Too awful, sure, for what they treated of,
   But all she is and does is awful; odes
   About this losing of the child; and rhymes
   And dismal lyrics, prophesying change
   Beyond all reason:  these the women sang;
   And they that know such things--I sought but peace;
   No critic I--would call them masterpieces:
   They mastered _me_.  At last she begged a boon,
   A certain summer-palace which I have
   Hard by your father's frontier:  I said no,
   Yet being an easy man, gave it:  and there,
   All wild to found an University
   For maidens, on the spur she fled; and more
   We know not,--only this:  they see no men,
   Not even her brother Arac, nor the twins
   Her brethren, though they love her, look upon her
   As on a kind of paragon; and I
   (Pardon me saying it) were much loth to breed
   Dispute betwixt myself and mine:  but since
   (And I confess with right) you think me bound
   In some sort, I can give you letters to her;
   And yet, to speak the truth, I rate your chance
   Almost at naked nothing.'
                            Thus the king;
   And I, though nettled that he seemed to slur
   With garrulous ease and oily courtesies
   Our formal compact, yet, not less (all frets
   But chafing me on fire to find my bride)
   Went forth again with both my friends.  We rode
   Many a long league back to the North.  At last
   From hills, that looked across a land of hope,
   We dropt with evening on a rustic town
   Set in a gleaming river's crescent-curve,
   Close at the boundary of the liberties;
   There, entered an old hostel, called mine host
   To council, plied him with his richest wines,
   And showed the late-writ letters of the king.

        He with a long low sibilation, stared
   As blank as death in marble; then exclaimed
   Averring it was clear against all rules
   For any man to go:  but as his brain
   Began to mellow, 'If the king,' he said,
   'Had given us letters, was he bound to speak?
   The king would bear him out;' and at the last--
   The summer of the vine in all his veins--
   'No doubt that we might make it worth his while.
   She once had past that way; he heard her speak;
   She scared him; life! he never saw the like;
   She looked as grand as doomsday and as grave:
   And he, he reverenced his liege-lady there;
   He always made a point to post with mares;
   His daughter and his housemaid were the boys:
   The land, he understood, for miles about
   Was tilled by women; all the swine were sows,
   And all the dogs'--
                      But while he jested thus,
   A thought flashed through me which I clothed in act,
   Remembering how we three presented Maid
   Or Nymph, or Goddess, at high tide of feast,
   In masque or pageant at my father's court.
   We sent mine host to purchase female gear;
   He brought it, and himself, a sight to shake
   The midriff of despair with laughter, holp
   To lace us up, till, each, in maiden plumes
   We rustled:  him we gave a costly bribe
   To guerdon silence, mounted our good steeds,
   And boldly ventured on the liberties.

        We followed up the river as we rode,
   And rode till midnight when the college lights
   Began to glitter firefly-like in copse
   And linden alley:  then we past an arch,
   Whereon a woman-statue rose with wings
   From four winged horses dark against the stars;
   And some inscription ran along the front,
   But deep in shadow:  further on we gained
   A little street half garden and half house;
   But scarce could hear each other speak for noise
   Of clocks and chimes, like silver hammers falling
   On silver anvils, and the splash and stir
   Of fountains spouted up and showering down
   In meshes of the jasmine and the rose:
   And all about us pealed the nightingale,
   Rapt in her song, and careless of the snare.

        There stood a bust of Pallas for a sign,
   By two sphere lamps blazoned like Heaven and Earth
   With constellation and with continent,
   Above an entry:  riding in, we called;
   A plump-armed Ostleress and a stable wench
   Came running at the call, and helped us down.
   Then stept a buxom hostess forth, and sailed,
   Full-blown, before us into rooms which gave
   Upon a pillared porch, the bases lost
   In laurel:  her we asked of that and this,
   And who were tutors.  'Lady Blanche' she said,
   'And Lady Psyche.'  'Which was prettiest,
   Best-natured?'  'Lady Psyche.'  'Hers are we,'
   One voice, we cried; and I sat down and wrote,
   In such a hand as when a field of corn
   Bows all its ears before the roaring East;

        'Three ladies of the Northern empire pray
   Your Highness would enroll them with your own,
   As Lady Psyche's pupils.'
                            This I sealed:
   The seal was Cupid bent above a scroll,
   And o'er his head Uranian Venus hung,
   And raised the blinding bandage from his eyes:
   I gave the letter to be sent with dawn;
   And then to bed, where half in doze I seemed
   To float about a glimmering night, and watch
   A full sea glazed with muffled moonlight, swell
   On some dark shore just seen that it was rich.


   As through the land at eve we went,
      And plucked the ripened ears,
   We fell out, my wife and I,
   O we fell out I know not why,
      And kissed again with tears.
   And blessings on the falling out
      That all the more endears,
   When we fall out with those we love
      And kiss again with tears!
   For when we came where lies the child
      We lost in other years,
   There above the little grave,
   O there above the little grave,
      We kissed again with tears.




II



   At break of day the College Portress came:
   She brought us Academic silks, in hue
   The lilac, with a silken hood to each,
   And zoned with gold; and now when these were on,
   And we as rich as moths from dusk cocoons,
   She, curtseying her obeisance, let us know
   The Princess Ida waited:  out we paced,
   I first, and following through the porch that sang
   All round with laurel, issued in a court
   Compact of lucid marbles, bossed with lengths
   Of classic frieze, with ample awnings gay
   Betwixt the pillars, and with great urns of flowers.
   The Muses and the Graces, grouped in threes,
   Enringed a billowing fountain in the midst;
   And here and there on lattice edges lay
   Or book or lute; but hastily we past,
   And up a flight of stairs into the hall.

        There at a board by tome and paper sat,
   With two tame leopards couched beside her throne,
   All beauty compassed in a female form,
   The Princess; liker to the inhabitant
   Of some clear planet close upon the Sun,
   Than our man's earth; such eyes were in her head,
   And so much grace and power, breathing down
   From over her arched brows, with every turn
   Lived through her to the tips of her long hands,
   And to her feet.  She rose her height, and said:

        'We give you welcome:  not without redound
   Of use and glory to yourselves ye come,
   The first-fruits of the stranger:  aftertime,
   And that full voice which circles round the grave,
   Will rank you nobly, mingled up with me.
   What! are the ladies of your land so tall?'
   'We of the court' said Cyril.  'From the court'
   She answered, 'then ye know the Prince?' and he:
   'The climax of his age! as though there were
   One rose in all the world, your Highness that,
   He worships your ideal:'  she replied:
   'We scarcely thought in our own hall to hear
   This barren verbiage, current among men,
   Light coin, the tinsel clink of compliment.
   Your flight from out your bookless wilds would seem
   As arguing love of knowledge and of power;
   Your language proves you still the child.  Indeed,
   We dream not of him:  when we set our hand
   To this great work, we purposed with ourself
   Never to wed.  You likewise will do well,
   Ladies, in entering here, to cast and fling
   The tricks, which make us toys of men, that so,
   Some future time, if so indeed you will,
   You may with those self-styled our lords ally
   Your fortunes, justlier balanced, scale with scale.'

        At those high words, we conscious of ourselves,
   Perused the matting:  then an officer
   Rose up, and read the statutes, such as these:
   Not for three years to correspond with home;
   Not for three years to cross the liberties;
   Not for three years to speak with any men;
   And many more, which hastily subscribed,
   We entered on the boards:  and 'Now,' she cried,
   'Ye are green wood, see ye warp not.  Look, our hall!
   Our statues!--not of those that men desire,
   Sleek Odalisques, or oracles of mode,
   Nor stunted squaws of West or East; but she
   That taught the Sabine how to rule, and she
   The foundress of the Babylonian wall,
   The Carian Artemisia strong in war,
   The Rhodope, that built the pyramid,
   Clelia, Cornelia, with the Palmyrene
   That fought Aurelian, and the Roman brows
   Of Agrippina.  Dwell with these, and lose
   Convention, since to look on noble forms
   Makes noble through the sensuous organism
   That which is higher.  O lift your natures up:
   Embrace our aims:  work out your freedom.  Girls,
   Knowledge is now no more a fountain sealed:
   Drink deep, until the habits of the slave,
   The sins of emptiness, gossip and spite
   And slander, die.  Better not be at all
   Than not be noble.  Leave us:  you may go:
   Today the Lady Psyche will harangue
   The fresh arrivals of the week before;
   For they press in from all the provinces,
   And fill the hive.'
                      She spoke, and bowing waved
   Dismissal:  back again we crost the court
   To Lady Psyche's:  as we entered in,
   There sat along the forms, like morning doves
   That sun their milky bosoms on the thatch,
   A patient range of pupils; she herself
   Erect behind a desk of satin-wood,
   A quick brunette, well-moulded, falcon-eyed,
   And on the hither side, or so she looked,
   Of twenty summers.  At her left, a child,
   In shining draperies, headed like a star,
   Her maiden babe, a double April old,
   Aglaïa slept.  We sat:  the Lady glanced:
   Then Florian, but not livelier than the dame
   That whispered 'Asses' ears', among the sedge,
   'My sister.'  'Comely, too, by all that's fair,'
   Said Cyril.  'Oh hush, hush!' and she began.

        'This world was once a fluid haze of light,
   Till toward the centre set the starry tides,
   And eddied into suns, that wheeling cast
   The planets:  then the monster, then the man;
   Tattooed or woaded, winter-clad in skins,
   Raw from the prime, and crushing down his mate;
   As yet we find in barbarous isles, and here
   Among the lowest.'
                     Thereupon she took
   A bird's-eye-view of all the ungracious past;
   Glanced at the legendary Amazon
   As emblematic of a nobler age;
   Appraised the Lycian custom, spoke of those
   That lay at wine with Lar and Lucumo;
   Ran down the Persian, Grecian, Roman lines
   Of empire, and the woman's state in each,
   How far from just; till warming with her theme
   She fulmined out her scorn of laws Salique
   And little-footed China, touched on Mahomet
   With much contempt, and came to chivalry:
   When some respect, however slight, was paid
   To woman, superstition all awry:
   However then commenced the dawn:  a beam
   Had slanted forward, falling in a land
   Of promise; fruit would follow.  Deep, indeed,
   Their debt of thanks to her who first had dared
   To leap the rotten pales of prejudice,
   Disyoke their necks from custom, and assert
   None lordlier than themselves but that which made
   Woman and man.  She had founded; they must build.
   Here might they learn whatever men were taught:
   Let them not fear:  some said their heads were less:
   Some men's were small; not they the least of men;
   For often fineness compensated size:
   Besides the brain was like the hand, and grew
   With using; thence the man's, if more was more;
   He took advantage of his strength to be
   First in the field:  some ages had been lost;
   But woman ripened earlier, and her life
   Was longer; and albeit their glorious names
   Were fewer, scattered stars, yet since in truth
   The highest is the measure of the man,
   And not the Kaffir, Hottentot, Malay,
   Nor those horn-handed breakers of the glebe,
   But Homer, Plato, Verulam; even so
   With woman:  and in arts of government
   Elizabeth and others; arts of war
   The peasant Joan and others; arts of grace
   Sappho and others vied with any man:
   And, last not least, she who had left her place,
   And bowed her state to them, that they might grow
   To use and power on this Oasis, lapt
   In the arms of leisure, sacred from the blight
   Of ancient influence and scorn.
                                  At last
   She rose upon a wind of prophecy
   Dilating on the future; 'everywhere
   Who heads in council, two beside the hearth,
   Two in the tangled business of the world,
   Two in the liberal offices of life,
   Two plummets dropt for one to sound the abyss
   Of science, and the secrets of the mind:
   Musician, painter, sculptor, critic, more:
   And everywhere the broad and bounteous Earth
   Should bear a double growth of those rare souls,
   Poets, whose thoughts enrich the blood of the world.'

        She ended here, and beckoned us:  the rest
   Parted; and, glowing full-faced welcome, she
   Began to address us, and was moving on
   In gratulation, till as when a boat
   Tacks, and the slackened sail flaps, all her voice
   Faltering and fluttering in her throat, she cried
   'My brother!'  'Well, my sister.'  'O,' she said,
   'What do you here? and in this dress? and these?
   Why who are these? a wolf within the fold!
   A pack of wolves! the Lord be gracious to me!
   A plot, a plot, a plot to ruin all!'
   'No plot, no plot,' he answered.  'Wretched boy,
   How saw you not the inscription on the gate,
   LET NO MAN ENTER IN ON PAIN OF DEATH?'
   'And if I had,' he answered, 'who could think
   The softer Adams of your Academe,
   O sister, Sirens though they be, were such
   As chanted on the blanching bones of men?'
   'But you will find it otherwise' she said.
   'You jest:  ill jesting with edge-tools! my vow
   Binds me to speak, and O that iron will,
   That axelike edge unturnable, our Head,
   The Princess.'  'Well then, Psyche, take my life,
   And nail me like a weasel on a grange
   For warning:  bury me beside the gate,
   And cut this epitaph above my bones;
   _Here lies a brother by a sister slain,
   All for the common good of womankind._'
   'Let me die too,' said Cyril, 'having seen
   And heard the Lady Psyche.'
                              I struck in:
   'Albeit so masked, Madam, I love the truth;
   Receive it; and in me behold the Prince
   Your countryman, affianced years ago
   To the Lady Ida:  here, for here she was,
   And thus (what other way was left) I came.'
   'O Sir, O Prince, I have no country; none;
   If any, this; but none.  Whate'er I was
   Disrooted, what I am is grafted here.
   Affianced, Sir? love-whispers may not breathe
   Within this vestal limit, and how should I,
   Who am not mine, say, live:  the thunderbolt
   Hangs silent; but prepare:  I speak; it falls.'
   'Yet pause,' I said: 'for that inscription there,
   I think no more of deadly lurks therein,
   Than in a clapper clapping in a garth,
   To scare the fowl from fruit:  if more there be,
   If more and acted on, what follows? war;
   Your own work marred:  for this your Academe,
   Whichever side be Victor, in the halloo
   Will topple to the trumpet down, and pass
   With all fair theories only made to gild
   A stormless summer.'  'Let the Princess judge
   Of that' she said:  'farewell, Sir--and to you.
   I shudder at the sequel, but I go.'

        'Are you that Lady Psyche,' I rejoined,
   'The fifth in line from that old Florian,
   Yet hangs his portrait in my father's hall
   (The gaunt old Baron with his beetle brow
   Sun-shaded in the heat of dusty fights)
   As he bestrode my Grandsire, when he fell,
   And all else fled? we point to it, and we say,
   The loyal warmth of Florian is not cold,
   But branches current yet in kindred veins.'
   'Are you that Psyche,' Florian added; 'she
   With whom I sang about the morning hills,
   Flung ball, flew kite, and raced the purple fly,
   And snared the squirrel of the glen? are you
   That Psyche, wont to bind my throbbing brow,
   To smoothe my pillow, mix the foaming draught
   Of fever, tell me pleasant tales, and read
   My sickness down to happy dreams? are you
   That brother-sister Psyche, both in one?
   You were that Psyche, but what are you now?'
   'You are that Psyche,' said Cyril, 'for whom
   I would be that for ever which I seem,
   Woman, if I might sit beside your feet,
   And glean your scattered sapience.'
                                      Then once more,
   'Are you that Lady Psyche,' I began,
   'That on her bridal morn before she past
   From all her old companions, when the kind
   Kissed her pale cheek, declared that ancient ties
   Would still be dear beyond the southern hills;
   That were there any of our people there
   In want or peril, there was one to hear
   And help them? look! for such are these and I.'
   'Are you that Psyche,' Florian asked, 'to whom,
   In gentler days, your arrow-wounded fawn
   Came flying while you sat beside the well?
   The creature laid his muzzle on your lap,
   And sobbed, and you sobbed with it, and the blood
   Was sprinkled on your kirtle, and you wept.
   That was fawn's blood, not brother's, yet you wept.
   O by the bright head of my little niece,
   You were that Psyche, and what are you now?'
   'You are that Psyche,' Cyril said again,
   'The mother of the sweetest little maid,
   That ever crowed for kisses.'
                                'Out upon it!'
   She answered, 'peace! and why should I not play
   The Spartan Mother with emotion, be
   The Lucius Junius Brutus of my kind?
   Him you call great:  he for the common weal,
   The fading politics of mortal Rome,
   As I might slay this child, if good need were,
   Slew both his sons:  and I, shall I, on whom
   The secular emancipation turns
   Of half this world, be swerved from right to save
   A prince, a brother? a little will I yield.
   Best so, perchance, for us, and well for you.
   O hard, when love and duty clash!  I fear
   My conscience will not count me fleckless; yet--
   Hear my conditions:  promise (otherwise
   You perish) as you came, to slip away
   Today, tomorrow, soon:  it shall be said,
   These women were too barbarous, would not learn;
   They fled, who might have shamed us:  promise, all.'

        What could we else, we promised each; and she,
   Like some wild creature newly-caged, commenced
   A to-and-fro, so pacing till she paused
   By Florian; holding out her lily arms
   Took both his hands, and smiling faintly said:
   'I knew you at the first:  though you have grown
   You scarce have altered:  I am sad and glad
   To see you, Florian.  _I_ give thee to death
   My brother! it was duty spoke, not I.
   My needful seeming harshness, pardon it.
   Our mother, is she well?'
                            With that she kissed
   His forehead, then, a moment after, clung
   About him, and betwixt them blossomed up
   From out a common vein of memory
   Sweet household talk, and phrases of the hearth,
   And far allusion, till the gracious dews
   Began to glisten and to fall:  and while
   They stood, so rapt, we gazing, came a voice,
   'I brought a message here from Lady Blanche.'
   Back started she, and turning round we saw
   The Lady Blanche's daughter where she stood,
   Melissa, with her hand upon the lock,
   A rosy blonde, and in a college gown,
   That clad her like an April daffodilly
   (Her mother's colour) with her lips apart,
   And all her thoughts as fair within her eyes,
   As bottom agates seen to wave and float
   In crystal currents of clear morning seas.

        So stood that same fair creature at the door.
   Then Lady Psyche, 'Ah--Melissa--you!
   You heard us?' and Melissa, 'O pardon me
   I heard, I could not help it, did not wish:
   But, dearest Lady, pray you fear me not,
   Nor think I bear that heart within my breast,
   To give three gallant gentlemen to death.'
   'I trust you,' said the other, 'for we two
   Were always friends, none closer, elm and vine:
   But yet your mother's jealous temperament--
   Let not your prudence, dearest, drowse, or prove
   The Danaïd of a leaky vase, for fear
   This whole foundation ruin, and I lose
   My honour, these their lives.'  'Ah, fear me not'
   Replied Melissa; 'no--I would not tell,
   No, not for all Aspasia's cleverness,
   No, not to answer, Madam, all those hard things
   That Sheba came to ask of Solomon.'
   'Be it so' the other, 'that we still may lead
   The new light up, and culminate in peace,
   For Solomon may come to Sheba yet.'
   Said Cyril, 'Madam, he the wisest man
   Feasted the woman wisest then, in halls
   Of Lebanonian cedar:  nor should you
   (Though, Madam, _you_ should answer, _we_ would ask)
   Less welcome find among us, if you came
   Among us, debtors for our lives to you,
   Myself for something more.'  He said not what,
   But 'Thanks,' she answered 'Go:  we have been too long
   Together:  keep your hoods about the face;
   They do so that affect abstraction here.
   Speak little; mix not with the rest; and hold
   Your promise:  all, I trust, may yet be well.'

        We turned to go, but Cyril took the child,
   And held her round the knees against his waist,
   And blew the swollen cheek of a trumpeter,
   While Psyche watched them, smiling, and the child
   Pushed her flat hand against his face and laughed;
   And thus our conference closed.
                                  And then we strolled
   For half the day through stately theatres
   Benched crescent-wise.  In each we sat, we heard
   The grave Professor.  On the lecture slate
   The circle rounded under female hands
   With flawless demonstration:  followed then
   A classic lecture, rich in sentiment,
   With scraps of thunderous Epic lilted out
   By violet-hooded Doctors, elegies
   And quoted odes, and jewels five-words-long
   That on the stretched forefinger of all Time
   Sparkle for ever:  then we dipt in all
   That treats of whatsoever is, the state,
   The total chronicles of man, the mind,
   The morals, something of the frame, the rock,
   The star, the bird, the fish, the shell, the flower,
   Electric, chemic laws, and all the rest,
   And whatsoever can be taught and known;
   Till like three horses that have broken fence,
   And glutted all night long breast-deep in corn,
   We issued gorged with knowledge, and I spoke:
   'Why, Sirs, they do all this as well as we.'
   'They hunt old trails' said Cyril 'very well;
   But when did woman ever yet invent?'
   'Ungracious!' answered Florian; 'have you learnt
   No more from Psyche's lecture, you that talked
   The trash that made me sick, and almost sad?'
   'O trash' he said, 'but with a kernel in it.
   Should I not call her wise, who made me wise?
   And learnt?  I learnt more from her in a flash,
   Than in my brainpan were an empty hull,
   And every Muse tumbled a science in.
   A thousand hearts lie fallow in these halls,
   And round these halls a thousand baby loves
   Fly twanging headless arrows at the hearts,
   Whence follows many a vacant pang; but O
   With me, Sir, entered in the bigger boy,
   The Head of all the golden-shafted firm,
   The long-limbed lad that had a Psyche too;
   He cleft me through the stomacher; and now
   What think you of it, Florian? do I chase
   The substance or the shadow? will it hold?
   I have no sorcerer's malison on me,
   No ghostly hauntings like his Highness.  I
   Flatter myself that always everywhere
   I know the substance when I see it.  Well,
   Are castles shadows?  Three of them?  Is she
   The sweet proprietress a shadow?  If not,
   Shall those three castles patch my tattered coat?
   For dear are those three castles to my wants,
   And dear is sister Psyche to my heart,
   And two dear things are one of double worth,
   And much I might have said, but that my zone
   Unmanned me:  then the Doctors!  O to hear
   The Doctors!  O to watch the thirsty plants
   Imbibing! once or twice I thought to roar,
   To break my chain, to shake my mane:  but thou,
   Modulate me, Soul of mincing mimicry!
   Make liquid treble of that bassoon, my throat;
   Abase those eyes that ever loved to meet
   Star-sisters answering under crescent brows;
   Abate the stride, which speaks of man, and loose
   A flying charm of blushes o'er this cheek,
   Where they like swallows coming out of time
   Will wonder why they came:  but hark the bell
   For dinner, let us go!'
                          And in we streamed
   Among the columns, pacing staid and still
   By twos and threes, till all from end to end
   With beauties every shade of brown and fair
   In colours gayer than the morning mist,
   The long hall glittered like a bed of flowers.
   How might a man not wander from his wits
   Pierced through with eyes, but that I kept mine own
   Intent on her, who rapt in glorious dreams,
   The second-sight of some Astræan age,
   Sat compassed with professors:  they, the while,
   Discussed a doubt and tost it to and fro:
   A clamour thickened, mixt with inmost terms
   Of art and science:  Lady Blanche alone
   Of faded form and haughtiest lineaments,
   With all her autumn tresses falsely brown,
   Shot sidelong daggers at us, a tiger-cat
   In act to spring.
                    At last a solemn grace
   Concluded, and we sought the gardens:  there
   One walked reciting by herself, and one
   In this hand held a volume as to read,
   And smoothed a petted peacock down with that:
   Some to a low song oared a shallop by,
   Or under arches of the marble bridge
   Hung, shadowed from the heat:  some hid and sought
   In the orange thickets:  others tost a ball
   Above the fountain-jets, and back again
   With laughter:  others lay about the lawns,
   Of the older sort, and murmured that their May
   Was passing:  what was learning unto them?
   They wished to marry; they could rule a house;
   Men hated learned women:  but we three
   Sat muffled like the Fates; and often came
   Melissa hitting all we saw with shafts
   Of gentle satire, kin to charity,
   That harmed not:  then day droopt; the chapel bells
   Called us:  we left the walks; we mixt with those
   Six hundred maidens clad in purest white,
   Before two streams of light from wall to wall,
   While the great organ almost burst his pipes,
   Groaning for power, and rolling through the court
   A long melodious thunder to the sound
   Of solemn psalms, and silver litanies,
   The work of Ida, to call down from Heaven
   A blessing on her labours for the world.


   Sweet and low, sweet and low,
      Wind of the western sea,
   Low, low, breathe and blow,
      Wind of the western sea!
   Over the rolling waters go,
   Come from the dying moon, and blow,
      Blow him again to me;
   While my little one, while my pretty one, sleeps.

   Sleep and rest, sleep and rest,
      Father will come to thee soon;
   Rest, rest, on mother's breast,
      Father will come to thee soon;
   Father will come to his babe in the nest,
   Silver sails all out of the west
      Under the silver moon:
   Sleep, my little one, sleep, my pretty one, sleep.




III



   Morn in the wake of the morning star
   Came furrowing all the orient into gold.
   We rose, and each by other drest with care
   Descended to the court that lay three parts
   In shadow, but the Muses' heads were touched
   Above the darkness from their native East.

        There while we stood beside the fount, and watched
   Or seemed to watch the dancing bubble, approached
   Melissa, tinged with wan from lack of sleep,
   Or grief, and glowing round her dewy eyes
   The circled Iris of a night of tears;
   'And fly,' she cried, 'O fly, while yet you may!
   My mother knows:'  and when I asked her 'how,'
   'My fault' she wept 'my fault! and yet not mine;
   Yet mine in part.  O hear me, pardon me.
   My mother, 'tis her wont from night to night
   To rail at Lady Psyche and her side.
   She says the Princess should have been the Head,
   Herself and Lady Psyche the two arms;
   And so it was agreed when first they came;
   But Lady Psyche was the right hand now,
   And the left, or not, or seldom used;
   Hers more than half the students, all the love.
   And so last night she fell to canvass you:
   _Her_ countrywomen! she did not envy her.
   "Who ever saw such wild barbarians?
   Girls?--more like men!" and at these words the snake,
   My secret, seemed to stir within my breast;
   And oh, Sirs, could I help it, but my cheek
   Began to burn and burn, and her lynx eye
   To fix and make me hotter, till she laughed:
   "O marvellously modest maiden, you!
   Men! girls, like men! why, if they had been men
   You need not set your thoughts in rubric thus
   For wholesale comment."  Pardon, I am shamed
   That I must needs repeat for my excuse
   What looks so little graceful:  "men" (for still
   My mother went revolving on the word)
   "And so they are,--very like men indeed--
   And with that woman closeted for hours!"
   Then came these dreadful words out one by one,
   "Why--these--_are_--men:"  I shuddered:  "and you know it."
   "O ask me nothing," I said:  "And she knows too,
   And she conceals it."  So my mother clutched
   The truth at once, but with no word from me;
   And now thus early risen she goes to inform
   The Princess:  Lady Psyche will be crushed;
   But you may yet be saved, and therefore fly;
   But heal me with your pardon ere you go.'

        'What pardon, sweet Melissa, for a blush?'
   Said Cyril:  'Pale one, blush again:  than wear
   Those lilies, better blush our lives away.
   Yet let us breathe for one hour more in Heaven'
   He added, 'lest some classic Angel speak
   In scorn of us, "They mounted, Ganymedes,
   To tumble, Vulcans, on the second morn."
   But I will melt this marble into wax
   To yield us farther furlough:'  and he went.

        Melissa shook her doubtful curls, and thought
   He scarce would prosper.  'Tell us,' Florian asked,
   'How grew this feud betwixt the right and left.'
   'O long ago,' she said, 'betwixt these two
   Division smoulders hidden; 'tis my mother,
   Too jealous, often fretful as the wind
   Pent in a crevice:  much I bear with her:
   I never knew my father, but she says
   (God help her) she was wedded to a fool;
   And still she railed against the state of things.
   She had the care of Lady Ida's youth,
   And from the Queen's decease she brought her up.
   But when your sister came she won the heart
   Of Ida:  they were still together, grew
   (For so they said themselves) inosculated;
   Consonant chords that shiver to one note;
   One mind in all things:  yet my mother still
   Affirms your Psyche thieved her theories,
   And angled with them for her pupil's love:
   She calls her plagiarist; I know not what:
   But I must go:  I dare not tarry,' and light,
   As flies the shadow of a bird, she fled.

        Then murmured Florian gazing after her,
   'An open-hearted maiden, true and pure.
   If I could love, why this were she:  how pretty
   Her blushing was, and how she blushed again,
   As if to close with Cyril's random wish:
   Not like your Princess crammed with erring pride,
   Nor like poor Psyche whom she drags in tow.'

        'The crane,' I said, 'may chatter of the crane,
   The dove may murmur of the dove, but I
   An eagle clang an eagle to the sphere.
   My princess, O my princess! true she errs,
   But in her own grand way:  being herself
   Three times more noble than three score of men,
   She sees herself in every woman else,
   And so she wears her error like a crown
   To blind the truth and me:  for her, and her,
   Hebes are they to hand ambrosia, mix
   The nectar; but--ah she--whene'er she moves
   The Samian Herè rises and she speaks
   A Memnon smitten with the morning Sun.'

        So saying from the court we paced, and gained
   The terrace ranged along the Northern front,
   And leaning there on those balusters, high
   Above the empurpled champaign, drank the gale
   That blown about the foliage underneath,
   And sated with the innumerable rose,
   Beat balm upon our eyelids.  Hither came
   Cyril, and yawning 'O hard task,' he cried;
   'No fighting shadows here!  I forced a way
   Through opposition crabbed and gnarled.
   Better to clear prime forests, heave and thump
   A league of street in summer solstice down,
   Than hammer at this reverend gentlewoman.
   I knocked and, bidden, entered; found her there
   At point to move, and settled in her eyes
   The green malignant light of coming storm.
   Sir, I was courteous, every phrase well-oiled,
   As man's could be; yet maiden-meek I prayed
   Concealment:  she demanded who we were,
   And why we came?  I fabled nothing fair,
   But, your example pilot, told her all.
   Up went the hushed amaze of hand and eye.
   But when I dwelt upon your old affiance,
   She answered sharply that I talked astray.
   I urged the fierce inscription on the gate,
   And our three lives.  True--we had limed ourselves
   With open eyes, and we must take the chance.
   But such extremes, I told her, well might harm
   The woman's cause.  "Not more than now," she said,
   "So puddled as it is with favouritism."
   I tried the mother's heart.  Shame might befall
   Melissa, knowing, saying not she knew:
   Her answer was "Leave me to deal with that."
   I spoke of war to come and many deaths,
   And she replied, her duty was to speak,
   And duty duty, clear of consequences.
   I grew discouraged, Sir; but since I knew
   No rock so hard but that a little wave
   May beat admission in a thousand years,
   I recommenced; "Decide not ere you pause.
   I find you here but in the second place,
   Some say the third--the authentic foundress you.
   I offer boldly:  we will seat you highest:
   Wink at our advent:  help my prince to gain
   His rightful bride, and here I promise you
   Some palace in our land, where you shall reign
   The head and heart of all our fair she-world,
   And your great name flow on with broadening time
   For ever."  Well, she balanced this a little,
   And told me she would answer us today,
   meantime be mute:  thus much, nor more I gained.'

        He ceasing, came a message from the Head.
   'That afternoon the Princess rode to take
   The dip of certain strata to the North.
   Would we go with her? we should find the land
   Worth seeing; and the river made a fall
   Out yonder:'  then she pointed on to where
   A double hill ran up his furrowy forks
   Beyond the thick-leaved platans of the vale.

        Agreed to, this, the day fled on through all
   Its range of duties to the appointed hour.
   Then summoned to the porch we went.  She stood
   Among her maidens, higher by the head,
   Her back against a pillar, her foot on one
   Of those tame leopards.  Kittenlike he rolled
   And pawed about her sandal.  I drew near;
   I gazed.  On a sudden my strange seizure came
   Upon me, the weird vision of our house:
   The Princess Ida seemed a hollow show,
   Her gay-furred cats a painted fantasy,
   Her college and her maidens, empty masks,
   And I myself the shadow of a dream,
   For all things were and were not.  Yet I felt
   My heart beat thick with passion and with awe;
   Then from my breast the involuntary sigh
   Brake, as she smote me with the light of eyes
   That lent my knee desire to kneel, and shook
   My pulses, till to horse we got, and so
   Went forth in long retinue following up
   The river as it narrowed to the hills.

        I rode beside her and to me she said:
   'O friend, we trust that you esteemed us not
   Too harsh to your companion yestermorn;
   Unwillingly we spake.'  'No--not to her,'
   I answered, 'but to one of whom we spake
   Your Highness might have seemed the thing you say.'
   'Again?' she cried, 'are you ambassadresses
   From him to me? we give you, being strange,
   A license:  speak, and let the topic die.'

        I stammered that I knew him--could have wished--
   'Our king expects--was there no precontract?
   There is no truer-hearted--ah, you seem
   All he prefigured, and he could not see
   The bird of passage flying south but longed
   To follow:  surely, if your Highness keep
   Your purport, you will shock him even to death,
   Or baser courses, children of despair.'

        'Poor boy,' she said, 'can he not read--no books?
   Quoit, tennis, ball--no games? nor deals in that
   Which men delight in, martial exercise?
   To nurse a blind ideal like a girl,
   Methinks he seems no better than a girl;
   As girls were once, as we ourself have been:
   We had our dreams; perhaps he mixt with them:
   We touch on our dead self, nor shun to do it,
   Being other--since we learnt our meaning here,
   To lift the woman's fallen divinity
   Upon an even pedestal with man.'

        She paused, and added with a haughtier smile
   'And as to precontracts, we move, my friend,
   At no man's beck, but know ourself and thee,
   O Vashti, noble Vashti!  Summoned out
   She kept her state, and left the drunken king
   To brawl at Shushan underneath the palms.'

        'Alas your Highness breathes full East,' I said,
   'On that which leans to you.  I know the Prince,
   I prize his truth:  and then how vast a work
   To assail this gray preëminence of man!
   You grant me license; might I use it? think;
   Ere half be done perchance your life may fail;
   Then comes the feebler heiress of your plan,
   And takes and ruins all; and thus your pains
   May only make that footprint upon sand
   Which old-recurring waves of prejudice
   Resmooth to nothing:  might I dread that you,
   With only Fame for spouse and your great deeds
   For issue, yet may live in vain, and miss,
   Meanwhile, what every woman counts her due,
   Love, children, happiness?'
                              And she exclaimed,
   'Peace, you young savage of the Northern wild!
   What! though your Prince's love were like a God's,
   Have we not made ourself the sacrifice?
   You are bold indeed:  we are not talked to thus:
   Yet will we say for children, would they grew
   Like field-flowers everywhere! we like them well:
   But children die; and let me tell you, girl,
   Howe'er you babble, great deeds cannot die;
   They with the sun and moon renew their light
   For ever, blessing those that look on them.
   Children--that men may pluck them from our hearts,
   Kill us with pity, break us with ourselves--
   O--children--there is nothing upon earth
   More miserable than she that has a son
   And sees him err:  nor would we work for fame;
   Though she perhaps might reap the applause of Great,
   Who earns the one POU STO whence after-hands
   May move the world, though she herself effect
   But little:  wherefore up and act, nor shrink
   For fear our solid aim be dissipated
   By frail successors.  Would, indeed, we had been,
   In lieu of many mortal flies, a race
   Of giants living, each, a thousand years,
   That we might see our own work out, and watch
   The sandy footprint harden into stone.'

        I answered nothing, doubtful in myself
   If that strange Poet-princess with her grand
   Imaginations might at all be won.
   And she broke out interpreting my thoughts:

        'No doubt we seem a kind of monster to you;
   We are used to that:  for women, up till this
   Cramped under worse than South-sea-isle taboo,
   Dwarfs of the gynæceum, fail so far
   In high desire, they know not, cannot guess
   How much their welfare is a passion to us.
   If we could give them surer, quicker proof--
   Oh if our end were less achievable
   By slow approaches, than by single act
   Of immolation, any phase of death,
   We were as prompt to spring against the pikes,
   Or down the fiery gulf as talk of it,
   To compass our dear sisters' liberties.'

        She bowed as if to veil a noble tear;
   And up we came to where the river sloped
   To plunge in cataract, shattering on black blocks
   A breadth of thunder.  O'er it shook the woods,
   And danced the colour, and, below, stuck out
   The bones of some vast bulk that lived and roared
   Before man was.  She gazed awhile and said,
   'As these rude bones to us, are we to her
   That will be.'  'Dare we dream of that,' I asked,
   'Which wrought us, as the workman and his work,
   That practice betters?'  'How,' she cried, 'you love
   The metaphysics! read and earn our prize,
   A golden brooch:  beneath an emerald plane
   Sits Diotima, teaching him that died
   Of hemlock; our device; wrought to the life;
   She rapt upon her subject, he on her:
   For there are schools for all.'  'And yet' I said
   'Methinks I have not found among them all
   One anatomic.'  'Nay, we thought of that,'
   She answered, 'but it pleased us not:  in truth
   We shudder but to dream our maids should ape
   Those monstrous males that carve the living hound,
   And cram him with the fragments of the grave,
   Or in the dark dissolving human heart,
   And holy secrets of this microcosm,
   Dabbling a shameless hand with shameful jest,
   Encarnalize their spirits:  yet we know
   Knowledge is knowledge, and this matter hangs:
   Howbeit ourself, foreseeing casualty,
   Nor willing men should come among us, learnt,
   For many weary moons before we came,
   This craft of healing.  Were you sick, ourself
   Would tend upon you.  To your question now,
   Which touches on the workman and his work.
   Let there be light and there was light:  'tis so:
   For was, and is, and will be, are but is;
   And all creation is one act at once,
   The birth of light:  but we that are not all,
   As parts, can see but parts, now this, now that,
   And live, perforce, from thought to thought, and make
   One act a phantom of succession:  thus
   Our weakness somehow shapes the shadow, Time;
   But in the shadow will we work, and mould
   The woman to the fuller day.'
                                She spake
   With kindled eyes; we rode a league beyond,
   And, o'er a bridge of pinewood crossing, came
   On flowery levels underneath the crag,
   Full of all beauty.  'O how sweet' I said
   (For I was half-oblivious of my mask)
   'To linger here with one that loved us.'  'Yea,'
   She answered, 'or with fair philosophies
   That lift the fancy; for indeed these fields
   Are lovely, lovelier not the Elysian lawns,
   Where paced the Demigods of old, and saw
   The soft white vapour streak the crownèd towers
   Built to the Sun:'  then, turning to her maids,
   'Pitch our pavilion here upon the sward;
   Lay out the viands.'  At the word, they raised
   A tent of satin, elaborately wrought
   With fair Corinna's triumph; here she stood,
   Engirt with many a florid maiden-cheek,
   The woman-conqueror; woman-conquered there
   The bearded Victor of ten-thousand hymns,
   And all the men mourned at his side:  but we
   Set forth to climb; then, climbing, Cyril kept
   With Psyche, with Melissa Florian, I
   With mine affianced.  Many a little hand
   Glanced like a touch of sunshine on the rocks,
   Many a light foot shone like a jewel set
   In the dark crag:  and then we turned, we wound
   About the cliffs, the copses, out and in,
   Hammering and clinking, chattering stony names
   Of shales and hornblende, rag and trap and tuff,
   Amygdaloid and trachyte, till the Sun
   Grew broader toward his death and fell, and all
   The rosy heights came out above the lawns.


      The splendour falls on castle walls
         And snowy summits old in story:
      The long light shakes across the lakes,
         And the wild cataract leaps in glory.
   Blow, bugle, blow, set the wild echoes flying,
   Blow, bugle; answer, echoes, dying, dying, dying.

      O hark, O hear! how thin and clear,
         And thinner, clearer, farther going!
      O sweet and far from cliff and scar
         The horns of Elfland faintly blowing!
   Blow, let us hear the purple glens replying:
   Blow, bugle; answer, echoes, dying, dying, dying.

      O love, they die in yon rich sky,
         They faint on hill or field or river:
      Our echoes roll from soul to soul,
         And grow for ever and for ever.
   Blow, bugle, blow, set the wild echoes flying,
   And answer, echoes, answer, dying, dying, dying.




IV



   'There sinks the nebulous star we call the Sun,
   If that hypothesis of theirs be sound'
   Said Ida; 'let us down and rest;' and we
   Down from the lean and wrinkled precipices,
   By every coppice-feathered chasm and cleft,
   Dropt through the ambrosial gloom to where below
   No bigger than a glow-worm shone the tent
   Lamp-lit from the inner.  Once she leaned on me,
   Descending; once or twice she lent her hand,
   And blissful palpitations in the blood,
   Stirring a sudden transport rose and fell.

        But when we planted level feet, and dipt
   Beneath the satin dome and entered in,
   There leaning deep in broidered down we sank
   Our elbows:  on a tripod in the midst
   A fragrant flame rose, and before us glowed
   Fruit, blossom, viand, amber wine, and gold.

        Then she, 'Let some one sing to us:  lightlier move
   The minutes fledged with music:' and a maid,
   Of those beside her, smote her harp, and sang.


      'Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean,
   Tears from the depth of some divine despair
   Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,
   In looking on the happy Autumn-fields,
   And thinking of the days that are no more.

      'Fresh as the first beam glittering on a sail,
   That brings our friends up from the underworld,
   Sad as the last which reddens over one
   That sinks with all we love below the verge;
   So sad, so fresh, the days that are no more.

      'Ah, sad and strange as in dark summer dawns
   The earliest pipe of half-awakened birds
   To dying ears, when unto dying eyes
   The casement slowly grows a glimmering square;
   So sad, so strange, the days that are no more.

      'Dear as remembered kisses after death,
   And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feigned
   On lips that are for others; deep as love,
   Deep as first love, and wild with all regret;
   O Death in Life, the days that are no more.'


        She ended with such passion that the tear,
   She sang of, shook and fell, an erring pearl
   Lost in her bosom:  but with some disdain
   Answered the Princess, 'If indeed there haunt
   About the mouldered lodges of the Past
   So sweet a voice and vague, fatal to men,
   Well needs it we should cram our ears with wool
   And so pace by:  but thine are fancies hatched
   In silken-folded idleness; nor is it
   Wiser to weep a true occasion lost,
   But trim our sails, and let old bygones be,
   While down the streams that float us each and all
   To the issue, goes, like glittering bergs of ice,
   Throne after throne, and molten on the waste
   Becomes a cloud:  for all things serve their time
   Toward that great year of equal mights and rights,
   Nor would I fight with iron laws, in the end
   Found golden:  let the past be past; let be
   Their cancelled Babels:  though the rough kex break
   The starred mosaic, and the beard-blown goat
   Hang on the shaft, and the wild figtree split
   Their monstrous idols, care not while we hear
   A trumpet in the distance pealing news
   Of better, and Hope, a poising eagle, burns
   Above the unrisen morrow:' then to me;
   'Know you no song of your own land,' she said,
   'Not such as moans about the retrospect,
   But deals with the other distance and the hues
   Of promise; not a death's-head at the wine.'

        Then I remembered one myself had made,
   What time I watched the swallow winging south
   From mine own land, part made long since, and part
   Now while I sang, and maidenlike as far
   As I could ape their treble, did I sing.


      'O Swallow, Swallow, flying, flying South,
   Fly to her, and fall upon her gilded eaves,
   And tell her, tell her, what I tell to thee.

      'O tell her, Swallow, thou that knowest each,
   That bright and fierce and fickle is the South,
   And dark and true and tender is the North.

      'O Swallow, Swallow, if I could follow, and light
   Upon her lattice, I would pipe and trill,
   And cheep and twitter twenty million loves.

      'O were I thou that she might take me in,
   And lay me on her bosom, and her heart
   Would rock the snowy cradle till I died.

      'Why lingereth she to clothe her heart with love,
   Delaying as the tender ash delays
   To clothe herself, when all the woods are green?

      'O tell her, Swallow, that thy brood is flown:
   Say to her, I do but wanton in the South,
   But in the North long since my nest is made.

      'O tell her, brief is life but love is long,
   And brief the sun of summer in the North,
   And brief the moon of beauty in the South.

      'O Swallow, flying from the golden woods,
   Fly to her, and pipe and woo her, and make her mine,
   And tell her, tell her, that I follow thee.'


        I ceased, and all the ladies, each at each,
   Like the Ithacensian suitors in old time,
   Stared with great eyes, and laughed with alien lips,
   And knew not what they meant; for still my voice
   Rang false:  but smiling 'Not for thee,' she said,
   O Bulbul, any rose of Gulistan
   Shall burst her veil:  marsh-divers, rather, maid,
   Shall croak thee sister, or the meadow-crake
   Grate her harsh kindred in the grass:  and this
   A mere love-poem!  O for such, my friend,
   We hold them slight:  they mind us of the time
   When we made bricks in Egypt.  Knaves are men,
   That lute and flute fantastic tenderness,
   And dress the victim to the offering up,
   And paint the gates of Hell with Paradise,
   And play the slave to gain the tyranny.
   Poor soul!  I had a maid of honour once;
   She wept her true eyes blind for such a one,
   A rogue of canzonets and serenades.
   I loved her.  Peace be with her.  She is dead.
   So they blaspheme the muse!  But great is song
   Used to great ends:  ourself have often tried
   Valkyrian hymns, or into rhythm have dashed
   The passion of the prophetess; for song
   Is duer unto freedom, force and growth
   Of spirit than to junketing and love.
   Love is it?  Would this same mock-love, and this
   Mock-Hymen were laid up like winter bats,
   Till all men grew to rate us at our worth,
   Not vassals to be beat, nor pretty babes
   To be dandled, no, but living wills, and sphered
   Whole in ourselves and owed to none.  Enough!
   But now to leaven play with profit, you,
   Know you no song, the true growth of your soil,
   That gives the manners of your country-women?'

        She spoke and turned her sumptuous head with eyes
   Of shining expectation fixt on mine.
   Then while I dragged my brains for such a song,
   Cyril, with whom the bell-mouthed glass had wrought,
   Or mastered by the sense of sport, began
   To troll a careless, careless tavern-catch
   Of Moll and Meg, and strange experiences
   Unmeet for ladies.  Florian nodded at him,
   I frowning; Psyche flushed and wanned and shook;
   The lilylike Melissa drooped her brows;
   'Forbear,' the Princess cried; 'Forbear, Sir' I;
   And heated through and through with wrath and love,
   I smote him on the breast; he started up;
   There rose a shriek as of a city sacked;
   Melissa clamoured 'Flee the death;' 'To horse'
   Said Ida; 'home! to horse!' and fled, as flies
   A troop of snowy doves athwart the dusk,
   When some one batters at the dovecote-doors,
   Disorderly the women.  Alone I stood
   With Florian, cursing Cyril, vext at heart,
   In the pavilion:  there like parting hopes
   I heard them passing from me:  hoof by hoof,
   And every hoof a knell to my desires,
   Clanged on the bridge; and then another shriek,
   'The Head, the Head, the Princess, O the Head!'
   For blind with rage she missed the plank, and rolled
   In the river.  Out I sprang from glow to gloom:
   There whirled her white robe like a blossomed branch
   Rapt to the horrible fall:  a glance I gave,
   No more; but woman-vested as I was
   Plunged; and the flood drew; yet I caught her; then
   Oaring one arm, and bearing in my left
   The weight of all the hopes of half the world,
   Strove to buffet to land in vain.  A tree
   Was half-disrooted from his place and stooped
   To wrench his dark locks in the gurgling wave
   Mid-channel.  Right on this we drove and caught,
   And grasping down the boughs I gained the shore.

        There stood her maidens glimmeringly grouped
   In the hollow bank.  One reaching forward drew
   My burthen from mine arms; they cried 'she lives:'
   They bore her back into the tent:  but I,
   So much a kind of shame within me wrought,
   Not yet endured to meet her opening eyes,
   Nor found my friends; but pushed alone on foot
   (For since her horse was lost I left her mine)
   Across the woods, and less from Indian craft
   Than beelike instinct hiveward, found at length
   The garden portals.  Two great statues, Art
   And Science, Caryatids, lifted up
   A weight of emblem, and betwixt were valves
   Of open-work in which the hunter rued
   His rash intrusion, manlike, but his brows
   Had sprouted, and the branches thereupon
   Spread out at top, and grimly spiked the gates.

        A little space was left between the horns,
   Through which I clambered o'er at top with pain,
   Dropt on the sward, and up the linden walks,
   And, tost on thoughts that changed from hue to hue,
   Now poring on the glowworm, now the star,
   I paced the terrace, till the Bear had wheeled
   Through a great arc his seven slow suns.
                                           A step
   Of lightest echo, then a loftier form
   Than female, moving through the uncertain gloom,
   Disturbed me with the doubt 'if this were she,'
   But it was Florian.  'Hist O Hist,' he said,
   'They seek us:  out so late is out of rules.
   Moreover "seize the strangers" is the cry.
   How came you here?' I told him:  'I' said he,
   'Last of the train, a moral leper, I,
   To whom none spake, half-sick at heart, returned.
   Arriving all confused among the rest
   With hooded brows I crept into the hall,
   And, couched behind a Judith, underneath
   The head of Holofernes peeped and saw.
   Girl after girl was called to trial:  each
   Disclaimed all knowledge of us:  last of all,
   Melissa:  trust me, Sir, I pitied her.
   She, questioned if she knew us men, at first
   Was silent; closer prest, denied it not:
   And then, demanded if her mother knew,
   Or Psyche, she affirmed not, or denied:
   From whence the Royal mind, familiar with her,
   Easily gathered either guilt.  She sent
   For Psyche, but she was not there; she called
   For Psyche's child to cast it from the doors;
   She sent for Blanche to accuse her face to face;
   And I slipt out:  but whither will you now?
   And where are Psyche, Cyril? both are fled:
   What, if together? that were not so well.
   Would rather we had never come!  I dread
   His wildness, and the chances of the dark.'

        'And yet,' I said, 'you wrong him more than I
   That struck him:  this is proper to the clown,
   Though smocked, or furred and purpled, still the clown,
   To harm the thing that trusts him, and to shame
   That which he says he loves:  for Cyril, howe'er
   He deal in frolic, as tonight--the song
   Might have been worse and sinned in grosser lips
   Beyond all pardon--as it is, I hold
   These flashes on the surface are not he.
   He has a solid base of temperament:
   But as the waterlily starts and slides
   Upon the level in little puffs of wind,
   Though anchored to the bottom, such is he.'

        Scarce had I ceased when from a tamarisk near
   Two Proctors leapt upon us, crying, 'Names:'
   He, standing still, was clutched; but I began
   To thrid the musky-circled mazes, wind
   And double in and out the boles, and race
   By all the fountains:  fleet I was of foot:
   Before me showered the rose in flakes; behind
   I heard the puffed pursuer; at mine ear
   Bubbled the nightingale and heeded not,
   And secret laughter tickled all my soul.
   At last I hooked my ankle in a vine,
   That claspt the feet of a Mnemosyne,
   And falling on my face was caught and known.

        They haled us to the Princess where she sat
   High in the hall:  above her drooped a lamp,
   And made the single jewel on her brow
   Burn like the mystic fire on a mast-head,
   Prophet of storm:  a handmaid on each side
   Bowed toward her, combing out her long black hair
   Damp from the river; and close behind her stood
   Eight daughters of the plough, stronger than men,
   Huge women blowzed with health, and wind, and rain,
   And labour.  Each was like a Druid rock;
   Or like a spire of land that stands apart
   Cleft from the main, and wailed about with mews.

        Then, as we came, the crowd dividing clove
   An advent to the throne:  and therebeside,
   Half-naked as if caught at once from bed
   And tumbled on the purple footcloth, lay
   The lily-shining child; and on the left,
   Bowed on her palms and folded up from wrong,
   Her round white shoulder shaken with her sobs,
   Melissa knelt; but Lady Blanche erect
   Stood up and spake, an affluent orator.

        'It was not thus, O Princess, in old days:
   You prized my counsel, lived upon my lips:
   I led you then to all the Castalies;
   I fed you with the milk of every Muse;
   I loved you like this kneeler, and you me
   Your second mother:  those were gracious times.
   Then came your new friend:  you began to change--
   I saw it and grieved--to slacken and to cool;
   Till taken with her seeming openness
   You turned your warmer currents all to her,
   To me you froze:  this was my meed for all.
   Yet I bore up in part from ancient love,
   And partly that I hoped to win you back,
   And partly conscious of my own deserts,
   And partly that you were my civil head,
   And chiefly you were born for something great,
   In which I might your fellow-worker be,
   When time should serve; and thus a noble scheme
   Grew up from seed we two long since had sown;
   In us true growth, in her a Jonah's gourd,
   Up in one night and due to sudden sun:
   We took this palace; but even from the first
   You stood in your own light and darkened mine.
   What student came but that you planed her path
   To Lady Psyche, younger, not so wise,
   A foreigner, and I your countrywoman,
   I your old friend and tried, she new in all?
   But still her lists were swelled and mine were lean;
   Yet I bore up in hope she would be known:
   Then came these wolves:  _they_ knew her:  _they_ endured,
   Long-closeted with her the yestermorn,
   To tell her what they were, and she to hear:
   And me none told:  not less to an eye like mine
   A lidless watcher of the public weal,
   Last night, their mask was patent, and my foot
   Was to you:  but I thought again:  I feared
   To meet a cold "We thank you, we shall hear of it
   From Lady Psyche:" you had gone to her,
   She told, perforce; and winning easy grace
   No doubt, for slight delay, remained among us
   In our young nursery still unknown, the stem
   Less grain than touchwood, while my honest heat
   Were all miscounted as malignant haste
   To push my rival out of place and power.
   But public use required she should be known;
   And since my oath was ta'en for public use,
   I broke the letter of it to keep the sense.
   I spoke not then at first, but watched them well,
   Saw that they kept apart, no mischief done;
   And yet this day (though you should hate me for it)
   I came to tell you; found that you had gone,
   Ridden to the hills, she likewise:  now, I thought,
   That surely she will speak; if not, then I:
   Did she?  These monsters blazoned what they were,
   According to the coarseness of their kind,
   For thus I hear; and known at last (my work)
   And full of cowardice and guilty shame,
   I grant in her some sense of shame, she flies;
   And I remain on whom to wreak your rage,
   I, that have lent my life to build up yours,
   I that have wasted here health, wealth, and time,
   And talent, I--you know it--I will not boast:
   Dismiss me, and I prophesy your plan,
   Divorced from my experience, will be chaff
   For every gust of chance, and men will say
   We did not know the real light, but chased
   The wisp that flickers where no foot can tread.'

        She ceased:  the Princess answered coldly, 'Good:
   Your oath is broken:  we dismiss you:  go.
   For this lost lamb (she pointed to the child)
   Our mind is changed:  we take it to ourself.'

        Thereat the Lady stretched a vulture throat,
   And shot from crooked lips a haggard smile.
   'The plan was mine.  I built the nest' she said
   'To hatch the cuckoo.  Rise!' and stooped to updrag
   Melissa:  she, half on her mother propt,
   Half-drooping from her, turned her face, and cast
   A liquid look on Ida, full of prayer,
   Which melted Florian's fancy as she hung,
   A Niobëan daughter, one arm out,
   Appealing to the bolts of Heaven; and while
   We gazed upon her came a little stir
   About the doors, and on a sudden rushed
   Among us, out of breath as one pursued,
   A woman-post in flying raiment.  Fear
   Stared in her eyes, and chalked her face, and winged
   Her transit to the throne, whereby she fell
   Delivering sealed dispatches which the Head
   Took half-amazed, and in her lion's mood
   Tore open, silent we with blind surmise
   Regarding, while she read, till over brow
   And cheek and bosom brake the wrathful bloom
   As of some fire against a stormy cloud,
   When the wild peasant rights himself, the rick
   Flames, and his anger reddens in the heavens;
   For anger most it seemed, while now her breast,
   Beaten with some great passion at her heart,
   Palpitated, her hand shook, and we heard
   In the dead hush the papers that she held
   Rustle:  at once the lost lamb at her feet
   Sent out a bitter bleating for its dam;
   The plaintive cry jarred on her ire; she crushed
   The scrolls together, made a sudden turn
   As if to speak, but, utterance failing her,
   She whirled them on to me, as who should say
   'Read,' and I read--two letters--one her sire's.

        'Fair daughter, when we sent the Prince your way,
   We knew not your ungracious laws, which learnt,
   We, conscious of what temper you are built,
   Came all in haste to hinder wrong, but fell
   Into his father's hands, who has this night,
   You lying close upon his territory,
   Slipt round and in the dark invested you,
   And here he keeps me hostage for his son.'

        The second was my father's running thus:
   'You have our son:  touch not a hair of his head:
   Render him up unscathed:  give him your hand:
   Cleave to your contract:  though indeed we hear
   You hold the woman is the better man;
   A rampant heresy, such as if it spread
   Would make all women kick against their Lords
   Through all the world, and which might well deserve
   That we this night should pluck your palace down;
   And we will do it, unless you send us back
   Our son, on the instant, whole.'
                                   So far I read;
   And then stood up and spoke impetuously.

        'O not to pry and peer on your reserve,
   But led by golden wishes, and a hope
   The child of regal compact, did I break
   Your precinct; not a scorner of your sex
   But venerator, zealous it should be
   All that it might be:  hear me, for I bear,
   Though man, yet human, whatsoe'er your wrongs,
   From the flaxen curl to the gray lock a life
   Less mine than yours:  my nurse would tell me of you;
   I babbled for you, as babies for the moon,
   Vague brightness; when a boy, you stooped to me
   From all high places, lived in all fair lights,
   Came in long breezes rapt from inmost south
   And blown to inmost north; at eve and dawn
   With Ida, Ida, Ida, rang the woods;
   The leader wildswan in among the stars
   Would clang it, and lapt in wreaths of glowworm light
   The mellow breaker murmured Ida.  Now,
   Because I would have reached you, had you been
   Sphered up with Cassiopëia, or the enthroned
   Persephonè in Hades, now at length,
   Those winters of abeyance all worn out,
   A man I came to see you:  but indeed,
   Not in this frequence can I lend full tongue,
   O noble Ida, to those thoughts that wait
   On you, their centre:  let me say but this,
   That many a famous man and woman, town
   And landskip, have I heard of, after seen
   The dwarfs of presage:  though when known, there grew
   Another kind of beauty in detail
   Made them worth knowing; but in your I found
   My boyish dream involved and dazzled down
   And mastered, while that after-beauty makes
   Such head from act to act, from hour to hour,
   Within me, that except you slay me here,
   According to your bitter statute-book,
   I cannot cease to follow you, as they say
   The seal does music; who desire you more
   Than growing boys their manhood; dying lips,
   With many thousand matters left to do,
   The breath of life; O more than poor men wealth,
   Than sick men health--yours, yours, not mine--but half
   Without you; with you, whole; and of those halves
   You worthiest; and howe'er you block and bar
   Your heart with system out from mine, I hold
   That it becomes no man to nurse despair,
   But in the teeth of clenched antagonisms
   To follow up the worthiest till he die:
   Yet that I came not all unauthorized
   Behold your father's letter.'
                                On one knee
   Kneeling, I gave it, which she caught, and dashed
   Unopened at her feet:  a tide of fierce
   Invective seemed to wait behind her lips,
   As waits a river level with the dam
   Ready to burst and flood the world with foam:
   And so she would have spoken, but there rose
   A hubbub in the court of half the maids
   Gathered together:  from the illumined hall
   Long lanes of splendour slanted o'er a press
   Of snowy shoulders, thick as herded ewes,
   And rainbow robes, and gems and gemlike eyes,
   And gold and golden heads; they to and fro
   Fluctuated, as flowers in storm, some red, some pale,
   All open-mouthed, all gazing to the light,
   Some crying there was an army in the land,
   And some that men were in the very walls,
   And some they cared not; till a clamour grew
   As of a new-world Babel, woman-built,
   And worse-confounded:  high above them stood
   The placid marble Muses, looking peace.

        Not peace she looked, the Head:  but rising up
   Robed in the long night of her deep hair, so
   To the open window moved, remaining there
   Fixt like a beacon-tower above the waves
   Of tempest, when the crimson-rolling eye
   Glares ruin, and the wild birds on the light
   Dash themselves dead.  She stretched her arms and called
   Across the tumult and the tumult fell.

        'What fear ye, brawlers? am not I your Head?
   On me, me, me, the storm first breaks:  _I_ dare
   All these male thunderbolts:  what is it ye fear?
   Peace! there are those to avenge us and they come:
   If not,--myself were like enough, O girls,
   To unfurl the maiden banner of our rights,
   And clad in iron burst the ranks of war,
   Or, falling, promartyr of our cause,
   Die:  yet I blame you not so much for fear:
   Six thousand years of fear have made you that
   From which I would redeem you:  but for those
   That stir this hubbub--you and you--I know
   Your faces there in the crowd--tomorrow morn
   We hold a great convention:  then shall they
   That love their voices more than duty, learn
   With whom they deal, dismissed in shame to live
   No wiser than their mothers, household stuff,
   Live chattels, mincers of each other's fame,
   Full of weak poison, turnspits for the clown,
   The drunkard's football, laughing-stocks of Time,
   Whose brains are in their hands and in their heels
   But fit to flaunt, to dress, to dance, to thrum,
   To tramp, to scream, to burnish, and to scour,
   For ever slaves at home and fools abroad.'

        She, ending, waved her hands:  thereat the crowd
   Muttering, dissolved:  then with a smile, that looked
   A stroke of cruel sunshine on the cliff,
   When all the glens are drowned in azure gloom
   Of thunder-shower, she floated to us and said:

        'You have done well and like a gentleman,
   And like a prince:  you have our thanks for all:
   And you look well too in your woman's dress:
   Well have you done and like a gentleman.
   You saved our life:  we owe you bitter thanks:
   Better have died and spilt our bones in the flood--
   Then men had said--but now--What hinders me
   To take such bloody vengeance on you both?--
   Yet since our father--Wasps in our good hive,
   You would-be quenchers of the light to be,
   Barbarians, grosser than your native bears--
   O would I had his sceptre for one hour!
   You that have dared to break our bound, and gulled
   Our servants, wronged and lied and thwarted us--
   _I_ wed with thee!  _I_ bound by precontract
   Your bride, our bondslave! not though all the gold
   That veins the world were packed to make your crown,
   And every spoken tongue should lord you.  Sir,
   Your falsehood and yourself are hateful to us:
   I trample on your offers and on you:
   Begone:  we will not look upon you more.
   Here, push them out at gates.'
                                 In wrath she spake.
   Then those eight mighty daughters of the plough
   Bent their broad faces toward us and addressed
   Their motion:  twice I sought to plead my cause,
   But on my shoulder hung their heavy hands,
   The weight of destiny:  so from her face
   They pushed us, down the steps, and through the court,
   And with grim laughter thrust us out at gates.

        We crossed the street and gained a petty mound
   Beyond it, whence we saw the lights and heard the voices murmuring.
   While I listened, came
   On a sudden the weird seizure and the doubt:
   I seemed to move among a world of ghosts;
   The Princess with her monstrous woman-guard,
   The jest and earnest working side by side,
   The cataract and the tumult and the kings
   Were shadows; and the long fantastic night
   With all its doings had and had not been,
   And all things were and were not.
                                    This went by
   As strangely as it came, and on my spirits
   Settled a gentle cloud of melancholy;
   Not long; I shook it off; for spite of doubts
   And sudden ghostly shadowings I was one
   To whom the touch of all mischance but came
   As night to him that sitting on a hill
   Sees the midsummer, midnight, Norway sun
   Set into sunrise; then we moved away.


   Thy voice is heard through rolling drums,
      That beat to battle where he stands;
   Thy face across his fancy comes,
      And gives the battle to his hands:
   A moment, while the trumpets blow,
      He sees his brood about thy knee;
   The next, like fire he meets the foe,
      And strikes him dead for thine and thee.


   So Lilia sang:  we thought her half-possessed,
   She struck such warbling fury through the words;
   And, after, feigning pique at what she called
   The raillery, or grotesque, or false sublime--
   Like one that wishes at a dance to change
   The music--clapt her hands and cried for war,
   Or some grand fight to kill and make an end:
   And he that next inherited the tale
   Half turning to the broken statue, said,
   'Sir Ralph has got your colours:  if I prove
   Your knight, and fight your battle, what for me?'
   It chanced, her empty glove upon the tomb
   Lay by her like a model of her hand.
   She took it and she flung it.  'Fight' she said,
   'And make us all we would be, great and good.'
   He knightlike in his cap instead of casque,
   A cap of Tyrol borrowed from the hall,
   Arranged the favour, and assumed the Prince.




V



   Now, scarce three paces measured from the mound,
   We stumbled on a stationary voice,
   And 'Stand, who goes?'  'Two from the palace' I.
   'The second two:  they wait,' he said, 'pass on;
   His Highness wakes:' and one, that clashed in arms,
   By glimmering lanes and walls of canvas led
   Threading the soldier-city, till we heard
   The drowsy folds of our great ensign shake
   From blazoned lions o'er the imperial tent
   Whispers of war.
                   Entering, the sudden light
   Dazed me half-blind:  I stood and seemed to hear,
   As in a poplar grove when a light wind wakes
   A lisping of the innumerous leaf and dies,
   Each hissing in his neighbour's ear; and then
   A strangled titter, out of which there brake
   On all sides, clamouring etiquette to death,
   Unmeasured mirth; while now the two old kings
   Began to wag their baldness up and down,
   The fresh young captains flashed their glittering teeth,
   The huge bush-bearded Barons heaved and blew,
   And slain with laughter rolled the gilded Squire.

        At length my Sire, his rough cheek wet with tears,
   Panted from weary sides 'King, you are free!
   We did but keep you surety for our son,
   If this be he,--or a dragged mawkin, thou,
   That tends to her bristled grunters in the sludge:'
   For I was drenched with ooze, and torn with briers,
   More crumpled than a poppy from the sheath,
   And all one rag, disprinced from head to heel.
   Then some one sent beneath his vaulted palm
   A whispered jest to some one near him, 'Look,
   He has been among his shadows.'  'Satan take
   The old women and their shadows! (thus the King
   Roared) make yourself a man to fight with men.
   Go:  Cyril told us all.'
                           As boys that slink
   From ferule and the trespass-chiding eye,
   Away we stole, and transient in a trice
   From what was left of faded woman-slough
   To sheathing splendours and the golden scale
   Of harness, issued in the sun, that now
   Leapt from the dewy shoulders of the Earth,
   And hit the Northern hills.  Here Cyril met us.
   A little shy at first, but by and by
   We twain, with mutual pardon asked and given
   For stroke and song, resoldered peace, whereon
   Followed his tale.  Amazed he fled away
   Through the dark land, and later in the night
   Had come on Psyche weeping:  'then we fell
   Into your father's hand, and there she lies,
   But will not speak, or stir.'
                                He showed a tent
   A stone-shot off:  we entered in, and there
   Among piled arms and rough accoutrements,
   Pitiful sight, wrapped in a soldier's cloak,
   Like some sweet sculpture draped from head to foot,
   And pushed by rude hands from its pedestal,
   All her fair length upon the ground she lay:
   And at her head a follower of the camp,
   A charred and wrinkled piece of womanhood,
   Sat watching like the watcher by the dead.

        Then Florian knelt, and 'Come' he whispered to her,
   'Lift up your head, sweet sister:  lie not thus.
   What have you done but right? you could not slay
   Me, nor your prince:  look up:  be comforted:
   Sweet is it to have done the thing one ought,
   When fallen in darker ways.'  And likewise I:
   'Be comforted:  have I not lost her too,
   In whose least act abides the nameless charm
   That none has else for me?'  She heard, she moved,
   She moaned, a folded voice; and up she sat,
   And raised the cloak from brows as pale and smooth
   As those that mourn half-shrouded over death
   In deathless marble.  'Her,' she said, 'my friend--
   Parted from her--betrayed her cause and mine--
   Where shall I breathe? why kept ye not your faith?
   O base and bad! what comfort? none for me!'
   To whom remorseful Cyril, 'Yet I pray
   Take comfort:  live, dear lady, for your child!'
   At which she lifted up her voice and cried.

        'Ah me, my babe, my blossom, ah, my child,
   My one sweet child, whom I shall see no more!
   For now will cruel Ida keep her back;
   And either she will die from want of care,
   Or sicken with ill-usage, when they say
   The child is hers--for every little fault,
   The child is hers; and they will beat my girl
   Remembering her mother:  O my flower!
   Or they will take her, they will make her hard,
   And she will pass me by in after-life
   With some cold reverence worse than were she dead.
   Ill mother that I was to leave her there,
   To lag behind, scared by the cry they made,
   The horror of the shame among them all:
   But I will go and sit beside the doors,
   And make a wild petition night and day,
   Until they hate to hear me like a wind
   Wailing for ever, till they open to me,
   And lay my little blossom at my feet,
   My babe, my sweet Aglaïa, my one child:
   And I will take her up and go my way,
   And satisfy my soul with kissing her:
   Ah! what might that man not deserve of me
   Who gave me back my child?'  'Be comforted,'
   Said Cyril, 'you shall have it:' but again
   She veiled her brows, and prone she sank, and so
   Like tender things that being caught feign death,
   Spoke not, nor stirred.
                          By this a murmur ran
   Through all the camp and inward raced the scouts
   With rumour of Prince Arab hard at hand.
   We left her by the woman, and without
   Found the gray kings at parle:  and 'Look you' cried
   My father 'that our compact be fulfilled:
   You have spoilt this child; she laughs at you and man:
   She wrongs herself, her sex, and me, and him:
   But red-faced war has rods of steel and fire;
   She yields, or war.'
                       Then Gama turned to me:
   'We fear, indeed, you spent a stormy time
   With our strange girl:  and yet they say that still
   You love her.  Give us, then, your mind at large:
   How say you, war or not?'
                            'Not war, if possible,
   O king,' I said, 'lest from the abuse of war,
   The desecrated shrine, the trampled year,
   The smouldering homestead, and the household flower
   Torn from the lintel--all the common wrong--
   A smoke go up through which I loom to her
   Three times a monster:  now she lightens scorn
   At him that mars her plan, but then would hate
   (And every voice she talked with ratify it,
   And every face she looked on justify it)
   The general foe.  More soluble is this knot,
   By gentleness than war.  I want her love.
   What were I nigher this although we dashed
   Your cities into shards with catapults,
   She would not love;--or brought her chained, a slave,
   The lifting of whose eyelash is my lord,
   Not ever would she love; but brooding turn
   The book of scorn, till all my flitting chance
   Were caught within the record of her wrongs,
   And crushed to death:  and rather, Sire, than this
   I would the old God of war himself were dead,
   Forgotten, rusting on his iron hills,
   Rotting on some wild shore with ribs of wreck,
   Or like an old-world mammoth bulked in ice,
   Not to be molten out.'
                         And roughly spake
   My father, 'Tut, you know them not, the girls.
   Boy, when I hear you prate I almost think
   That idiot legend credible.  Look you, Sir!
   Man is the hunter; woman is his game:
   The sleek and shining creatures of the chase,
   We hunt them for the beauty of their skins;
   They love us for it, and we ride them down.
   Wheedling and siding with them!  Out! for shame!
   Boy, there's no rose that's half so dear to them
   As he that does the thing they dare not do,
   Breathing and sounding beauteous battle, comes
   With the air of the trumpet round him, and leaps in
   Among the women, snares them by the score
   Flattered and flustered, wins, though dashed with death
   He reddens what he kisses:  thus I won
   You mother, a good mother, a good wife,
   Worth winning; but this firebrand--gentleness
   To such as her! if Cyril spake her true,
   To catch a dragon in a cherry net,
   To trip a tigress with a gossamer
   Were wisdom to it.'
                      'Yea but Sire,' I cried,
   'Wild natures need wise curbs.  The soldier?  No:
   What dares not Ida do that she should prize
   The soldier?  I beheld her, when she rose
   The yesternight, and storming in extremes,
   Stood for her cause, and flung defiance down
   Gagelike to man, and had not shunned the death,
   No, not the soldier's:  yet I hold her, king,
   True woman:  you clash them all in one,
   That have as many differences as we.
   The violet varies from the lily as far
   As oak from elm:  one loves the soldier, one
   The silken priest of peace, one this, one that,
   And some unworthily; their sinless faith,
   A maiden moon that sparkles on a sty,
   Glorifying clown and satyr; whence they need
   More breadth of culture:  is not Ida right?
   They worth it? truer to the law within?
   Severer in the logic of a life?
   Twice as magnetic to sweet influences
   Of earth and heaven? and she of whom you speak,
   My mother, looks as whole as some serene
   Creation minted in the golden moods
   Of sovereign artists; not a thought, a touch,
   But pure as lines of green that streak the white
   Of the first snowdrop's inner leaves; I say,
   Not like the piebald miscellany, man,
   Bursts of great heart and slips in sensual mire,
   But whole and one:  and take them all-in-all,
   Were we ourselves but half as good, as kind,
   As truthful, much that Ida claims as right
   Had ne'er been mooted, but as frankly theirs
   As dues of Nature.  To our point:  not war:
   Lest I lose all.'
                    'Nay, nay, you spake but sense'
   Said Gama.  'We remember love ourself
   In our sweet youth; we did not rate him then
   This red-hot iron to be shaped with blows.
   You talk almost like Ida:  _she_ can talk;
   And there is something in it as you say:
   But you talk kindlier:  we esteem you for it.--
   He seems a gracious and a gallant Prince,
   I would he had our daughter:  for the rest,
   Our own detention, why, the causes weighed,
   Fatherly fears--you used us courteously--
   We would do much to gratify your Prince--
   We pardon it; and for your ingress here
   Upon the skirt and fringe of our fair land,
   you did but come as goblins in the night,
   Nor in the furrow broke the ploughman's head,
   Nor burnt the grange, nor bussed the milking-maid,
   Nor robbed the farmer of his bowl of cream:
   But let your Prince (our royal word upon it,
   He comes back safe) ride with us to our lines,
   And speak with Arac:  Arac's word is thrice
   As ours with Ida:  something may be done--
   I know not what--and ours shall see us friends.
   You, likewise, our late guests, if so you will,
   Follow us:  who knows? we four may build some plan
   Foursquare to opposition.'
                             Here he reached
   White hands of farewell to my sire, who growled
   An answer which, half-muffled in his beard,
   Let so much out as gave us leave to go.

        Then rode we with the old king across the lawns
   Beneath huge trees, a thousand rings of Spring
   In every bole, a song on every spray
   Of birds that piped their Valentines, and woke
   Desire in me to infuse my tale of love
   In the old king's ears, who promised help, and oozed
   All o'er with honeyed answer as we rode
   And blossom-fragrant slipt the heavy dews
   Gathered by night and peace, with each light air
   On our mailed heads:  but other thoughts than Peace
   Burnt in us, when we saw the embattled squares,
   And squadrons of the Prince, trampling the flowers
   With clamour:  for among them rose a cry
   As if to greet the king; they made a halt;
   The horses yelled; they clashed their arms; the drum
   Beat; merrily-blowing shrilled the martial fife;
   And in the blast and bray of the long horn
   And serpent-throated bugle, undulated
   The banner:  anon to meet us lightly pranced
   Three captains out; nor ever had I seen
   Such thews of men:  the midmost and the highest
   Was Arac:  all about his motion clung
   The shadow of his sister, as the beam
   Of the East, that played upon them, made them glance
   Like those three stars of the airy Giant's zone,
   That glitter burnished by the frosty dark;
   And as the fiery Sirius alters hue,
   And bickers into red and emerald, shone
   Their morions, washed with morning, as they came.

        And I that prated peace, when first I heard
   War-music, felt the blind wildbeast of force,
   Whose home is in the sinews of a man,
   Stir in me as to strike:  then took the king
   His three broad sons; with now a wandering hand
   And now a pointed finger, told them all:
   A common light of smiles at our disguise
   Broke from their lips, and, ere the windy jest
   Had laboured down within his ample lungs,
   The genial giant, Arac, rolled himself
   Thrice in the saddle, then burst out in words.

        'Our land invaded, 'sdeath! and he himself
   Your captive, yet my father wills not war:
   And, 'sdeath! myself, what care I, war or no?
   but then this question of your troth remains:
   And there's a downright honest meaning in her;
   She flies too high, she flies too high! and yet
   She asked but space and fairplay for her scheme;
   She prest and prest it on me--I myself,
   What know I of these things? but, life and soul!
   I thought her half-right talking of her wrongs;
   I say she flies too high, 'sdeath! what of that?
   I take her for the flower of womankind,
   And so I often told her, right or wrong,
   And, Prince, she can be sweet to those she loves,
   And, right or wrong, I care not:  this is all,
   I stand upon her side:  she made me swear it--
   'Sdeath--and with solemn rites by candle-light--
   Swear by St something--I forget her name--
   Her that talked down the fifty wisest men;
   _She_ was a princess too; and so I swore.
   Come, this is all; she will not:  waive your claim:
   If not, the foughten field, what else, at once
   Decides it, 'sdeath! against my father's will.'

        I lagged in answer loth to render up
   My precontract, and loth by brainless war
   To cleave the rift of difference deeper yet;
   Till one of those two brothers, half aside
   And fingering at the hair about his lip,
   To prick us on to combat 'Like to like!
   The woman's garment hid the woman's heart.'
   A taunt that clenched his purpose like a blow!
   For fiery-short was Cyril's counter-scoff,
   And sharp I answered, touched upon the point
   Where idle boys are cowards to their shame,
   'Decide it here:  why not? we are three to three.'

        Then spake the third 'But three to three? no more?
   No more, and in our noble sister's cause?
   More, more, for honour:  every captain waits
   Hungry for honour, angry for his king.
   More, more some fifty on a side, that each
   May breathe himself, and quick! by overthrow
   Of these or those, the question settled die.'

        'Yea,' answered I, 'for this wreath of air,
   This flake of rainbow flying on the highest
   Foam of men's deeds--this honour, if ye will.
   It needs must be for honour if at all:
   Since, what decision? if we fail, we fail,
   And if we win, we fail:  she would not keep
   Her compact.'  ''Sdeath! but we will send to her,'
   Said Arac, 'worthy reasons why she should
   Bide by this issue:  let our missive through,
   And you shall have her answer by the word.'

        'Boys!' shrieked the old king, but vainlier than a hen
   To her false daughters in the pool; for none
   Regarded; neither seemed there more to say:
   Back rode we to my father's camp, and found
   He thrice had sent a herald to the gates,
   To learn if Ida yet would cede our claim,
   Or by denial flush her babbling wells
   With her own people's life:  three times he went:
   The first, he blew and blew, but none appeared:
   He battered at the doors; none came:  the next,
   An awful voice within had warned him thence:
   The third, and those eight daughters of the plough
   Came sallying through the gates, and caught his hair,
   And so belaboured him on rib and cheek
   They made him wild:  not less one glance he caught
   Through open doors of Ida stationed there
   Unshaken, clinging to her purpose, firm
   Though compassed by two armies and the noise
   Of arms; and standing like a stately Pine
   Set in a cataract on an island-crag,
   When storm is on the heights, and right and left
   Sucked from the dark heart of the long hills roll
   The torrents, dashed to the vale:  and yet her will
   Bred will in me to overcome it or fall.

        But when I told the king that I was pledged
   To fight in tourney for my bride, he clashed
   His iron palms together with a cry;
   Himself would tilt it out among the lads:
   But overborne by all his bearded lords
   With reasons drawn from age and state, perforce
   He yielded, wroth and red, with fierce demur:
   And many a bold knight started up in heat,
   And sware to combat for my claim till death.

        All on this side the palace ran the field
   Flat to the garden-wall:  and likewise here,
   Above the garden's glowing blossom-belts,
   A columned entry shone and marble stairs,
   And great bronze valves, embossed with Tomyris
   And what she did to Cyrus after fight,
   But now fast barred:  so here upon the flat
   All that long morn the lists were hammered up,
   And all that morn the heralds to and fro,
   With message and defiance, went and came;
   Last, Ida's answer, in a royal hand,
   But shaken here and there, and rolling words
   Oration-like.  I kissed it and I read.

        'O brother, you have known the pangs we felt,
   What heats of indignation when we heard
   Of those that iron-cramped their women's feet;
   Of lands in which at the altar the poor bride
   Gives her harsh groom for bridal-gift a scourge;
   Of living hearts that crack within the fire
   Where smoulder their dead despots; and of those,--
   Mothers,--that, with all prophetic pity, fling
   Their pretty maids in the running flood, and swoops
   The vulture, beak and talon, at the heart
   Made for all noble motion:  and I saw
   That equal baseness lived in sleeker times
   With smoother men:  the old leaven leavened all:
   Millions of throats would bawl for civil rights,
   No woman named:  therefore I set my face
   Against all men, and lived but for mine own.
   Far off from men I built a fold for them:
   I stored it full of rich memorial:
   I fenced it round with gallant institutes,
   And biting laws to scare the beasts of prey
   And prospered; till a rout of saucy boys
   Brake on us at our books, and marred our peace,
   Masked like our maids, blustering I know not what
   Of insolence and love, some pretext held
   Of baby troth, invalid, since my will
   Sealed not the bond--the striplings! for their sport!--
   I tamed my leopards:  shall I not tame these?
   Or you? or I? for since you think me touched
   In honour--what, I would not aught of false--
   Is not our case pure? and whereas I know
   Your prowess, Arac, and what mother's blood
   You draw from, fight; you failing, I abide
   What end soever:  fail you will not.  Still
   Take not his life:  he risked it for my own;
   His mother lives:  yet whatsoe'er you do,
   Fight and fight well; strike and strike him.  O dear
   Brothers, the woman's Angel guards you, you
   The sole men to be mingled with our cause,
   The sole men we shall prize in the after-time,
   Your very armour hallowed, and your statues
   Reared, sung to, when, this gad-fly brushed aside,
   We plant a solid foot into the Time,
   And mould a generation strong to move
   With claim on claim from right to right, till she
   Whose name is yoked with children's, know herself;
   And Knowledge in our own land make her free,
   And, ever following those two crownèd twins,
   Commerce and conquest, shower the fiery grain
   Of freedom broadcast over all the orbs
   Between the Northern and the Southern morn.'

        Then came a postscript dashed across the rest.
   See that there be no traitors in your camp:
   We seem a nest of traitors--none to trust
   Since our arms failed--this Egypt-plague of men!
   Almost our maids were better at their homes,
   Than thus man-girdled here:  indeed I think
   Our chiefest comfort is the little child
   Of one unworthy mother; which she left:
   She shall not have it back:  the child shall grow
   To prize the authentic mother of her mind.
   I took it for an hour in mine own bed
   This morning:  there the tender orphan hands
   Felt at my heart, and seemed to charm from thence
   The wrath I nursed against the world:  farewell.'

        I ceased; he said, 'Stubborn, but she may sit
   Upon a king's right hand in thunder-storms,
   And breed up warriors!  See now, though yourself
   Be dazzled by the wildfire Love to sloughs
   That swallow common sense, the spindling king,
   This Gama swamped in lazy tolerance.
   When the man wants weight, the woman takes it up,
   And topples down the scales; but this is fixt
   As are the roots of earth and base of all;
   Man for the field and woman for the hearth:
   Man for the sword and for the needle she:
   Man with the head and woman with the heart:
   Man to command and woman to obey;
   All else confusion.  Look you! the gray mare
   Is ill to live with, when her whinny shrills
   From tile to scullery, and her small goodman
   Shrinks in his arm-chair while the fires of Hell
   Mix with his hearth:  but you--she's yet a colt--
   Take, break her:  strongly groomed and straitly curbed
   She might not rank with those detestable
   That let the bantling scald at home, and brawl
   Their rights and wrongs like potherbs in the street.
   They say she's comely; there's the fairer chance:
   _I_ like her none the less for rating at her!
   Besides, the woman wed is not as we,
   But suffers change of frame.  A lusty brace
   Of twins may weed her of her folly.  Boy,
   The bearing and the training of a child
   Is woman's wisdom.'
                      Thus the hard old king:
   I took my leave, for it was nearly noon:
   I pored upon her letter which I held,
   And on the little clause 'take not his life:'
   I mused on that wild morning in the woods,
   And on the 'Follow, follow, thou shalt win:'
   I thought on all the wrathful king had said,
   And how the strange betrothment was to end:
   Then I remembered that burnt sorcerer's curse
   That one should fight with shadows and should fall;
   And like a flash the weird affection came:
   King, camp and college turned to hollow shows;
   I seemed to move in old memorial tilts,
   And doing battle with forgotten ghosts,
   To dream myself the shadow of a dream:
   And ere I woke it was the point of noon,
   The lists were ready.  Empanoplied and plumed
   We entered in, and waited, fifty there
   Opposed to fifty, till the trumpet blared
   At the barrier like a wild horn in a land
   Of echoes, and a moment, and once more
   The trumpet, and again:  at which the storm
   Of galloping hoofs bare on the ridge of spears
   And riders front to front, until they closed
   In conflict with the crash of shivering points,
   And thunder.  Yet it seemed a dream, I dreamed
   Of fighting.  On his haunches rose the steed,
   And into fiery splinters leapt the lance,
   And out of stricken helmets sprang the fire.
   Part sat like rocks:  part reeled but kept their seats:
   Part rolled on the earth and rose again and drew:
   Part stumbled mixt with floundering horses.  Down
   From those two bulks at Arac's side, and down
   From Arac's arm, as from a giant's flail,
   The large blows rained, as here and everywhere
   He rode the mellay, lord of the ringing lists,
   And all the plain,--brand, mace, and shaft, and shield--
   Shocked, like an iron-clanging anvil banged
   With hammers; till I thought, can this be he
   From Gama's dwarfish loins? if this be so,
   The mother makes us most--and in my dream
   I glanced aside, and saw the palace-front
   Alive with fluttering scarfs and ladies' eyes,
   And highest, among the statues, statuelike,
   Between a cymballed Miriam and a Jael,
   With Psyche's babe, was Ida watching us,
   A single band of gold about her hair,
   Like a Saint's glory up in heaven:  but she
   No saint--inexorable--no tenderness--
   Too hard, too cruel:  yet she sees me fight,
   Yea, let her see me fall! and with that I drave
   Among the thickest and bore down a Prince,
   And Cyril, one.  Yea, let me make my dream
   All that I would.  But that large-moulded man,
   His visage all agrin as at a wake,
   Made at me through the press, and, staggering back
   With stroke on stroke the horse and horseman, came
   As comes a pillar of electric cloud,
   Flaying the roofs and sucking up the drains,
   And shadowing down the champaign till it strikes
   On a wood, and takes, and breaks, and cracks, and splits,
   And twists the grain with such a roar that Earth
   Reels, and the herdsmen cry; for everything
   Game way before him:  only Florian, he
   That loved me closer than his own right eye,
   Thrust in between; but Arac rode him down:
   And Cyril seeing it, pushed against the Prince,
   With Psyche's colour round his helmet, tough,
   Strong, supple, sinew-corded, apt at arms;
   But tougher, heavier, stronger, he that smote
   And threw him:  last I spurred; I felt my veins
   Stretch with fierce heat; a moment hand to hand,
   And sword to sword, and horse to horse we hung,
   Till I struck out and shouted; the blade glanced,
   I did but shear a feather, and dream and truth
   Flowed from me; darkness closed me; and I fell.


   Home they brought her warrior dead:
      She nor swooned, nor uttered cry:
   All her maidens, watching, said,
      'She must weep or she will die.'

   Then they praised him, soft and low,
      Called him worthy to be loved,
   Truest friend and noblest foe;
      Yet she neither spoke nor moved.

   Stole a maiden from her place,
      Lightly to the warrior stept,
   Took the face-cloth from the face;
      Yet she neither moved nor wept.

   Rose a nurse of ninety years,
      Set his child upon her knee--
   Like summer tempest came her tears--
      'Sweet my child, I live for thee.'




VI



   My dream had never died or lived again.
   As in some mystic middle state I lay;
   Seeing I saw not, hearing not I heard:
   Though, if I saw not, yet they told me all
   So often that I speak as having seen.

        For so it seemed, or so they said to me,
   That all things grew more tragic and more strange;
   That when our side was vanquished and my cause
   For ever lost, there went up a great cry,
   The Prince is slain.  My father heard and ran
   In on the lists, and there unlaced my casque
   And grovelled on my body, and after him
   Came Psyche, sorrowing for Aglaïa.
        But high upon the palace Ida stood
   With Psyche's babe in arm:  there on the roofs
   Like that great dame of Lapidoth she sang.


      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  the seed,
   The little seed they laughed at in the dark,
   Has risen and cleft the soil, and grown a bulk
   Of spanless girth, that lays on every side
   A thousand arms and rushes to the Sun.

      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  they came;
   The leaves were wet with women's tears:  they heard
   A noise of songs they would not understand:
   They marked it with the red cross to the fall,
   And would have strown it, and are fallen themselves.

      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  they came,
   The woodmen with their axes:  lo the tree!
   But we will make it faggots for the hearth,
   And shape it plank and beam for roof and floor,
   And boats and bridges for the use of men.

      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  they struck;
   With their own blows they hurt themselves, nor knew
   There dwelt an iron nature in the grain:
   The glittering axe was broken in their arms,
   Their arms were shattered to the shoulder blade.

      'Our enemies have fallen, but this shall grow
   A night of Summer from the heat, a breadth
   Of Autumn, dropping fruits of power:  and rolled
   With music in the growing breeze of Time,
   The tops shall strike from star to star, the fangs
   Shall move the stony bases of the world.

        'And now, O maids, behold our sanctuary
   Is violate, our laws broken:  fear we not
   To break them more in their behoof, whose arms
   Championed our cause and won it with a day
   Blanched in our annals, and perpetual feast,
   When dames and heroines of the golden year
   Shall strip a hundred hollows bare of Spring,
   To rain an April of ovation round
   Their statues, borne aloft, the three:  but come,
   We will be liberal, since our rights are won.
   Let them not lie in the tents with coarse mankind,
   Ill nurses; but descend, and proffer these
   The brethren of our blood and cause, that there
   Lie bruised and maimed, the tender ministries
   Of female hands and hospitality.'

        She spoke, and with the babe yet in her arms,
   Descending, burst the great bronze valves, and led
   A hundred maids in train across the Park.
   Some cowled, and some bare-headed, on they came,
   Their feet in flowers, her loveliest:  by them went
   The enamoured air sighing, and on their curls
   From the high tree the blossom wavering fell,
   And over them the tremulous isles of light
   Slided, they moving under shade:  but Blanche
   At distance followed:  so they came:  anon
   Through open field into the lists they wound
   Timorously; and as the leader of the herd
   That holds a stately fretwork to the Sun,
   And followed up by a hundred airy does,
   Steps with a tender foot, light as on air,
   The lovely, lordly creature floated on
   To where her wounded brethren lay; there stayed;
   Knelt on one knee,--the child on one,--and prest
   Their hands, and called them dear deliverers,
   And happy warriors, and immortal names,
   And said 'You shall not lie in the tents but here,
   And nursed by those for whom you fought, and served
   With female hands and hospitality.'

        Then, whether moved by this, or was it chance,
   She past my way.  Up started from my side
   The old lion, glaring with his whelpless eye,
   Silent; but when she saw me lying stark,
   Dishelmed and mute, and motionlessly pale,
   Cold even to her, she sighed; and when she saw
   The haggard father's face and reverend beard
   Of grisly twine, all dabbled with the blood
   Of his own son, shuddered, a twitch of pain
   Tortured her mouth, and o'er her forehead past
   A shadow, and her hue changed, and she said:
   'He saved my life:  my brother slew him for it.'
   No more:  at which the king in bitter scorn
   Drew from my neck the painting and the tress,
   And held them up:  she saw them, and a day
   Rose from the distance on her memory,
   When the good Queen, her mother, shore the tress
   With kisses, ere the days of Lady Blanche:
   And then once more she looked at my pale face:
   Till understanding all the foolish work
   Of Fancy, and the bitter close of all,
   Her iron will was broken in her mind;
   Her noble heart was molten in her breast;
   She bowed, she set the child on the earth; she laid
   A feeling finger on my brows, and presently
   'O Sire,' she said, 'he lives:  he is not dead:
   O let me have him with my brethren here
   In our own palace:  we will tend on him
   Like one of these; if so, by any means,
   To lighten this great clog of thanks, that make
   Our progress falter to the woman's goal.'

        She said:  but at the happy word 'he lives'
   My father stooped, re-fathered o'er my wounds.
   So those two foes above my fallen life,
   With brow to brow like night and evening mixt
   Their dark and gray, while Psyche ever stole
   A little nearer, till the babe that by us,
   Half-lapt in glowing gauze and golden brede,
   Lay like a new-fallen meteor on the grass,
   Uncared for, spied its mother and began
   A blind and babbling laughter, and to dance
   Its body, and reach its fatling innocent arms
   And lazy lingering fingers.  She the appeal
   Brooked not, but clamouring out 'Mine--mine--not yours,
   It is not yours, but mine:  give me the child'
   Ceased all on tremble:  piteous was the cry:
   So stood the unhappy mother open-mouthed,
   And turned each face her way:  wan was her cheek
   With hollow watch, her blooming mantle torn,
   Red grief and mother's hunger in her eye,
   And down dead-heavy sank her curls, and half
   The sacred mother's bosom, panting, burst
   The laces toward her babe; but she nor cared
   Nor knew it, clamouring on, till Ida heard,
   Looked up, and rising slowly from me, stood
   Erect and silent, striking with her glance
   The mother, me, the child; but he that lay
   Beside us, Cyril, battered as he was,
   Trailed himself up on one knee:  then he drew
   Her robe to meet his lips, and down she looked
   At the armed man sideways, pitying as it seemed,
   Or self-involved; but when she learnt his face,
   Remembering his ill-omened song, arose
   Once more through all her height, and o'er him grew
   Tall as a figure lengthened on the sand
   When the tide ebbs in sunshine, and he said:

        'O fair and strong and terrible!  Lioness
   That with your long locks play the Lion's mane!
   But Love and Nature, these are two more terrible
   And stronger.  See, your foot is on our necks,
   We vanquished, you the Victor of your will.
   What would you more? Give her the child! remain
   Orbed in your isolation:  he is dead,
   Or all as dead:  henceforth we let you be:
   Win you the hearts of women; and beware
   Lest, where you seek the common love of these,
   The common hate with the revolving wheel
   Should drag you down, and some great Nemesis
   Break from a darkened future, crowned with fire,
   And tread you out for ever:  but howso'er
   Fixed in yourself, never in your own arms
   To hold your own, deny not hers to her,
   Give her the child!  O if, I say, you keep
   One pulse that beats true woman, if you loved
   The breast that fed or arm that dandled you,
   Or own one port of sense not flint to prayer,
   Give her the child! or if you scorn to lay it,
   Yourself, in hands so lately claspt with yours,
   Or speak to her, your dearest, her one fault,
   The tenderness, not yours, that could not kill,
   Give _me_ it:  _I_ will give it her.
                                   He said:
   At first her eye with slow dilation rolled
   Dry flame, she listening; after sank and sank
   And, into mournful twilight mellowing, dwelt
   Full on the child; she took it:  'Pretty bud!
   Lily of the vale! half opened bell of the woods!
   Sole comfort of my dark hour, when a world
   Of traitorous friend and broken system made
   No purple in the distance, mystery,
   Pledge of a love not to be mine, farewell;
   These men are hard upon us as of old,
   We two must part:  and yet how fain was I
   To dream thy cause embraced in mine, to think
   I might be something to thee, when I felt
   Thy helpless warmth about my barren breast
   In the dead prime:  but may thy mother prove
   As true to thee as false, false, false to me!
   And, if thou needs must needs bear the yoke, I wish it
   Gentle as freedom'--here she kissed it:  then--
   'All good go with thee! take it Sir,' and so
   Laid the soft babe in his hard-mailèd hands,
   Who turned half-round to Psyche as she sprang
   To meet it, with an eye that swum in thanks;
   Then felt it sound and whole from head to foot,
   And hugged and never hugged it close enough,
   And in her hunger mouthed and mumbled it,
   And hid her bosom with it; after that
   Put on more calm and added suppliantly:

        'We two were friends:  I go to mine own land
   For ever:  find some other:  as for me
   I scarce am fit for your great plans:  yet speak to me,
   Say one soft word and let me part forgiven.'

        But Ida spoke not, rapt upon the child.
   Then Arac.  'Ida--'sdeath! you blame the man;
   You wrong yourselves--the woman is so hard
   Upon the woman.  Come, a grace to me!
   I am your warrior:  I and mine have fought
   Your battle:  kiss her; take her hand, she weeps:
   'Sdeath!  I would sooner fight thrice o'er than see it.'

        But Ida spoke not, gazing on the ground,
   And reddening in the furrows of his chin,
   And moved beyond his custom, Gama said:

        'I've heard that there is iron in the blood,
   And I believe it.  Not one word? not one?
   Whence drew you this steel temper? not from me,
   Not from your mother, now a saint with saints.
   She said you had a heart--I heard her say it--
   "Our Ida has a heart"--just ere she died--
   "But see that some on with authority
   Be near her still" and I--I sought for one--
   All people said she had authority--
   The Lady Blanche:  much profit!  Not one word;
   No! though your father sues:  see how you stand
   Stiff as Lot's wife, and all the good knights maimed,
   I trust that there is no one hurt to death,
   For our wild whim:  and was it then for this,
   Was it for this we gave our palace up,
   Where we withdrew from summer heats and state,
   And had our wine and chess beneath the planes,
   And many a pleasant hour with her that's gone,
   Ere you were born to vex us?  Is it kind?
   Speak to her I say:  is this not she of whom,
   When first she came, all flushed you said to me
   Now had you got a friend of your own age,
   Now could you share your thought; now should men see
   Two women faster welded in one love
   Than pairs of wedlock; she you walked with, she
   You talked with, whole nights long, up in the tower,
   Of sine and arc, spheroïd and azimuth,
   And right ascension, Heaven knows what; and now
   A word, but one, one little kindly word,
   Not one to spare her:  out upon you, flint!
   You love nor her, nor me, nor any; nay,
   You shame your mother's judgment too.  Not one?
   You will not? well--no heart have you, or such
   As fancies like the vermin in a nut
   Have fretted all to dust and bitterness.'
   So said the small king moved beyond his wont.

        But Ida stood nor spoke, drained of her force
   By many a varying influence and so long.
   Down through her limbs a drooping languor wept:
   Her head a little bent; and on her mouth
   A doubtful smile dwelt like a clouded moon
   In a still water:  then brake out my sire,
   Lifted his grim head from my wounds.  'O you,
   Woman, whom we thought woman even now,
   And were half fooled to let you tend our son,
   Because he might have wished it--but we see,
   The accomplice of your madness unforgiven,
   And think that you might mix his draught with death,
   When your skies change again:  the rougher hand
   Is safer:  on to the tents:  take up the Prince.'

        He rose, and while each ear was pricked to attend
   A tempest, through the cloud that dimmed her broke
   A genial warmth and light once more, and shone
   Through glittering drops on her sad friend.
                                              'Come hither.
   O Psyche,' she cried out, 'embrace me, come,
   Quick while I melt; make reconcilement sure
   With one that cannot keep her mind an hour:
   Come to the hollow hear they slander so!
   Kiss and be friends, like children being chid!
   _I_ seem no more:  _I_ want forgiveness too:
   I should have had to do with none but maids,
   That have no links with men.  Ah false but dear,
   Dear traitor, too much loved, why?--why?--Yet see,
   Before these kings we embrace you yet once more
   With all forgiveness, all oblivion,
   And trust, not love, you less.
                                 And now, O sire,
   Grant me your son, to nurse, to wait upon him,
   Like mine own brother.  For my debt to him,
   This nightmare weight of gratitude, I know it;
   Taunt me no more:  yourself and yours shall have
   Free adit; we will scatter all our maids
   Till happier times each to her proper hearth:
   What use to keep them here--now? grant my prayer.
   Help, father, brother, help; speak to the king:
   Thaw this male nature to some touch of that
   Which kills me with myself, and drags me down
   From my fixt height to mob me up with all
   The soft and milky rabble of womankind,
   Poor weakling even as they are.'
                                   Passionate tears
   Followed:  the king replied not:  Cyril said:
   'Your brother, Lady,--Florian,--ask for him
   Of your great head--for he is wounded too--
   That you may tend upon him with the prince.'
   'Ay so,' said Ida with a bitter smile,
   'Our laws are broken:  let him enter too.'
   Then Violet, she that sang the mournful song,
   And had a cousin tumbled on the plain,
   Petitioned too for him.  'Ay so,' she said,
   'I stagger in the stream:  I cannot keep
   My heart an eddy from the brawling hour:
   We break our laws with ease, but let it be.'
   'Ay so?' said Blanche:  'Amazed am I to her
   Your Highness:  but your Highness breaks with ease
   The law your Highness did not make:  'twas I.
   I had been wedded wife, I knew mankind,
   And blocked them out; but these men came to woo
   Your Highness--verily I think to win.'

        So she, and turned askance a wintry eye:
   But Ida with a voice, that like a bell
   Tolled by an earthquake in a trembling tower,
   Rang ruin, answered full of grief and scorn.

        'Fling our doors wide! all, all, not one, but all,
   Not only he, but by my mother's soul,
   Whatever man lies wounded, friend or foe,
   Shall enter, if he will.  Let our girls flit,
   Till the storm die! but had you stood by us,
   The roar that breaks the Pharos from his base
   Had left us rock.  She fain would sting us too,
   But shall not.  Pass, and mingle with your likes.
   We brook no further insult but are gone.'
        She turned; the very nape of her white neck
   Was rosed with indignation:  but the Prince
   Her brother came; the king her father charmed
   Her wounded soul with words:  nor did mine own
   Refuse her proffer, lastly gave his hand.

        Then us they lifted up, dead weights, and bare
   Straight to the doors:  to them the doors gave way
   Groaning, and in the Vestal entry shrieked
   The virgin marble under iron heels:
   And on they moved and gained the hall, and there
   Rested:  but great the crush was, and each base,
   To left and right, of those tall columns drowned
   In silken fluctuation and the swarm
   Of female whisperers:  at the further end
   Was Ida by the throne, the two great cats
   Close by her, like supporters on a shield,
   Bow-backed with fear:  but in the centre stood
   The common men with rolling eyes; amazed
   They glared upon the women, and aghast
   The women stared at these, all silent, save
   When armour clashed or jingled, while the day,
   Descending, struck athwart the hall, and shot
   A flying splendour out of brass and steel,
   That o'er the statues leapt from head to head,
   Now fired an angry Pallas on the helm,
   Now set a wrathful Dian's moon on flame,
   And now and then an echo started up,
   And shuddering fled from room to room, and died
   Of fright in far apartments.
                               Then the voice
   Of Ida sounded, issuing ordinance:
   And me they bore up the broad stairs, and through
   The long-laid galleries past a hundred doors
   To one deep chamber shut from sound, and due
   To languid limbs and sickness; left me in it;
   And others otherwhere they laid; and all
   That afternoon a sound arose of hoof
   And chariot, many a maiden passing home
   Till happier times; but some were left of those
   Held sagest, and the great lords out and in,
   From those two hosts that lay beside the walls,
   Walked at their will, and everything was changed.


   Ask me no more:  the moon may draw the sea;
      The cloud may stoop from heaven and take the shape
      With fold to fold, of mountain or of cape;
   But O too fond, when have I answered thee?
                          Ask me no more.

   Ask me no more:  what answer should I give?
      I love not hollow cheek or faded eye:
      Yet, O my friend, I will not have thee die!
   Ask me no more, lest I should bid thee live;
                          Ask me no more.

   Ask me no more:  thy fate and mine are sealed:
      I strove against the stream and all in vain:
      Let the great river take me to the main:
   No more, dear love, for at a touch I yield;
                          Ask me no more.




VII



   So was their sanctuary violated,
   So their fair college turned to hospital;
   At first with all confusion:  by and by
   Sweet order lived again with other laws:
   A kindlier influence reigned; and everywhere
   Low voices with the ministering hand
   Hung round the sick:  the maidens came, they talked,
   They sang, they read:  till she not fair began
   To gather light, and she that was, became
   Her former beauty treble; and to and fro
   With books, with flowers, with Angel offices,
   Like creatures native unto gracious act,
   And in their own clear element, they moved.

        But sadness on the soul of Ida fell,
   And hatred of her weakness, blent with shame.
   Old studies failed; seldom she spoke:  but oft
   Clomb to the roofs, and gazed alone for hours
   On that disastrous leaguer, swarms of men
   Darkening her female field:  void was her use,
   And she as one that climbs a peak to gaze
   O'er land and main, and sees a great black cloud
   Drag inward from the deeps, a wall of night,
   Blot out the slope of sea from verge to shore,
   And suck the blinding splendour from the sand,
   And quenching lake by lake and tarn by tarn
   Expunge the world:  so fared she gazing there;
   So blackened all her world in secret, blank
   And waste it seemed and vain; till down she came,
   And found fair peace once more among the sick.

        And twilight dawned; and morn by morn the lark
   Shot up and shrilled in flickering gyres, but I
   Lay silent in the muffled cage of life:
   And twilight gloomed; and broader-grown the bowers
   Drew the great night into themselves, and Heaven,
   Star after Star, arose and fell; but I,
   Deeper than those weird doubts could reach me, lay
   Quite sundered from the moving Universe,
   Nor knew what eye was on me, nor the hand
   That nursed me, more than infants in their sleep.

        But Psyche tended Florian:  with her oft,
   Melissa came; for Blanche had gone, but left
   Her child among us, willing she should keep
   Court-favour:  here and there the small bright head,
   A light of healing, glanced about the couch,
   Or through the parted silks the tender face
   Peeped, shining in upon the wounded man
   With blush and smile, a medicine in themselves
   To wile the length from languorous hours, and draw
   The sting from pain; nor seemed it strange that soon
   He rose up whole, and those fair charities
   Joined at her side; nor stranger seemed that hears
   So gentle, so employed, should close in love,
   Than when two dewdrops on the petals shake
   To the same sweet air, and tremble deeper down,
   And slip at once all-fragrant into one.

        Less prosperously the second suit obtained
   At first with Psyche.  Not though Blanche had sworn
   That after that dark night among the fields
   She needs must wed him for her own good name;
        Not though he built upon the babe restored;
   Nor though she liked him, yielded she, but feared
   To incense the Head once more; till on a day
   When Cyril pleaded, Ida came behind
   Seen but of Psyche:  on her foot she hung
   A moment, and she heard, at which her face
   A little flushed, and she past on; but each
   Assumed from thence a half-consent involved
   In stillness, plighted troth, and were at peace.

        Nor only these:  Love in the sacred halls
   Held carnival at will, and flying struck
   With showers of random sweet on maid and man.
   Nor did her father cease to press my claim,
   Nor did mine own, now reconciled; nor yet
   Did those twin-brothers, risen again and whole;
   Nor Arac, satiate with his victory.

        But I lay still, and with me oft she sat:
   Then came a change; for sometimes I would catch
   Her hand in wild delirium, gripe it hard,
   And fling it like a viper off, and shriek
   'You are not Ida;' clasp it once again,
   And call her Ida, though I knew her not,
   And call her sweet, as if in irony,
   And call her hard and cold which seemed a truth:
   And still she feared that I should lose my mind,
   And often she believed that I should die:
   Till out of long frustration of her care,
   And pensive tendance in the all-weary noons,
   And watches in the dead, the dark, when clocks
   Throbbed thunder through the palace floors, or called
   On flying Time from all their silver tongues--
   And out of memories of her kindlier days,
   And sidelong glances at my father's grief,
   And at the happy lovers heart in heart--
   And out of hauntings of my spoken love,
   And lonely listenings to my muttered dream,
   And often feeling of the helpless hands,
   And wordless broodings on the wasted cheek--
   From all a closer interest flourished up,
   Tenderness touch by touch, and last, to these,
   Love, like an Alpine harebell hung with tears
   By some cold morning glacier; frail at first
   And feeble, all unconscious of itself,
   But such as gathered colour day by day.

   Last I woke sane, but well-nigh close to death
   For weakness:  it was evening:  silent light
   Slept on the painted walls, wherein were wrought
   Two grand designs; for on one side arose
   The women up in wild revolt, and stormed
   At the Oppian Law.  Titanic shapes, they crammed
   The forum, and half-crushed among the rest
   A dwarf-like Cato cowered.  On the other side
   Hortensia spoke against the tax; behind,
   A train of dames:  by axe and eagle sat,
   With all their foreheads drawn in Roman scowls,
   And half the wolf's-milk curdled in their veins,
   The fierce triumvirs; and before them paused
   Hortensia pleading:  angry was her face.

        I saw the forms:  I knew not where I was:
   They did but look like hollow shows; nor more
   Sweet Ida:  palm to palm she sat:  the dew
   Dwelt in her eyes, and softer all her shape
   And rounder seemed:  I moved:  I sighed:  a touch
   Came round my wrist, and tears upon my hand:
   Then all for languor and self-pity ran
   Mine down my face, and with what life I had,
   And like a flower that cannot all unfold,
   So drenched it is with tempest, to the sun,
   Yet, as it may, turns toward him, I on her
   Fixt my faint eyes, and uttered whisperingly:

        'If you be, what I think you, some sweet dream,
   I would but ask you to fulfil yourself:
   But if you be that Ida whom I knew,
   I ask you nothing:  only, if a dream,
   Sweet dream, be perfect.  I shall die tonight.
   Stoop down and seem to kiss me ere I die.'

        I could no more, but lay like one in trance,
   That hears his burial talked of by his friends,
   And cannot speak, nor move, nor make one sign,
   But lies and dreads his doom.  She turned; she paused;
   She stooped; and out of languor leapt a cry;
   Leapt fiery Passion from the brinks of death;
   And I believed that in the living world
   My spirit closed with Ida's at the lips;
   Till back I fell, and from mine arms she rose
   Glowing all over noble shame; and all
   Her falser self slipt from her like a robe,
   And left her woman, lovelier in her mood
   Than in her mould that other, when she came
   From barren deeps to conquer all with love;
   And down the streaming crystal dropt; and she
   Far-fleeted by the purple island-sides,
   Naked, a double light in air and wave,
   To meet her Graces, where they decked her out
   For worship without end; nor end of mine,
   Stateliest, for thee! but mute she glided forth,
   Nor glanced behind her, and I sank and slept,
   Filled through and through with Love, a happy sleep.

        Deep in the night I woke:  she, near me, held
   A volume of the Poets of her land:
   There to herself, all in low tones, she read.


      'Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white;
   Nor waves the cypress in the palace walk;
   Nor winks the gold fin in the porphyry font:
   The fire-fly wakens:  wake thou with me.

      Now droops the milkwhite peacock like a ghost,
   And like a ghost she glimmers on to me.

      Now lies the Earth all Danaë to the stars,
   And all thy heart lies open unto me.

      Now lies the silent meteor on, and leaves
   A shining furrow, as thy thoughts in me.

      Now folds the lily all her sweetness up,
   And slips into the bosom of the lake:
   So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip
   Into my bosom and be lost in me.'


   I heard her turn the page; she found a small
   Sweet Idyl, and once more, as low, she read:


      'Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height:
   What pleasure lives in height (the shepherd sang)
   In height and cold, the splendour of the hills?
   But cease to move so near the Heavens, and cease
   To glide a sunbeam by the blasted Pine,
   To sit a star upon the sparkling spire;
   And come, for love is of the valley, come,
   For love is of the valley, come thou down
   And find him; by the happy threshold, he,
   Or hand in hand with Plenty in the maize,
   Or red with spirted purple of the vats,
   Or foxlike in the vine; nor cares to walk
   With Death and Morning on the silver horns,
   Nor wilt thou snare him in the white ravine,
   Nor find him dropt upon the firths of ice,
   That huddling slant in furrow-cloven falls
   To roll the torrent out of dusky doors:
   But follow; let the torrent dance thee down
   To find him in the valley; let the wild
   Lean-headed Eagles yelp alone, and leave
   The monstrous ledges there to slope, and spill
   Their thousand wreaths of dangling water-smoke,
   That like a broken purpose waste in air:
   So waste not thou; but come; for all the vales
   Await thee; azure pillars of the hearth
   Arise to thee; the children call, and I
   Thy shepherd pipe, and sweet is every sound,
   Sweeter thy voice, but every sound is sweet;
   Myriads of rivulets hurrying through the lawn,
   The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
   And murmuring of innumerable bees.'


   So she low-toned; while with shut eyes I lay
   Listening; then looked.  Pale was the perfect face;
   The bosom with long sighs laboured; and meek
   Seemed the full lips, and mild the luminous eyes,
   And the voice trembled and the hand.  She said
   Brokenly, that she knew it, she had failed
   In sweet humility; had failed in all;
   That all her labour was but as a block
   Left in the quarry; but she still were loth,
   She still were loth to yield herself to one
   That wholly scorned to help their equal rights
   Against the sons of men, and barbarous laws.
   She prayed me not to judge their cause from her
   That wronged it, sought far less for truth than power
   In knowledge:  something wild within her breast,
   A greater than all knowledge, beat her down.
   And she had nursed me there from week to week:
   Much had she learnt in little time.  In part
   It was ill counsel had misled the girl
   To vex true hearts:  yet was she but a girl--
   'Ah fool, and made myself a Queen of farce!
   When comes another such? never, I think,
   Till the Sun drop, dead, from the signs.'
                                            Her voice
   choked, and her forehead sank upon her hands,
   And her great heart through all the faultful Past
   Went sorrowing in a pause I dared not break;
   Till notice of a change in the dark world
   Was lispt about the acacias, and a bird,
   That early woke to feed her little ones,
   Sent from a dewy breast a cry for light:
   She moved, and at her feet the volume fell.

        'Blame not thyself too much,' I said, 'nor blame
   Too much the sons of men and barbarous laws;
   These were the rough ways of the world till now.
   Henceforth thou hast a helper, me, that know
   The woman's cause is man's:  they rise or sink
   Together, dwarfed or godlike, bond or free:
   For she that out of Lethe scales with man
   The shining steps of Nature, shares with man
   His nights, his days, moves with him to one goal,
   Stays all the fair young planet in her hands--
   If she be small, slight-natured, miserable,
   How shall men grow? but work no more alone!
   Our place is much:  as far as in us lies
   We two will serve them both in aiding her--
   Will clear away the parasitic forms
   That seem to keep her up but drag her down--
   Will leave her space to burgeon out of all
   Within her--let her make herself her own
   To give or keep, to live and learn and be
   All that not harms distinctive womanhood.
   For woman is not undevelopt man,
   But diverse:  could we make her as the man,
   Sweet Love were slain:  his dearest bond is this,
   Not like to like, but like in difference.
   Yet in the long years liker must they grow;
   The man be more of woman, she of man;
   He gain in sweetness and in moral height,
   Nor lose the wrestling thews that throw the world;
   She mental breadth, nor fail in childward care,
   Nor lose the childlike in the larger mind;
   Till at the last she set herself to man,
   Like perfect music unto noble words;
   And so these twain, upon the skirts of Time,
   Sit side by side, full-summed in all their powers,
   Dispensing harvest, sowing the To-be,
   Self-reverent each and reverencing each,
   Distinct in individualities,
   But like each other even as those who love.
   Then comes the statelier Eden back to men:
   Then reign the world's great bridals, chaste and calm:
   Then springs the crowning race of humankind.
   May these things be!'
                        Sighing she spoke 'I fear
   They will not.'
                  'Dear, but let us type them now
   In our own lives, and this proud watchword rest
   Of equal; seeing either sex alone
   Is half itself, and in true marriage lies
   Nor equal, nor unequal:  each fulfils
   Defect in each, and always thought in thought,
   Purpose in purpose, will in will, they grow,
   The single pure and perfect animal,
   The two-celled heart beating, with one full stroke,
   Life.'
         And again sighing she spoke:  'A dream
   That once was mind! what woman taught you this?'

        'Alone,' I said, 'from earlier than I know,
   Immersed in rich foreshadowings of the world,
   I loved the woman:  he, that doth not, lives
   A drowning life, besotted in sweet self,
   Or pines in sad experience worse than death,
   Or keeps his winged affections clipt with crime:
   Yet was there one through whom I loved her, one
   Not learnèd, save in gracious household ways,
   Not perfect, nay, but full of tender wants,
   No Angel, but a dearer being, all dipt
   In Angel instincts, breathing Paradise,
   Interpreter between the Gods and men,
   Who looked all native to her place, and yet
   On tiptoe seemed to touch upon a sphere
   Too gross to tread, and all male minds perforce
   Swayed to her from their orbits as they moved,
   And girdled her with music.  Happy he
   With such a mother! faith in womankind
   Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high
   Comes easy to him, and though he trip and fall
   He shall not blind his soul with clay.'
                                          'But I,'
   Said Ida, tremulously, 'so all unlike--
   It seems you love to cheat yourself with words:
   This mother is your model.  I have heard
   of your strange doubts:  they well might be:  I seem
   A mockery to my own self.  Never, Prince;
   You cannot love me.'
                       'Nay but thee' I said
   'From yearlong poring on thy pictured eyes,
   Ere seen I loved, and loved thee seen, and saw
   Thee woman through the crust of iron moods
   That masked thee from men's reverence up, and forced
   Sweet love on pranks of saucy boyhood:  now,
   Given back to life, to life indeed, through thee,
   Indeed I love:  the new day comes, the light
   Dearer for night, as dearer thou for faults
   Lived over:  lift thine eyes; my doubts are dead,
   My haunting sense of hollow shows:  the change,
   This truthful change in thee has killed it.  Dear,
   Look up, and let thy nature strike on mine,
   Like yonder morning on the blind half-world;
   Approach and fear not; breathe upon my brows;
   In that fine air I tremble, all the past
   Melts mist-like into this bright hour, and this
   Is morn to more, and all the rich to-come
   Reels, as the golden Autumn woodland reels
   Athwart the smoke of burning weeds.  Forgive me,
   I waste my heart in signs:  let be.  My bride,
   My wife, my life.  O we will walk this world,
   Yoked in all exercise of noble end,
   And so through those dark gates across the wild
   That no man knows.  Indeed I love thee:  come,
   Yield thyself up:  my hopes and thine are one:
   Accomplish thou my manhood and thyself;
   Lay thy sweet hands in mine and trust to me.'




CONCLUSION



   So closed our tale, of which I give you all
   The random scheme as wildly as it rose:
   The words are mostly mine; for when we ceased
   There came a minute's pause, and Walter said,
   'I wish she had not yielded!' then to me,
   'What, if you drest it up poetically?'
   So prayed the men, the women:  I gave assent:
   Yet how to bind the scattered scheme of seven
   Together in one sheaf?  What style could suit?
   The men required that I should give throughout
   The sort of mock-heroic gigantesque,
   With which we bantered little Lilia first:
   The women--and perhaps they felt their power,
   For something in the ballads which they sang,
   Or in their silent influence as they sat,
   Had ever seemed to wrestle with burlesque,
   And drove us, last, to quite a solemn close--
   They hated banter, wished for something real,
   A gallant fight, a noble princess--why
   Not make her true-heroic--true-sublime?
   Or all, they said, as earnest as the close?
   Which yet with such a framework scarce could be.
   Then rose a little feud betwixt the two,
   Betwixt the mockers and the realists:
   And I, betwixt them both, to please them both,
   And yet to give the story as it rose,
   I moved as in a strange diagonal,
   And maybe neither pleased myself nor them.

        But Lilia pleased me, for she took no part
   In our dispute:  the sequel of the tale
   Had touched her; and she sat, she plucked the grass,
   She flung it from her, thinking:  last, she fixt
   A showery glance upon her aunt, and said,
   'You--tell us what we are' who might have told,
   For she was crammed with theories out of books,
   But that there rose a shout:  the gates were closed
   At sunset, and the crowd were swarming now,
   To take their leave, about the garden rails.

        So I and some went out to these:  we climbed
   The slope to Vivian-place, and turning saw
   The happy valleys, half in light, and half
   Far-shadowing from the west, a land of peace;
   Gray halls alone among their massive groves;
   Trim hamlets; here and there a rustic tower
   Half-lost in belts of hop and breadths of wheat;
   The shimmering glimpses of a stream; the seas;
   A red sail, or a white; and far beyond,
   Imagined more than seen, the skirts of France.

        'Look there, a garden!' said my college friend,
   The Tory member's elder son, 'and there!
   God bless the narrow sea which keeps her off,
   And keeps our Britain, whole within herself,
   A nation yet, the rulers and the ruled--
   Some sense of duty, something of a faith,
   Some reverence for the laws ourselves have made,
   Some patient force to change them when we will,
   Some civic manhood firm against the crowd--
   But yonder, whiff! there comes a sudden heat,
   The gravest citizen seems to lose his head,
   The king is scared, the soldier will not fight,
   The little boys begin to shoot and stab,
   A kingdom topples over with a shriek
   Like an old woman, and down rolls the world
   In mock heroics stranger than our own;
   Revolts, republics, revolutions, most
   No graver than a schoolboys' barring out;
   Too comic for the serious things they are,
   Too solemn for the comic touches in them,
   Like our wild Princess with as wise a dream
   As some of theirs--God bless the narrow seas!
   I wish they were a whole Atlantic broad.'

        'Have patience,' I replied, 'ourselves are full
   Of social wrong; and maybe wildest dreams
   Are but the needful preludes of the truth:
   For me, the genial day, the happy crowd,
   The sport half-science, fill me with a faith.
   This fine old world of ours is but a child
   Yet in the go-cart.  Patience!  Give it time
   To learn its limbs:  there is a hand that guides.'

        In such discourse we gained the garden rails,
   And there we saw Sir Walter where he stood,
   Before a tower of crimson holly-hoaks,
   Among six boys, head under head, and looked
   No little lily-handed Baronet he,
   A great broad-shouldered genial Englishman,
   A lord of fat prize-oxen and of sheep,
   A raiser of huge melons and of pine,
   A patron of some thirty charities,
   A pamphleteer on guano and on grain,
   A quarter-sessions chairman, abler none;
   Fair-haired and redder than a windy morn;
   Now shaking hands with him, now him, of those
   That stood the nearest--now addressed to speech--
   Who spoke few words and pithy, such as closed
   Welcome, farewell, and welcome for the year
   To follow:  a shout rose again, and made
   The long line of the approaching rookery swerve
   From the elms, and shook the branches of the deer
   From slope to slope through distant ferns, and rang
   Beyond the bourn of sunset; O, a shout
   More joyful than the city-roar that hails
   Premier or king!  Why should not these great Sirs
   Give up their parks some dozen times a year
   To let the people breathe?  So thrice they cried,
   I likewise, and in groups they streamed away.

        But we went back to the Abbey, and sat on,
   So much the gathering darkness charmed:  we sat
   But spoke not, rapt in nameless reverie,
   Perchance upon the future man:  the walls
   Blackened about us, bats wheeled, and owls whooped,
   And gradually the powers of the night,
   That range above the region of the wind,
   Deepening the courts of twilight broke them up
   Through all the silent spaces of the worlds,
   Beyond all thought into the Heaven of Heavens.

        Last little Lilia, rising quietly,
   Disrobed the glimmering statue of Sir Ralph
   From those rich silks, and home well-pleased we went.





THE SUPPRESSED POEMS

OF

ALFRED LORD TENNYSON

1830-1868


Edited By J.C. Thomson




Contents


EDITOR'S NOTE


TIMBUCTOO


POEMS CHIEFLY LYRICAL

    i. The How and the Why
   ii. The Burial of Love
  iii. To ----
   iv. Song _'I' the gloaming light'_
    v. Song _'Every day hath its night'_
   vi. Hero to Leander
  vii. The Mystic
 viii. The Grasshopper
   ix. Love, Pride and Forgetfulness
    x. Chorus _'The varied earth, the moving heaven'_
   xi. Lost Hope
  xii. The Tears of Heaven
 xiii. Love and Sorrow
  xiv. To a Lady sleeping
   xv. Sonnet _'Could I outwear my present state of woe'_
  xvi. Sonnet _'Though night hath climbed'_
 xvii. Sonnet _'Shall the hag Evil die'_
xviii. Sonnet _'The pallid thunder stricken sigh for gain'_
  xix. Love
   xx. English War Song
  xxi. National Song
 xxii. Dualisms
xxiii. [Greek: ohi rheontes]
 xxiv. Song _'The lintwhite and the throstlecock'_


CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERIODICALS, 1831-32

   xxv. A Fragment
  xxvi. Anacreontics
 xxvii. _'O sad no more! O sweet no more'_
xxviii. Sonnet _'Check every outflash, every ruder sally'_
  xxix. Sonnet _'Me my own fate to lasting sorrow doometh'_
   xxx. Sonnet _'There are three things that fill my heart with sighs'_


POEMS, 1833

   xxxi. Sonnet _'Oh beauty, passing beauty'_
  xxxii. The Hesperides
 xxxiii. Rosalind
  xxxiv. Song _'Who can say'_
   xxxv. Sonnet _'Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afar'_
  xxxvi. O Darling Room
 xxxvii. To Christopher North
xxxviii. The Lotos-Eaters
  xxxix. A Dream of Fair Women


MISCELLANEOUS POEMS AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERIODICALS, 1833-68

    xl. Cambridge
   xli. The Germ of 'Maud'
  xlii. _'A gate and afield half ploughed'_
 xliii. The Skipping-Rope
  xliv. The New Timon and the Poets
   xlv. Mablethorpe
  xlvi. _'What time I wasted youthful hours'_
 xlvii. Britons, guard your own
xlviii. Hands all round
  xlix. Suggested by reading an article in a newspaper
     l. _'God bless our Prince and Bride'_
    li. The Ringlet
   lii. Song _'Home they brought him slain with spears'_
  liii. 1865-1866


THE LOVER'S TALE, 1833.


INDEX OF FIRST LINES




_Note_

_To those unacquainted with Tennyson's conscientious methods, it may
seem strange that a volume of 160 pages is necessary to contain those
poems written and published by him during his active literary career,
and ultimately rejected as unsatisfactory. Of this considerable body
of verse, a great part was written, not in youth or old age, but while
Tennyson's powers were at their greatest. Whatever reasons may once
have existed for suppressing the poems that follow, the student of
English literature is entitled to demand that the whole body of
Tennyson's work should now be open, without restriction or impediment,
to the critical study to which the works of his compeers are
subjected._

_The bibliographical notes prefixed to the various poems give, in every
case, the date and medium of first publication._

_J.C.T._




=Timbuctoo=

A Poem Which Obtained The Chancellor's Medal At The
_Cambridge Commencement_  MDCCCXXIX

By
A. Tennyson
Of Trinity College

[Printed in Cambridge _Chronicle and Journal_ of Friday, July 10,
1829, and at the University Press by James Smith, among the
_Prolusiones Academicæ Præmiis annuis dignatæ et in Curia
Cantabrigiensi Recitatæ Comitiis Maximis_, MDCCCXXIX. Republished in
_Cambridge Prize Poems_, 1813 to 1858, by Messrs. Macmillan in 1859,
without alteration; and in 1893 in the appendix to a reprint of _Poems
by Two Brothers_].


=Timbuctoo=

    Deep in that lion-haunted inland lies
    A mystic city, goal of high Emprize.[A]
      --CHAPMAN.

  I stood upon the Mountain which o'erlooks
  The narrow seas, whose rapid interval
  Parts Afric from green Europe, when the Sun
  Had fall'n below th' Atlantick, and above
  The silent Heavens were blench'd with faery light,
  Uncertain whether faery light or cloud,
  Flowing Southward, and the chasms of deep, deep blue
  Slumber'd unfathomable, and the stars
  Were flooded over with clear glory and pale.
  I gaz'd upon the sheeny coast beyond,
  There where the Giant of old Time infixed
  The limits of his prowess, pillars high
  Long time eras'd from Earth: even as the sea
  When weary of wild inroad buildeth up
  Huge mounds whereby to stay his yeasty waves.
  And much I mus'd on legends quaint and old
  Which whilome won the hearts of all on Earth
  Toward their brightness, ev'n as flame draws air;
  But had their being in the heart of Man
  As air is th' life of flame: and thou wert then
  A center'd glory-circled Memory,
  Divinest Atalantis, whom the waves
  Have buried deep, and thou of later name
  Imperial Eldorado root'd with gold:
  Shadows to which, despite all shocks of Change,
  All on-set of capricious Accident,
  Men clung with yearning Hope which would not die.
  As when in some great City where the walls
  Shake, and the streets with ghastly faces throng'd
  Do utter forth a subterranean voice,
  Among the inner columns far retir'd
  At midnight, in the lone Acropolis.
  Before the awful Genius of the place
  Kneels the pale Priestess in deep faith, the while
  Above her head the weak lamp dips and winks
  Unto the fearful summoning without:
  Nathless she ever clasps the marble knees,
  Bathes the cold hand with tears, and gazeth on
  Those eyes which wear no light but that wherewith
  Her phantasy informs them.

                   Where are ye
  Thrones of the Western wave, fair Islands green?
  Where are your moonlight halls, your cedarn glooms,
  The blossoming abysses of your hills?
  Your flowering Capes and your gold-sanded bays
  Blown round with happy airs of odorous winds?
  Where are the infinite ways which, Seraphtrod,
  Wound thro' your great Elysian solitudes,
  Whose lowest depths were, as with visible love,
  Fill'd with Divine effulgence, circumfus'd,
  Flowing between the clear and polish'd stems,
  And ever circling round their emerald cones
  In coronals and glories, such as gird
  The unfading foreheads of the Saints in Heaven?
  For nothing visible, they say, had birth
  In that blest ground but it was play'd about
  With its peculiar glory. Then I rais'd
  My voice and cried 'Wide Afric, doth thy Sun
  Lighten, thy hills enfold a City as fair
  As those which starr'd the night o' the Elder World?
  Or is the rumour of thy Timbuctoo
  A dream as frail as those of ancient Time?'

  A curve of whitening, flashing, ebbing light!
  A rustling of white wings! The bright descent
  Of a young Seraph! and he stood beside me
  There on the ridge, and look'd into my face
  With his unutterable, shining orbs,
  So that with hasty motion I did veil
  My vision with both hands, and saw before me
  Such colour'd spots as dance athwart the eyes
  Of those that gaze upon the noonday Sun.
  Girt with a Zone of flashing gold beneath
  His breast, and compass'd round about his brow
  With triple arch of everchanging bows,
  And circled with the glory of living light
  And alternations of all hues, he stood.
  'O child of man, why muse you here alone
  Upon the Mountain, on the dreams of old
  Which fill'd the Earth with passing loveliness,
  Which flung strange music on the howling winds,
  And odours rapt from remote Paradise?
  Thy sense is clogg'd with dull mortality,
  Thy spirit fetter'd with the bond of clay:
  Open thine eye and see.'

                    I look'd, but not
  Upon his face, for it was wonderful
  With its exceeding brightness, and the light
  Of the great angel mind which look'd from out
  The starry glowing of his restless eyes.
  I felt my soul grow mighty, and my spirit
  With supernatural excitation bound
  Within me, and my mental eye grew large
  With such a vast circumference of thought,
  That in my vanity I seem'd to stand
  Upon the outward verge and bound alone
  Of full beatitude. Each failing sense
  As with a momentary flash of light
  Grew thrillingly distinct and keen. I saw
  The smallest grain that dappled the dark Earth,
  The indistinctest atom in deep air,
  The Moon's white cities, and the opal width
  Of her small glowing lakes, her silver heights
  Unvisited with dew of vagrant cloud,
  And the unsounded, undescended depth
  Of her black hollows. The clear Galaxy
  Shorn of its hoary lustre, wonderful,
  Distinct and vivid with sharp points of light
  Blaze within blaze, an unimagin'd depth
  And harmony of planet-girded Suns
  And moon-encircled planets, wheel in wheel,
  Arch'd the wan Sapphire. Nay, the hum of men,
  Or other things talking in unknown tongues,
  And notes of busy life in distant worlds
  Beat like a far wave on my anxious ear.

  A maze of piercing, trackless, thrilling thoughts
  Involving and embracing each with each
  Rapid as fire, inextricably link'd,
  Expanding momently with every sight
  And sound which struck the palpitating sense,
  The issue of strong impulse, hurried through
  The riv'n rapt brain: as when in some large lake
  From pressure of descendant crags, which lapse
  Disjointed, crumbling from their parent slope
  At slender interval, the level calm
  Is ridg'd with restless and increasing spheres
  Which break upon each other, each th' effect
  Of separate impulse, but more fleet and strong
  Than its precursor, till the eyes in vain
  Amid the wild unrest of swimming shade
  Dappled with hollow and alternate rise
  Of interpenetrated arc, would scan
  Definite round.
                   I know not if I shape
  These things with accurate similitude
  From visible objects, for but dimly now,
  Less vivid than a half-forgotten dream,
  The memory of that mental excellence
  Comes o'er me, and it may be I entwine
  The indecision of my present mind
  With its past clearness, yet it seems to me
  As even then the torrent of quick thought
  Absorbed me from the nature of itself
  With its own fleetness. Where is he that, borne
  Adown the sloping of an arrowy stream,
  Could link his shallop to the fleeting edge,
  And muse midway with philosophic calm
  Upon the wondrous laws which regulate
  The fierceness of the bounding element?
  My thoughts which long had grovell'd in the slime
  Of this dull world, like dusky worms which house
  Beneath unshaken waters, but at once
  Upon some earth-awakening day of spring
  Do pass from gloom to glory, and aloft
  Winnow the purple, bearing on both sides
  Double display of starlit wings which burn
  Fanlike and fibred, with intensest bloom:
  E'en so my thoughts, erewhile so low, now felt
  Unutterable buoyancy and strength
  To bear them upward through the trackless fields
  Of undefin'd existence far and free.

  Then first within the South methought I saw
  A wilderness of spires, and chrystal pile
  Of rampart upon rampart, dome on dome,
  Illimitable range of battlement
  On battlement, and the Imperial height
  Of Canopy o'ercanopied.
                              Behind,
  In diamond light, upsprung the dazzling Cones
  Of Pyramids, as far surpassing Earth's
  As Heaven than Earth is fairer. Each aloft
  Upon his renown'd Eminence bore globes
  Of wheeling suns, or stars, or semblances
  Of either, showering circular abyss
  Of radiance. But the glory of the place
  Stood out a pillar'd front of burnish'd gold
  Interminably high, if gold it were
  Or metal more ethereal, and beneath
  Two doors of blinding brilliance, where no gaze
  Might rest, stood open, and the eye could scan
  Through length of porch and lake and boundless
      hall,
  Part of a throne of fiery flame, wherefrom
  The snowy skirting of a garment hung,
  And glimpse of multitudes of multitudes
  That minister'd around it--if I saw
  These things distinctly, for my human brain
  Stagger'd beneath the vision, and thick night
  Came down upon my eyelids, and I fell.

  With ministering hand he rais'd me up;
  Then with a mournful and ineffable smile,
  Which but to look on for a moment fill'd
  My eyes with irresistible sweet tears,
  In accents of majestic melody,
  Like a swol'n river's gushings in still night
  Mingled with floating music, thus he spake:
  'There is no mightier Spirit than I to sway
  The heart of man: and teach him to attain
  By shadowing forth the Unattainable;
  And step by step to scale that mighty stair
  Whose landing-place is wrapt about with clouds
  Of glory of Heaven.[B] With earliest Light of Spring,
  And in the glow of sallow Summertide,
  And in red Autumn when the winds are wild
  With gambols, and when full-voiced Winter roofs
  The headland with inviolate white snow,
  I play about his heart a thousand ways,
  Visit his eyes with visions, and his ears
  With harmonies of wind and wave and wood
  --Of winds which tell of waters, and of waters
  Betraying the close kisses of the wind--
  And win him unto me: and few there be
  So gross of heart who have not felt and known
  A higher than they see: They with dim eyes
  Behold me darkling. Lo! I have given _thee_
  To understand my presence, and to feel
  My fullness; I have fill'd thy lips with power.
  I have rais'd thee higher to the Spheres of Heaven,
  Man's first, last home: and thou with ravish'd sense
  Listenest the lordly music flowing from
  Th' illimitable years. I am the Spirit,
  The permeating life which courseth through
  All th' intricate and labyrinthine veins
  Of the great vine of _Fable_, which, outspread
  With growth of shadowing leaf and clusters rare,
  Reacheth to every corner under Heaven,
  Deep-rooted in the living soil of truth:
  So that men's hopes and fears take refuge in
  The fragrance of its complicated glooms
  And cool impleachèd twilights. Child of Man,
  See'st thou yon river, whose translucent wave,
  Forth issuing from darkness, windeth through
  The argent streets o' the City, imaging
  The soft inversion of her tremulous Domes;
  Her gardens frequent with the stately Palm,
  Her Pagods hung with music of sweet bells:
  Her obelisks of rangèd Chrysolite,
  Minarets and towers? Lo! how he passeth by,
  And gulphs himself in sands, as not enduring
  To carry through the world those waves, which bore
  The reflex of my City in their depths.
  Oh City! Oh latest Throne! where I was rais'd
  To be a mystery of loveliness
  Unto all eyes, the time is well nigh come
  When I must render up this glorious home
  To keen _Discovery_: soon yon brilliant towers
  Shall darken with the waving of her wand;
  Darken, and shrink and shiver into huts,
  Black specks amid a waste of dreary sand,
  Low-built, mud-walled, Barbarian settlement,
  How chang'd from this fair City!'
                    Thus far the Spirit:
  Then parted Heavenward on the wing: and I
  Was left alone on Calpe, and the Moon
  Had fallen from the night, and all was dark!


[The following review of 'Timbuctoo' was published in the _Athenæum_
of 22nd July, 1829: 'We have accustomed ourselves to think, perhaps
without any very good reason, that poetry was likely to perish among
us for a considerable period after the great generation of poets which
is now passing away. The age seems determined to contradict us, and
that in the most decided manner; for it has put forth poetry by a
young man, and that where we should least expect it--namely, in a
prize poem. These productions have often been ingenious and elegant
but we have never before seen one of them which indicated really
first-rate poetical genius, and which would have done honour to any
men that ever wrote. Such, we do not hesitate to affirm, is the little
work before us; and the examiners seem to have felt it like ourselves,
for they have assigned the prize to the author, though the measure in
which he writes was never before, we believe, thus selected for
honour. We extract a few lines to justify our admiration (50 lines,
62-112, quoted). How many men have lived for a century who could equal
this?' At the time when this highly eulogistic notice of the youthful
unknown poet appeared, the _Athenæum_ was edited by John Sterling and
Frederick Denison Maurice, its then proprietors.]


[Footnote A: Mr Swinburne failed to find this couplet in any of
Chapman's original poems or translations, and was of opinion that it
is Tennyson's own.]

[Footnote B: Be ye perfect even as your Father in Heaven is perfect.]




=Poems Chiefly Lyrical=

[The poems numbered I-XXIV which follow, were published in 1830 in the
volume _Poems chiefly Lyrical_. (London: Effingham Wilson, Royal
Exchange, 1830.) They were never republished by Tennyson.]




I

=The 'How' and the 'Why'=

      I am any man's suitor,
      If any will be my tutor:
  Some say this life is pleasant,
      Some think it speedeth fast:
  In time there is no present,
      In eternity no future,
      In eternity no past.
  We laugh, we cry, we are born, we die,
  Who will riddle me the _how_ and the _why_?

  The bulrush nods unto his brother
  The wheatears whisper to each other:
  What is it they say? What do they there?
  Why two and two make four? Why round is not square?
  Why the rocks stand still, and the light clouds fly?
  Why the heavy oak groans, and the white willows sigh?
  Why deep is not high, and high is not deep?
  Whether we wake or whether we sleep?
  Whether we sleep or whether we die?
  How you are you? Why I am I?
  Who will riddle me the _how_ and the _why_?

  The world is somewhat; it goes on somehow;
  But what is the meaning of _then_ and _now_!
  I feel there is something; but how and what?
  I know there is somewhat; but what and why!
  I cannot tell if that somewhat be I.

  The little bird pipeth 'why! why!'
  In the summerwoods when the sun falls low,
  And the great bird sits on the opposite bough,
  And stares in his face and shouts 'how? how?'
  And the black owl scuds down the mellow twilight,
  And chaunts 'how? how?' the whole of the night.

  Why the life goes when the blood is spilt?
  What the life is? where the soul may lie?
  Why a church is with a steeple built;
  And a house with a chimney-pot?
  Who will riddle me the how and the what?
  Who will riddle me the what and the why?




II

=The Burial of Love=

      His eyes in eclipse,
      Pale cold his lips,
  The light of his hopes unfed,
      Mute his tongue,
      His bow unstrung
  With the tears he hath shed,
  Backward drooping his graceful head.

      Love is dead;
      His last arrow sped;
  He hath not another dart;
      Go--carry him to his dark deathbed;
  Bury him in the cold, cold heart--
      Love is dead.

  Oh, truest love! art thou forlorn,
      And unrevenged? Thy pleasant wiles
  Forgotten, and thine innocent joy?
      Shall hollow-hearted apathy,
  The cruellest form of perfect scorn,
      With langour of most hateful smiles,
  For ever write
  In the weathered light
      Of the tearless eye
      An epitaph that all may spy?
      No! sooner she herself shall die.

  For her the showers shall not fall,
  Nor the round sun that shineth to all;
      Her light shall into darkness change;
  For her the green grass shall not spring,
  Nor the rivers flow, nor the sweet birds sing,
      Till Love have his full revenge.




III

=To ----=

  Sainted Juliet! dearest name!
      If to love be life alone,
        Divinest Juliet,
      I love thee, and live; and yet
  Love unreturned is like the fragrant flame
      Folding the slaughter of the sacrifice
      Offered to Gods upon an altarthrone;
  My heart is lighted at thine eyes,
  Changed into fire, and blown about with sighs.




IV

=Song=

  I

      I' the glooming light
      Of middle night,
      So cold and white,
  Worn Sorrow sits by the moaning wave;
      Beside her are laid,
      Her mattock and spade,
  For she hath half delved her own deep grave.
      Alone she is there:
  The white clouds drizzle: her hair falls loose;
      Her shoulders are bare;
  Her tears are mixed with the bearded dews.

  II

      Death standeth by;
      She will not die;
      With glazèd eye
  She looks at her grave: she cannot sleep;
      Ever alone
      She maketh her moan:
  She cannot speak; she can only weep;
      For she will not hope.
  The thick snow falls on her flake by flake,
      The dull wave mourns down the slope,
  The world will not change, and her heart will not break.




V

=Song=

  I

  Every day hath its night:
      Every night its morn:
  Through dark and bright
      Wingèd hours are borne;
          Ah! welaway!
  Seasons flower and fade;
      Golden calm and storm
          Mingle day by day.
      There is no bright form
  Doth not cast a shade--
          Ah! welaway!

  II

  When we laugh, and our mirth
      Apes the happy vein,
  We're so kin to earth
      Pleasuance fathers pain--
          Ah! welaway!
  Madness laugheth loud:
      Laughter bringeth tears:
          Eyes are worn away
      Till the end of fears
  Cometh in the shroud,
          Ah! welaway!

  III

  All is change, woe or weal;
      Joy is sorrow's brother;
  Grief and sadness steal
      Symbols of each other;
          Ah! welaway!
  Larks in heaven's cope
      Sing: the culvers mourn
          All the livelong day.
      Be not all forlorn;
  Let us weep in hope--
          Ah! welaway!




VI

=Hero to Leander=

  Oh go not yet, my love,
      The night is dark and vast;
  The white moon is hid in her heaven above,
      And the waves climb high and fast.
  Oh! kiss me, kiss me, once again,
      Lest thy kiss should be the last.
      Oh kiss me ere we part;
      Grow closer to my heart.
  My heart is warmer surely than the bosom of the main.

  Oh joy! O bliss of blisses!
      My heart of hearts art thou.
  Come bathe me with thy kisses,
      My eyelids and my brow.
  Hark how the wild rain hisses,
      And the loud sea roars below.

  Thy heart beats through thy rosy limbs
      So gladly doth it stir;
  Thine eye in drops of gladness swims.
      I have bathed thee with the pleasant myrrh;
  Thy locks are dripping balm;
      Thou shalt not wander hence to-night,
  I'll stay thee with my kisses.
      To-night the roaring brine
  Will rend thy golden tresses;
      The ocean with the morrow light
  Will be both blue and calm;
      And the billow will embrace thee with a kiss as soft as mine.

  No western odours wander
      On the black and moaning sea,
  And when thou art dead, Leander,
      My soul shall follow thee!
  Oh go not yet, my love,
      Thy voice is sweet and low;
  The deep salt wave breaks in above
      Those marble steps below.
  The turretstairs are wet
      That lead into the sea.
  Leander! go not yet.
  The pleasant stars have set!
  Oh! go not, go not yet,
      Or I will follow thee.




VII

=The Mystic=

  Angels have talked with him, and showed him thrones:
  Ye knew him not: he was not one of ye,
  Ye scorned him with an undiscerning scorn:
  Ye could not read the marvel in his eye,
  The still serene abstraction; he hath felt
  The vanities of after and before;
  Albeit, his spirit and his secret heart
  The stern experiences of converse lives,
  The linkèd woes of many a fiery change
  Had purified, and chastened, and made free.
  Always there stood before him, night and day,
  Of wayward vary coloured circumstance,
  The imperishable presences serene,
  Colossal, without form, or sense, or sound,
  Dim shadows but unwaning presences
  Fourfacèd to four corners of the sky;
  And yet again, three shadows, fronting one,
  One forward, one respectant, three but one;
  And yet again, again and evermore,
  For the two first were not, but only seemed
  One shadow in the midst of a great light,
  One reflex from eternity on time,
  One mighty countenance of perfect calm,
  Awful with most invariable eyes.
  For him the silent congregated hours,
  Daughters of time, divinely tall, beneath
  Severe and youthful brows, with shining eyes
  Smiling a godlike smile (the innocent light
  Of earliest youth pierced through and through with all
  Keen knowledges of low-embowèd eld)
  Upheld, and ever hold aloft the cloud
  Which droops low hung on either gate of life,
  Both birth and death; he in the centre fixed,
  Saw far on each side through the grated gates
  Most pale and clear and lovely distances.
  He often lying broad awake, and yet
  Remaining from the body, and apart
  In intellect and power and will, hath heard
  Time flowing in the middle of the night,
  And all things creeping to a day of doom.
  How could ye know him? Ye were yet within
  The narrower circle; he had well nigh reached
  The last, with which a region of white flame,
  Pure without heat, into a larger air
  Upburning, and an ether of black hue,
  Investeth and ingirds all other lives.




VIII

=The Grasshopper=

  I

  Voice of the summerwind,
      Joy of the summerplain,
      Life of the summerhours,
    Carol clearly, bound along.
      No Tithon thou as poets feign
  (Shame fall 'em they are deaf and blind)
    But an insect lithe and strong,
      Bowing the seeded summerflowers.
  Prove their falsehood and thy quarrel,
      Vaulting on thine airy feet.
  Clap thy shielded sides and carol,
      Carol clearly, chirrup sweet
  Thou art a mailèd warrior in youth and strength complete;
      Armed cap-a-pie,
      Full fair to see;
        Unknowing fear,
      Undreading loss,
        A gallant cavalier
  _Sans peur et sans reproche_,
      In sunlight and in shadow,
      The Bayard of the meadow.

  II

  I would dwell with thee,
      Merry grasshopper,
  Thou art so glad and free,
      And as light as air;
  Thou hast no sorrow or tears,
  Thou hast no compt of years,
  No withered immortality,
  But a short youth sunny and free.
  Carol clearly, bound along,
      Soon thy joy is over,
  A summer of loud song,
      And slumbers in the clover.
      What hast thou to do with evil
      In thine hour of love and revel,
      In thy heat of summerpride,
      Pushing the thick roots aside
      Of the singing flowerèd grasses,
      That brush thee with their silken tresses?
  What hast thou to do with evil,
  Shooting, singing, ever springing
      In and out the emerald glooms,
  Ever leaping, ever singing,
      Lighting on the golden blooms?




IX

=Love, Pride and Forgetfulness=

  Ere yet my heart was sweet Love's tomb,
  Love laboured honey busily.
  I was the hive and Love the bee,
  My heart the honey-comb.
  One very dark and chilly night
  Pride came beneath and held a light.

  The cruel vapours went through all,
  Sweet Love was withered in his cell;
  Pride took Love's sweets, and by a spell
  Did change them into gall;
  And Memory tho' fed by Pride
  Did wax so thin on gall,
  Awhile she scarcely lived at all,
  What marvel that she died?




X

=Chorus=

_In an unpublished drama written very early._

  The varied earth, the moving heaven,
      The rapid waste of roving sea,
  The fountainpregnant mountains riven
      To shapes of wildest anarchy,
  By secret fire and midnight storms
      That wander round their windy cones,
  The subtle life, the countless forms
      Of living things, the wondrous tones
  Of man and beast are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.

  The day, the diamonded light,
      The echo, feeble child of sound,
  The heavy thunder's girding might,
      The herald lightning's starry bound,
  The vocal spring of bursting bloom,
      The naked summer's glowing birth,
  The troublous autumn's sallow gloom,
      The hoarhead winter paving earth
  With sheeny white, are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.

  Each sun which from the centre flings
      Grand music and redundant fire,
  The burning belts, the mighty rings,
      The murmurous planets' rolling choir,
  The globefilled arch that, cleaving air,
      Lost in its effulgence sleeps,
  The lawless comets as they glare,
      And thunder thro' the sapphire deeps
  In wayward strength, are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.




XI

=Lost Hope=

  You cast to ground the hope which once was mine,
      But did the while your harsh decree deplore,
  Embalming with sweet tears the vacant shrine,
      My heart, where Hope had been and was no more.

  So on an oaken sprout
      A goodly acorn grew;
  But winds from heaven shook the acorn out,
      And filled the cup with dew.




XII

=The Tears of Heaven=

  Heaven weeps above the earth all night till morn,
  In darkness weeps, as all ashamed to weep,
  Because the earth hath made her state forlorn
  With selfwrought evils of unnumbered years,
  And doth the fruit of her dishonour reap.
  And all the day heaven gathers back her tears
  Into her own blue eyes so clear and deep,
  And showering down the glory of lightsome day,
  Smiles on the earth's worn brow to win her if she may.




XIII

=Love and Sorrow=

  O maiden, fresher than the first green leaf
  With which the fearful springtide flecks the lea,
  Weep not, Almeida, that I said to thee
  That thou hast half my heart, for bitter grief
  Doth hold the other half in sovranty.
  Thou art my heart's sun in love's crystalline:
  Yet on both sides at once thou canst not shine:
  Thine is the bright side of my heart, and thine
  My heart's day, but the shadow of my heart,
  Issue of its own substance, my heart's night
  Thou canst not lighten even with _thy_ light,
  All powerful in beauty as thou art.
  Almeida, if my heart were substanceless,
  Then might thy rays pass thro' to the other side,
  So swiftly, that they nowhere would abide,
  But lose themselves in utter emptiness.
  Half-light, half-shadow, let my spirit sleep
  They never learnt to love who never knew to weep.




XIV

=To a Lady Sleeping=

  O thou whose fringèd lids I gaze upon,
  Through whose dim brain the wingèd dreams are born,
  Unroof the shrines of clearest vision,
  In honour of the silverfleckèd morn:
  Long hath the white wave of the virgin light
  Driven back the billow of the dreamful dark.
  Thou all unwittingly prolongest night,
  Though long ago listening the poisèd lark,
  With eyes dropt downward through the blue serene,
  Over heaven's parapets the angels lean.




XV

=Sonnet=

  Could I outwear my present state of woe
  With one brief winter, and indue i' the spring
  Hues of fresh youth, and mightily outgrow
  The wan dark coil of faded suffering--
  Forth in the pride of beauty issuing
  A sheeny snake, the light of vernal bowers,
  Moving his crest to all sweet plots of flowers
  And watered vallies where the young birds sing;
  Could I thus hope my lost delights renewing,
  I straightly would commend the tears to creep
  From my charged lids; but inwardly I weep:
  Some vital heat as yet my heart is wooing:
  This to itself hath drawn the frozen rain
  From my cold eyes and melted it again.




XVI

=Sonnet=

  Though Night hath climbed her peak of highest noon,
  And bitter blasts the screaming autumn whirl,
  All night through archways of the bridgèd pearl
  And portals of pure silver walks the moon.
  Wake on, my soul, nor crouch to agony:
  Turn cloud to light, and bitterness to joy,
  And dross to gold with glorious alchemy,
  Basing thy throne above the world's annoy.
  Reign thou above the storms of sorrow and ruth
  That roar beneath; unshaken peace hath won thee:
  So shall thou pierce the woven glooms of truth;
  So shall the blessing of the meek be on thee;
  So in thine hour of dawn, the body's youth,
  An honourable eld shall come upon thee.




XVII

=Sonnet=

  Shall the hag Evil die with the child of Good,
  Or propagate again her loathèd kind,
  Thronging the cells of the diseased mind,
  Hateful with hanging cheeks, a withered brood,
  Though hourly pastured on the salient blood?
  Oh! that the wind which bloweth cold or heat
  Would shatter and o'erbear the brazen beat
  Of their broad vans, and in the solitude
  Of middle space confound them, and blow back
  Their wild cries down their cavernthroats, and slake
  With points of blastborne hail their heated eyne!
  So their wan limbs no more might come between
  The moon and the moon's reflex in the night;
  Nor blot with floating shades the solar light.




XVIII

=Sonnet=

  The palid thunderstricken sigh for gain,
  Down an ideal stream they ever float,
  And sailing on Pactolus in a boat,
  Drown soul and sense, while wistfully they strain
  Weak eyes upon the glistering sands that robe
  The understream. The wise could he behold
  Cathedralled caverns of thick-ribbèd gold
  And branching silvers of the central globe,
  Would marvel from so beautiful a sight
  How scorn and ruin, pain and hate could flow:
  But Hatred in a gold cave sits below,
  Pleached with her hair, in mail of argent light
  Shot into gold, a snake her forehead clips
  And skins the colour from her trembling lips.




XIX

=Love=

  I

  Thou, from the first, unborn, undying love,
  Albeit we gaze not on thy glories near,
  Before the face of God didst breath and move,
  Though night and pain and ruin and death reign here.
  Thou foldest, like a golden atmosphere,
  The very throne of the eternal God:
  Passing through thee the edicts of his fear
  Are mellowed into music, borne abroad
  By the loud winds, though they uprend the sea,
  Even from his central deeps: thine empery
  Is over all: thou wilt not brook eclipse;
  Thou goest and returnest to His Lips
  Like lightning: thou dost ever brood above
  The silence of all hearts, unutterable Love.

  II

  To know thee is all wisdom, and old age
  Is but to know thee: dimly we behold thee
  Athwart the veils of evil which enfold thee
  We beat upon our aching hearts with rage;
  We cry for thee: we deem the world thy tomb.
  As dwellers in lone planets look upon
  The mighty disk of their majestic sun,
  Hallowed in awful chasms of wheeling gloom,
  Making their day dim, so we gaze on thee.
  Come, thou of many crowns, white-robèd love,
  Oh! rend the veil in twain: all men adore thee;
  Heaven crieth after thee; earth waileth for thee:
  Breathe on thy wingèd throne, and it shall move
  In music and in light o'er land and sea.

  III

  And now--methinks I gaze upon thee now,
  As on a serpent in his agonies
  Awestricken Indians; what time laid low
  And crushing the thick fragrant reeds he lies,
  When the new year warm breathèd on the earth,
  Waiting to light him with his purple skies,
  Calls to him by the fountain to uprise.
  Already with the pangs of a new birth
  Strain the hot spheres of his convulsèd eyes,
  And in his writhings awful hues begin
  To wander down his sable sheeny sides,
  Like light on troubled waters: from within
  Anon he rusheth forth with merry din,
  And in him light and joy and strength abides;
  And from his brows a crown of living light
  Looks through the thickstemmed woods by day and night




XX

=English War Song=

      Who fears to die? Who fears to die?
      Is there any here who fears to die
  He shall find what he fears, and none shall grieve
      For the man who fears to die:
  But the withering scorn of the many shall cleave
      To the man who fears to die.

  _Chorus_.--Shout for England!
                  Ho! for England!
                  George for England!
                  Merry England!
                  England for aye!

  The hollow at heart shall crouch forlorn,
  He shall eat the bread of common scorn;
      It shall be steeped in the salt, salt tear,
      Shall be steeped in his own salt tear:
  Far better, far better he never were born
      Than to shame merry England here.

  _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.

  There standeth our ancient enemy;
  Hark! he shouteth--the ancient enemy!
      On the ridge of the hill his banners rise;
      They stream like fire in the skies;
  Hold up the Lion of England on high
      Till it dazzle and blind his eyes.

      _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.

  Come along! we alone of the earth are free;
  The child in our cradles is bolder than he;
      For where is the heart and strength of slaves?
      Oh! where is the strength of slaves?
  He is weak! we are strong; he a slave, we are free;
      Come along! we will dig their graves.

      _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.

  There standeth our ancient enemy;
  Will he dare to battle with the free?
      Spur along! spur amain! charge to the fight:
      Charge! charge to the fight!
  Hold up the Lion of England on high!
      Shout for God and our right!

      _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.




XXI

=National Song=

  There is no land like England
    Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no hearts like English hearts,
    Such hearts of oak as they be.
  There is no land like England
    Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no men like Englishmen,
    So tall and bold as they be.

  _Chorus_.--For the French the Pope may shrive 'em,
                  For the devil a whit we heed 'em,
                  As for the French, God speed 'em
                    Unto their hearts' desire,
                  And the merry devil drive 'em
                    Through the water and the fire.

  _Chorus_.--Our glory is our freedom,
                    We lord it o'er the sea;
                  We are the sons of freedom,
                    We are free.

  There is no land like England,
    Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no wives like English wives,
    So fair and chaste as they be.
  There is no land like England,
    Where'er the light of day be,
  There are no maids like English maids,
    So beautiful as they be.

  _Chorus_.--For the French, etc.

[Sixty years after first publication this Song was incorporated in
'The Foresters' (published 1892) as the opening chorus of the second
act. The two verses were unaltered, but the two choruses were
re-written.]




XXII

=Dualisms=

  Two bees within a chrystal flowerbell rockèd
  Hum a lovelay to the westwind at noontide.
  Both alike, they buzz together,
  Both alike, they hum together
  Through and through the flowered heather.

  Where in a creeping cove the wave unshockèd
    Lays itself calm and wide,
  Over a stream two birds of glancing feather
  Do woo each other, carolling together.
  Both alike, they glide together
    Side by side;
  Both alike, they sing together,
  Arching blue-glossèd necks beneath the purple weather.

  Two children lovelier than love, adown the lea are singing,
  As they gambol, lilygarlands ever stringing:
  Both in blosmwhite silk are frockèd:
  Like, unlike, they roam together
  Under a summervault of golden weather;
  Like, unlike, they sing together
    Side by side;
  Mid May's darling goldenlockèd,
  Summer's tanling diamondeyed.




XXIII

[Greek: ohi rheontes]

  I

  All thoughts, all creeds, all dreams are true,
    All visions wild and strange;
  Man is the measure of all truth
    Unto himself. All truth is change:
  All men do walk in sleep, and all
    Have faith in that they dream:
  For all things are as they seem to all,
    And all things flow like a stream.

  II

  There is no rest, no calm, no pause,
    Nor good nor ill, nor light nor shade,
  Nor essence nor eternal laws:
    For nothing is, but all is made,
  But if I dream that all these are,
    They are to me for that I dream;
  For all things are as they seem to all,
    And all things flow like a stream.


Argal.--This very opinion is only true relatively to the flowing
philosophers. (Tennyson's note.)




XXIV

=Song=

  I

  The lintwhite and the throstlecock
      Have voices sweet and clear;
    All in the bloomèd May.
  They from the blosmy brere
  Call to the fleeting year,
  If that he would them hear
      And stay.
  Alas! that one so beautiful
    Should have so dull an ear.

  II

  Fair year, fair year, thy children call,
      But thou art deaf as death;
    All in the bloomèd May.
  When thy light perisheth
  That from thee issueth,
  Our life evanisheth:
      Oh! stay.
  Alas! that lips so cruel dumb
    Should have so sweet a breath!

  III

  Fair year, with brows of royal love
      Thou comest, as a King.
    All in the bloomèd May.
  Thy golden largess fling,
  And longer hear us sing;
  Though thou art fleet of wing,
      Yet stay.
  Alas! that eyes so full of light
  Should be so wandering!

  IV

  Thy locks are full of sunny sheen
      In rings of gold yronne,[C]
    All in the bloomèd May,
  We pri' thee pass not on;
  If thou dost leave the sun,
  Delight is with thee gone,
      Oh! stay.
  Thou art the fairest of thy feres,
    We pri' thee pass not on.

[Footnote C: His crispè hair in ringis was yronne.--Chaucer, _Knight's
Tale_. (Tennyson's note.)]




=Contributions to Periodicals 1831-32=


XXV

=A Fragment=

[Published in _The Gem: a Literary Annual_. London: W. Marshall,
Holborn Bars, mdcccxxxi.]

  Where is the Giant of the Sun, which stood
  In the midnoon the glory of old Rhodes,
  A perfect Idol, with profulgent brows
  Far sheening down the purple seas to those
  Who sailed from Mizraim underneath the star
  Named of the Dragon--and between whose limbs
  Of brassy vastness broad-blown Argosies
  Drave into haven? Yet endure unscathed
  Of changeful cycles the great Pyramids
  Broad-based amid the fleeting sands, and sloped
  Into the slumberous summer noon; but where,
  Mysterious Egypt, are thine obelisks
  Graven with gorgeous emblems undiscerned?
  Thy placid Sphinxes brooding o'er the Nile?
  Thy shadowy Idols in the solitudes,
  Awful Memnonian countenances calm
  Looking athwart the burning flats, far off
  Seen by the high-necked camel on the verge
  Journeying southward? Where are thy monuments
  Piled by the strong and sunborn Anakim
  Over their crowned brethren [Greek: ON] and [Greek: ORÊ]?
  Thy Memnon, when his peaceful lips are kissed
  With earliest rays, that from his mother's eyes
  Flow over the Arabian bay, no more
  Breathes low into the charmed ears of morn
  Clear melody flattering the crisped Nile
  By columned Thebes. Old Memphis hath gone down:
  The Pharaohs are no more: somewhere in death
  They sleep with staring eyes and gilded lips,
  Wrapped round with spiced cerements in old grots
  Rock-hewn and sealed for ever.




XXVI

=Anacreontics=

[Published in _The Gem: a Literary Annual_. London: W. Marshall,
Holborn Bars, mdcccxxxi.]

  With roses musky breathed,
  And drooping daffodilly,
  And silverleaved lily,
  And ivy darkly-wreathed,
  I wove a crown before her,
  For her I love so dearly,
  A garland for Lenora.
  With a silken cord I bound it.
  Lenora, laughing clearly
  A light and thrilling laughter,
  About her forehead wound it,
  And loved me ever after.




XXVII

[Published in _The Gem: a Literary Annual_. London: W. Marshall,
Holborn Bars, mdcccxxxi.]

      O sad _No more!_ O sweet _No more!_
                O strange _No more!_
      By a mossed brookbank on a stone
      I smelt a wildweed flower alone;
      There was a ringing in my ears,
      And both my eyes gushed out with tears.
  Surely all pleasant things had gone before,
  Low-buried fathom deep beneath with thee,
                NO MORE!




XXVIII

=Sonnet=

[Published in the _Englishman's Magazine_, August, 1831. London:
Edward Moxon, 64 New Bond Street. Reprinted in _Friendship's Offering:
a Literary Album_ for 1833. London; Smith and Elder.]

  Check every outflash, every ruder sally
    Of thought and speech; speak low, and give up wholly
    Thy spirit to mild-minded Melancholy;
  This is the place. Through yonder poplar alley
  Below, the blue-green river windeth slowly;
    But in the middle of the sombre valley
    The crispèd waters whisper musically,
  And all the haunted place is dark and holy.
  The nightingale, with long and low preamble,
    Warbled from yonder knoll of solemn larches,
    And in and out the woodbine's flowery arches
  The summer midges wove their wanton gambol,
    And all the white-stemmed pinewood slept above--
    When in this valley first I told my love.




XXIX

=Sonnet=

[Published in _Friendships Offering: a Literary Album_ for 1832.
London: Smith and Elder.]

  Me my own fate to lasting sorrow doometh:
    Thy woes are birds of passage, transitory:
    Thy spirit, circled with a living glory,
  In summer still a summer joy resumeth.
  Alone my hopeless melancholy gloometh,
    Like a lone cypress, through the twilight hoary,
  From an old garden where no flower bloometh,
    One cypress on an inland promontory.
  But yet my lonely spirit follows thine,
    As round the rolling earth night follows day:
  But yet thy lights on my horizon shine
    Into my night when thou art far away;
  I am so dark, alas! and thou so bright,
  When we two meet there's never perfect light.




XXX

=Sonnet=

[Published in the _Yorkshire Literary Annual_ for 1832. Edited by C.F.
Edgar, London: Longman and Co. Reprinted in the _Athenæum_, 4 May,
1867.]

  There are three things that fill my heart with sighs
  And steep my soul in laughter (when I view
  Fair maiden forms moving like melodies),
  Dimples, roselips, and eyes of any hue.

  There are three things beneath the blessed skies
  For which I live--black eyes, and brown and blue;
  I hold them all most dear; but oh! black eyes,
  I live and die, and only die for you.

  Of late such eyes looked at me--while I mused
  At sunset, underneath a shadowy plane
  In old Bayona, nigh the Southern Sea--
  From an half-open lattice looked at _me_.

  I saw no more only those eyes--confused
  And dazzled to the heart with glorious pain.




=Poems, 1833=


[The poems numbered XXXI-XXXIX were published in the 1832 volume
(_Poems by Alfred Tennyson_. London: Edward Moxon, 94 New Bond Street.
MDCCCXXXIII; published December, 1832), and were thereafter
suppressed.]




XXXI

=Sonnet=

  Oh, Beauty, passing beauty! sweetest Sweet!
    How canst thou let me waste my youth in sighs;
  I only ask to sit beside thy feet.
    Thou knowest I dare not look into thine eyes,
  Might I but kiss thy hand! I dare not fold
    My arms about thee--scarcely dare to speak.
  And nothing seems to me so wild and bold,
    As with one kiss to touch thy blessèd cheek.
  Methinks if I should kiss thee, no control
    Within the thrilling brain could keep afloat
    The subtle spirit. Even while I spoke,
  The bare word KISS hath made my inner soul
    To tremble like a lutestring, ere the note
    Hath melted in the silence that it broke.




XXXII

=The Hesperides=

    Hesperus and his daughters three
    That sing about the golden tree.
      --COMUS.

  The Northwind fall'n, in the newstarréd night
  Zidonian Hanno, voyaging beyond
  The hoary promontory of Soloë
  Past Thymiaterion, in calmèd bays,
  Between the Southern and the Western Horn,
  Heard neither warbling of the nightingale,
  Nor melody o' the Lybian lotusflute
  Blown seaward from the shore; but from a slope
  That ran bloombright into the Atlantic blue,
  Beneath a highland leaning down a weight
  Of cliffs, and zoned below with cedarshade,
  Came voices, like the voices in a dream,
  Continuous till he reached the other sea.


_Song_

  I

  The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
  Guard it well, guard it warily,
  Singing airily,
  Standing about the charméd root.
  Round about all is mute,
  As the snowfield on the mountain-peaks,
  As the sandfield at the mountain-foot.
  Crocodiles in briny creeks
  Sleep and stir not: all is mute.
  If ye sing not, if ye make false measure,
  We shall lose eternal pleasure,
  Worth eternal want of rest.
  Laugh not loudly: watch the treasure
  Of the wisdom of the West.
  In a corner wisdom whispers. Five and three
  (Let it not be preached abroad) make an awful mystery.
  For the blossom unto three-fold music bloweth;
  Evermore it is born anew;
  And the sap to three-fold music floweth,
  From the root
  Drawn in the dark,
  Up to the fruit,
  Creeping under the fragrant bark,
  Liquid gold, honeysweet thro' and thro'.
  Keen-eyed Sisters, singing airily,
  Looking warily
  Every way,
  Guard the apple night and day,
  Lest one from the East come and take it away.

  II

  Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, ever and aye,
  Looking under silver hair with a silver eye.
  Father, twinkle not thy stedfast sight;
  Kingdoms lapse, and climates change, and races die;
  Honour comes with mystery;
  Hoarded wisdom brings delight.
  Number, tell them over and number
  How many the mystic fruit-tree holds,
  Lest the redcombed dragon slumber
  Rolled together in purple folds.
  Look to him, father, lest he wink, and the golden apple be stol'n away,
  For his ancient heart is drunk with overwatchings night and day,
  Round about the hallowed fruit tree curled--
  Sing away, sing aloud and evermore in the wind, without stop,
  Lest his scalèd eyelid drop,
  For he is older than the world.
  If he waken, we waken,
  Rapidly levelling eager eyes.
  If he sleep, we sleep,
  Dropping the eyelid over the eyes.
  If the golden apple be taken
  The world will be overwise.
  Five links, a golden chain, are we,
  Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
  Bound about the golden tree.

  III

  Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, night and day,
  Lest the old wound of the world be healèd,
  The glory unsealèd,
  The golden apple stol'n away,
  And the ancient secret revealèd.
  Look from west to east along:
  Father, old Himla weakens, Caucasus is bold and strong.
  Wandering waters unto wandering waters call;
  Let them clash together, foam and fall.
  Out of watchings, out of wiles,
  Comes the bliss of secret smiles,
  All things are not told to all,
  Half round the mantling night is drawn,
  Purplefringed with even and dawn.
  Hesper hateth Phosphor, evening hateth morn.

  IV

  Every flower and every fruit the redolent breath
  Of this warm seawind ripeneth,
  Arching the billow in his sleep;
  But the land-wind wandereth,
  Broken by the highland-steep,
  Two streams upon the violet deep:
  For the western sun and the western star,
  And the low west wind, breathing afar,
  The end of day and beginning of night
  Make the apple holy and bright,
  Holy and bright, round and full, bright and blest,
  Mellowed in a land of rest;
  Watch it warily day and night;
  All good things are in the west,
  Till midnoon the cool east light
  Is shut out by the round of the tall hillbrow;
  But when the fullfaced sunset yellowly
  Stays on the flowering arch of the bough,
  The luscious fruitage clustereth mellowly,
  Goldenkernelled, goldencored,
  Sunset ripened, above on the tree,
  The world is wasted with fire and sword,
  But the apple of gold hangs over the sea,
  Five links, a golden chain, are we,
  Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
      Daughters three,
      Bound about
      All round about
  The gnarlèd bole of the charmèd tree,
  The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
  Guard it well, guard it warily,
      Watch it warily,
      Singing airily,
  Standing about the charmèd root.




XXXIII

=Rosalind=

    My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
  Bold, subtle, careless Rosalind,
  Is one of those who know no strife
  Of inward woe or outward fear;
  To whom the slope and stream of life,
  The life before, the life behind,
  In the ear, from far and near,
  Chimeth musically clear.
  My falconhearted Rosalind
  Fullsailed before a vigorous wind,
  Is one of those who cannot weep
  For others' woes, but overleap
  All the petty shocks and fears
  That trouble life in early years,
  With a flash of frolic scorn
  And keen delight, that never falls
  Away from freshness, self-upborne
  With such gladness, as, whenever
  The freshflushing springtime calls
  To the flooding waters cool,
  Young fishes, on an April morn,
  Up and down a rapid river,
  Leap the little waterfalls
  That sing into the pebbled pool.
  My happy falcon, Rosalind,
  Hath daring fancies of her own,
  Fresh as the dawn before the day,
  Fresh as the early seasmell blown
  Through vineyards from an inland bay.
  My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
  Because no shadow on you falls,
  Think you hearts are tennis balls
  To play with, wanton Rosalind?




XXXIV

=Song=

  Who can say
  Why To-day
  To-morrow will be yesterday?
  Who can tell
  Why to smell
  The violet, recalls the dewy prime
  Of youth and buried time?
  The cause is nowhere found in rhyme.




XXXV

=Sonnet=

_Written on hearing of the outbreak of the Polish Insurrection._

  Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afar
    The hosts to battle: be not bought and sold.
    Arise, brave Poles, the boldest of the bold;
  Break through your iron shackles--fling them far.
  O for those days of Piast, ere the Czar
    Grew to this strength among his deserts cold;
    When even to Moscow's cupolas were rolled
  The growing murmurs of the Polish war!
  Now must your noble anger blaze out more
    Than when from Sobieski, clan by clan,
  The Moslem myriads fell, and fled before--
    Than when Zamoysky smote the Tartar Khan,
  Than earlier, when on the Baltic shore
    Boleslas drove the Pomeranian.




XXXVI

=O Darling Room=[D]

  I

  O darling room, my heart's delight,
  Dear room, the apple of my sight,
  With thy two couches soft and white,
  There is no room so exquisite,
  No little room so warm and bright
  Wherein to read, wherein to write.

  II

  For I the Nonnenwerth have seen,
  And Oberwinter's vineyards green,
  Musical Lurlei; and between
  The hills to Bingen have I been,
  Bingen in Darmstadt, where the Rhene
  Curves towards Mentz, a woody scene.

  III

  Yet never did there meet my sight,
  In any town, to left or right,
  A little room so exquisite,
  With two such couches soft and white;
  Not any room so warm and bright,
  Wherein to read, wherein to write.

[Footnote D: 'As soon as this poem was published, I altered the second
line to "All books and pictures ranged aright"; yet "Dear room, the
apple of my sight" (which was much abused) is not as bad as "Do go,
dear rain, do go away."' [Note initialed 'A.T.' in _Life_, vol. I, p.
89.] The worthlessness of much of the criticism lavished on Tennyson
by his coterie of adulating friends may be judged from the fact that
Arthur Hallam wrote to Tennyson that this poem was 'mighty
pleasant.']




XXXVII

=To Christopher North=

  You did late review my lays,
    Crusty Christopher;
  You did mingle blame and praise,
    Rusty Christopher.
  When I learnt from whom it came,
  I forgave you all the blame,
    Musty Christopher;
  I could _not_ forgive the praise,
    Fusty Christopher.

[This epigram was Tennyson's reply to an article by Professor
Wilson--'Christopher North'--in _Blackwood's Magazine_ for May 1832,
dealing in sensible fashion with Tennyson's 1830 volume, and
ridiculing the fulsome praise lavished on him by his inconsiderate
friends--especially referring to Arthur Hallam's article in the
_Englishman's Magazine_ for August, 1831.]




XXXVIII

=The Lotos-Eaters=

[These forty lines formed the conclusion to the original (1833)
version of the poem. When the poem was reprinted in the 1842 volumes
these lines were suppressed.]

  We have had enough of motion,
  Weariness and wild alarm,
  Tossing on the tossing ocean,
  Where the tuskèd seahorse walloweth
  In a stripe of grassgreen calm,
  At noon-tide beneath the lea;
  And the monstrous narwhale swalloweth
  His foamfountains in the sea.
  Long enough the winedark wave our weary bark did carry.
  This is lovelier and sweeter,
  Men of Ithaca, this is meeter,
  In the hollow rosy vale to tarry,
  Like a dreamy Lotos-eater, a delirious Lotos-eater!
  We will eat the Lotos, sweet
  As the yellow honeycomb,
  In the valley some, and some
  On the ancient heights divine;
  And no more roam,
  On the loud hoar foam,
  To the melancholy home
  At the limit of the brine,
  The little isle of Ithaca, beneath the day's decline.
  We'll lift no more the shattered oar,
  No more unfurl the straining sail;
  With the blissful Lotos-eaters pale
  We will abide in the golden vale
  Of the Lotos-land, till the Lotos fail;
  We will not wander more.
  Hark! how sweet the horned ewes bleat
  On the solitary steeps,
  And the merry lizard leaps,
  And the foam-white waters pour;
  And the dark pine weeps,
  And the lithe vine creeps,
  And the heavy melon sleeps
  On the level of the shore:
  Oh! islanders of Ithaca, we will not wander more,
  Surely, surely, slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore
  Than labour in the ocean, and rowing with the oar,
  Oh! islanders of Ithaca, we will return no more.




XXXIX

=A Dream of Fair Women=

[In the 1833 volume the poem opened with the following four verses,
suppressed after 1842. These Fitz Gerald considered made 'a perfect
poem by themselves.']

  As when a man, that sails in a balloon,
    Downlooking sees the solid shining ground
  Stream from beneath him in the broad blue noon,
    Tilth, hamlet, mead and mound:

  And takes his flags and waves them to the mob
    That shout below, all faces turned to where
  Glows rubylike the far-up crimson globe,
    Filled with a finer air:

  So, lifted high, the poet at his will
    Lets the great world flit from him, seeing all,
  Higher thro' secret splendours mounting still,
    Self-poised, nor fears to fall.

  Hearing apart the echoes of his fame.
    While I spoke thus, the seedsman, Memory,
  Sowed my deep-furrowed thought with many a name
    Whose glory will not die.




=Miscellaneous Poems and Contributions to Periodicals=
=1833-1868=




XL

=Cambridge=

[This poem is written in pencil on the fly-leaf of a copy of _Poems_
1833 in the Dyce Collection in South Kensington Museum. Reprinted with
many alterations in _Life_, vol. I, p. 67.]

  Therefore your halls, your ancient colleges,
    Your portals statued with old kings and queens,
  Your bridges and your busted libraries,
    Wax-lighted chapels and rich carved screens,
    Your doctors and your proctors and your deans
  Shall not avail you when the day-beam sports
    New-risen o'er awakened Albion--No,
    Nor yet your solemn organ-pipes that blow
  Melodious thunders through your vacant courts
  At morn and even; for your manner sorts
    Not with this age, nor with the thoughts that roll,
  Because the words of little children preach
  Against you,--ye that did profess to teach
    And have taught nothing, feeding on the soul.




XLI

=The Germ of 'Maud'=

[There was published in 1837 in _The Tribute_, (a collection of
original poems by various authors, edited by Lord Northampton), a
contribution by Tennyson entitled 'Stanzas,' consisting of xvi stanzas
of varying lengths (110 lines in all). In 1855 the first xii stanzas
were published as the fourth section of the second part of 'Maud.'
Some verbal changes and transpositions of lines were made; a new
stanza (the present sixth) and several new lines were introduced, and
the xth stanza of 1837 became the xiiith of 1855. But stanzas xiii-xvi
of 1837 have never been reprinted in any edition of Tennyson's works,
though quoted in whole or part in various critical studies of the
poet. Swinburne refers to this poem as 'the poem of deepest charm and
fullest delight of pathos and melody ever written, even by Mr
Tennyson.' This poem in _The Tribute_ gained Tennyson his first notice
in the _Edinburgh Review_, which had till then ignored him.]

  XIII

  But she tarries in her place
  And I paint the beauteous face
      Of the maiden, that I lost,
          In my inner eyes again,
  Lest my heart be overborne,
  By the thing I hold in scorn,
      By a dull mechanic ghost
          And a juggle of the brain.

  XIV

  I can shadow forth my bride
      As I knew her fair and kind
          As I woo'd her for my wife;
  She is lovely by my side
      In the silence of my life--
          'Tis a phantom of the mind.

  XV

  'Tis a phantom fair and good
      I can call it to my side,
          So to guard my life from ill,
      Tho' its ghastly sister glide
          And be moved around me still
  With the moving of the blood
      That is moved not of the will.

  XVI

  Let it pass, the dreary brow,
      Let the dismal face go by,
  Will it lead me to the grave?
      Then I lose it: it will fly:
  Can it overlast the nerves?
      Can it overlive the eye?
  But the other, like a star,
  Thro' the channel windeth far
      Till it fade and fail and die,
  To its Archetype that waits
  Clad in light by golden gates,
  Clad in light the Spirit waits
      To embrace me in the sky.




XLII

[On the fly-leaf of a book illustrated by Bewick, in the library of
the late Lord Ravensworth, the following lines in Tennyson's autograph
were discovered in 1903.]

  A gate and a field half ploughed,
  A solitary cow,
  A child with a broken slate,
  And a titmarsh in the bough.
  But where, alack, is Bewick
  To tell the meaning now?




XLIII

=The Skipping-Rope=

[This poem, published in the second volume of _Poems by Alfred
Tennyson_ (in two volumes, London, Edward Moxon, MDCCCXLII), was
reprinted in every edition until 1851, when it was suppressed.]

  Sure never yet was Antelope
    Could skip so lightly by.
  Stand off, or else my skipping-rope
    Will hit you in the eye.
  How lightly whirls the skipping-rope!
    How fairy-like you fly!
  Go, get you gone, you muse and mope--
    I hate that silly sigh.
  Nay, dearest, teach me how to hope,
    Or tell me how to die.
  There, take it, take my skipping-rope
    And hang yourself thereby.




XLIV

=The New Timon and the Poets=

[From _Punch_, February 28, 1846. Bulwer Lytton published in 1845 his
satirical poem 'New Timon: a Romance of London,' in which he bitterly
attacked Tennyson for the civil list pension granted the previous
year, particularly referring to the poem 'O Darling Room' in the 1833
volume. Tennyson replied in the following vigorous verses, which made
the literary sensation of the year. Tennyson afterwards declared: 'I
never sent my lines to _Punch_. John Forster did. They were too
bitter. I do not think that I should ever have published
them.'--_Life_, vol. I, p. 245.]

  We know him, out of Shakespeare's art,
    And those fine curses which he spoke;
  The old Timon, with his noble heart,
    That, strongly loathing, greatly broke.

  So died the Old: here comes the New:
    Regard him: a familiar face:
  I _thought_ we knew him: What, it's you
    The padded man--that wears the stays--

  Who killed the girls and thrill'd the boys
    With dandy pathos when you wrote,
  A Lion, you, that made a noise,
    And shook a mane en papillotes.

  And once you tried the Muses too:
    You fail'd, Sir: therefore now you turn,
  You fall on those who are to you
    As captain is to subaltern.

  But men of long enduring hopes,
    And careless what this hour may bring,
  Can pardon little would-be Popes
    And Brummels, when they try to sting.

  An artist, Sir, should rest in art,
    And wave a little of his claim;
  To have the deep poetic heart
    Is more than all poetic fame.

  But you, Sir, you are hard to please;
    You never look but half content:
  Nor like a gentleman at ease
    With moral breadth of temperament.

  And what with spites and what with fears,
    You cannot let a body be:
  It's always ringing in your ears,
    'They call this man as good as _me_.'

  What profits now to understand
    The merits of a spotless shirt--
  A dapper boot--a little hand--
    If half the little soul is dirt?

  _You_ talk of tinsel! why we see
    The old mark of rouge upon your cheeks.
  _You_ prate of nature! you are he
  That spilt his life about the cliques.

  A Timon you! Nay, nay, for shame:
    It looks too arrogant a jest--
  The fierce old man--to take _his_ name
  You bandbox. Off, and let him rest.




XLV

=Mablethorpe=

[Published in _Manchester Athænaum Album_, 1850. Written, 1837.
Republished, altered, in _Life_, vol. I, p. 161.]

  How often, when a child I lay reclined,
    I took delight in this locality!
  Here stood the infant Ilion of the mind,
    And here the Grecian ships did seem to be.

  And here again I come and only find
    The drain-cut levels of the marshy lea,--
  Gray sand banks and pale sunsets--dreary wind,
    Dim shores, dense rains, and heavy clouded sea.




XLVI

[Published in _The Keepsake for 1851: an illustrated annual_, edited
by Miss Power. London: David Bogue. To this issue of the Keepsake
Tennyson also contributed 'Come not when I am dead' now included in
the collected Works.]

  What time I wasted youthful hours
  One of the shining wingèd powers,
  Show'd me vast cliffs with crown of towers,

  As towards the gracious light I bow'd,
  They seem'd high palaces and proud,
  Hid now and then with sliding cloud.

  He said, 'The labour is not small;
  Yet winds the pathway free to all:--
  Take care thou dost not fear to fall!'




XLVII

=Britons, Guard your Own=

[Published in _The Examiner_, January 31, 1852. Verses 1 (considerably
altered), 7, 8 and 10, are reprinted in Life, vol. I, p. 344.]

  Rise, Britons, rise, if manhood be not dead;
  The world's last tempest darkens overhead;
          The Pope has bless'd him;
          The Church caress'd him;
  He triumphs; maybe, we shall stand alone:
          Britons, guard your own.

  His ruthless host is bought with plunder'd gold,
  By lying priest's the peasant's votes controlled.
          All freedom vanish'd,
          The true men banished,
  He triumphs; maybe, we shall stand alone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Peace-lovers we--sweet Peace we all desire--
  Peace-lovers we--but who can trust a liar?--
         Peace-lovers, haters
         Of shameless traitors,
  We hate not France, but this man's heart of stone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  We hate not France, but France has lost her voice
  This man is France, the man they call her choice.
          By tricks and spying,
          By craft and lying,
  And murder was her freedom overthrown.
          Britons, guard your own.

  'Vive l'Empereur' may follow by and bye;
  'God save the Queen' is here a truer cry.
          God save the Nation,
          The toleration,
  And the free speech that makes a Briton known.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Rome's dearest daughter now is captive France,
  The Jesuit laughs, and reckoning on his chance,
          Would, unrelenting,
          Kill all dissenting,
  Till we were left to fight for truth alone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Call home your ships across Biscayan tides,
  To blow the battle from their oaken sides.
          Why waste they yonder
          Their idle thunder?
  Why stay they there to guard a foreign throne?
          Seamen, guard your own.

  We were the best of marksmen long ago,
  We won old battles with our strength, the bow.
          Now practise, yeomen,
          Like those bowmen,
  Till your balls fly as their true shafts have flown.
          Yeomen, guard your own.

  His soldier-ridden Highness might incline
  To take Sardinia, Belgium, or the Rhine:
         Shall we stand idle,
         Nor seek to bridle
  His vile aggressions, till we stand alone?
          Make their cause your own.

  Should he land here, and for one hour prevail,
  There must no man go back to bear the tale:
          No man to bear it--
          Swear it! We swear it!
  Although we fought the banded world alone,
          We swear to guard our own.




XLVIII

=Hands all Round=

[Published in _The Examiner_, February 7, 1852. Reprinted, slightly
altered, in Life, vol. I, p. 345. Included, almost entirely
re-written, in collected Works.]

  First drink a health, this solemn night,
    A health to England, every guest;
  That man's the best cosmopolite
    Who loves his native country best.
  May Freedom's oak for ever live
    With stronger life from day to day;
  That man's the best Conservative
    Who lops the mouldered branch away.
          Hands all round!
  God the tyrant's hope confound!
  To this great cause of Freedom drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  A health to Europe's honest men!
    Heaven guard them from her tyrants' jails!
  From wronged Poerio's noisome den,
    From iron limbs and tortured nails!
  We curse the crimes of Southern kings,
    The Russian whips and Austrian rods--
  We likewise have our evil things;
    Too much we make our Ledgers, Gods.
          Yet hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To Europe's better health we drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  What health to France, if France be she
    Whom martial progress only charms?
  Yet tell her--better to be free
    Than vanquish all the world in arms.
  Her frantic city's flashing heats
    But fire, to blast the hopes of men.
  Why change the titles of your streets?
    You fools, you'll want them all again.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To France, the wiser France, we drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  Gigantic daughter of the West,
    We drink to thee across the flood,
  We know thee most, we love thee best,
    For art thou not of British blood?
  Should war's mad blast again be blown,
    Permit not thou the tyrant powers
  To fight thy mother here alone,
    But let thy broadsides roar with ours.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our great kinsmen of the West, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  O rise, our strong Atlantic sons,
    When war against our freedom springs!
  O speak to Europe through your guns!
  They _can_ be understood by kings.
  You must not mix our Queen with those
    That wish to keep their people fools;
  Our freedom's foemen are her foes,
    She comprehends the race she rules.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our dear kinsmen of the West, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.




XLIX

=Suggested by Reading an Article in a Newspaper=

[Published in _The Examiner_, February 14, 1852, and never reprinted
nor acknowledged. The proof sheets of the poem, with alterations in
Tennyson's autograph, were offered for public sale in 1906.]

To the Editor of _The Examiner_.

SIR,--I have read with much interest the poems of Merlin. The enclosed
is longer than either of those, and certainly not so good: yet as I
flatter myself that it has a smack of Merlin's style in it, and as I
feel that it expresses forcibly enough some of the feelings of our
time, perhaps you may be induced to admit it.

TALIESSEN.


  How much I love this writer's manly style!
    By such men led, our press had ever been
  The public conscience of our noble isle,
    Severe and quick to feel a civic sin,
  To raise the people and chastise the times
  With such a heat as lives in great creative rhymes.

  O you, the Press! what good from you might spring!
    What power is yours to blast a cause or bless!
  I fear for you, as for some youthful king,
    Lest you go wrong from power in excess.
  Take heed of your wide privileges! we
  The thinking men of England, loathe a tyranny.

  A freeman is, I doubt not, freest here;
    The single voice may speak his mind aloud;
  An honest isolation need not fear
    The Court, the Church, the Parliament, the crowd.
  No, nor the Press! and look you well to that--
  We must not dread in you the nameless autocrat.

  And you, dark Senate of the public pen,
    You may not, like yon tyrant, deal in spies.
  Yours are the public acts of public men,
    But yours are not their household privacies.
  I grant you one of the great Powers on earth,
  But be not you the blatant traitors of the hearth.

  You hide the hand that writes: it must be so,
    For better so you fight for public ends;
  But some you strike can scarce return the blow;
    You should be all the nobler, O my friends.
  Be noble, you! nor work with faction's tools
    To charm a lower sphere of fulminating fools.

  But knowing all your power to heat or cool,
    To soothe a civic wound or keep it raw,
  Be loyal, if you wish for wholesome rule:
    Our ancient boast is this--we reverence law.
  We still were loyal in our wildest fights,
  Or loyally disloyal battled for our rights.

  O Grief and Shame if while I preach of laws
    Whereby to guard our Freedom from offence--
  And trust an ancient manhood and the cause
    Of England and her health of commonsense--
  There hang within the heavens a dark disgrace,
  Some vast Assyrian doom to burst upon our race.

  I feel the thousand cankers of our State,
    I fain would shake their triple-folded ease,
  The hogs who can believe in nothing great,
    Sneering bedridden in the down of Peace
  Over their scrips and shares, their meats and wine,
  With stony smirks at all things human and divine!

  I honour much, I say, this man's appeal.
    We drag so deep in our commercial mire,
  We move so far from greatness, that I feel
    Exception to be character'd in fire.
  Who looks for Godlike greatness here shall see
  The British Goddess, sleek Respectability.

  Alas for her and all her small delights!
    She feels not how the social frame is rack'd.
  She loves a little scandal which excites;
    A little feeling is a want of tact.
  For her there lie in wait millions of foes,
  And yet the 'not too much' is all the rule she knows.

  Poor soul! behold her: what decorous calm!
    She, with her week-day worldliness sufficed,
  Stands in her pew and hums her decent psalm
    With decent dippings at the name of Christ!
  And she has mov'd in that smooth way so long,
    She hardly can believe that she shall suffer wrong.

  Alas, our Church! alas, her growing ills,
    And those who tolerate not her tolerance,
  But needs must sell the burthen of their wills
    To that half-pagan harlot kept by France!
  Free subjects of the kindliest of all thrones,
  Headlong they plunge their doubts among old rags and bones.

  Alas, Church writers, altercating tribes--
    The vessel and your Church may sink in storms.
  Christ cried: Woe, woe, to Pharisees and Scribes!
    Like them, you bicker less for truth than forms.
  I sorrow when I read the things you write,
  What unheroic pertness! what un-Christian spite!

  Alas, our youth, so clever yet so small,
    Thin dilletanti deep in nature's plan,
  Who make the emphatic One, by whom is all,
    An essence less concentred than a man!
  Better wild Mahmoud's war-cry once again!
  O fools, we want a manlike God and Godlike men!

  Go, frightful omens. Yet once more I turn
    To you that mould men's thoughts; I call on you
  To make opinion warlike, lest we learn
    A sharper lesson than we ever knew.
  I hear a thunder though the skies are fair,
  But shrill you, loud and long, the warning-note:
      Prepare!




L

[Lord Tennyson wrote, by Royal request, two stanzas which were sung as
part of _God Save the Queen_ at a State concert in connection with the
Princess Royal's marriage: these were printed in the _Times_ of
January 26, 1858.]

  God bless our Prince and Bride!
  God keep their lands allied,
    God save the Queen!
  Clothe them with righteousness,
  Crown them with happiness,
  Them with all blessings bless,
    God save the Queen.

  Fair fall this hallow'd hour,
  Farewell our England's flower,
    God save the Queen!
  Farewell, fair rose of May!
  Let both the peoples say,
  God bless thy marriage-day,
    God bless the Queen.




LI

=The Ringlet=

[Published in _Enoch Arden_ volume (London: E. Moxon & Co, 1864) and
never reprinted.]

  'Your ringlets, your ringlets,
    That look so golden-gay,
  If you will give me one, but one,
    To kiss it night and day,
  Then never chilling touch of Time
    Will turn it silver-gray;
  And then shall I know it is all true gold
  To flame and sparkle and stream as of old,
  Till all the comets in heaven are cold,
    And all her stars decay.'
  'Then take it, love, and put it by;
  This cannot change, nor yet can I.'

  'My ringlet, my ringlet,
    That art so golden-gay,
  Now never chilling touch of Time
    Can turn thee silver-gray;
  And a lad may wink, and a girl may hint,
    And a fool may say his say;
  For my doubts and fears were all amiss,
  And I swear henceforth by this and this,
  That a doubt will only come for a kiss,
    And a fear to be kissed away.'
  'Then kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I kiss'd you night and day,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You still are golden-gay,
  But Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You should be silver-gray:
  For what is this which now I'm told,
  I that took you for true gold,
  She that gave you's bought and sold,
          Sold, sold.

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She blush'd a rosy red,
  When Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She clipt you from her head,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She gave you me, and said,
  'Come, kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'
  O fie, you golden nothing, fie
          You golden lie.

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I count you much to blame,
  For Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You put me much to shame,
  So Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I doom you to the flame.
  For what is this which now I learn,
  Has given all my faith a turn?
  Burn, you glossy heretic, burn,
            Burn, burn.




LII

=Song=

[This first form of the Song in _The Princess_ ('Home they brought her
warrior dead') was published only in _Selections from Tennyson_.
London: E. Moxon & Co, 1864.]

  Home they brought him slain with spears.
    They brought him home at even-fall:
  All alone she sits and hears
    Echoes in his empty hall,
      Sounding on the morrow.

  The Sun peeped in from open field,
    The boy began to leap and prance,
    Rode upon his father's lance,
  Beat upon his father's shield--
      'Oh hush, my joy, my sorrow.'




LIII

=1865-1866=

[Published in _Good Words_ for March 1, 1868 as a decorative page,
with an accompanying full page plate by T. Dalziel. The lines were
never reprinted.]

  I stood on a tower in the wet,
  And New Year and Old Year met,
  And winds were roaring and blowing;
  And I said, 'O years that meet in tears,
  Have ye aught that is worth the knowing?

  'Science enough and exploring
  Wanderers coming and going
  Matter enough for deploring
  But aught that is worth the knowing?'

  Seas at my feet were flowing
  Waves on the shingle pouring,
  Old Year roaring and blowing
  And New Year blowing and roaring.




=The Lover's Tale=
1833

[It was originally intended by Tennyson that this poem should
form part of his 1833 volume. It was put in type and, according to
custom, copies were distributed among his friends, when, on the eve of
publication, he decided to omit it. Again, in 1869, it was sent to
press with a new third part added, and was again withdrawn, the third
part only--'The Golden Supper,' founded on a story in Boccaccio's
_Decameron_--being published in the volume, 'The Holy Grail.' In 1866,
1870 and 1875, attempts had been made by Mr Herne Shepherd to publish
editions of 'The Lover's Tale,' reprinted from stray proof copies of
the 1833 printing. Each of these attempts was repressed by Tennyson,
and at last in 1879 the complete poem, as now included in the
collected Works, was issued, with an apologetic reference to the
necessity of reprinting the poem to prevent its circulation in an
unauthorised form. But the 1879 issue is considerably altered from the
original issue of 1833, as written by Tennyson in his nineteenth year.
Since only as a product of Tennyson's youth does the poem merit any
attention, it has seemed good to reprint it here as originally
written.]

A FRAGMENT

The Poem of the Lover's Tale (the lover is supposed to be himself a
poet) was written in my nineteenth year, and consequently contains
nearly as many faults as words. That I deemed it not wholly unoriginal
is my only apology for its publication--an apology lame and poor, and
somewhat impertinent to boot: so that if its infirmities meet with
more laughter than charity in the world, I shall not raise my voice in
its defence. I am aware how deficient the Poem is in point of art, and
it is not without considerable misgivings that I have ventured to
publish even this fragment of it. 'Enough,' says the old proverb, 'is
as good as a feast.'--(Tennyson's original introductory note.)

  Here far away, seen from the topmost cliff,
  Filling with purple gloom the vacancies
  Between the tufted hills the sloping seas
  Hung in mid-heaven, and half-way down rare sails,
  White as white clouds, floated from sky to sky.
  Oh! pleasant breast of waters, quiet bay,
  Like to a quiet mind in the loud world,
  Where the chafed breakers of the outer sea
  Sunk powerless, even as anger falls aside,
  And withers on the breast of peaceful love,
  Thou didst receive that belt of pines, that fledged
  The hills that watch'd thee, as Love watcheth Love,--
  In thine own essence, and delight thyself
  To make it wholly thine on sunny days.
  Keep thou thy name of 'Lover's bay': See, Sirs,
  Even now the Goddess of the Past, that takes
  The heart, and sometimes toucheth but one string,
  That quivers, and is silent, and sometimes
  Sweeps suddenly all its half-moulder'd chords
  To an old melody, begins to play
  On those first-moved fibres of the brain.
  I come, Great mistress of the ear and eye:
  Oh! lead me tenderly, for fear the mind
  Rain thro' my sight, and strangling sorrow weigh
  Mine utterance with lameness. Tho' long years
  Have hallowed out a valley and a gulf
  Betwixt the native land of Love and me,
  Breathe but a little on me, and the sail
  Will draw me to the rising of the sun,
  The lucid chambers of the morning star,
  And East of life.
                    Permit me, friend, I prithee,
  To pass my hand across my brows, and muse
  On those dear hills, that nevermore will meet
  The sight that throbs and aches beneath my touch,
  As tho' there beat a heart in either eye;
  For when the outer lights are darken'd thus,
  The memory's vision hath a keener edge.
  It grows upon me now--the semicircle
  Of dark blue waters and the narrow fringe
  Of curving beach--its wreaths of dripping green--
  Its pale pink shells--the summer-house aloft
  That open'd on the pines with doors of glass,
  A mountain nest the pleasure boat that rock'd
  Light-green with its own shadow, keel to keel,
  Upon the crispings of the dappled waves
  That blanched upon its side.
                               O Love, O Hope,
  They come, they crowd upon me all at once,
  Moved from the cloud of unforgotten things,
  That sometimes on the horizon of the mind
  Lies folded--often sweeps athwart in storm--
  They flash across the darkness of my brain,
  The many pleasant days, the moolit nights,
  The dewy dawnings and the amber eyes,
  When thou and I, Camilla, thou and I
  Were borne about the bay, or safely moor'd
  Beneath some low brow'd cavern, where the wave
  Plash'd sapping its worn ribs (the while without,
  And close above us, sang the wind-tost pine,
  And shook its earthly socket, for we heard,
  In rising and in falling with the tide,
  Close by our ears, the huge roots strain and creak),
  Eye feeding upon eye with deep intent;
  And mine, with love too high to be express'd
  Arrested in its sphere, and ceasing from
  All contemplation of all forms, did pause
  To worship mine own image, laved in light,
  The centre of the splendours, all unworthy
  Of such a shrine--mine image in her eyes,
  By diminution made most glorious,
  Moved with their motions, as those eyes were moved
  With motions of the soul, as my heart beat
  Twice to the melody of hers. Her face
  Was starry-fair, not pale, tenderly flush'd
  As 'twere with dawn. She was dark-hair'd, dark-eyed;
  Oh, such dark eyes! A single glance of them
  Will govern a whole life from birth to death,
  Careless of all things else, led on with light
  In trances and in visions: look at them,
  You lose yourself in utter ignorance,
  You cannot find their depth; for they go back,
  And farther back, and still withdraw themselves
  Quite into the deep soul, that evermore,
  Fresh springing from her fountains in the brain,
  Still pouring thro', floods with redundant light
  Her narrow portals.

                      Trust me, long ago
  I should have died, if it were possible
  To die in gazing on that perfectness
  Which I do bear within me; I had died
  But from my farthest lapse, my latest ebb,
  Thine image, like a charm of light and strength
  Upon the waters, pushed me back again
  On these deserted sands of barren life.
  Tho' from the deep vault, where the heart of hope
  Fell into dust, and crumbled in the dark--
  Forgetting who to render beautiful
  Her countenance with quick and healthful blood--
  Thou didst not sway me upward, could I perish
  With such a costly casket in the grasp
  Of memory? He, that saith it, hath o'erstepp'd
  The slippery footing of his narrow wit,
  And fall'n away from judgment. Thou art light,
  To which my spirit leaneth all her flowers,
  And length of days, and immortality
  Of thought, and freshness ever self-renew'd.
  For Time and Grief abode too long with Life,
  And like all other friends i' the world, at last
  They grew aweary of her fellowship:
  So Time and Grief did beckon unto Death,
  And Death drew nigh and beat the doors of Life;
  But thou didst sit alone in the inner house,
  A wakeful port'ress and didst parle with Death,
  'This is a charmed dwelling which I hold';
  So Death gave back, and would no further come.
  Yet is my life nor in the present time,
  Nor in the present place. To me alone,
  Pushed from his chair of regal heritage,
  The Present is the vassal of the Past:
  So that, in that I _have_ lived, do I live,
  And cannot die, and am, in having been,
  A portion of the pleasant yesterday,
  Thrust forward on to-day and out of place;
  A body journeying onward, sick with toil,
  The lithe limbs bow'd as with a heavy weight
  And all the senses weaken'd in all save that
  Which, long ago, they had glean'd and garner'd up
  Into the granaries of memory--
  The clear brow, bulwark of the precious brain,
  Now seam'd and chink'd with years--and all the while
  The light soul twines and mingles with the growths
  Of vigorous early days, attracted, won,
  Married, made one with, molten into all
  The beautiful in Past of act or place.
  Even as the all-enduring camel, driven
  Far from the diamond fountain by the palms,
  Toils onward thro' the middle moonlight nights,
  Shadow'd and crimson'd with the drifting dust,
  Or when the white heats of the blinding noons
  Beat from the concave sand; yet in him keeps
  A draught of that sweet fountain that he loves,
  To stay his feet from falling, and his spirit
  From bitterness of death.

                            Ye ask me, friends,
  When I began to love. How should I tell ye?
  Or from the after fulness of my heart,
  Flow back again unto my slender spring
  And first of love, tho' every turn and depth
  Between is clearer in my life than all
  Its present flow. Ye know not what ye ask.
  How should the broad and open flower tell
  What sort of bud it was, when press'd together
  In its green sheath, close lapt in silken folds?
  It seemed to keep its sweetness to itself,
  Yet was not the less sweet for that it seem'd.
  For young Life knows not when young Life was born,
  But takes it all for granted: neither Love,
  Warm in the heart, his cradle can remember
  Love in the womb, but resteth satisfied,
  Looking on her that brought him to the light:
  Or as men know not when they fall asleep
  Into delicious dreams, our other life,
  So know I not when I began to love.
  This is my sum of knowledge--that my love
  Grew with myself--and say rather, was my growth,
  My inward sap, the hold I have on earth,
  My outward circling air wherein I breathe,
  Which yet upholds my life, and evermore
  Was to me daily life and daily death:
  For how should I have lived and not have loved?
  Can ye take off the sweetness from the flower,
  The colour and the sweetness from the rose,
  And place them by themselves? or set apart
  Their motions and their brightness from the stars,
  And then point out the flower or the star?
  Or build a wall betwixt my life and love,
  And tell me where I am? 'Tis even thus:
  In that I live I love; because I love
  I live: whate'er is fountain to the one
  Is fountain to the other; and whene'er
  Our God unknits the riddle of the one,
  There is no shade or fold of mystery
  Swathing the other.

                      Many, many years,
  For they seem many and my most of life,
  And well I could have linger'd in that porch,
  So unproportioned to the dwelling place,
  In the maydews of childhood, opposite
  The flush and dawn of youth, we lived together,
  Apart, alone together on those hills.
  Before he saw my day my father died,
  And he was happy that he saw it not:
  But I and the first daisy on his grave
  From the same clay came into light at once.
  As Love and I do number equal years
  So she, my love, is of an age with me.
  How like each other was the birth of each!
  The sister of my mother--she that bore
  Camilla close beneath her beating heart,
  Which to the imprisoned spirit of the child,
  With its true touched pulses in the flow
  And hourly visitation of the blood,
  Sent notes of preparation manifold,
  And mellow'd echoes of the outer world--
  My mother's sister, mother of my love,
  Who had a twofold claim upon my heart,
  One twofold mightier than the other was,
  In giving so much beauty to the world,
  And so much wealth as God had charged her with,
  Loathing to put it from herself for ever,
  Crown'd with her highest act the placid face
  And breathless body of her good deeds past.
  So we were born, so orphan'd. She was motherless,
  And I without a father. So from each
  Of those two pillars which from earth uphold
  Our childhood, one had fall'n away, and all
  The careful burthen of our tender years
  Trembled upon the other. He that gave
  Her life, to me delightedly fulfill'd
  All loving-kindnesses, all offices
  Of watchful care and trembling tenderness.
  He worked for both: he pray'd for both: he slept
  Dreaming of both; nor was his love the less
  Because it was divided, and shot forth
  Boughs on each side, laden with wholesome shade,
  Wherein we rested sleeping or awake,
  And sung aloud the matin-song of life.

  She was my foster-sister: on one arm
  The flaxen ringlets of our infancies
  Wander'd, the while we rested: one soft lap
  Pillow'd us both: one common light of eyes
  Was on us as we lay: our baby lips,
  Kissing one bosom, ever drew from thence
  The stream of life, one stream, one life, one blood,
  One sustenance, which, still as thought grew large,
  Still larger moulding all the house of thought,
  Perchance assimilated all our tastes
  And future fancies. 'Tis a beautiful
  And pleasant meditation, what whate'er
  Our general mother meant for me alone,
  Our mutual mother dealt to both of us:
  So what was earliest mine in earliest life,
  I shared with her in whom myself remains.
  As was our childhood, so our infancy,
  They tell me, was a very miracle
  Of fellow-feeling and communion.
  They tell me that we would not be alone,--
  We cried when we were parted; when I wept,
  Her smile lit up the rainbow on my tears,
  Stay'd on the clouds of sorrow; that we loved
  The sound of one another's voices more
  Than the grey cuckoo loves his name, and learn'd
  To lisp in tune together; that we slept
  In the same cradle always, face to face,
  Heart beating time to heart, lip pressing lip,
  Folding each other, breathing on each other,
  Dreaming together (dreaming of each other
  They should have added) till the morning light
  Sloped thro' the pines, upon the dewy pane
  Falling, unseal'd our eyelids, and we woke
  To gaze upon each other. If this be true,
  At thought of which my whole soul languishes
  And faints, and hath no pulse, no breath, as tho'
  A man in some still garden should infuse
  Rich attar in the bosom of the rose,
  Till, drunk with its own wine and overfull
  Of sweetness, and in smelling of itself,
  It fall on its own thorns--if this be true--
  And that way my wish leaneth evermore
  Still to believe it--'tis so sweet a thought,
  Why in the utter stillness of the soul
  Doth question'd memory answer not, nor tell,
  Of this our earliest, our closest drawn,
  Most loveliest, most delicious union?
  Oh, happy, happy outset of my days!
  Green springtide, April promise, glad new year
  Of Being, which with earliest violets,
  And lavish carol of clear-throated larks,
  Fill'd all the march of life.--I will not speak of thee;
  These have not seen thee, these can never know thee,
  They cannot understand me. Pass on then
  A term of eighteen years. Ye would but laugh
  If I should tell ye how I heard in thought
  Those rhymes, 'The Lion and the Unicorn'
  'The Four-and-twenty Blackbirds' 'Banbury Cross,'
  'The Gander' and 'The man of Mitylene,'
  And all the quaint old scraps of ancient crones,
  Which are as gems set in my memory,
  Because she learn'd them with me. Or what profits it
  To tell ye that her father died, just ere
  The daffodil was blown; or how we found
  The drowned seaman on the shore? These things
  Unto the quiet daylight of your minds
  Are cloud and smoke, but in the dark of mine
  Show traced with flame. Move with me to that hour,
  Which was the hinge on which the door of Hope,
  Once turning, open'd far into the outward,
  And never closed again.

                        I well remember,
  It was a glorious morning, such a one
  As dawns but once a season. Mercury
  On such a morning would have flung himself
  From cloud to cloud, and swum with balanced wings
  To some tall mountain. On that day the year
  First felt his youth and strength, and from his spring
  Moved smiling toward his summer. On that day,
  Love working shook his wings (that charged the winds
  With spiced May-sweets from bound to bound) and blew
  Fresh fire into the sun, and from within
  Burst thro' the heated buds, and sent his soul
  Into the songs of birds, and touch'd far-off
  His mountain-altars, his high hills, with flame
  Milder and purer. Up the rocks we wound;
  The great pine shook with lovely sounds of joy,
  That came on the sea-wind. As mountain brooks
  Our blood ran free: the sunshine seem'd to brood
  More warmly on the heart than on the brow.
  We often paused, and looking back, we saw
  The clefts and openings in the hills all fill'd
  With the blue valley and the glistening brooks,
  And with the low dark groves--a land of Love;
  Where Love was worshipp'd upon every height,
  Where Love was worshipp'd under every tree--
  A land of promise, flowing with the milk
  And honey of delicious memories
  Down to the sea, as far as eye could ken,
  From verge to verge it was a holy land,
  Still growing holier as you near'd the bay,
  For where the temple stood. When we had reach'd
  The grassy platform on some hill, I stoop'd,
  I gather'd the wild herbs, and for her brows
  And mine wove chaplets of the self-same flower,
  Which she took smiling, and with my work there
  Crown'd her clear forehead. Once or twice she told me
  (For I remember all things), to let grow
  The flowers that run poison in their veins.
  She said, 'The evil flourish in the world';
  Then playfully she gave herself the lie:
  'Nothing in nature is unbeautiful,
  So, brother, pluck and spare not.' So I wove
  Even the dull-blooded poppy, 'whose red flower
  Hued with the scarlet of a fierce sunrise,
  Like to the wild youth of an evil king,
  Is without sweetness, but who crowns himself
  Above the secret poisons of his heart
  In his old age'--a graceful thought of hers
  Graven on my fancy! As I said, with these
  She crown'd her forehead. O how like a nymph,
  A stately mountain-nymph, she look'd! how native
  Unto the hills she trod on! What an angel!
  How clothed with beams! My eyes, fix'd upon hers,
  Almost forgot even to move again.
  My spirit leap'd as with those thrills of bliss
  That shoot across the soul in prayer, and show us
  That we are surely heard. Methought a light
  Burst from the garland I had woven, and stood
  A solid glory on her bright black hair:
  A light, methought, broke from her dark, dark eyes,
  And shot itself into the singing winds;
  A light, methought, flash'd even from her white robe,
  As from a glass in the sun, and fell about
  My footsteps on the mountains.

                      About sunset
  We came unto the hill of woe, so call'd
  Because the legend ran that, long time since,
  One rainy night, when every wind blew loud,
  A woful man had thrust his wife and child
  With shouts from off the bridge, and following, plunged
  Into the dizzy chasm below. Below,
  Sheer thro' the black-wall'd cliff the rapid brook
  Shot down his inner thunders, built above
  With matted bramble and the shining gloss
  Of ivy-leaves, whose low-hung tresses, dipp'd
  In the fierce stream, bore downward with the wave.
  The path was steep and loosely strewn with crags
  We mounted slowly: yet to both of us
  It was delight, not hindrance: unto both
  Delight from hardship to be overcome,
  And scorn of perilous seeming: unto me
  Intense delight and rapture that I breathed,
  As with a sense of nigher Deity,
  With her to whom all outward fairest things
  Were by the busy mind referr'd, compared,
  As bearing no essential fruits of excellence.
  Save as they were the types and shadowings
  Of hers--and then that I became to her
  A tutelary angel as she rose,
  And with a fearful self-impelling joy
  Saw round her feet the country far away,
  Beyond the nearest mountain's bosky brows,
  Burst into open prospect--heath and hill,
  And hollow lined and wooded to the lips--
  And steep down walls of battlemented rock
  Girded with broom or shiver'd into peaks--
  And glory of broad waters interfused,
  Whence rose as it were breath and steam of gold;
  And over all the great wood rioting
  And climbing, starr'd at slender intervals
  With blossom tufts of purest white; and last,
  Framing the mighty landskip to the West,
  A purple range of purple cones, between
  Whose interspaces gush'd, in blinding bursts,
  The incorporate light of sun and sea.

                            At length,
  Upon the tremulous bridge, that from beneath
  Seemed with a cobweb firmament to link
  The earthquake-shattered chasm, hung with shrubs,
  We passed with tears of rapture. All the West,
  And even unto the middle South, was ribb'd
  And barr'd with bloom on bloom. The sun beneath,
  Held for a space 'twixt cloud and wave, shower'd down
  Rays of a mighty circle, weaving over
  That varied wilderness a tissue of light
  Unparallel'd. On the other side the moon,
  Half-melted into thin blue air, stood still
  And pale and fibrous as a wither'd leaf,
  Nor yet endured in presence of his eyes
  To imbue his lustre; most unloverlike;
  Since in his absence full of light and joy
  And giving light to others. But this chiefest,
  Next to her presence whom I loved so well,
  Spoke loudly, even into my inmost heart,
  As to my outward hearing: the loud stream,
  Forth issuing from his portals in the crag
  (A visible link unto the home of my heart),
  Ran amber toward the West, and nigh the sea,
  Parting my own loved mountains, was received
  Shorn of its strength, into the sympathy
  Of that small bay, which into open main
  Glow'd intermingling close beneath the sun
  Spirit of Love! That little hour was bound,
  Shut in from Time, and dedicate to thee;
  Thy fires from heav'n had touch'd it, and the earth
  They fell on became hallow'd evermore.

  We turn'd: our eyes met: her's were bright, and mine
  Were dim with floating tears, that shot the sunset,
  In light rings round me; and my name was borne
  Upon her breath. Henceforth my name has been
  A hallow'd memory, like the names of old;
  A center'd, glory-circled memory,
  And a peculiar treasure, brooking not
  Exchange or currency; and in that hour
  A hope flow'd round me, like a golden mist
  Charm'd amid eddies of melodious airs,
  A moment, ere the onward whirlwind shatter it,
  Waver'd and floated--which was less than Hope,
  Because it lack'd the power of perfect Hope;
  But which was more and higher than all Hope,
  Because all other Hope hath lower aim;
  Even that this name to which her seraph lips
  Did lend such gentle utterance, this one name
  In some obscure hereafter, might inwreathe
  (How lovelier, nobler then!) her life, her love,
  With my life, love, soul, spirit and heart and strength.

  'Brother,' she said, 'let this be call'd henceforth
  The Hill of Hope'; and I replied: 'O sister,
  My will is one with thine; the Hill of Hope.'
  Nevertheless, we did not change the name.

  Love lieth deep; Love dwells not in lip-depths:
  Love wraps her wings on either side the heart,
  Constraining it with kisses close and warm,
  Absorbing all the incense of sweet thoughts
  So that they pass not to the shrine of sound.
  Else had the life of that delighted hour
  Drunk in the largeness of the utterance
  Of Love; but how should earthly measure mete
  The heavenly unmeasured or unlimited Love,
  Which scarce can tune his high majestic sense
  Unto the thunder-song that wheels the spheres;
  Scarce living in the Aeolian harmony,
  And flowing odour of the spacious air;
  Scarce housed in the circle of this earth:
  Be cabin'd up in words and syllables,
  Which waste with the breath that made 'em.
                          Sooner earth
  Might go round heaven, and the straight girth of Time
  Inswathe the fullness of Eternity,
  Than language grasp the infinite of Love.
  O day, which did enwomb that happy hour,
  Thou art blest in the years, divinest day!
  O Genius of that hour which dost uphold
  Thy coronal of glory like a God,
  Amid thy melancholy mates far-seen,
  Who walk before thee, and whose eyes are dim
  With gazing on the light and depth of thine
  Thy name is ever worshipp'd among hours!
  Had I died then, I had not seem'd to die
  For bliss stood round me like the lights of heaven,
  That cannot fade, they are so burning bright.
  Had I died then, I had not known the death;
  Planting my feet against this mound of time
  I had thrown me on the vast, and from this impulse
  Continuing and gathering ever, ever,
  Agglomerated swiftness, I had lived
  That intense moment thro' eternity.
  Oh, had the Power from whose right hand the light
  Of Life issueth, and from whose left hand floweth
  The shadow of Death, perennial effluences,
  Whereof to all that draw the wholesome air,
  Somewhile the one must overflow the other;
  Then had he stemm'd my day with night and driven
  My current to the fountain whence it sprang--
  Even his own abiding excellence--
  On me, methinks, that shock of gloom had fall'n
  Unfelt, and like the sun I gazed upon,
  Which, lapt in seeming dissolution,
  And dipping his head low beneath the verge,
  Yet bearing round about him his own day,
  In confidence of unabated strength,
  Steppeth from heaven to heaven, from light to light,
  And holding his undimmed forehead far
  Into a clearer zenith, pure of cloud;
  So bearing on thro' Being limitless
  The triumph of this foretaste, I had merged
  Glory in glory, without sense of change.

  We trod the shadow of the downward hill;
  We pass'd from light to dark. On the other side
  Is scooped a cavern and a mountain-hall,
  Which none have fathom'd. If you go far in
  (The country people rumour) you may hear
  The moaning of the woman and the child,
  Shut in the secret chambers of the rock.
  I too have heard a sound--perchance of streams
  Running far-off within its inmost halls,
  The home of darkness, but the cavern mouth,
  Half overtrailed with a wanton weed
  Gives birth to a brawling stream, that stepping lightly
  Adown a natural stair of tangled roots,
  Is presently received in a sweet grove
  Of eglantine, a place of burial
  Far lovelier than its cradle; for unseen
  But taken with the sweetness of the place,
  It giveth out a constant melody
  That drowns the nearer echoes. Lower down
  Spreads out a little lake, that, flooding, makes
  Cushions of yellow sand; and from the woods
  That belt it rise three dark tall cypresses;
  Three cypresses, symbols of mortal woe,
  That men plant over graves.

                   Hither we came,
  And sitting down upon the golden moss
  Held converse sweet and low--low converse sweet,
  In which our voices bore least part. The wind
  Told a love-tale beside us, how he woo'd
  The waters, and the crisp'd waters lisp'd
  The kisses of the wind, that, sick with love,
  Fainted at intervals, and grew again
  To utterance of passion. Ye cannot shape
  Fancy so fair as is this memory.
  Methought all excellence that ever was
  Had drawn herself from many thousand years,
  And all the separate Edens of this earth,
  To centre in this place and time. I listen'd,
  And her words stole with most prevailing sweetness
  Into my heart, as thronged fancies come,
  All unawares, into the poet's brain;
  Or as the dew-drops on the petal hung,
  When summer winds break their soft sleep with sighs,
  Creep down into the bottom of the flower.
  Her words were like a coronal of wild blooms
  Strung in the very negligence of Art,
  Or in the art of Nature, where each rose
  Doth faint upon the bosom of the other,
  Flooding its angry cheek with odorous tears.
  So each with each inwoven lived with each,
  And were in union more than double-sweet.
  What marvel my Camilla told me all?
  It was so happy an hour, so sweet a place,
  And I was as the brother of her blood,
  And by that name was wont to live in her speech,
  Dear name! which had too much of nearness in it
  And heralded the distance of this time.
  At first her voice was very sweet and low,
  As tho' she were afeard of utterance;
  But in the onward current of her speech,
  (As echoes of the hollow-banked brooks
  Are fashioned by the channel which they keep)
  His words did of their meaning borrow sound,
  Her cheek did catch the colour of her words,
  I heard and trembled, yet I could but hear;
  My heart paused,--my raised eyelids would not fall,
  But still I kept my eyes upon the sky.
  I seem'd the only part of Time stood still,
  And saw the motion of all other things;
  While her words, syllable by syllable,
  Like water, drop by drop, upon my ear
  Fell, and I wish'd, yet wish'd her not to speak,
  But she spoke on, for I did name no wish.
  What marvel my Camilla told me all
  Her maiden dignities of Hope and Love,
  'Perchance' she said 'return'd.' Even then the stars
  Did tremble in their stations as I gazed;
  But she spake on, for I did name no wish,
  No wish--no hope. Hope was not wholly dead,
  But breathing hard at the approach of Death,
  Updrawn in expectation of her change--
  Camilla, my Camilla, who was mine
  No longer in the dearest use of mine--
  The written secrets of her inmost soul
  Lay like an open scroll before my view,
  And my eyes read, they read aright, her heart
  Was Lionel's: it seem'd as tho' a link
  Of some light chain within my inmost frame
  Was riven in twain: that life I heeded not
  Flow'd from me, and the darkness of the grave,
  The darkness of the grave and utter night,
  Did swallow up my vision: at her feet,
  Even the feet of her I loved, I fell,
  Smit with exceeding sorrow unto death.

  Then had the earth beneath me yawning given
  Sign of convulsion; and tho' horrid rifts
  Sent up the moaning of unhappy spirits
  Imprison'd in her centre, with the heat
  Of their infolding element; had the angels,
  The watchers at heaven's gate, push'd them apart,
  And from the golden threshold had down-roll'd
  Their heaviest thunder, I had lain as still,
  And blind and motionless as then I lay!
  White as quench'd ashes, cold as were the hopes
  Of my lorn love! What happy air shall woo
  The wither'd leaf fall'n in the woods, or blasted
  Upon this bough? a lightning stroke had come
  Even from that Heaven in whose light I bloom'd
  And taken away the greenness of my life,
  The blossom and the fragrance. Who was cursed
  But I? who miserable but I? even Misery
  Forgot herself in that extreme distress,
  And with the overdoing of her part
  Did fall away into oblivion.
  The night in pity took away my day
  Because my grief as yet was newly born,
  Of too weak eyes to look upon the light,
  And with the hasty notice of the ear,
  Frail life was startled from the tender love
  Of him she brooded over. Would I had lain
  Until the pleached ivy tress had wound
  Round my worn limbs, and the wild briar had driven
  Its knotted thorns thro' my unpaining brows
  Leaning its roses on my faded eyes.
  The wind had blown above me, and the rain
  Had fall'n upon me, and the gilded snake
  Had nestled in this bosomthrone of love,
  But I had been at rest for evermore.
  Long time entrancement held me: all too soon,
  Life (like a wanton too-officious friend
  Who will not hear denial, vain and rude
  With proffer of unwished for services)
  Entering all the avenues of sense,
  Pass'd thro' into his citadel, the brain
  With hated warmth of apprehensiveness:
  And first the chillness of the mountain stream
  Smote on my brow, and then I seem'd to hear
  Its murmur, as the drowning seaman hears,
  Who with his head below the surface dropt,
  Listens the dreadful murmur indistinct
  Of the confused seas, and knoweth not
  Beyond the sound he lists: and then came in
  O'erhead the white light of the weary moon,
  Diffused and molten into flaky cloud.
  Was my sight drunk, that it did shape to me
  Him who should own that name? or had my fancy
  So lethargised discernment in the sense,
  That she did act the step-dame to mine eyes,
  Warping their nature, till they minister'd
  Unto her swift conceits? 'Twere better thus
  If so be that the memory of that sound
  With mighty evocation, had updrawn
  The fashion and the phantasm of the form
  It should attach to. There was no such thing.--
  It was the man she loved, even Lionel,
  The lover Lionel, the happy Lionel,
  All joy; who drew the happy atmosphere
  Of my unhappy sighs, fed with my tears,
  To him the honey dews of orient hope.
  Oh! rather had some loathly ghastful brow,
  Half-bursten from the shroud, in cere cloth bound,
  The dead skin withering on the fretted bone,
  The very spirit of Paleness made still paler
  By the shuddering moonlight, fix'd his eyes on mine
  Horrible with the anger and the heat
  Of the remorseful soul alive within,
  And damn'd unto his loathed tenement.
  Methinks I could have sooner met that gaze!
  Oh, how her choice did leap forth from his eyes!
  Oh, how her love did clothe itself in smiles
  About his lips! This was the very arch-mock
  And insolence of uncontrolled Fate,
  When the effect weigh'd seas upon my head
  To twit me with the cause.
                          Why how was this?
  Could he not walk what paths he chose, nor breathe
  What airs he pleased! Was not the wide world free,
  With all her interchange of hill and plain
  To him as well as me? I know not, faith:
  But Misery, like a fretful, wayward child,
  Refused to look his author in the face,
  Must he come my way too? Was not the South,
  The East, the West, all open, if he had fall'n
  In love in twilight? Why should he come my way,
  Robed in those robes of light I must not wear,
  With that great crown of beams about his brows?
  Come like an angel to a damned soul?
  To tell him of the bliss he had with God;
  Come like a careless and a greedy heir,
  That scarce can wait the reading of the will
  Before he takes possession? Was mine a mood
  To be invaded rudely, and not rather
  A sacred, secret, unapproached woe
  Unspeakable? I was shut up with grief;
  She took the body of my past delight,
  Narded, and swathed and balm'd it for herself,
  And laid it in a new-hewn sepulchre,
  Where man had never lain. I was led mute
  Into her temple like a sacrifice;
  I was the high-priest in her holiest place,
  Not to be loudly broken in upon.
  Oh! friend, thoughts deep and heavy as these well-nigh
  O'erbore the limits of my brain; but he
  Bent o'er me, and my neck his arm upstay'd
  From earth. I thought it was an adder's fold,
  And once I strove to disengage myself,
  But fail'd, I was so feeble. She was there too:
  She bent above me too: her cheek was pale,
  Oh! very fair and pale: rare pity had stolen
  The living bloom away, as tho' a red rose
  Should change into a white one suddenly.
  Her eyes, I saw, were full of tears in the morn,
  And some few drops of that distressful rain
  Being wafted on the wind, drove in my sight,
  And being there they did break forth afresh
  In a new birth, immingled with my own,
  And still bewept my grief. Keeping unchanged
  The purport of their coinage. Her long ringlets,
  Drooping and beaten with the plaining wind,
  Did brush my forehead in their to-and-fro:
  For in the sudden anguish of her heart
  Loosed from their simple thrall they had flowed abroad,
  And onward floating in a full, dark wave,
  Parted on either side her argent neck,
  Mantling her form half way. She, when I woke,
  After my refluent health made tender quest
  Unanswer'd, for I spoke not: for the sound
  Of that dear voice so musically low,
  And now first heard with any sense of pain,
  As it had taken life away before,
  Choked all the syllables that in my throat
  Strove to uprise, laden with mournful thanks,
  From my full heart: and ever since that hour,
  My voice hath somewhat falter'd--and what wonder
  That when hope died, part of her eloquence
  Died with her? He, the blissful lover, too,
  From his great hoard of happiness distill'd
  Some drops of solace; like a vain rich man,
  That, having always prosper'd in the world,
  Folding his hands deals comfortable words
  To hearts wounded for ever; yet, in truth,
  Fair speech was his and delicate of phrase,
  Falling in whispers on the sense, address'd
  More to the inward than the outward ear,
  As rain of the midsummer midnight soft
  Scarce-heard, recalling fragrance and the green
  Of the dead spring--such as in other minds
  Had film'd the margents of the recent wound.
  And why was I to darken their pure love,
  If, as I knew, they two did love each other,
  Because my own was darken'd? Why was I
  To stand within the level of their hopes,
  Because my hope was widow'd, like the cur
  In the child's adage? Did I love Camilla?
  Ye know that I did love her: to this present
  My full-orb'd love hath waned not. Did I love her,
  And could I look upon her tearful eyes?
  Tears wept for me; for me--weep at my grief?
  What had _she_ done to weep--let my heart
  Break rather--whom the gentlest airs of heaven
  Should kiss with an unwonted gentleness.
  Her love did murder mine; what then? she deem'd
  I wore a brother's mind: she call'd me brother:
  She told me all her love: she shall not weep.

  The brightness of a burning thought awhile
  Battailing with the glooms of my dark will,
  Moonlike emerged, lit up unto itself,
  Upon the depths of an unfathom'd woe,
  Reflex of action, starting up at once,
  As men do from a vague and horrid dream,
  And throwing by all consciousness of self,
  In eager haste I shook him by the hand;
  Then flinging myself down upon my knees
  Even where the grass was warm where I had lain,
  I pray'd aloud to God that he would hold
  The hand of blessing over Lionel,
  And her whom he would make his wedded wife,
  Camilla! May their days be golden days,
  And their long life a dream of linked love,
  From which may rude Death never startle them,
  But grow upon them like a glorious vision
  Of unconceived and awful happiness,
  Solemn but splendid, full of shapes and sounds,
  Swallowing its precedent in victory.
  Let them so love that men and boys may say,
  Lo! how they love each other! till their love
  Shall ripen to a proverb unto all,
  Known when their faces are forgot in the land.
  And as for me, Camilla, as for me,
  Think not thy tears will make my name grow green,--
  The dew of tears is an unwholesome dew.
  The course of Hope is dried,--the life o' the plant--
  They will but sicken the sick plant more.
  Deem then I love thee but as brothers do,
  So shalt thou love me still as sisters do;
  Or if thou dream'st aught farther, dream but how
  I could have loved thee, had there been none else
  To love as lovers, loved again by thee.

  Or this, or somewhat like to this, I spoke,
  When I did see her weep so ruefully;
  For sure my love should ne'er induce the front
  And mask of Hate, whom woful ailments
  Of unavailing tears and heart deep moans
  Feed and envenom, as the milky blood
  Of hateful herbs a subtle-fanged snake.
  Shall Love pledge Hatred in her bitter draughts,
  And batten on his poisons? Love forbid!
  Love passeth not the threshold of cold Hate,
  And Hate is strange beneath the roof of Love.
  O Love, if thou be'st Love, dry up these tears
  Shed for the love of Love; for tho' mine image,
  The subject of thy power, be cold in her,
  Yet, like cold snow, it melteth in the source
  Of these sad tears, and feeds their downward flow.
  So Love, arraign'd to judgment and to death,
  Received unto himself a part of blame.
  Being guiltless, as an innocent prisoner,
  Who when the woful sentence hath been past,
  And all the clearness of his fame hath gone
  Beneath the shadow of the curse of men,
  First falls asleep in swoon. Wherefrom awaked
  And looking round upon his tearful friends,
  Forthwith and in his agony conceives
  A shameful sense as of a cleaving crime--
  For whence without some guilt should such grief be?
  So died that hour, and fell into the abysm
  Of forms outworn, but not to be outworn,
  Who never hail'd another worth the Life
  That made it sensible. So died that hour,
  Like odour wrapt into the winged wind
  Borne into alien lands and far away.
  There be some hearts so airy-fashioned,
  That in the death of love, if e'er they loved,
  On that sharp ridge of utmost doom ride highly
  Above the perilous seas of change and chance;
  Nay, more, holds out the lights of cheerfulness;
  As the tall ship, that many a dreary year
  Knit to some dismal sandbank far at sea,
  All through the lifelong hours of utter dark,
  Showers slanting light upon the dolorous wave.
  For me all other Hopes did sway from that
  Which hung the frailest: falling, they fell too,
  Crush'd link on link into the beaten earth,
  And Love did walk with banish'd Hope no more,
  It was ill-done to part ye, Sisters fair;
  Love's arms were wreathed about the neck of Hope,
  And Hope kiss'd Love, and Love drew in her breath
  In that close kiss, and drank her whisper'd tales.
  They said that Love would die when Hope was gone,
  And Love mourned long, and sorrowed after Hope;
  At last she sought out memory, and they trod
  The same old paths where Love had walked with Hope,
  And Memory fed the soul of Love with tears.

  II

  From that time forth I would not see her more,
  But many weary moons I lived alone--
  Alone, and in the heart of the great forest.
  Sometimes upon the hills beside the sea
  All day I watched the floating isles of shade,
  And sometimes on the shore, upon the sands
  Insensibly I drew her name, until
  The meaning of the letters shot into
  My brain: anon the wanton billow wash'd
  Them over, till they faded like my love.
  The hollow caverns heard me--the black brooks
  Of the mid-forest heard me--the soft winds,
  Laden with thistledown and seeds of flowers,
  Paused in their course to hear me, for my voice
  Was all of thee: the merry linnet knew me,
  The squirrel knew me, and the dragon-fly
  Shot by me like a flash of purple fire.
  The rough briar tore my bleeding palms; the hemlock,
  Brow high, did strike my forehead as I pas'd;
  Yet trod I not the wild-flower in my path,
  Nor bruised the wild-bird's egg.
                        Was this the end?
  Why grew we then together i' the same plot?
  Why fed we the same fountain? drew the same sun?
  Why were our mothers branches of one stem?
  Why were we one in all things, save in that
  Where to have been one had been the roof and crown
  Of all I hoped and fear'd? if that same nearness
  Were father to this distance, and that _one_
  Vauntcourier this _double_? If affection
  Living slew Love, and Sympathy hew'd out
  The bosom-sepulchre of Sympathy.

  Chiefly I sought the cavern and the hill
  Where last we roam'd together, for the sound
  Of the loud stream was pleasant, and the wind
  Came wooingly with violet smells. Sometimes
  All day I sat within the cavern-mouth,
  Fixing my eyes on those three cypress-cones
  Which spired above the wood; and with mad hand
  Tearing the bright leaves of the ivy-screen,
  I cast them in the noisy brook beneath,
  And watch'd them till they vanished from my sight
  Beneath the bower of wreathed eglantines:
  And all the fragments of the living rock,
  (Huge splinters, which the sap of earliest showers,
  Or moisture of the vapour, left in clinging,
  When the shrill storm-blast feeds it from behind,
  And scatters it before, had shatter'd from
  The mountain, till they fell, and with the shock
  Half dug their own graves), in mine agony,
  Did I make bear of all the deep rich moss
  Wherewith the dashing runnel in the spring
  Had liveried them all over. In my brain
  The spirit seem'd to flag from thought to thought,
  Like moonlight wandering through a mist: my blood
  Crept like the drains of a marsh thro' all my body;
  The motions of my heart seem'd far within me,
  Unfrequent, low, as tho' it told its pulses;
  And yet it shook me, that my frame did shudder,
  As it were drawn asunder by the rack.
  But over the deep graves of Hope and Fear,
  The wreck of ruin'd life and shatter'd thought,
  Brooded one master-passion evermore,
  Like to a low hung and a fiery sky
  Above some great metropolis, earth shock'd
  Hung round with ragged-rimmed burning folds,
  Embathing all with wild and woful hues--
  Great hills of ruins, and collapsed masses
  Of thunder-shaken columns, indistinct
  And fused together in the tyrannous light.

  So gazed I on the ruins of that thought
  Which was the playmate of my youth--for which
  I lived and breathed: the dew, the sun, the rain,
  Unto the growth of body and of mind;
  The blood, the breath, the feeling and the motion,
  The slope into the current of my years,
  Which drove them onward--made them sensible;
  The precious jewel of my honour'd life,
  Erewhile close couch'd in golden happiness,
  Now proved counterfeit, was shaken out,
  And, trampled on, left to its own decay.




The Lover's Tale

  Sometimes I thought Camilla was no more,
  Some one had told me she was dead, and ask'd me
  If I would see her burial: then I seem'd
  To rise, and thro' the forest-shadow borne
  With more than mortal swiftness, I ran down
  The sleepy sea-bank, till I came upon
  The rear of a procession, curving round
  The silver-sheeted bay: in front of which
  Six stately virgins, all in white, upbare
  A broad earth-sweeping pall of whitest lawn,
  Wreathed round the bier with garlands: in the distance,
  From out the yellow woods, upon the hill,
  Look'd forth the summit and the pinnacles
  Of a grey steeple. All the pageantry,
  Save those six virgins which upheld the bier,
  Were stoled from head to foot in flowing black;
  One walk'd abreast with me, and veiled his brow,
  And he was loud in weeping and in praise
  Of the departed: a strong sympathy
  Shook all my soul: I flung myself upon him
  In tears and cries: I told him all my love,
  How I had loved her from the first; whereat
  He shrunk and howl'd, and from his brow drew back
  His hand to push me from him; and the face
  The very face and form of Lionel,
  Flash'd through my eyes into my innermost brain,
  And at his feet I seemed to faint and fall,
  To fall and die away. I could not rise,
  Albeit I strove to follow. They pass'd on,
  The lordly Phantasms; in their floating folds
  They pass'd and were no more: but I had fall'n
  Prone by the dashing runnel on the grass.

  Always th' inaudible, invisible thought
  Artificer and subject, lord and slave
  Shaped by the audible and visible,
  Moulded the audible and visible;
  All crisped sounds of wave, and leaf and wind,
  Flatter'd the fancy of my fading brain;
  The storm-pavilion'd element, the wood,
  The mountain, the three cypresses, the cave,
  Were wrought into the tissue of my dream.
  The moanings in the forest, the loud stream,
  Awoke me not, but were a part of sleep;
  And voices in the distance, calling to me,
  And in my vision bidding me dream on,
  Like sounds within the twilight realms of dreams,
  Which wander round the bases of the hills,
  And murmur in the low-dropt eaves of sleep,
  But faint within the portals. Oftentimes
  The vision had fair prelude, in the end
  Opening on darkness, stately vestibules
  To cares and shows of Death; whether the mind,
  With a revenge even to itself unknown,
  Made strange division of its suffering
  With her, whom to have suffering view'd had been
  Extremest pain; or that the clear-eyed Spirit,
  Being blasted in the Present, grew at length
  Prophetical and prescient of whate'er
  The Future had in store; or that which most
  Enchains belief, the sorrow of my spirit
  Was of so wide a compass it took in
  All I had loved, and my dull agony.
  Ideally to her transferred, became
  Anguish intolerable.
                 The day waned;
  Alone I sat with her: about my brow
  Her warm breath floated in the utterance
  Of silver-chorded tones: her lips were sunder'd
  With smiles of tranquil bliss, which broke in light
  Like morning from her eyes--her eloquent eyes
  (As I have seen them many hundred times),
  Fill'd all with clear pure fire, thro' mine down rain'd
  Their spirit-searching splendours. As a vision
  Unto a haggard prisoner, iron-stay'd
  In damp and dismal dungeons underground
  Confined on points of faith, when strength is shock'd
  With torment, and expectancy of worse
  Upon the morrow, thro' the ragged walls,
  All unawares before his half-shut eyes,
  Comes in upon him in the dead of night,
  And with th' excess of sweetness and of awe,
  Makes the heart tremble, and the eyes run over
  Upon his steely gyves; so those fair eyes
  Shone on my darkness forms which ever stood
  Within the magic cirque of memory,
  Invisible but deathless, waiting still
  The edict of the will to reassume
  The semblance of those rare realities
  Of which they were the mirrors. Now the light,
  Which was their life, burst through the cloud of thought
  Keen, irrepressible.
                        It was a room
  Within the summer-house of which I spoke,
  Hung round with paintings of the sea, and one
  A vessel in mid-ocean, her heaved prow
  Clambering, the mast bent, and the revin wind
  In her sail roaring. From the outer day,
  Betwixt the closest ivies came a broad
  And solid beam of isolated light,
  Crowded with driving atomies, and fell
  Slanting upon that picture, from prime youth
  Well-known, well-loved. She drew it long ago
  Forth gazing on the waste and open sea,
  One morning when the upblown billow ran
  Shoreward beneath red clouds, and I had pour'd
  Into the shadowing pencil's naked forms
  Colour and life: it was a bond and seal
  Of friendship, spoken of with tearful smiles;
  A monument of childhood and of love,
  The poesy of childhood; my lost love
  Symbol'd in storm. We gazed on it together
  In mute and glad remembrance, and each heart
  Grew closer to the other, and the eye
  Was riveted and charm-bound, gazing like
  The Indian on a still-eyed snake, low crouch'd
  A beauty which is death, when all at once
  That painted vessel, as with inner life,
  'Gan rock and heave upon that painted sea;
  An earthquake, my loud heartbeats, made the ground
  Roll under us, and all at once soul, life,
  And breath, and motion, pass'd and flow'd away
  To those unreal billows: round and round
  A whirlwind caught and bore us; mighty gyves,
  Rapid and vast, of hissing spray wind-driven
  Far through the dizzy dark. Aloud she shriek'd--
  My heart was cloven with pain. I wound my arms
  About her: we whirl'd giddily: the wind
  Sung: but I clasp'd her without fear: her weight
  Shrank in my grasp, and over my dim eyes
  And parted lips which drank her breath, down hung
  The jaws of Death: I, screaming, from me flung
  The empty phantom: all the sway and whirl
  Of the storm dropt to windless calm, and I
  Down welter'd thro' the dark ever and ever.




Index to First Lines


A gate and a field half ploughed
All thoughts, all creeds, all dreams, are true
Angels have talked with him and showed him thrones
As when a man, that sails in a balloon
Blow ye the trumpets, gather from afar
But she tarries in her place
Check every outflash, every ruder sally
Could I outwear my present state of woe
Ere yet my heart was sweet Love's tomb
Every day hath its night
First drink a health, this solemn night
God bless our Prince and Bride
Heaven weeps above the earth all night
Here far away, seen from the topmost cliff
His eyes in eclipse
Home they brought him slain with spears
How much I love this writer's manly style
How often, when a child I lay reclined
I am any man's suitor
I stood on a tower in the wet
I stood upon the Mountain which o'erlooks
I' the glooming light
Me my own fate to lasting sorrow doometh
My Rosalind, my Rosalind
O darling room, my heart's delight
Oh, Beauty, passing beauty! sweetest sweet!
Oh, go not yet, my love
O maiden fresher than the first green leaf
O sad _No more_! O sweet _No more_
O thou whose fringèd lids I gaze upon
Rise, Britons, rise, if manhood be not dead
Sainted Juliet! dearest name
Shall the hag Evil die with the child of Good
Sure never yet was Antelope
The lintwhite and the throstlecock
The Northwind fall'n in the new starréd night
The pallid thunderstricken sigh for gain
There are three things that fill my heart with sighs
Therefore your halls, your ancient colleges
There is no land like England
The varied earth, the moving heaven
Thou, from the first, unborn, undying love
Though Night hath climbed her peak
Two bees within a chrystal flowerbell rockèd
Voice of the summerwind
We have had enough of motion
We know him, out of Shakespeare's art
What time I wasted youthful hours
Where is the Giant of the Sun, which stood
Who can say
Who fears to die? Who fears to die
With roses musky breathed
You cast to ground the hope which once was mine
You did late review my lays
Your ringlets, your ringlets







A Garland for Girls

By Louisa May Alcott

TO R.A. LAWRENCE

THIS LITTLE BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED BY HER GRATEFUL FRIEND,

L.M. ALCOTT






CONTENTS





MAY FLOWERS

AN IVY SPRAY AND LADIES' SLIPPERS

PANSIES

WATER-LILIES

POPPIES AND WHEAT

LITTLE BUTTON-ROSE

MOUNTAIN-LAUREL AND MAIDEN-HAIR






PREFACE





These stories were written for my own amusement during a period of
enforced seclusion. The flowers which were my solace and pleasure
suggested titles for the tales and gave an interest to the work.

If my girls find a little beauty or sunshine in these common
blossoms, their old friend will not have made her Garland in vain.

L.M. ALCOTT.

SEPTEMBER, 1887.






MAY FLOWERS





Being Boston girls, of course they got up a club for mental
improvement, and, as they were all descendants of the Pilgrim
Fathers, they called it the Mayflower Club. A very good name, and
the six young girls who were members of it made a very pretty posy
when they met together, once a week, to sew, and read well-chosen
books. At the first meeting of the season, after being separated all
summer, there was a good deal of gossip to be attended to before the
question, "What shall we read?" came up for serious discussion.

Anna Winslow, as president, began by proposing "Happy Dodd;" but a
chorus of "I've read it!" made her turn to her list for another
title.

"'Prisoners of Poverty' is all about workingwomen, very true and
very sad; but Mamma said it might do us good to know something of
the hard times other girls have," said Anna, soberly; for she was a
thoughtful creature, very anxious to do her duty in all ways.

"I'd rather not know about sad things, since I can't help to make
them any better," answered Ella Carver, softly patting the apple
blossoms she was embroidering on a bit of blue satin.

"But we might help if we really tried, I suppose; you know how much
Happy Dodd did when she once began, and she was only a poor little
girl without half the means of doing good which we have," said Anna,
glad to discuss the matter, for she had a little plan in her head
and wanted to prepare a way for proposing it.

"Yes, I'm always saying that I have more than my share of fun and
comfort and pretty things, and that I ought and will share them with
some one. But I don't do it; and now and then, when I hear about
real poverty, or dreadful sickness, I feel so wicked it quite upsets
me. If I knew HOW to begin, I really would. But dirty little
children don't come in my way, nor tipsy women to be reformed, nor
nice lame girls to sing and pray with, as it all happens in books,"
cried Marion Warren, with such a remorseful expression on her merry
round face that her mates laughed with one accord.

"I know something that I COULD do if I only had the courage to begin
it. But Papa would shake his head unbelievingly, and Mamma worry
about its being proper, and it would interfere with my music, and
everything nice that I especially wanted to go to would be sure
to come on whatever day I set for my good work, and I should get
discouraged or ashamed, and not half do it, so I don't begin, but I
know I ought." And Elizabeth Alden rolled her large eyes from one
friend to another, as if appealing to them to goad her to this duty
by counsel and encouragement of some sort.

"Well, I suppose it's right, but I do perfectly hate to go poking
round among poor folks, smelling bad smells, seeing dreadful sights,
hearing woful tales, and running the risk of catching fever, and
diphtheria, and horrid things. I don't pretend to like charity, but
say right out I'm a silly, selfish wretch, and want to enjoy every
minute, and not worry about other people. Isn't it shameful?"

Maggie Bradford looked such a sweet little sinner as she boldly made
this sad confession, that no one could scold her, though Ida
Standish, her bosom friend, shook her head, and Anna said, with a
sigh: "I'm afraid we all feel very much as Maggie does, though we
don't own it so honestly. Last spring, when I was ill and thought I
might die, I was so ashamed of my idle, frivolous winter, that I
felt as if I'd give all I had to be able to live it over and do
better. Much is not expected of a girl of eighteen, I know; but oh!
there were heaps of kind little things I MIGHT have done if I hadn't
thought only of myself. I resolved if I lived I'd try at least to be
less selfish, and make some one happier for my being in the world. I
tell you, girls, it's rather solemn when you lie expecting to die,
and your sins come up before you, even though they are very small
ones. I never shall forget it, and after my lovely summer I mean to
be a better girl, and lead a better life if I can."

Anna was so much in earnest that her words, straight out of a very
innocent and contrite heart, touched her hearers deeply, and put
them into the right mood to embrace her proposition. No one spoke
for a moment, then Maggie said quietly,--

"I know what it is. I felt very much so when the horses ran away,
and for fifteen minutes I sat clinging to Mamma, expecting to be
killed. Every unkind, undutiful word I'd ever said to her came back
to me, and was worse to bear than the fear of sudden death. It
scared a great deal of naughtiness out of me, and dear Mamma and I
have been more to each other ever since."

"Let us begin with 'The Prisoners of Poverty,' and perhaps it will
show us something to do," said Lizzie. "But I must say I never felt
as if shop-girls needed much help; they generally seem so contented
with themselves, and so pert or patronizing to us, that I don't pity
them a bit, though it must be a hard life."

"I think we can't do MUCH in that direction, except set an example
of good manners when we go shopping. I wanted to propose that we
each choose some small charity for this winter, and do it
faithfully. That will teach us how to do more by and by, and we can
help one another with our experiences, perhaps, or amuse with our
failures. What do you say?" asked Anna, surveying her five friends
with a persuasive smile.

"What COULD we do?"

"People will call us goody-goody."

"I haven't the least idea how to go to work"

"Don't believe Mamma will let me."

"We'd better change our names from May Flowers to sisters of
charity, and wear meek black bonnets and flapping cloaks."

Anna received these replies with great composure, and waited for the
meeting to come to order, well knowing that the girls would have
their fun and outcry first, and then set to work in good earnest.

"I think it's a lovely idea, and I'll carry out my plan. But I won't
tell what it is yet; you'd all shout, and say I couldn't do it, but
if you were trying also, that would keep me up to the mark," said
Lizzie, with a decided snap of her scissors, as she trimmed the
edges of a plush case for her beloved music.

"Suppose we all keep our attempts secret, and not let our right hand
know what the left hand does? It's such fun to mystify people, and
then no one can laugh at us. If we fail, we can say nothing; if we
succeed, we can tell of it and get our reward. I'd like that way,
and will look round at once for some especially horrid boot-black,
ungrateful old woman, or ugly child, and devote myself to him, her,
or it with the patience of a saint," cried Maggie, caught by the
idea of doing good in secret and being found out by accident.

The other girls agreed, after some discussion, and then Anna took
the floor again.

"I propose that we each work in our own way till next May, then, at
our last meeting, report what we have done, truly and honestly, and
plan something better for next year. Is it a vote?"

It evidently was a unanimous vote, for five gold thimbles went up,
and five blooming faces smiled as the five girlish voices cried,
"Aye!"

"Very well, now let us decide what to read, and begin at once. I
think the 'Prisoners' a good book, and we shall doubtless get some
hints from it."

So they began, and for an hour one pleasant voice after the other
read aloud those sad, true stories of workingwomen and their hard
lives, showing these gay young creatures what their pretty clothes
cost the real makers of them, and how much injustice, suffering, and
wasted strength went into them. It was very sober reading, but most
absorbing; for the crochet needles went slower and slower, the
lace-work lay idle, and a great tear shone like a drop of dew on the
apple blossoms as Ella listened to "Rose's Story." They skipped the
statistics, and dipped here and there as each took her turn; but
when the two hours were over, and it was time for the club to
adjourn, all the members were deeply interested in that pathetic
book, and more in earnest than before; for this glimpse into other
lives showed them how much help was needed, and made them anxious to
lend a hand,

"We can't do much, being 'only girls,'" said Anna; "but if each does
one small chore somewhere it will pave the way for better work; so
we will all try, at least, though it seems like so many ants trying
to move a mountain."

"Well, ants build nests higher than a man's head in Africa; you
remember the picture of them in our old geographies? And we can do
as much, I'm sure, if each tugs her pebble or straw faithfully. I
shall shoulder mine to-morrow if Mamma is willing," answered Lizzie,
shutting up her work-bag as if she had her resolution inside and was
afraid it might evaporate before she got home.

"I shall stand on the Common, and proclaim aloud, 'Here's a nice
young missionary, in want of a job! Charity for sale cheap! Who'll
buy? who'll buy?'" said Maggie, with a resigned expression, and a
sanctimonious twang to her voice.

"I shall wait and see what comes to me, since I don't know what I'm
fit for;" and Marion gazed out of the window as if expecting to see
some interesting pauper waiting for her to appear.

"I shall ask Miss Bliss for advice; she knows all about the poor,
and will give me a good start," added prudent Ida, who resolved to
do nothing rashly lest she should fail.

"I shall probably have a class of dirty little girls, and teach them
how to sew, as I can't do anything else. They won't learn much, but
steal, and break, and mess, and be a dreadful trial, and I shall get
laughed at and wish I hadn't done it. Still I shall try it, and
sacrifice my fancy-work to the cause of virtue," said Ella,
carefully putting away her satin glove-case with a fond glance at
the delicate flowers she so loved to embroider.

"I have no plans, but want to do so much! I shall have to wait till
I discover what is best. After to-day we won't speak of our work, or
it won't be a secret any longer. In May we will report. Good luck to
all, and good-by till next Saturday."

With these farewell words from their president the girls departed,
with great plans and new ideas simmering in their young heads and
hearts.

It seemed a vast undertaking; but where there is a will there is
always a way, and soon it was evident that each had found "a little
chore" to do for sweet charity's sake. Not a word was said at the
weekly meetings, but the artless faces betrayed all shades of hope,
discouragement, pride, and doubt, as their various attempts seemed
likely to succeed or fail. Much curiosity was felt, and a few
accidental words, hints, or meetings in queer places, were very
exciting, though nothing was discovered.

Marion was often seen in a North End car, and Lizzie in a South End
car, with a bag of books and papers. Ella haunted a certain shop
where fancy articles were sold, and Ida always brought plain sewing
to the club. Maggie seemed very busy at home, and Anna was found
writing industriously several times when one of her friends called.
All seemed very happy, and rather important when outsiders
questioned them about their affairs. But they had their pleasures as
usual, and seemed to enjoy them with an added relish, as if they
realized as never before how many blessings they possessed, and were
grateful for them.

So the winter passed, and slowly something new and pleasant seemed
to come into the lives of these young girls. The listless,
discontented look some of them used to wear passed away; a sweet
earnestness and a cheerful activity made them charming, though they
did not know it, and wondered when people said, "That set of girls
are growing up beautifully; they will make fine women by and by."
The mayflowers were budding under the snow, and as spring came on
the fresh perfume began to steal out, the rosy faces to brighten,
and the last year's dead leaves to fall away, leaving the young
plants green and strong.

On the 15th of May the club met for the last time that season, as
some left town early, and all were full of spring work and summer
plans. Every member was in her place at an unusually early hour that
day, and each wore an air of mingled anxiety, expectation, and
satisfaction, pleasant to behold. Anna called them to order with
three raps of her thimble and a beaming smile.

"We need not choose a book for our reading to-day, as each of us is
to contribute an original history of her winter's work. I know it
will be very interesting, and I hope more instructive, than some of
the novels we have read. Who shall begin?"

"You! you!" was the unanimous answer; for all loved and respected
her very much, and felt that their presiding officer should open the
ball.

Anna colored modestly, but surprised her friends by the composure
with which she related her little story, quite as if used to public
speaking.

"You know I told you last November that I should have to look about
for something that I COULD do. I did look a long time, and was
rather in despair, when my task came to me in the most unexpected
way. Our winter work was being done, so I had a good deal of
shopping on my hands, and found it less a bore than usual, because I
liked to watch the shop-girls, and wish I dared ask some of them if
I could help them. I went often to get trimmings and buttons at
Cotton's, and had a good deal to do with the two girls at that
counter. They were very obliging and patient about matching some jet
ornaments for Mamma, and I found out that their names were Mary and
Maria Porter. I liked them, for they were very neat and plain in
their dress,--not like some, who seem to think that if their waists
are small, and their hair dressed in the fashion, it is no matter
how soiled their collars are, nor how untidy their nails. Well, one
day when I went for certain kinds of buttons which were to be made
for us, Maria, the younger one, who took the order, was not there. I
asked for her, and Mary said she was at home with a lame knee. I was
so sorry, and ventured to put a few questions in a friendly way.
Mary seemed glad to tell her troubles, and I found that 'Ria,' as
she called her sister, had been suffering for a long time, but did
not complain for fear of losing her place. No stools are allowed at
Cotton's, so the poor girls stand nearly all day, or rest a minute
now and then on a half-opened drawer. I'd seen Maria doing it, and
wondered why some one did not make a stir about seats in this place,
as they have in other stores and got stools for the shop women. I
didn't dare to speak to the gentlemen, but I gave Mary the Jack
roses I wore in my breast, and asked if I might take some books or
flowers to poor Maria. It was lovely to see her sad face light up
and hear her thank me when I went to see her, for she was very
lonely without her sister, and discouraged about her place. She did
not lose it entirely, but had to work at home, for her lame knee
will be a long time in getting well. I begged Mamma and Mrs.
Ailingham to speak to Mr. Cotton for her; so she got the mending of
the jet and bead work to do, and buttons to cover, and things of
that sort. Mary takes them to and fro, and Maria feels so happy not
to be idle. We also got stools, for all the other girls in that
shop. Mrs. Allingham is so rich and kind she can do anything, and
now it's such a comfort to see those tired things resting when off
duty that I often go in and enjoy the sight."

Anna paused as cries of "Good! good!" interrupted her tale; but she
did not add the prettiest part of it, and tell how the faces of the
young women behind the counters brightened when she came in, nor how
gladly all served the young lady who showed them what a true
gentlewoman was.

"I hope that isn't all?" said Maggie, eagerly.

"Only a little more. I know you will laugh when I tell you that I've
been reading papers to a class of shop-girls at the Union once a
week all winter."

A murmur of awe and admiration greeted this deeply interesting
statement; for, true to the traditions of the modern Athens in which
they lived, the girls all felt the highest respect for "papers" on
any subject, it being the fashion for ladies, old and young, to read
and discuss every subject, from pottery to Pantheism, at the various
clubs all over the city.

"It came about very naturally," continued Anna, as if anxious to
explain her seeming audacity. "I used to go to see Molly and Ria,
and heard all about their life and its few pleasures, and learned to
like them more and more. They had only each other in the world,
lived in two rooms, worked all day, and in the way of amusement or
instruction had only what they found at the Union in the evening. I
went with them a few times, and saw how useful and pleasant it was,
and wanted to help, as other kind girls only a little older than I
did. Eva Randal read a letter from a friend in Russia one time, and
the girls enjoyed it very much. That reminded me of my brother
George's lively journals, written when he was abroad. You remember
how we used to laugh over them when he sent them home? Well, when I
was begged to give them an evening, I resolved to try one of those
amusing journal-letters, and chose the best,--all about how George
and a friend went to the different places Dickens describes in some
of his funny books. I wish you could have seen how those dear girls
enjoyed it, and laughed till they cried over the dismay of the boys,
when they knocked at a door in Kingsgate Street, and asked if Mrs.
Gamp lived there. It was actually a barber's shop, and a little man,
very like Poll Sweedlepipes, told them 'Mrs. Britton was the nuss as
lived there now.' It upset those rascals to come so near the truth,
and they ran away because they couldn't keep sober."

The members of the club indulged in a general smile as they recalled
the immortal Sairey with "the bottle on the mankle-shelf," the
"cowcuber," and the wooden pippins. Then Anna continued, with an air
of calm satisfaction, quite sure now of her audience and herself,--

"It was a great success. So I went on, and when the journals were
done, I used to read other things, and picked up books for their
library, and helped in any way I could, while learning to know them
better and give them confidence in me. They are proud and shy, just
as we should be but if you REALLY want to be friends and don't mind
rebuffs now and then, they come to trust and like you, and there is
so much to do for them one never need sit idle any more. I won't
give names, as they don't like it, nor tell how I tried to serve
them, but it is very sweet and good for me to have found this work,
and to know that each year I can do it better and better. So I feel
encouraged and am very glad I began, as I hope you all are. Now, who
comes next?"

As Anna ended, the needles dropped and ten soft hands gave her a
hearty round of applause; for all felt that she had done well, and
chosen a task especially fitted to her powers, as she had money,
time, tact, and the winning manners that make friends everywhere.

Beaming with pleasure at their approval, but feeling that they made
too much of her small success, Anna called the club to order by
saying, "Ella looks as if she were anxious to tell her experiences,
so perhaps we had better ask her to hold forth next."

"Hear! hear!" cried the girls; and, nothing loath, Ella promptly
began, with twinkling eyes and a demure smile, for HER story ended
romantically.

"If you are interested in shop-girls, Miss President and ladies, you
will like to know that _I_ am one, at least a silent partner and
co-worker in a small fancy store at the West End."

"No!" exclaimed the amazed club with one voice; and, satisfied with
this sensational beginning Ella went on.

"I really am, and you have bought some of my fancy-work. Isn't that
a good joke? You needn't stare so, for I actually made that
needle-book, Anna, and my partner knit Lizzie's new cloud. This is
the way it all happened. I didn't wish to waste any time, but one
can't rush into the street and collar shabby little girls, and say,
'Come along and learn to sew,' without a struggle, so I thought I'd
go and ask Mrs. Brown how to begin. Her branch of the Associated
Charities is in Laurel Street, not far from our house, you know; and
the very day after our last meeting I posted off to get my 'chore.'
I expected to have to fit work for poor needlewomen, or go to see
some dreadful sick creature, or wash dirty little Pats, and was
bracing up my mind for whatever might come, as I toiled up the hill
in a gale of wind. Suddenly my hat flew off and went gayly skipping
away, to the great delight of some black imps, who only grinned and
cheered me on as I trotted after it with wild grabs and wrathful
dodges. I got it at last out of a puddle, and there I was in a nice
mess. The elastic was broken, feather wet, and the poor thing all
mud and dirt. I didn't care much, as it was my old one,--dressed for
my work, you see. But I couldn't go home bareheaded, and I didn't
know a soul in that neighborhood. I turned to step into a grocery
store at the corner, to borrow a brush or buy a sheet of paper to
wear, for I looked like a lunatic with my battered hat and my hair
in a perfect mop. Luckily I spied a woman's fancy shop on the other
corner, and rushed in there to hide myself, for the brats hooted and
people stared. It was a very small shop, and behind the counter sat
a tall, thin, washed-out-looking woman, making a baby's hood. She
looked poor and blue and rather sour, but took pity on me; and while
she sewed the cord, dried the feather, and brushed off the dirt, I
warmed myself and looked about to see what I could buy in return for
her trouble.

"A few children's aprons hung in the little window, with some knit
lace, balls, and old-fashioned garters, two or three dolls, and a
very poor display of small wares. In a show-case, however, on the
table that was the counter, I found some really pretty things, made
of plush, silk, and ribbon, with a good deal of taste. So I said I'd
buy a needle-book, and a gay ball, and a pair of distracting baby's
shoes, made to look like little open-work socks with pink
ankle-ties, so cunning and dainty, I was glad to get them for Cousin
Clara's baby. The woman seemed pleased, though she had a grim way of
talking, and never smiled once. I observed that she handled my hat
as if used to such work, and evidently liked to do it. I thanked her
for repairing damages so quickly and well, and she said, with my hat
on her hand, as if she hated to part with it, 'I'm used to
millineryin' and never should have give it up, if I didn't have my
folks to see to. I took this shop, hopin' to make things go, as such
a place was needed round here, but mother broke down, and is a sight
of care; so I couldn't leave her, and doctors is expensive, and
times hard, and I had to drop my trade, and fall back on pins and
needles, and so on.'"

Ella was a capital mimic, and imitated the nasal tones of the
Vermont woman to the life, with a doleful pucker of her own blooming
face, which gave such a truthful picture of poor Miss Almira Miller
that those who had seen her recognized it at once, and laughed
gayly.

"Just as I was murmuring a few words of regret at her bad luck,"
continued Ella, "a sharp voice called out from a back room, 'Almiry!
Almiry! come here.' It sounded very like a cross parrot, but it was
the old lady, and while I put on my hat I heard her asking who was
in the shop, and what we were 'gabbin' about.' Her daughter told
her, and the old soul demanded to 'see the gal;' so I went in, being
ready for fun as usual. It was a little, dark, dismal place, but as
neat as a pin, and in the bed sat a regular Grandma Smallweed
smoking a pipe, with a big cap, a snuff-box, and a red cotton
handkerchief. She was a tiny, dried-up thing, brown as a berry, with
eyes like black beads, a nose and chin that nearly met, and hands
like birds' claws. But such a fierce, lively, curious, blunt old
lady you never saw, and I didn't know what would be the end of me
when she began to question, then to scold, and finally to demand
that 'folks should come and trade to Almiry's shop after promisin'
they would, and she havin' took a lease of the place on account of
them lies.' I wanted to laugh, but dared not do it, so just let her
croak, for the daughter had to go to her customers. The old lady's
tirade informed me that they came from Vermont, had 'been wal on 't
till father died and the farm was sold.' Then it seems the women
came to Boston and got on pretty well till 'a stroke of numb-palsy,'
whatever that is, made the mother helpless and kept Almiry at home
to care for her. I can't tell you how funny and yet how sad it was
to see the poor old soul, so full of energy and yet so helpless, and
the daughter so discouraged with her pathetic little shop and no
customers to speak of. I did not know what to say till 'Grammer
Miller,' as the children call her, happened to say, when she took up
her knitting after the lecture, 'If folks who go spendin' money
reckless on redic'lus toys for Christmas only knew what nice things,
useful and fancy, me and Almiry could make ef we had the goods,
they'd jest come round this corner and buy 'em, and keep me out of a
Old Woman's Home and that good, hard-workin' gal of mine out of a
'sylum; for go there she will ef she don't get a boost somehow, with
rent and firin' and vittles all on her shoulders, and me only able
to wag them knittin'-needles.'

"'I will buy things here, and tell all my friends about it, and I
have a drawer full of pretty bits of silk and velvet and plush, that
I will give Miss Miller for her work, if she will let me.' I added
that, for I saw that Almiry was rather proud, and hid her troubles
under a grim look.

"That pleased the old lady, and, lowering her voice, she said, with
a motherly sort of look in her beady eyes: 'Seein' as you are so
friendly, I'll tell you what frets me most, a layin' here, a burden
to my darter. She kep' company with Nathan Baxter, a master
carpenter up to Westminster where we lived, and ef father hadn't a
died suddin' they'd a ben married. They waited a number o' years,
workin' to their trades, and we was hopin' all would turn out wal,
when troubles come, and here we be. Nathan's got his own folks to
see to, and Almiry won't add to HIS load with hern, nor leave me; so
she give him back his ring, and jest buckled to all alone. She don't
say a word, but it's wearin' her to a shadder, and I can't do a
thing to help, but make a few pinballs, knit garters, and kiver
holders. Ef she got a start in business it would cheer her up a
sight, and give her a kind of a hopeful prospeck, for old folks
can't live forever, and Nathan is a waitin', faithful and true.'

"That just finished me, for I am romantic, and do enjoy love stories
with all my heart, even if the lovers are only a skinny spinster and
a master carpenter. So I just resolved to see what I could do for
poor Almiry and the peppery old lady. I didn't promise anything but
my bits, and, taking the things I bought, went home to talk it over
with Mamma. I found she had often got pins and tape, and such small
wares, at the little shop, and found it very convenient, though she
knew nothing about the Millers. She was willing I should help if I
could, but advised going slowly, and seeing what they could do
first. We did not dare to treat them like beggars, and send them
money and clothes, and tea and sugar, as we do the Irish, for they
were evidently respectable people, and proud as poor. So I took my
bundle of odds and ends, and Mamma added some nice large pieces of
dresses we had done with, and gave a fine order for aprons and
holders and balls for our church fair.

"It would have done your hearts good, girls, to see those poor old
faces light up as I showed my scraps, and asked if the work would be
ready by Christmas. Grammer fairly swam in the gay colors I strewed
over her bed, and enjoyed them like a child, while Almiry tried to
be grim, but had to give it up, as she began at once to cut out
aprons, and dropped tears all over the muslin when her back was
turned to me. I didn't know a washed-out old maid COULD be so
pathetic."

Ella stopped to give a regretful sigh over her past blindness, while
her hearers made a sympathetic murmur; for young hearts are very
tender, and take an innocent interest in lovers' sorrows, no matter
how humble.

"Well, that was the beginning of it. I got so absorbed in making
things go well that I didn't look any further, but just 'buckled to'
with Miss Miller and helped run that little shop. No one knew me in
that street, so I slipped in and out, and did what I liked. The old
lady and I got to be great friends; though she often pecked and
croaked like a cross raven, and was very wearing. I kept her busy
with her 'pin-balls and knittin'-work, and supplied Almiry with
pretty materials for the various things I found she could make. You
wouldn't believe what dainty bows those long fingers could tie, what
ravishing doll's hats she would make out of a scrap of silk and
lace, or the ingenious things she concocted with cones and shells
and fans and baskets. I love such work, and used to go and help her
often, for I wanted her window and shop to be full for Christmas,
and lure in plenty of customers. Our new toys and the little cases
of sewing silk sold well, and people began to come more, after I
lent Almiry some money to lay in a stock of better goods. Papa
enjoyed my business venture immensely, and was never tired of joking
about it. He actually went and bought balls for four small black
boys who were gluing their noses to the window one day, spellbound
by the orange, red, and blue treasures displayed there. He liked my
partner's looks, though he teased me by saying that we'd better add
lemonade to our stock, as poor, dear Almiry's acid face would make
lemons unnecessary, and sugar and water were cheap.

"Well, Christmas came, and we did a great business, for Mamma came
and sent others, and our fancy things were as pretty and cheaper
than those at the art stores, so they went well, and the Millers
were cheered up, and I felt encouraged, and we took a fresh start
after the holidays. One of my gifts at New Year was my own
glove-case,--you remember the apple-blossom thing I began last
autumn? I put it in our window to fill up, and Mamma bought it, and
gave it to me full of elegant gloves, with a sweet note, and Papa
sent a check to 'Miller, Warren & Co.' I was so pleased and proud I
could hardly help telling you all. But the best joke was the day you
girls came in and bought our goods, and I peeped at you through the
crack of the door, being in the back room dying with laughter to see
you look round, and praise our 'nice assortment of useful and pretty
articles.'"

"That's all very well, and we can bear to be laughed at if you
succeeded, Miss. But I don't believe you did, for no Millers are
there now. Have you taken a palatial store on Boylston Street for
this year, intending to run it alone? We'll all patronize it, and
your name will look well on a sign," said Maggie, wondering what the
end of Ella's experience had been.

"Ah! I still have the best of it, for my romance finished up
delightfully, as you shall hear. We did well all winter, and no
wonder. What was needed was a little 'boost' in the right direction,
and I could give it; so my Millers were much comforted, and we were
good friends. But in March Grammer died suddenly, and poor Almiry
mourned as if she had been the sweetest mother in the world. The old
lady's last wishes were to be 'laid out harnsome in a cap with a
pale blue satin ribbin, white wasn't becomin', to hev at least three
carriages to the funeral, and be sure a paper with her death in it
was sent to N. Baxter, Westminster, Vermont.'

"I faithfully obeyed her commands, put on the ugly cap myself, gave
a party of old ladies from the home a drive in the hacks, and
carefully directed a marked paper to Nathan, hoping that he HAD
proved 'faithful and true.' I didn't expect he would, so was not
surprised when no answer came. But I WAS rather amazed when Almiry
told me she didn't care to keep on with the store now she was free.
She wanted to visit her friends a spell this spring, and in the fall
would go back to her trade in some milliner's store.

"I was sorry, for I really enjoyed my partnership. It seemed a
little bit ungrateful after all my trouble in getting her customers,
but I didn't say anything, and we sold out to the Widow Bates, who
is a good soul with six children, and will profit by our efforts.

"Almiry bid me good-by with all the grim look gone out of her face,
many thanks, and a hearty promise to write soon. That was in April.
A week ago I got a short letter saying,--

"'DEAR FRIEND,--You will be pleased to hear that I am married to Mr.
Baxter, and shall remain here. He was away when the paper came with
mother's death, but as soon as he got home he wrote. I couldn't make
up my mind till I got home and see him. Now it's all right. and I am
very happy. Many thanks for all you done for me and mother. I shall
never forget it My husband sends respects, and I remain Yours
gratefully, ALMIRA M. BAXTER.'"

"That's splendid! You did well, and next winter you can look up
another sour spinster and cranky old lady and make them happy," said
Anna, with the approving smile all loved to receive from her.

"My adventures are not a bit romantic, or even interesting, and yet
I've been as busy as a bee all winter, and enjoyed my work very
much," began Elizabeth, as the President gave her a nod.

"The plan I had in mind was to go and carry books and papers to the
people in hospitals, as one of Mamma's friends has done for years. I
went once to the City Hospital with her, and it was very
interesting, but I didn't dare to go to the grown people all alone,
so I went to the Children's Hospital, and soon loved to help amuse
the poor little dears. I saved all the picture-books and papers I
could find for them, dressed dolls, and mended toys, and got new
ones, and made bibs and night-gowns, and felt like the mother of a
large family.

"I had my pets, of course, and did my best for them, reading and
singing and amusing them, for many suffered very much. One little
girl was so dreadfully burned she could not use her hands, and would
lie and look at a gay dolly tied to the bedpost by the hour
together, and talk to it and love it, and died with it on her pillow
when I 'sung lullaby' to her for the last time. I keep it among my
treasures, for I learned a lesson in patience from little Norah that
I never can forget.

"Then Jimmy Dolan with hip disease was a great delight to me, for he
was as gay as a lark in spite of pain, and a real little hero in the
way he bore the hard things that had to be done to him. He never can
get well, and he is at home now; but I still see to him, and he is
learning to make toy furniture very nicely, so that by and by, if he
gets able to work at all, he may be able to learn a cabinet-maker's
trade, or some easy work.

"But my pet of pets was Johnny, the blind boy. His poor eyes had to
be taken out, and there he was left so helpless and pathetic, all
his life before him, and no one to help him, for his people were
poor and he had to go away from the hospital since he was incurable.
He seemed almost given to me, for the first time I saw him I was
singing to Jimmy, when the door opened and a small boy came fumbling
in.

"'I hear a pretty voice, I want to find it,' he said, stopping as I
stopped with both hands out as if begging for more.

"'Come on. Johnny, and the lady will sing to you like a bobolink,'
called Jimmy, as proud as Barnum showing off Jumbo.

"The poor little thing came and stood at my knee, without stirring,
while I sang all the nursery jingles I knew. Then he put such a thin
little finger on my lips as if to feel where the music came from,
and said, smiling all over his white face, 'More, please more, lots
of 'em! I love it!'

"So I sang away till I was as hoarse as a crow, and Johnny drank it
all in like water; kept time with his head, stamped when I gave him
'Marching through Georgia,' and hurrahed feebly in the chorus of
'Red, White, and Blue.' It was lovely to see how he enjoyed it, and
I was so glad I had a voice to comfort those poor babies with. He
cried when I had to go, and so touched my heart that I asked all
about him, and resolved to get him into the Blind School as the only
place where he could be taught and made happy."

"I thought you were bound there the day I met you, Lizzie; but you
looked as solemn as if all your friends had lost their sight," cried
Marion.

"I did feel solemn, for if Johnny could not go there he would be
badly off. Fortunately he was ten, and dear Mrs. Russell helped me,
and those good people took him in though they were crowded. 'We
cannot turn one away,' said kind Mr. Parpatharges.

"So there my boy is, as happy as a king with his little mates,
learning all sorts of useful lessons and pretty plays. He models
nicely in clay. Here is one of his little works. Could you do as
well without eyes?" and Lizzie proudly produced a very one-sided
pear with a long straw for a stem. "I don't expect he will ever be a
sculptor, but I hope he will do something with music he loves it so,
and is already piping away on a fife very cleverly. Whatever his
gift may prove, if he lives, he will be taught to be a useful,
independent man, not a helpless burden, nor an unhappy creature
sitting alone in the dark. I feel very happy about my lads, and am
surprised to find how well I get on with them. I shall look up some
more next year, for I really think I have quite a gift that way,
though you wouldn't expect it, as I have no brothers, and always had
a fancy boys were little imps."

The girls were much amused at Lizzie's discovery of her own powers,
for she was a stately damsel, who never indulged in romps, but lived
for her music. Now it was evident that she had found the key to
unlock childish hearts, and was learning to use it, quite
unconscious that the sweet voice she valued so highly was much
improved by the tender tones singing lullabies gave it. The fat pear
was passed round like refreshments, receiving much praise and no
harsh criticism; and when it was safely returned to its proud
possessor, Ida began her tale in a lively tone.

"I waited for MY chore, and it came tumbling down our basement steps
one rainy day in the shape of a large dilapidated umbrella with a
pair of small boots below it. A mild howl made me run to open the
door, for I was at lunch in the dining-room, all alone, and rather
blue because I couldn't go over to see Ella. A very small girl lay
with her head in a puddle at the foot of the steps, the boots waving
in the air, and the umbrella brooding over her like a draggled green
bird.

"'Are you hurt, child?' said I.

"'No, I thank you, ma'am,' said the mite quite calmly, as she sat up
and settled a woman's shabby black hat on her head.

"'Did you come begging?' I asked.

"'No, ma'am, I came for some things Mrs. Grover's got for us. She
told me to. I don't beg.' And up rose the sopping thing with great
dignity.

"So I asked her to sit down, and ran up to call Mrs. Grover. She was
busy with Grandpa just then, and when I went back to my lunch there
sat my lady with her arms folded, water dripping out of the toes of
her old boots as they hung down from the high chair, and the biggest
blue eyes I ever saw fixed upon the cake and oranges on the table. I
gave her a piece, and she sighed with rapture, but only picked at it
till I asked if she didn't like it.

"'Oh yes, 'm, it's elegant! Only I was wishin' I could take it to
Caddy and Tot, if you didn't mind. They never had frostin' in all
their lives, and I did once.'

"Of course I put up a little basket of cake and oranges and figs,
and while Lotty feasted, we talked. I found that their mother washed
dishes all day in a restaurant over by the Albany Station, leaving
the three children alone in the room they have on Berry Street.
Think of that poor thing going off before light these winter
mornings to stand over horrid dishes all day long, and those three
scraps of children alone till night! Sometimes they had a fire, and
when they hadn't they stayed in bed. Broken food and four dollars a
week was all the woman got, and on that they tried to live. Good
Mrs. Grover happened to be nursing a poor soul near Berry Street
last summer, and used to see the three little things trailing round
the streets with no one to look after them.

"Lotty is nine, though she looks about six, but is as old as most
girls of fourteen, and takes good care of 'the babies,' as she calls
the younger ones. Mrs. Grover went to see them, and, though a
hard-working creature, did all she could for them. This winter she
has plenty of time to sew, for Grandpapa needs little done for him
except at night and morning, and that kind woman spent her own
money, and got warm flannel and cotton and stuff, and made each
child a good suit. Lotty had come for hers, and when the bundle was
in her arms she hugged it close, and put up her little face to kiss
Grover so prettily, I felt that I wanted to do something too. So I
hunted up Min's old waterproof and rubbers, and a hood, and sent
Lotty home as happy as a queen, promising to go and see her. I did
go, and there was my work all ready for me. Oh, girls! such a bare,
cold room, without a spark of fire, and no food but a pan of bits of
pie and bread and meat, not fit for any one to eat, and in the bed,
with an old carpet for cover, lay the three children. Tot and Caddy
cuddled in the warmest place, while Lotty, with her little blue
hands, was trying to patch up some old stockings with bits of
cotton. I didn't know how to begin, but Lotty did, and I just took
her orders; for that wise little woman told me where to buy a bushel
of coal and some kindlings, and milk and meal, and all I wanted. I
worked like a beaver for an hour or two, and was so glad I'd been to
a cooking-class, for I could make a fire, with Lotty to do the
grubby part, and start a nice soup with the cold meat and potatoes,
and an onion or so. Soon the room was warm, and full of a nice
smell, and out of bed tumbled 'the babies,' to dance round the stove
and sniff at the soup, and drink milk like hungry kittens, till I
could get bread and butter ready.

"It was great fun! and when we had cleared things up a bit, and I'd
put food for supper in the closet, and told Lotty to warm a bowl of
soup for her mother and keep the fire going, I went home tired and
dirty, but very glad I'd found something to do. It is perfectly
amazing how little poor people's things cost, and yet they can't get
the small amount of money needed without working themselves to
death. Why, all I bought didn't cost more than I often spend for
flowers, or theatre tickets, or lunches, and it made those poor
babies so comfortable I could have cried to think I'd never done it
before."

Ida paused to shake her head remorsefully, then went on with her
story, sewing busily all the while on an unbleached cotton
night-gown which looked about fit for a large doll.

"I have no romantic things to tell, for poor Mrs. Kennedy was a
shiftless, broken-down woman, who could only 'sozzle round,' as Mrs.
Grover said, and rub along with help from any one who would lend a
hand. She had lived out, married young, and had no faculty about
anything; so when her husband died, and she was left with three
little children, it was hard to get on, with no trade, feeble
health, and a discouraged mind. She does her best, loves the girls,
and works hard at the only thing she can find to do; but when she
gives out, they will all have to part,--she to a hospital, and the
babies to some home. She dreads that, and tugs away, trying to keep
together and get ahead. Thanks to Mrs. Grover, who is very sensible,
and knows how to help poor people, we have made things comfortable,
and the winter has gone nicely.

"The mother has got work nearer home, Lotty and Caddy go to school,
and Tot is safe and warm, with Miss Parsons to look after her. Miss
Parsons is a young woman who was freezing and starving in a little
room upstairs, too proud to beg and too shy and sick to get much
work. I found her warming her hands one day in Mrs. Kennedy's room,
and hanging over the soup-pot as if she was eating the smell. It
reminded me of the picture in Punch where the two beggar boys look
in at a kitchen, sniffing at the nice dinner cooking there. One
says, 'I don't care for the meat, Bill, but I don't mind if I takes
a smell at the pudd'n' when it's dished.' I proposed a lunch at
once, and we all sat down, and ate soup out of yellow bowls with
pewter spoons with such a relish it was fun to see. I had on my old
rig; so poor Parsons thought I was some dressmaker or work-girl, and
opened her heart to me as she never would have done if I'd gone and
demanded her confidence, and patronized her, as some people do when
they want to help. I promised her some work, and proposed that she
should do it in Mrs. K.'s room, as a favor, mind you, so that the
older girls could go to school and Tot have some one to look after
her. She agreed, and that saved her fire, and made the K.'s all
right. Sarah (that's Miss P.) tried to stiffen up when she learned
where I lived; but she wanted the work, and soon found I didn't put
on airs, but lent her books, and brought her and Tot my bouquets and
favors after a german, and told her pleasant things as she sat
cooking her poor chilblainy feet in the oven, as if she never could
get thawed out.

"This summer the whole batch are to go to Uncle Frank's farm and
pick berries, and get strong. He hires dozens of women and children
during the fruit season, and Mrs. Grover said it was just what they
all needed. So off they go in June, as merry as grigs, and I shall
be able to look after them now and then, as I always go to the farm
in July. That's all,--not a bit interesting, but it came to me, and
I did it, though only a small chore."

"I'm sure the helping of five poor souls is a fine work, and you may
well be proud of it, Ida. Now I know why you wouldn't go to matinees
with me, and buy every pretty thing we saw as you used to. The
pocket money went for coal and food, and your fancy work was little
clothes for these live dolls of yours. You dear thing! how good you
were to cook, and grub, and prick your fingers rough, and give up
fun, for this kind work!"

Maggie's hearty kiss, and the faces of her friends, made Ida feel
that her humble task had its worth in their eyes, as well as in her
own; and when the others had expressed their interest in her work,
all composed themselves to hear what Marion had to tell.

"I have been taking care of a scarlet runner,--a poor old
frost-bitten, neglected thing; it is transplanted now, and doing
well, I'm happy to say."

"What do you mean?" asked Ella, while the rest looked very curious.

Marion picked up a dropped stitch in the large blue sock she was
knitting, and continued, with a laugh in her eyes: "My dears, that
is what we call the Soldiers' Messenger Corps, with their red caps
and busy legs trotting all day. I've had one of them to care for,
and a gorgeous time of it, I do assure you. But before I exult over
my success, I must honestly confess my failures, for they were sad
ones. I was so anxious to begin my work at once, that I did go out
and collar the first pauper I saw. It was an old man, who sometimes
stands at the corners of streets to sell bunches of ugly paper
flowers. You've seen him, I dare say, and his magenta daisies and
yellow peonies. Well, he was rather a forlorn object, with his poor
old red nose, and bleary eyes, and white hair, standing at the windy
corners silently holding out those horrid flowers. I bought all he
had that day, and gave them to some colored children on my way home,
and told him to come to our house and get an old coat Mamma was
waiting to get rid of. He told a pitiful story of himself and his
old wife, who made the paper horrors in her bed, and how they needed
everything, but didn't wish to beg. I was much touched, and flew
home to look up the coat and some shoes, and when my old Lear came
creeping in the back way, I ordered cook to give him a warm dinner
and something nice for the old woman.

"I was called upstairs while he was mumbling his food, and blessing
me in the most lovely manner; and he went away much comforted, I
flattered myself. But an hour later, up came the cook in a great
panic to report that my venerable and pious beggar had carried off
several of Papa's shirts and pairs of socks out of the clothes-basket
in the laundry, and the nice warm hood we keep for the girl to hang
out clothes in.

"I was VERY angry, and, taking Harry with me, went at once to the
address the old rascal gave me, a dirty court out of Hanover Street
No such person had ever lived there, and my white-haired saint was a
humbug. Harry laughed at me, and Mamma forbade me to bring any more
thieves to the house, and the girls scolded awfully.

"Well, I recovered from the shock, and, nothing daunted, went off to
the little Irishwoman who sells apples on the Common,--not the fat,
tosey one with the stall near West Street, but the dried-up one who
sits by the path, nodding over an old basket with six apples and
four sticks of candy in it. No one ever seems to buy anything, but
she sits there and trusts to kind souls dropping a dime now and
then; she looks so feeble and forlorn, 'on the cold, cold ground.'

"She told me another sad tale of being all alone and unable to work,
and 'as wake as wather-grewl, without a hap-worth av flesh upon me
bones, and for the love of Heaven gimme a thrifle to kape the breath
av loife in a poor soul, with a bitter hard winter over me, and
niver a chick or child to do a hand's turn.' I hadn't much faith in
her, remembering my other humbug, but I did pity the old mummy; so I
got some tea and sugar, and a shawl, and used to give her my odd
pennies as I passed. I never told at home, they made such fun of my
efforts to be charitable. I thought I really was getting on pretty
well after a time, as my old Biddy seemed quite cheered up, and I
was planning to give her some coal, when she disappeared all of a
sudden. I feared she was ill, and asked Mrs. Maloney, the fat woman,
about her.

"'Lord love ye, Miss dear, it's tuk up and sint to the Island for
tree months she is; for a drunken ould crayther is Biddy Ryan, and
niver a cint but goes for whiskey,--more shame to her, wid a fine
bye av her own ready to kape her daycint.'

"Then I WAS discouraged, and went home to fold my hands, and see
what fate would send me, my own efforts being such failures."

"Poor thing, it WAS hard luck!" said Elizabeth, as they sobered down
after the gale of merriment caused by Marion's mishaps, and her
clever imitation of the brogue.

"Now tell of your success, and the scarlet runner," added Maggie.

"Ah! that was SENT, and so I prospered. I must begin ever so far
back, in war times, or I can't introduce my hero properly. You know
Papa was in the army, and fought all through the war till
Gettysburg, where he was wounded. He was engaged just before he
went; so when his father hurried to him after that awful battle,
Mamma went also, and helped nurse him till he could come home. He
wouldn't go to an officer's hospital, but kept with his men in a
poor sort of place, for many of his boys were hit, and he wouldn't
leave them. Sergeant Joe Collins was one of the bravest, and lost
his right arm saving the flag in one of the hottest struggles of
that great fight. He had been a Maine lumberman, and was over six
feet tall, but as gentle as a child, and as jolly as a boy, and very
fond of his colonel.

"Papa left first, but made Joe promise to let him know how he got
on, and Joe did so till he too went home. Then Papa lost sight of
him, and in the excitement of his own illness, and the end of the
war, and being married, Joe Collins was forgotten, till we children
came along, and used to love to hear the story of Papa's battles,
and how the brave sergeant caught the flag when the bearer was shot,
and held it in the rush till one arm was blown off and the other
wounded. We have fighting blood in us, you know, so we were never
tired of that story, though twenty-five years or more make it all
as far away to us as the old Revolution, where OUR ancestor was
killed, at OUR Bunker Hill!

"Last December, just after my sad disappointments, Papa came home to
dinner one day, exclaiming, in great glee: 'I've found old Joe! A
messenger came with a letter to me, and when I looked up to give my
answer, there stood a tall, grizzled fellow, as straight as a
ramrod, grinning from ear to ear, with his hand to his temple,
saluting me in regular style. "Don't you remember Joe Collins,
Colonel? Awful glad to see you, sir," said he. And then it all came
back, and we had a good talk, and I found out that the poor old boy
was down on his luck, and almost friendless, but as proud and
independent as ever, and bound to take care of himself while he had
a leg to stand on. I've got his address, and mean to keep an eye on
him, for he looks feeble and can't make much, I'm sure.'

"We were all very glad, and Joe came to see us, and Papa sent him on
endless errands, and helped him in that way till he went to New
York. Then, in the fun and flurry of the holidays, we forgot all
about Joe, till Papa came home and missed him from his post. I said
I'd go and find him; so Harry and I rummaged about till we did find
him, in a little house at the North End, laid up with rheumatic
fever in a stuffy back room, with no one to look after him but the
washerwoman with whom he boarded.

"I was SO sorry we had forgotten him! but HE never complained, only
said, with his cheerful grin,' I kinder mistrusted the Colonel was
away, but I wasn't goin' to pester him.' He tried to be jolly,
though in dreadful pain; called Harry 'Major,' and was so grateful
for all we brought him, though he didn't want oranges and tea, and
made us shout when I said, like a goose, thinking that was the
proper thing to do, 'Shall I bathe your brow, you are so feverish?'

"'No, thanky, miss, it was swabbed pretty stiddy to the horsepittle,
and I reckon a trifle of tobaccer would do more good and be a sight
more relishin', ef you'll excuse my mentionin' it.'

"Harry rushed off and got a great lump and a pipe, and Joe lay
blissfully puffing, in a cloud of smoke, when we left him, promising
to come again. We did go nearly every day, and had lovely times; for
Joe told us his adventures, and we got so interested in the war that
I began to read up evenings, and Papa was pleased, and fought all
his battles over again for us, and Harry and I were great friends
reading together, and Papa was charmed to see the old General's
spirit in us, as we got excited and discussed all our wars in a
fever of patriotism that made Mamma laugh. Joe said I 'brustled up'
at the word BATTLE like a war-horse at the smell of powder, and I'd
ought to have been a drummer, the sound of martial music made me so
'skittish.'

"It was all new and charming to us young ones, but poor old Joe had
a hard time, and was very ill. Exposure and fatigue, and scanty
food, and loneliness, and his wounds, were too much for him, and it
was plain his working days were over. He hated the thought of the
poor-house at home, which was all his own town could offer him, and
he had no friends to live with, and he could not get a pension,
something being wrong about his papers; so he would have been badly
off, but for the Soldiers' Home at Chelsea. As soon as he was able,
Papa got him in there, and he was glad to go, for that seemed the
proper place, and a charity the proudest man might accept, after
risking his life for his country.

"There is where I used to be going when you saw me, and I was SO
afraid you'd smell the cigars in my basket. The dear old boys always
want them, and Papa says they MUST have them, though it isn't half
so romantic as flowers, and jelly, and wine, and the dainty messes
we women always want to carry. I've learned about different kinds of
tobacco and cigars, and you'd laugh to see me deal out my gifts,
which are received as gratefully as the Victoria Cross, when the
Queen decorates HER brave men. I'm quite a great gun over there, and
the boys salute when I come, tell me their woes, and think that Papa
and I can run the whole concern. I like it immensely, and am as
proud and fond of my dear old wrecks as if I'd been a Rigoletto, and
ridden on a cannon from my babyhood. That's MY story, but I can't
begin to tell how interesting it all is, nor how glad I am that it
led me to look into the history of American wars, in which brave men
of our name did their parts so well."

A hearty round of applause greeted Marion's tale, for her glowing
face and excited voice stirred the patriotic spirit of the Boston
girls, and made them beam approvingly upon her.

"Now, Maggie, dear, last but not least, I'm sure," said Anna, with
an encouraging glance, for SHE had discovered the secret of this
friend, and loved her more than ever for it.

Maggie blushed and hesitated, as she put down the delicate muslin
cap-strings she was hemming with such care. Then, looking about her
with a face in which both humility and pride contended, she said
with an effort, "After the other lively experiences, mine will sound
very flat. In fact, I have no story to tell, for MY charity began at
home, and stopped there."

"Tell it, dear. I know it is interesting, and will do us all good,"
said Anna, quickly; and, thus supported, Maggie went on.

"I planned great things, and talked about what I meant to do, till
Papa said one day, when things were in a mess, as they often are at
our house, 'If the little girls who want to help the world along
would remember that charity be gins at home, they would soon find
enough to do.'

"I was rather taken aback, and said no more, but after Papa had gone
to the office, I began to think, and looked round to see what there
was to be done at that particular moment. I found enough for that
day, and took hold at once; for poor Mamma had one of her bad
headaches, the children could not go out because it rained, and so
were howling in the nursery, cook was on a rampage, and Maria had
the toothache. Well, I began by making Mamma lie down for a good
long sleep. I kept the children quiet by giving them my ribbon box
and jewelry to dress up with, put a poultice on Maria's face, and
offered to wash the glass and silver for her, to appease cook, who
was as cross as two sticks over extra work washing-day. It wasn't
much fun, as you may imagine, but I got through the afternoon, and
kept the house still, and at dusk crept into Mamma's room and softly
built up the fire, so it should be cheery when she waked. Then I
went trembling to the kitchen for some tea, and there found three
girls calling, and high jinks going on; for one whisked a plate of
cake into the table drawer, another put a cup under her shawl, and
cook hid the teapot, as I stirred round in the china closet before
opening the slide, through a crack of which I'd seen, heard, and
smelt 'the party,' as the children call it.

"I was angry enough to scold the whole set, but I wisely held my
tongue, shut my eyes, and politely asked for some hot water, nodded
to the guests, and told cook Maria was better, and would do her work
if she wanted to go out.

"So peace reigned, and as I settled the tray, I heard cook say in
her balmiest tone, for I suspect the cake and tea lay heavy on her
conscience, 'The mistress is very poorly, and Miss takes nice care
of her, the dear.'

"All blarney, but it pleased me and made me remember how feeble poor
Mamma was, and how little I really did. So I wept a repentant weep
as I toiled upstairs with my tea and toast, and found Mamma all
ready for them, and so pleased to find things going well. I saw by
that what a relief it would be to her if I did it oftener, as I
ought, and as I resolved that I would.

"I didn't say anything, but I kept on doing whatever came along, and
before I knew it ever so many duties slipped out of Mamma's hands
into mine, and seemed to belong to me. I don't mean that I liked
them, and didn't grumble to myself; I did, and felt regularly
crushed and injured sometimes when I wanted to go and have my own
fun. Duty is right, but it isn't easy, and the only comfort about it
is a sort of quiet feeling you get after a while, and a strong
feeling, as if you'd found something to hold on to and keep you
steady. I can't express it, but you know?" And Maggie looked
wistfully at the other faces, some of which answered her with a
quick flash of sympathy, and some only wore a puzzled yet respectful
expression, as if they felt they ought to know, but did not.

"I need not tire you with all my humdrum doings," continued Maggie.
"I made no plans, but just said each day, 'I'll take what comes,
and try to be cheerful and contented.' So I looked after the
children, and that left Maria more time to sew and help round. I did
errands, and went to market, and saw that Papa had his meals
comfortably when Mamma was not able to come down. I made calls for
her, and received visitors, and soon went on as if I were the lady
of the house, not 'a chit of a girl,' as Cousin Tom used to call me.

"The best of all were the cosey talks we had in the twilight, Mamma
and I, when she was rested, and all the day's worry was over, and we
were waiting for Papa. Now, when he came, I didn't have to go away,
for they wanted to ask and tell me things, and consult about
affairs, and make me feel that I was really the eldest daughter. Oh,
it was just lovely to sit between them and know that they needed me,
and loved to have me with them! That made up for the hard and
disagreeable things, and not long ago I got my reward. Mamma is
better, and I was rejoicing over it, when she said,' Yes, I really
am mending now, and hope soon to be able to relieve my good girl.
But I want to tell you, dear, that when I was most discouraged my
greatest comfort was, that if I had to leave my poor babies they
would find such a faithful little mother in you.'

"I was SO pleased I wanted to cry, for the children DO love me, and
run to me for everything now, and think the world of Sister, and
they didn't use to care much for me. But that wasn't all. I ought
not to tell these things, perhaps, but I'm so proud of them I can't
help it. When I asked Papa privately, if Mamma was REALLY better and
in no danger of falling ill again, he said, with his arms round me,
and such a tender kiss,--

"'No danger now, for this brave little girl put her shoulder to the
wheel so splendidly, that the dear woman got the relief from care
she needed just at the right time, and now she really rests sure
that we are not neglected. You couldn't have devoted yourself to a
better charity, or done it more sweetly, my darling. God bless
you!'"

Here Maggie's voice gave out, and she hid her face, with a happy
sob, that finished her story eloquently. Marion flew to wipe her
tears away with the blue sock, and the others gave a sympathetic
murmur, looking much touched; forgotten duties of their own rose
before them, and sudden resolutions were made to attend to them at
once, seeing how great Maggie's reward had been.

"I didn't mean to be silly; but I wanted you to know that I hadn't
been idle all winter, and that, though I haven't much to tell, I'm
quite satisfied with my chore," she said, looking up with smiles
shining through the tears till her face resembled a rose in a
sun-shower.

"Many daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all,"
answered Anna, with a kiss that completed her satisfaction.

"Now, as it is after our usual time, and we must break up,"
continued the President, producing a basket of flowers from its
hiding-place, "I will merely say that I think we have all learned a
good deal, and will be able to work better next winter; for I am
sure we shall want to try again, it adds so much sweetness to our
own lives to put even a little comfort into the hard lives of the
poor. As a farewell token, I sent for some real Plymouth mayflowers,
and here they are, a posy apiece, with my love and many thanks for
your help in carrying out my plan so beautifully."

So the nosegays were bestowed, the last lively chat enjoyed, new
plans suggested, and goodbyes said; then the club separated, each
member going gayly away with the rosy flowers on her bosom, and in
it a clearer knowledge of the sad side of life, a fresh desire to
see and help still more, and a sweet satisfaction in the thought
that each had done what she could.






AN IVY SPRAY AND LADIES' SLIPPERS





"IT can't be done! So I may as well give it I up and get a new pair.
I long for them, but I'm afraid my nice little plan for Laura will
be spoilt," said Jessie Delano to herself, as she shook her head
over a pair of small, dilapidated slippers almost past mending.
While she vainly pricked her fingers over them for the last time,
her mind was full of girlish hopes and fears, as well as of
anxieties far too serious for a light-hearted creature of sixteen.

A year ago the sisters had been the petted daughters of a rich man;
but death and misfortune came suddenly, and now they were left to
face poverty alone. They had few relations, and had offended the
rich uncle who offered Jessie a home, because she refused to be
separated from her sister. Poor Laura was an invalid, and no one
wanted her; but Jessie would not leave her, so they clung together
and lived on in the humble rooms where their father died, trying to
earn their bread by the only accomplishments they possessed. Laura
painted well, and after many disappointments was beginning to find a
sale for her dainty designs and delicate flowers. Jessie had a
natural gift for dancing; and her former teacher, a kind-hearted
Frenchwoman, offered her favorite pupil the post of assistant
teacher in her classes for children.

It cost the girl a struggle to accept a place of this sort and be a
humble teacher, patiently twirling stupid little boys and girls
round and round over the smooth floor where she used to dance so
happily when she was the pride of the class and the queen of the
closing balls. But for Laura's sake she gratefully accepted the
offer, glad to add her mite to their small store, and to feel that
she could help keep the wolf from the door. They had seemed to hear
the howl of this dreaded phantom more than once during that year,
and looked forward to the long hard winter with an anxiety which
neither would confess to the other. Laura feared to fall ill if she
worked too hard, and then what would become of this pretty young
sister who loved her so tenderly and would not be tempted to leave
her? And Jessie could do very little except rebel against their hard
fate and make impracticable plans. But each worked bravely, talked
cheerfully, and waited hopefully for some good fortune to befall
them, while doubt and pain and poverty and care made the young
hearts so heavy that the poor girls often fell asleep on pillows wet
with secret tears.

The smaller trials of life beset Jessie at this particular moment,
and her bright wits were trying to solve the problem how to spend
her treasured five dollars on slippers for herself and paints for
Laura. Both were much needed, and she had gone in shabby shoes to
save up money for the little surprise on which she had set her
heart; but now dismay fell upon her when the holes refused to be
cobbled, and the largest of bows would not hide the worn-out toes in
spite of ink and blacking lavishly applied.

"These are the last of my dear French slippers, and I can't afford
any more. I hate cheap things! But I shall have to get them; for my
boots are shabby, and every one has to look at my feet when I lead.
Oh dear, what a horrid thing it is to be poor!" and Jessie surveyed
the shabby little shoes affectionately, as her eyes filled with
tears; for the road looked very rough and steep now. when she
remembered how she used to dance through life as happy as a
butterfly in a garden full of sunshine and flowers.

"Now, Jess, no nonsense, no red eyes to tell tales! Go and do your
errands, and come in as gay as a lark, or Laura will be worried."
And springing up, the girl began to sing instead of sob, as she
stirred about her dismal little room, cleaning her old gloves,
mending her one white dress, and wishing with a sigh of intense
longing that she could afford some flowers to wear, every ornament
having been sold long ago. Then, with a kiss and a smile to her
patient sister, she hurried away to get the necessary slippers and
the much-desired paints, which Laura would not ask for, though her
work waited for want of them.

Having been reared in luxury, poor little Jessie's tastes were all
of the daintiest sort; and her hardest trial, after Laura's feeble
health, was the daily sacrifice of the many comforts and elegances
to which she had been accustomed. Faded gowns, cleaned gloves, and
mended boots cost her many a pang, and the constant temptation of
seeing pretty, useful, and unattainable things was a very hard one.
Laura rarely went out, and so was spared this cross; then she was
three years older, had always been delicate, and lived much in a
happy world of her own. So Jessie bore her trials silently, but
sometimes felt very covetous and resentful to see so much pleasure,
money, and beauty in the world, and yet have so little of it fall to
her lot.

"I feel as if I could pick a pocket to-day and not mind a bit, if it
were a rich person's. It's a shame, when papa was always so
generous, that no one remembers us. If ever I'm rich again, I'll
just hunt up all the poor girls I can find, and give them nice
shoes, if nothing else," she thought, as she went along the crowded
streets, pausing involuntarily at the shop windows to look with
longing eyes at the treasures within.

Resisting the allurements of French slippers with bows and buckles,
she wisely bought a plain, serviceable pair, and trudged away,
finding balm for her wounds in the fact that they were very cheap.
More balm came when she met a young friend, who joined her as she
stood wistfully eying the piles of grapes in a window and longing to
buy some for Laura.

This warm-hearted schoolmate read the wish before Jessie saw her,
and gratified it so adroitly that the girl could accept the pretty
basketful sent to her sister without feeling like a spendthrift or a
beggar. It comforted her very much, and the world began to look
brighter after that little touch of kindness, as it always does when
genuine sympathy makes sunshine in shady places.

At the art store she was told that more of Laura's autumn-flowers
were in demand; and her face was so full of innocent delight and
gratitude it quite touched the old man who sold her the paints, and
gave her more than her money's worth, remembering his own hard times
and pitying the pretty young girl whose father he had known.

So Jessie did not have to pretend very hard at being "as gay as a
lark" when she got home and showed her treasures. Laura was so happy
over the unexpected gifts that the dinner of bread and milk and
grapes was quite a picnic; and Jessie found a smile on her face when
she went to dress for her party.

It was only a child's party at the house of one of Mademoiselle's
pupils, and Jessie was merely invited to help the little people
through their dancing. She did not like to go in this way, as she
was sure to meet familiar faces there, full of the pity, curiosity,
or indifference so hard for a girl to bear. But Mademoiselle asked
it as a favor, and Jessie was grateful; so she went, expecting no
pleasure and certain of much weariness, if not annoyance.

When she was ready,--and it did not take long to slip on the white
woollen dress, brush out the curly dark hair, and fold up slippers
and gloves,--she stood before her glass looking at herself, quite
conscious that she was very pretty, with her large eyes, blooming
cheeks, and the lofty little air which nothing could change. She was
also painfully conscious that her dress was neither fresh nor
becoming without a bit of ribbon or a knot of flowers to give it the
touch of color it needed. She had an artistic eye, and used to
delight in ordering charming costumes for herself in the happy days
when all her wishes were granted as if fairies still lived. She
tossed over her very small store of ribbons in vain; everything had
been worn till neither beauty nor freshness remained.

"Oh dear! where CAN I find something to make me look less like a
nun,--and a very shabby one, too?" she said, longing for the pink
corals she sold to pay Laura's doctor's bill.

The sound of a soft tap, tap, tap, startled her, and she ran to open
the door. No one was there but Laura, fast asleep on the sofa. Tap,
tap, tap! went the invisible hand; and as the sound seemed to come
from the window, Jessie glanced that way, thinking her tame dove had
corne to be fed. Neither hungry dove nor bold sparrow appeared,--only
a spray of Japanese ivy waving in the wind. A very pretty spray it
was, covered with tiny crimson leaves; and it tapped impatiently, as
if it answered her question by saying, "Here is a garland for you;
come and take it."

Jessie's quick eye was caught at once by the fine color, and running
to the window she looked out as eagerly as if a new idea had come
into her head. It was a dull November day, and the prospect of
sheds, ash-barrels, and old brooms was a gloomy one; but the whole
back of the house glowed with the red tendrils of the hardy vine
that clung to and covered the dingy bricks with a royal mantle, as
if eager to cheer the eyes and hearts of all who looked. It preached
a little sermon of courage, aspiration, and content to those who had
the skill to read it, and bade them see how, springing from the
scanty soil of that back yard full of the commonest objects, the
humblest work, it set its little creepers in the crannies of the
stone, and struggled up to find the sun and air, till it grew strong
and beautiful,--making the blank wall green in summer, glorious in
autumn, and a refuge in winter, when it welcomed the sparrows to the
shelter of its branches where the sun lay warmest.

Jessie loved this beautiful neighbor, and had enjoyed it all that
summer,--the first she ever spent in the hot city. She felt the
grace its greenness gave to all it touched, and half unconsciously
imitated it in trying to be brave and bright, as she also climbed up
from the dismal place where she seemed shut away from everything
lovely, till she was beginning to discover that the blue sky was
over all, the sun still shone for her, and heaven's fresh air kissed
her cheeks as kindly as ever. Many a night she had leaned from the
high window when Laura was asleep, dreaming innocent dreams, living
over her short past, or trying to look into the future bravely and
trustfully. The little vine had felt warmer drops than rain or dew
fall on it when things went badly, had heard whispered prayers when
the lonely child asked the Father of the fatherless for help and
comfort, had peeped in to see her sleeping peacefully when the hard
hour was over, and been the first to greet her with a tap on the
window-pane as she woke full of new hope in the morning. It seemed
to know all her moods and troubles, to be her friend and confidante,
and now came with help like a fairy godmother when our Cinderella
wanted to be fine for the little ball.

"Just the thing! Why didn't I think of it? So bright and delicate
and becoming? It will last better than flowers; and no one can think
I'm extravagant, since it costs nothing."

As she spoke, Jessie was gathering long sprays of the rosy vine,
with its glossy leaves so beattifully shaded that it was evident
Jack Frost had done his best for it. Going to her glass, she
fastened a wreath of the smallest leaves about her head, set a
cluster of larger ones in her bosom, and then surveyed herself with
girlish pleasure, as well she might; for the effect of the simple
decoration was charming. Quite satisfied now, she tied on her cloud
and slipped away without waking Laura, little dreaming what good
