stirred up from its foundations, and the impulse given which raised even
persons of the most ordinary intellect to something of the dignity of
thinking beings. Of such we have had an example in the condition of
Europe during the times immediately following the Reformation; another,
though limited to the Continent and to a more cultivated class, in the
speculative movement of the latter half of the eighteenth century; and a
third, of still briefer duration, in the intellectual fermentation of
Germany during the Goethian and Fichtean period. These periods differed
widely in the particular opinions which they developed; but were alike
in this, that during all three the yoke of authority was broken. In
each, an old mental despotism had been thrown off, and no new one had
yet taken its place. The impulse given at these three periods has made
Europe what it now is. Every single improvement which has taken place
either in the human mind or in institutions, may be traced distinctly to
one or other of them. Appearances have for some time indicated that all
three impulses are well-nigh spent; and we can expect no fresh start,
until we again assert our mental freedom.

Let us now pass to the second division of the argument, and dismissing
the supposition that any of the received opinions may be false, let us
assume them to be true, and examine into the worth of the manner in
which they are likely to be held, when their truth is not freely and
openly canvassed. However unwillingly a person who has a strong opinion
may admit the possibility that his opinion may be false, he ought to be
moved by the consideration that however true it may be, if it is not
fully, frequently, and fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead
dogma, not a living truth.

There is a class of persons (happily not quite so numerous as formerly)
who think it enough if a person assents undoubtingly to what they think
true, though he has no knowledge whatever of the grounds of the opinion,
and could not make a tenable defence of it against the most superficial
objections. Such persons, if they can once get their creed taught from
authority, naturally think that no good, and some harm, comes of its
being allowed to be questioned. Where their influence prevails, they
make it nearly impossible for the received opinion to be rejected wisely
and considerately, though it may still be rejected rashly and
ignorantly; for to shut out discussion entirely is seldom possible, and
when it once gets in, beliefs not grounded on conviction are apt to give
way before the slightest semblance of an argument. Waiving, however,
this possibility--assuming that the true opinion abides in the mind, but
abides as a prejudice, a belief independent of, and proof against,
argument--this is not the way in which truth ought to be held by a
rational being. This is not knowing the truth. Truth, thus held, is but
one superstition the more, accidentally clinging to the words which
enunciate a truth.

If the intellect and judgment of mankind ought to be cultivated, a thing
which Protestants at least do not deny, on what can these faculties be
more appropriately exercised by any one, than on the things which
concern him so much that it is considered necessary for him to hold
opinions on them? If the cultivation of the understanding consists in
one thing more than in another, it is surely in learning the grounds of
one's own opinions. Whatever people believe, on subjects on which it is
of the first importance to believe rightly, they ought to be able to
defend against at least the common objections. But, some one may say,
"Let them be _taught_ the grounds of their opinions. It does not follow
that opinions must be merely parroted because they are never heard
controverted. Persons who learn geometry do not simply commit the
theorems to memory, but understand and learn likewise the
demonstrations; and it would be absurd to say that they remain ignorant
of the grounds of geometrical truths, because they never hear any one
deny, and attempt to disprove them." Undoubtedly: and such teaching
suffices on a subject like mathematics, where there is nothing at all to
be said on the wrong side of the question. The peculiarity of the
evidence of mathematical truths is, that all the argument is on one
side. There are no objections, and no answers to objections. But on
every subject on which difference of opinion is possible, the truth
depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of conflicting
reasons. Even in natural philosophy, there is always some other
explanation possible of the same facts; some geocentric theory instead
of heliocentric, some phlogiston instead of oxygen; and it has to be
shown why that other theory cannot be the true one: and until this is
shown, and until we know how it is shown, we do not understand the
grounds of our opinion. But when we turn to subjects infinitely more
complicated, to morals, religion, politics, social relations, and the
business of life, three-fourths of the arguments for every disputed
opinion consist in dispelling the appearances which favour some opinion
different from it. The greatest orator, save one, of antiquity, has left
it on record that he always studied his adversary's case with as great,
if not with still greater, intensity than even his own. What Cicero
practised as the means of forensic success, requires to be imitated by
all who study any subject in order to arrive at the truth. He who knows
only his own side of the case, knows little of that. His reasons may be
good, and no one may have been able to refute them. But if he is equally
unable to refute the reasons on the opposite side; if he does not so
much as know what they are, he has no ground for preferring either
opinion. The rational position for him would be suspension of judgment,
and unless he contents himself with that, he is either led by
authority, or adopts, like the generality of the world, the side to
which he feels most inclination. Nor is it enough that he should hear
the arguments of adversaries from his own teachers, presented as they
state them, and accompanied by what they offer as refutations. That is
not the way to do justice to the arguments, or bring them into real
contact with his own mind. He must be able to hear them from persons who
actually believe them; who defend them in earnest, and do their very
utmost for them. He must know them in their most plausible and
persuasive form; he must feel the whole force of the difficulty which
the true view of the subject has to encounter and dispose of; else he
will never really possess himself of the portion of truth which meets
and removes that difficulty. Ninety-nine in a hundred of what are called
educated men are in this condition; even of those who can argue fluently
for their opinions. Their conclusion may be true, but it might be false
for anything they know: they have never thrown themselves into the
mental position of those who think differently from them, and considered
what such persons may have to say; and consequently they do not, in any
proper sense of the word, know the doctrine which they themselves
profess. They do not know those parts of it which explain and justify
the remainder; the considerations which show that a fact which seemingly
conflicts with another is reconcilable with it, or that, of two
apparently strong reasons, one and not the other ought to be preferred.
All that part of the truth which turns the scale, and decides the
judgment of a completely informed mind, they are strangers to; nor is it
ever really known, but to those who have attended equally and
impartially to both sides, and endeavoured to see the reasons of both in
the strongest light. So essential is this discipline to a real
understanding of moral and human subjects, that if opponents of all
important truths do not exist, it is indispensable to imagine them, and
supply them with the strongest arguments which the most skilful devil's
advocate can conjure up.

To abate the force of these considerations, an enemy of free discussion
may be supposed to say, that there is no necessity for mankind in
general to know and understand all that can be said against or for their
opinions by philosophers and theologians. That it is not needful for
common men to be able to expose all the misstatements or fallacies of an
ingenious opponent. That it is enough if there is always somebody
capable of answering them, so that nothing likely to mislead
uninstructed persons remains unrefuted. That simple minds, having been
taught the obvious grounds of the truths inculcated on them, may trust
to authority for the rest, and being aware that they have neither
knowledge nor talent to resolve every difficulty which can be raised,
may repose in the assurance that all those which have been raised have
been or can be answered, by those who are specially trained to the task.

Conceding to this view of the subject the utmost that can be claimed for
it by those most easily satisfied with the amount of understanding of
truth which ought to accompany the belief of it; even so, the argument
for free discussion is no way weakened. For even this doctrine
acknowledges that mankind ought to have a rational assurance that all
objections have been satisfactorily answered; and how are they to be
answered if that which requires to be answered is not spoken? or how can
the answer be known to be satisfactory, if the objectors have no
opportunity of showing that it is unsatisfactory? If not the public, at
least the philosophers and theologians who are to resolve the
difficulties, must make themselves familiar with those difficulties in
their most puzzling form; and this cannot be accomplished unless they
are freely stated, and placed in the most advantageous light which they
admit of. The Catholic Church has its own way of dealing with this
embarrassing problem. It makes a broad separation between those who can
be permitted to receive its doctrines on conviction, and those who must
accept them on trust. Neither, indeed, are allowed any choice as to what
they will accept; but the clergy, such at least as can be fully confided
in, may admissibly and meritoriously make themselves acquainted with the
arguments of opponents, in order to answer them, and may, therefore,
read heretical books; the laity, not unless by special permission, hard
to be obtained. This discipline recognises a knowledge of the enemy's
case as beneficial to the teachers, but finds means, consistent with
this, of denying it to the rest of the world: thus giving to the _élite_
more mental culture, though not more mental freedom, than it allows to
the mass. By this device it succeeds in obtaining the kind of mental
superiority which its purposes require; for though culture without
freedom never made a large and liberal mind, it can make a clever _nisi
prius_ advocate of a cause. But in countries professing Protestantism,
this resource is denied; since Protestants hold, at least in theory,
that the responsibility for the choice of a religion must be borne by
each for himself, and cannot be thrown off upon teachers. Besides, in
the present state of the world, it is practically impossible that
writings which are read by the instructed can be kept from the
uninstructed. If the teachers of mankind are to be cognisant of all that
they ought to know, everything must be free to be written and published
without restraint.

If, however, the mischievous operation of the absence of free
discussion, when the received opinions are true, were confined to
leaving men ignorant of the grounds of those opinions, it might be
thought that this, if an intellectual, is no moral evil, and does not
affect the worth of the opinions, regarded in their influence on the
character. The fact, however, is, that not only the grounds of the
opinion are forgotten in the absence of discussion, but too often the
meaning of the opinion itself. The words which convey it, cease to
suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of those they were
originally employed to communicate. Instead of a vivid conception and a
living belief, there remain only a few phrases retained by rote; or, if
any part, the shell and husk only of the meaning is retained, the finer
essence being lost. The great chapter in human history which this fact
occupies and fills, cannot be too earnestly studied and meditated on.

It is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and
religious creeds. They are all full of meaning and vitality to those who
originate them, and to the direct disciples of the originators. Their
meaning continues to be felt in undiminished strength, and is perhaps
brought out into even fuller consciousness, so long as the struggle
lasts to give the doctrine or creed an ascendency over other creeds. At
last it either prevails, and becomes the general opinion, or its
progress stops; it keeps possession of the ground it has gained, but
ceases to spread further. When either of these results has become
apparent, controversy on the subject flags, and gradually dies away. The
doctrine has taken its place, if not as a received opinion, as one of
the admitted sects or divisions of opinion: those who hold it have
generally inherited, not adopted it; and conversion from one of these
doctrines to another, being now an exceptional fact, occupies little
place in the thoughts of their professors. Instead of being, as at
first, constantly on the alert either to defend themselves against the
world, or to bring the world over to them, they have subsided into
acquiescence, and neither listen, when they can help it, to arguments
against their creed, nor trouble dissentients (if there be such) with
arguments in its favour. From this time may usually be dated the decline
in the living power of the doctrine. We often hear the teachers of all
creeds lamenting the difficulty of keeping up in the minds of believers
a lively apprehension of the truth which they nominally recognise, so
that it may penetrate the feelings, and acquire a real mastery over the
conduct. No such difficulty is complained of while the creed is still
fighting for its existence: even the weaker combatants then know and
feel what they are fighting for, and the difference between it and other
doctrines; and in that period of every creed's existence, not a few
persons may be found, who have realised its fundamental principles in
all the forms of thought, have weighed and considered them in all their
important bearings, and have experienced the full effect on the
character, which belief in that creed ought to produce in a mind
thoroughly imbued with it. But when it has come to be a hereditary
creed, and to be received passively, not actively--when the mind is no
longer compelled, in the same degree as at first, to exercise its vital
powers on the questions which its belief presents to it, there is a
progressive tendency to forget all of the belief except the
formularies, or to give it a dull and torpid assent, as if accepting it
on trust dispensed with the necessity of realising it in consciousness,
or testing it by personal experience; until it almost ceases to connect
itself at all with the inner life of the human being. Then are seen the
cases, so frequent in this age of the world as almost to form the
majority, in which the creed remains as it were outside the mind,
encrusting and petrifying it against all other influences addressed to
the higher parts of our nature; manifesting its power by not suffering
any fresh and living conviction to get in, but itself doing nothing for
the mind or heart, except standing sentinel over them to keep them
vacant.

To what an extent doctrines intrinsically fitted to make the deepest
impression upon the mind may remain in it as dead beliefs, without being
ever realised in the imagination, the feelings, or the understanding, is
exemplified by the manner in which the majority of believers hold the
doctrines of Christianity. By Christianity I here mean what is accounted
such by all churches and sects--the maxims and precepts contained in the
New Testament. These are considered sacred, and accepted as laws, by all
professing Christians. Yet it is scarcely too much to say that not one
Christian in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by
reference to those laws. The standard to which he does refer it, is the
custom of his nation, his class, or his religious profession. He has
thus, on the one hand, a collection of ethical maxims, which he believes
to have been vouchsafed to him by infallible wisdom as rules for his
government; and on the other, a set of every-day judgments and
practices, which go a certain length with some of those maxims, not so
great a length with others, stand in direct opposition to some, and are,
on the whole, a compromise between the Christian creed and the interests
and suggestions of worldly life. To the first of these standards he
gives his homage; to the other his real allegiance. All Christians
believe that the blessed are the poor and humble, and those who are
ill-used by the world; that it is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven; that
they should judge not, lest they be judged; that they should swear not
at all; that they should love their neighbour as themselves; that if one
take their cloak, they should give him their coat also; that they should
take no thought for the morrow; that if they would be perfect, they
should sell all that they have and give it to the poor. They are not
insincere when they say that they believe these things. They do believe
them, as people believe what they have always heard lauded and never
discussed. But in the sense of that living belief which regulates
conduct, they believe these doctrines just up to the point to which it
is usual to act upon them. The doctrines in their integrity are
serviceable to pelt adversaries with; and it is understood that they are
to be put forward (when possible) as the reasons for whatever people do
that they think laudable. But any one who reminded them that the maxims
require an infinity of things which they never even think of doing,
would gain nothing but to be classed among those very unpopular
characters who affect to be better than other people. The doctrines have
no hold on ordinary believers--are not a power in their minds. They have
a habitual respect for the sound of them, but no feeling which spreads
from the words to the things signified, and forces the mind to take
_them_ in, and make them conform to the formula. Whenever conduct is
concerned, they look round for Mr. A and B to direct them how far to go
in obeying Christ.

Now we may be well assured that the case was not thus, but far
otherwise, with the early Christians. Had it been thus, Christianity
never would have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised Hebrews
into the religion of the Roman empire. When their enemies said, "See how
these Christians love one another" (a remark not likely to be made by
anybody now), they assuredly had a much livelier feeling of the meaning
of their creed than they have ever had since. And to this cause,
probably, it is chiefly owing that Christianity now makes so little
progress in extending its domain, and after eighteen centuries, is still
nearly confined to Europeans and the descendants of Europeans. Even with
the strictly religious, who are much in earnest about their doctrines,
and attach a greater amount of meaning to many of them than people in
general, it commonly happens that the part which is thus comparatively
active in their minds is that which was made by Calvin, or Knox, or some
such person much nearer in character to themselves. The sayings of
Christ coexist passively in their minds, producing hardly any effect
beyond what is caused by mere listening to words so amiable and bland.
There are many reasons, doubtless, why doctrines which are the badge of
a sect retain more of their vitality than those common to all recognised
sects, and why more pains are taken by teachers to keep their meaning
alive; but one reason certainly is, that the peculiar doctrines are more
questioned, and have to be oftener defended against open gainsayers.
Both teachers and learners go to sleep at their post, as soon as there
is no enemy in the field.

The same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional
doctrines--those of prudence and knowledge of life, as well as of morals
or religion. All languages and literatures are full of general
observations on life, both as to what it is, and how to conduct oneself
in it; observations which everybody knows, which everybody repeats, or
hears with acquiescence, which are received as truisms, yet of which
most people first truly learn the meaning, when experience, generally of
a painful kind, has made it a reality to them. How often, when smarting
under some unforeseen misfortune or disappointment, does a person call
to mind some proverb or common saying, familiar to him all his life, the
meaning of which, if he had ever before felt it as he does now, would
have saved him from the calamity. There are indeed reasons for this,
other than the absence of discussion: there are many truths of which the
full meaning _cannot_ be realised, until personal experience has brought
it home. But much more of the meaning even of these would have been
understood, and what was understood would have been far more deeply
impressed on the mind, if the man had been accustomed to hear it argued
_pro_ and _con_ by people who did understand it. The fatal tendency of
mankind to leave off thinking about a thing when it is no longer
doubtful, is the cause of half their errors. A contemporary author has
well spoken of "the deep slumber of a decided opinion."

But what! (it may be asked) Is the absence of unanimity an indispensable
condition of true knowledge? Is it necessary that some part of mankind
should persist in error, to enable any to realise the truth? Does a
belief cease to be real and vital as soon as it is generally
received--and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt
unless some doubt of it remains? As soon as mankind have unanimously
accepted a truth, does the truth perish within them? The highest aim and
best result of improved intelligence, it has hitherto been thought, is
to unite mankind more and more in the acknowledgment of all important
truths: and does the intelligence only last as long as it has not
achieved its object? Do the fruits of conquest perish by the very
completeness of the victory?

I affirm no such thing. As mankind improve, the number of doctrines
which are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on the
increase: and the well-being of mankind may almost be measured by the
number and gravity of the truths which have reached the point of being
uncontested. The cessation, on one question after another, of serious
controversy, is one of the necessary incidents of the consolidation of
opinion; a consolidation as salutary in the case of true opinions, as it
is dangerous and noxious when the opinions are erroneous. But though
this gradual narrowing of the bounds of diversity of opinion is
necessary in both senses of the term, being at once inevitable and
indispensable, we are not therefore obliged to conclude that all its
consequences must be beneficial. The loss of so important an aid to the
intelligent and living apprehension of a truth, as is afforded by the
necessity of explaining it to, or defending it against, opponents,
though not sufficient to outweigh, is no trifling drawback from, the
benefit of its universal recognition. Where this advantage can no longer
be had, I confess I should like to see the teachers of mankind
endeavouring to provide a substitute for it; some contrivance for making
the difficulties of the question as present to the learner's
consciousness, as if they were pressed upon him by a dissentient
champion, eager for his conversion.

But instead of seeking contrivances for this purpose, they have lost
those they formerly had. The Socratic dialectics, so magnificently
exemplified in the dialogues of Plato, were a contrivance of this
description. They were essentially a negative discussion of the great
questions of philosophy and life, directed with consummate skill to the
purpose of convincing any one who had merely adopted the commonplaces of
received opinion, that he did not understand the subject--that he as yet
attached no definite meaning to the doctrines he professed; in order
that, becoming aware of his ignorance, he might be put in the way to
attain a stable belief, resting on a clear apprehension both of the
meaning of doctrines and of their evidence. The school disputations of
the middle ages had a somewhat similar object. They were intended to
make sure that the pupil understood his own opinion, and (by necessary
correlation) the opinion opposed to it, and could enforce the grounds of
the one and confute those of the other. These last-mentioned contests
had indeed the incurable defect, that the premises appealed to were
taken from authority, not from reason; and, as a discipline to the mind,
they were in every respect inferior to the powerful dialectics which
formed the intellects of the "Socratici viri": but the modern mind owes
far more to both than it is generally willing to admit, and the present
modes of education contain nothing which in the smallest degree supplies
the place either of the one or of the other. A person who derives all
his instruction from teachers or books, even if he escape the besetting
temptation of contenting himself with cram, is under no compulsion to
hear both sides; accordingly it is far from a frequent accomplishment,
even among thinkers, to know both sides; and the weakest part of what
everybody says in defence of his opinion, is what he intends as a reply
to antagonists. It is the fashion of the present time to disparage
negative logic--that which points out weaknesses in theory or errors in
practice, without establishing positive truths. Such negative criticism
would indeed be poor enough as an ultimate result; but as a means to
attaining any positive knowledge or conviction worthy the name, it
cannot be valued too highly; and until people are again systematically
trained to it, there will be few great thinkers, and a low general
average of intellect, in any but the mathematical and physical
departments of speculation. On any other subject no one's opinions
deserve the name of knowledge, except so far as he has either had
forced upon him by others, or gone through of himself, the same mental
process which would have been required of him in carrying on an active
controversy with opponents. That, therefore, which when absent, it is so
indispensable, but so difficult, to create, how worse than absurd is it
to forego, when spontaneously offering itself! If there are any persons
who contest a received opinion, or who will do so if law or opinion will
let them, let us thank them for it, open our minds to listen to them,
and rejoice that there is some one to do for us what we otherwise ought,
if we have any regard for either the certainty or the vitality of our
convictions, to do with much greater labour for ourselves.


It still remains to speak of one of the principal causes which make
diversity of opinion advantageous, and will continue to do so until
mankind shall have entered a stage of intellectual advancement which at
present seems at an incalculable distance. We have hitherto considered
only two possibilities: that the received opinion may be false, and some
other opinion, consequently, true; or that, the received opinion being
true, a conflict with the opposite error is essential to a clear
apprehension and deep feeling of its truth. But there is a commoner
case than either of these; when the conflicting doctrines, instead of
being one true and the other false, share the truth between them; and
the nonconforming opinion is needed to supply the remainder of the
truth, of which the received doctrine embodies only a part. Popular
opinions, on subjects not palpable to sense, are often true, but seldom
or never the whole truth. They are a part of the truth; sometimes a
greater, sometimes a smaller part, but exaggerated, distorted, and
disjoined from the truths by which they ought to be accompanied and
limited. Heretical opinions, on the other hand, are generally some of
these suppressed and neglected truths, bursting the bonds which kept
them down, and either seeking reconciliation with the truth contained in
the common opinion, or fronting it as enemies, and setting themselves
up, with similar exclusiveness, as the whole truth. The latter case is
hitherto the most frequent, as, in the human mind, one-sidedness has
always been the rule, and many-sidedness the exception. Hence, even in
revolutions of opinion, one part of the truth usually sets while another
rises. Even progress, which ought to superadd, for the most part only
substitutes one partial and incomplete truth for another; improvement
consisting chiefly in this, that the new fragment of truth is more
wanted, more adapted to the needs of the time, than that which it
displaces. Such being the partial character of prevailing opinions, even
when resting on a true foundation; every opinion which embodies somewhat
of the portion of truth which the common opinion omits, ought to be
considered precious, with whatever amount of error and confusion that
truth may be blended. No sober judge of human affairs will feel bound to
be indignant because those who force on our notice truths which we
should otherwise have overlooked, overlook some of those which we see.
Rather, he will think that so long as popular truth is one-sided, it is
more desirable than otherwise that unpopular truth should have one-sided
asserters too; such being usually the most energetic, and the most
likely to compel reluctant attention to the fragment of wisdom which
they proclaim as if it were the whole.

Thus, in the eighteenth century, when nearly all the instructed, and all
those of the uninstructed who were led by them, were lost in admiration
of what is called civilisation, and of the marvels of modern science,
literature, and philosophy, and while greatly overrating the amount of
unlikeness between the men of modern and those of ancient times,
indulged the belief that the whole of the difference was in their own
favour; with what a salutary shock did the paradoxes of Rousseau explode
like bombshells in the midst, dislocating the compact mass of one-sided
opinion, and forcing its elements to recombine in a better form and with
additional ingredients. Not that the current opinions were on the whole
farther from the truth than Rousseau's were; on the contrary, they were
nearer to it; they contained more of positive truth, and very much less
of error. Nevertheless there lay in Rousseau's doctrine, and has floated
down the stream of opinion along with it, a considerable amount of
exactly those truths which the popular opinion wanted; and these are the
deposit which was left behind when the flood subsided. The superior
worth of simplicity of life, the enervating and demoralising effect of
the trammels and hypocrisies of artificial society, are ideas which have
never been entirely absent from cultivated minds since Rousseau wrote;
and they will in time produce their due effect, though at present
needing to be asserted as much as ever, and to be asserted by deeds, for
words, on this subject, have nearly exhausted their power.

In politics, again, it is almost a commonplace, that a party of order
or stability, and a party of progress or reform, are both necessary
elements of a healthy state of political life; until the one or the
other shall have so enlarged its mental grasp as to be a party equally
of order and of progress, knowing and distinguishing what is fit to be
preserved from what ought to be swept away. Each of these modes of
thinking derives its utility from the deficiencies of the other; but it
is in a great measure the opposition of the other that keeps each within
the limits of reason and sanity. Unless opinions favourable to democracy
and to aristocracy, to property and to equality, to co-operation and to
competition, to luxury and to abstinence, to sociality and
individuality, to liberty and discipline, and all the other standing
antagonisms of practical life, are expressed with equal freedom, and
enforced and defended with equal talent and energy, there is no chance
of both elements obtaining their due; one scale is sure to go up and the
other down. Truth, in the great practical concerns of life, is so much a
question of the reconciling and combining of opposites, that very few
have minds sufficiently capacious and impartial to make the adjustment
with an approach to correctness, and it has to be made by the rough
process of a struggle between combatants fighting under hostile
banners. On any of the great open questions just enumerated, if either
of the two opinions has a better claim than the other, not merely to be
tolerated, but to be encouraged and countenanced, it is the one which
happens at the particular time and place to be in a minority. That is
the opinion which, for the time being, represents the neglected
interests, the side of human well-being which is in danger of obtaining
less than its share. I am aware that there is not, in this country, any
intolerance of differences of opinion on most of these topics. They are
adduced to show, by admitted and multiplied examples, the universality
of the fact, that only through diversity of opinion is there, in the
existing state of human intellect, a chance of fair-play to all sides of
the truth. When there are persons to be found, who form an exception to
the apparent unanimity of the world on any subject, even if the world is
in the right, it is always probable that dissentients have something
worth hearing to say for themselves, and that truth would lose something
by their silence.

It may be objected, "But _some_ received principles, especially on the
highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. The
Christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject,
and if any one teaches a morality which varies from it, he is wholly in
error." As this is of all cases the most important in practice, none can
be fitter to test the general maxim. But before pronouncing what
Christian morality is or is not, it would be desirable to decide what is
meant by Christian morality. If it means the morality of the New
Testament, I wonder that any one who derives his knowledge of this from
the book itself, can suppose that it was announced, or intended, as a
complete doctrine of morals. The Gospel always refers to a pre-existing
morality, and confines its precepts to the particulars in which that
morality was to be corrected, or superseded by a wider and higher;
expressing itself, moreover, in terms most general, often impossible to
be interpreted literally, and possessing rather the impressiveness of
poetry or eloquence than the precision of legislation. To extract from
it a body of ethical doctrine, has ever been possible without eking it
out from the Old Testament, that is, from a system elaborate indeed, but
in many respects barbarous, and intended only for a barbarous people.
St. Paul, a declared enemy to this Judaical mode of interpreting the
doctrine and filling up the scheme of his Master, equally assumes a
pre-existing morality, namely, that of the Greeks and Romans; and his
advice to Christians is in a great measure a system of accommodation to
that; even to the extent of giving an apparent sanction to slavery. What
is called Christian, but should rather be termed theological, morality,
was not the work of Christ or the Apostles, but is of much later origin,
having been gradually built up by the Catholic church of the first five
centuries, and though not implicitly adopted by moderns and Protestants,
has been much less modified by them than might have been expected. For
the most part, indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off
the additions which had been made to it in the middle ages, each sect
supplying the place by fresh additions, adapted to its own character and
tendencies. That mankind owe a great debt to this morality, and to its
early teachers, I should be the last person to deny; but I do not
scruple to say of it, that it is, in many important points, incomplete
and one-sided, and that unless ideas and feelings, not sanctioned by it,
had contributed to the formation of European life and character, human
affairs would have been in a worse condition than they now are.
Christian morality (so called) has all the characters of a reaction; it
is, in great part, a protest against Paganism. Its ideal is negative
rather than positive; passive rather than active; Innocence rather than
Nobleness; Abstinence from Evil, rather than energetic Pursuit of Good:
in its precepts (as has been well said) "thou shalt not" predominates
unduly over "thou shalt." In its horror of sensuality, it made an idol
of asceticism, which has been gradually compromised away into one of
legality. It holds out the hope of heaven and the threat of hell, as the
appointed and appropriate motives to a virtuous life: in this falling
far below the best of the ancients, and doing what lies in it to give to
human morality an essentially selfish character, by disconnecting each
man's feelings of duty from the interests of his fellow-creatures,
except so far as a self-interested inducement is offered to him for
consulting them. It is essentially a doctrine of passive obedience; it
inculcates submission to all authorities found established; who indeed
are not to be actively obeyed when they command what religion forbids,
but who are not to be resisted, far less rebelled against, for any
amount of wrong to ourselves. And while, in the morality of the best
Pagan nations, duty to the State holds even a disproportionate place,
infringing on the just liberty of the individual; in purely Christian
ethics, that grand department of duty is scarcely noticed or
acknowledged. It is in the Koran, not the New Testament, that we read
the maxim--"A ruler who appoints any man to an office, when there is in
his dominions another man better qualified for it, sins against God and
against the State." What little recognition the idea of obligation to
the public obtains in modern morality, is derived from Greek and Roman
sources, not from Christian; as, even in the morality of private life,
whatever exists of magnanimity, high-mindedness, personal dignity, even
the sense of honour, is derived from the purely human, not the religious
part of our education, and never could have grown out of a standard of
ethics in which the only worth, professedly recognised, is that of
obedience.

I am as far as any one from pretending that these defects are
necessarily inherent in the Christian ethics, in every manner in which
it can be conceived, or that the many requisites of a complete moral
doctrine which it does not contain, do not admit of being reconciled
with it. Far less would I insinuate this of the doctrines and precepts
of Christ himself. I believe that the sayings of Christ are all, that I
can see any evidence of their having been intended to be; that they are
irreconcilable with nothing which a comprehensive morality requires;
that everything which is excellent in ethics may be brought within them,
with no greater violence to their language than has been done to it by
all who have attempted to deduce from them any practical system of
conduct whatever. But it is quite consistent with this, to believe that
they contain, and were meant to contain, only a part of the truth; that
many essential elements of the highest morality are among the things
which are not provided for, nor intended to be provided for, in the
recorded deliverances of the Founder of Christianity, and which have
been entirely thrown aside in the system of ethics erected on the basis
of those deliverances by the Christian Church. And this being so, I
think it a great error to persist in attempting to find in the Christian
doctrine that complete rule for our guidance, which its author intended
it to sanction and enforce, but only partially to provide. I believe,
too, that this narrow theory is becoming a grave practical evil,
detracting greatly from the value of the moral training and instruction,
which so many well-meaning persons are now at length exerting themselves
to promote. I much fear that by attempting to form the mind and feelings
on an exclusively religious type, and discarding those secular
standards (as for want of a better name they may be called) which
heretofore co-existed with and supplemented the Christian ethics,
receiving some of its spirit, and infusing into it some of theirs, there
will result, and is even now resulting, a low, abject, servile type of
character, which, submit itself as it may to what it deems the Supreme
Will, is incapable of rising to or sympathising in the conception of
Supreme Goodness. I believe that other ethics than any which can be
evolved from exclusively Christian sources, must exist side by side with
Christian ethics to produce the moral regeneration of mankind; and that
the Christian system is no exception to the rule, that in an imperfect
state of the human mind, the interests of truth require a diversity of
opinions. It is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore the moral truths
not contained in Christianity, men should ignore any of those which it
does contain. Such prejudice, or oversight, when it occurs, is
altogether an evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope to be always
exempt, and must be regarded as the price paid for an inestimable good.
The exclusive pretension made by a part of the truth to be the whole,
must and ought to be protested against, and if a reactionary impulse
should make the protestors unjust in their turn, this one-sidedness,
like the other, may be lamented, but must be tolerated. If Christians
would teach infidels to be just to Christianity, they should themselves
be just to infidelity. It can do truth no service to blink the fact,
known to all who have the most ordinary acquaintance with literary
history, that a large portion of the noblest and most valuable moral
teaching has been the work, not only of men who did not know, but of men
who knew and rejected, the Christian faith.

I do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom of
enunciating all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of
religious or philosophical sectarianism. Every truth which men of narrow
capacity are in earnest about, is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and
in many ways even acted on, as if no other truth existed in the world,
or at all events none that could limit or qualify the first. I
acknowledge that the tendency of all opinions to become sectarian is not
cured by the freest discussion, but is often heightened and exacerbated
thereby; the truth which ought to have been, but was not, seen, being
rejected all the more violently because proclaimed by persons regarded
as opponents. But it is not on the impassioned partisan, it is on the
calmer and more disinterested bystander, that this collision of
opinions works its salutary effect. Not the violent conflict between
parts of the truth, but the quiet suppression of half of it, is the
formidable evil: there is always hope when people are forced to listen
to both sides; it is when they attend only to one that errors harden
into prejudices, and truth itself ceases to have the effect of truth, by
being exaggerated into falsehood. And since there are few mental
attributes more rare than that judicial faculty which can sit in
intelligent judgment between two sides of a question, of which only one
is represented by an advocate before it, truth has no chance but in
proportion as every side of it, every opinion which embodies any
fraction of the truth, not only finds advocates, but is so advocated as
to be listened to.


We have now recognised the necessity to the mental well-being of mankind
(on which all their other well-being depends) of freedom of opinion, and
freedom of the expression of opinion, on four distinct grounds; which we
will now briefly recapitulate.

First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for
aught we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own
infallibility.

Secondly, though the silenced opinion be an error, it may, and very
commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and since the general or
prevailing opinion on any subject is rarely or never the whole truth, it
is only by the collision of adverse opinions, that the remainder of the
truth has any chance of being supplied.

Thirdly, even if the received opinion be not only true, but the whole
truth; unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and
earnestly contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held
in the manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of
its rational grounds. And not only this, but, fourthly, the meaning of
the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost, or enfeebled, and
deprived of its vital effect on the character and conduct: the dogma
becoming a mere formal profession, inefficacious for good, but cumbering
the ground, and preventing the growth of any real and heartfelt
conviction, from reason or personal experience.

Before quitting the subject of freedom of opinion, it is fit to take
some notice of those who say, that the free expression of all opinions
should be permitted, on condition that the manner be temperate, and do
not pass the bounds of fair discussion. Much might be said on the
impossibility of fixing where these supposed bounds are to be placed;
for if the test be offence to those whose opinion is attacked, I think
experience testifies that this offence is given whenever the attack is
telling and powerful, and that every opponent who pushes them hard, and
whom they find it difficult to answer, appears to them, if he shows any
strong feeling on the subject, an intemperate opponent. But this, though
an important consideration in a practical point of view, merges in a
more fundamental objection. Undoubtedly the manner of asserting an
opinion, even though it be a true one, may be very objectionable, and
may justly incur severe censure. But the principal offences of the kind
are such as it is mostly impossible, unless by accidental self-betrayal,
to bring home to conviction. The gravest of them is, to argue
sophistically, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements
of the case, or misrepresent the opposite opinion. But all this, even to
the most aggravated degree, is so continually done in perfect good
faith, by persons who are not considered, and in many other respects may
not deserve to be considered, ignorant or incompetent, that it is rarely
possible on adequate grounds conscientiously to stamp the
misrepresentation as morally culpable; and still less could law presume
to interfere with this kind of controversial misconduct. With regard to
what is commonly meant by intemperate discussion, namely invective,
sarcasm, personality, and the like, the denunciation of these weapons
would deserve more sympathy if it were ever proposed to interdict them
equally to both sides; but it is only desired to restrain the employment
of them against the prevailing opinion: against the unprevailing they
may not only be used without general disapproval, but will be likely to
obtain for him who uses them the praise of honest zeal and righteous
indignation. Yet whatever mischief arises from their use, is greatest
when they are employed against the comparatively defenceless; and
whatever unfair advantage can be derived by any opinion from this mode
of asserting it, accrues almost exclusively to received opinions. The
worst offence of this kind which can be committed by a polemic, is to
stigmatise those who hold the contrary opinion as bad and immoral men.
To calumny of this sort, those who hold any unpopular opinion are
peculiarly exposed, because they are in general few and uninfluential,
and nobody but themselves feel much interest in seeing justice done
them; but this weapon is, from the nature of the case, denied to those
who attack a prevailing opinion: they can neither use it with safety to
themselves, nor, if they could, would it do anything but recoil on their
own cause. In general, opinions contrary to those commonly received can
only obtain a hearing by studied moderation of language, and the most
cautious avoidance of unnecessary offence, from which they hardly ever
deviate even in a slight degree without losing ground: while unmeasured
vituperation employed on the side of the prevailing opinion, really does
deter people from professing contrary opinions, and from listening to
those who profess them. For the interest, therefore, of truth and
justice, it is far more important to restrain this employment of
vituperative language than the other; and, for example, if it were
necessary to choose, there would be much more need to discourage
offensive attacks on infidelity, than on religion. It is, however,
obvious that law and authority have no business with restraining either,
while opinion ought, in every instance, to determine its verdict by the
circumstances of the individual case; condemning every one, on whichever
side of the argument he places himself, in whose mode of advocacy either
want of candour, or malignity, bigotry, or intolerance of feeling
manifest themselves; but not inferring these vices from the side which
a person takes, though it be the contrary side of the question to our
own: and giving merited honour to every one, whatever opinion he may
hold, who has calmness to see and honesty to state what his opponents
and their opinions really are, exaggerating nothing to their discredit,
keeping nothing back which tells, or can be supposed to tell, in their
favour. This is the real morality of public discussion; and if often
violated, I am happy to think that there are many controversialists who
to a great extent observe it, and a still greater number who
conscientiously strive towards it.

FOOTNOTES:

[6] These words had scarcely been written, when, as if to give them an
emphatic contradiction, occurred the Government Press Prosecutions of
1858. That ill-judged interference with the liberty of public discussion
has not, however, induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has
it at all weakened my conviction that, moments of panic excepted, the
era of pains and penalties for political discussion has, in our own
country, passed away. For, in the first place, the prosecutions were not
persisted in; and, in the second, they were never, properly speaking,
political prosecutions. The offence charged was not that of criticising
institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but of circulating what
was deemed an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of Tyrannicide.

If the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there ought
to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter
of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be
considered. It would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to
examine here, whether the doctrine of Tyrannicide deserves that title. I
shall content myself with saying, that the subject has been at all times
one of the open questions of morals; that the act of a private citizen
in striking down a criminal, who, by raising himself above the law, has
placed himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, has been
accounted by whole nations, and by some of the best and wisest of men,
not a crime, but an act of exalted virtue; and that, right or wrong, it
is not of the nature of assassination, but of civil war. As such, I hold
that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a proper subject
of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a
probable connection can be established between the act and the
instigation. Even then, it is not a foreign government, but the very
government assailed, which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can
legitimately punish attacks directed against its own existence.

[7] Thomas Pooley, Bodmin Assizes, July 31, 1857. In December following,
he received a free pardon from the Crown.

[8] George Jacob Holyoake, August 17, 1857; Edward Truelove, July, 1857.

[9] Baron de Gleichen, Marlborough-Street Police Court, August 4, 1857.

[10] Ample warning may be drawn from the large infusion of the passions
of a persecutor, which mingled with the general display of the worst
parts of our national character on the occasion of the Sepoy
insurrection. The ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may
be unworthy of notice; but the heads of the Evangelical party have
announced as their principle, for the government of Hindoos and
Mahomedans, that no schools be supported by public money in which the
Bible is not taught, and by necessary consequence that no public
employment be given to any but real or pretended Christians. An
Under-Secretary of State, in a speech delivered to his constituents on
the 12th of November, 1857, is reported to have said: "Toleration of
their faith" (the faith of a hundred millions of British subjects), "the
superstition which they called religion, by the British Government, had
had the effect of retarding the ascendency of the British name, and
preventing the salutary growth of Christianity.... Toleration was the
great corner-stone of the religious liberties of this country; but do
not let them abuse that precious word toleration. As he understood it,
it meant the complete liberty to all, freedom of worship, _among
Christians, who worshipped upon the same foundation_. It meant
toleration of all sects and denominations of _Christians who believed in
the one mediation_." I desire to call attention to the fact, that a man
who has been deemed fit to fill a high office in the government of this
country, under a liberal Ministry, maintains the doctrine that all who
do not believe in the divinity of Christ are beyond the pale of
toleration. Who, after this imbecile display, can indulge the illusion
that religious persecution has passed away, never to return?




CHAPTER III.

OF INDIVIDUALITY, AS ONE OF THE ELEMENTS OF WELL-BEING.


Such being the reasons which make it imperative that human beings should
be free to form opinions, and to express their opinions without reserve;
and such the baneful consequences to the intellectual, and through that
to the moral nature of man, unless this liberty is either conceded, or
asserted in spite of prohibition; let us next examine whether the same
reasons do not require that men should be free to act upon their
opinions--to carry these out in their lives, without hindrance, either
physical or moral, from their fellow-men, so long as it is at their own
risk and peril. This last proviso is of course indispensable. No one
pretends that actions should be as free as opinions. On the contrary,
even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they
are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive
instigation to some mischievous act. An opinion that corn-dealers are
starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought to be
unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may justly
incur punishment when delivered orally to an excited mob assembled
before the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed about among the same
mob in the form of a placard. Acts, of whatever kind, which, without
justifiable cause, do harm to others, may be, and in the more important
cases absolutely require to be, controlled by the unfavourable
sentiments, and, when needful, by the active interference of mankind.
The liberty of the individual must be thus far limited; he must not make
himself a nuisance to other people. But if he refrains from molesting
others in what concerns them, and merely acts according to his own
inclination and judgment in things which concern himself, the same
reasons which show that opinion should be free, prove also that he
should be allowed, without molestation, to carry his opinions into
practice at his own cost. That mankind are not infallible; that their
truths, for the most part, are only half-truths; that unity of opinion,
unless resulting from the fullest and freest comparison of opposite
opinions, is not desirable, and diversity not an evil, but a good,
until mankind are much more capable than at present of recognising all
sides of the truth, are principles applicable to men's modes of action,
not less than to their opinions. As it is useful that while mankind are
imperfect there should be different opinions, so is it that there should
be different experiments of living; that free scope should be given to
varieties of character, short of injury to others; and that the worth of
different modes of life should be proved practically, when any one
thinks fit to try them. It is desirable, in short, that in things which
do not primarily concern others, individuality should assert itself.
Where, not the person's own character, but the traditions or customs of
other people are the rule of conduct, there is wanting one of the
principal ingredients of human happiness, and quite the chief ingredient
of individual and social progress.

In maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be encountered
does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an acknowledged end,
but in the indifference of persons in general to the end itself. If it
were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the
leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a co-ordinate
element with all that is designated by the terms civilisation,
instruction, education, culture, but is itself a necessary part and
condition of all those things; there would be no danger that liberty
should be under-valued, and the adjustment of the boundaries between it
and social control would present no extraordinary difficulty. But the
evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognised by the common
modes of thinking, as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving any
regard on its own account. The majority, being satisfied with the ways
of mankind as they now are (for it is they who make them what they are),
cannot comprehend why those ways should not be good enough for
everybody; and what is more, spontaneity forms no part of the ideal of
the majority of moral and social reformers, but is rather looked on with
jealousy, as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious obstruction to the
general acceptance of what these reformers, in their own judgment, think
would be best for mankind. Few persons, out of Germany, even comprehend
the meaning of the doctrine which Wilhelm von Humboldt, so eminent both
as a _savant_ and as a politician, made the text of a treatise--that
"the end of man, or that which is prescribed by the eternal or immutable
dictates of reason, and not suggested by vague and transient desires,
is the highest and most harmonious development of his powers to a
complete and consistent whole;" that, therefore, the object "towards
which every human being must ceaselessly direct his efforts, and on
which especially those who design to influence their fellow-men must
ever keep their eyes, is the individuality of power and development;"
that for this there are two requisites, "freedom, and a variety of
situations;" and that from the union of these arise "individual vigour
and manifold diversity," which combine themselves in "originality."[11]

Little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of Von
Humboldt, and surprising as it may be to them to find so high a value
attached to individuality, the question, one must nevertheless think,
can only be one of degree. No one's idea of excellence in conduct is
that people should do absolutely nothing but copy one another. No one
would assert that people ought not to put into their mode of life, and
into the conduct of their concerns, any impress whatever of their own
judgment, or of their own individual character. On the other hand, it
would be absurd to pretend that people ought to live as if nothing
whatever had been known in the world before they came into it; as if
experience had as yet done nothing towards showing that one mode of
existence, or of conduct, is preferable to another. Nobody denies that
people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know and benefit
by the ascertained results of human experience. But it is the privilege
and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the maturity of his
faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own way. It is for him
to find out what part of recorded experience is properly applicable to
his own circumstances and character. The traditions and customs of other
people are, to a certain extent, evidence of what their experience has
taught _them_; presumptive evidence, and as such, have a claim to his
deference: but, in the first place, their experience may be too narrow;
or they may not have interpreted it rightly. Secondly, their
interpretation of experience may be correct, but unsuitable to him.
Customs are made for customary circumstances, and customary characters:
and his circumstances or his character may be uncustomary. Thirdly,
though the customs be both good as customs, and suitable to him, yet to
conform to custom, merely _as_ custom, does not educate or develop in
him any of the qualities which are the distinctive endowment of a human
being. The human faculties of perception, judgment, discriminative
feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference, are exercised only
in making a choice. He who does anything because it is the custom, makes
no choice. He gains no practice either in discerning or in desiring what
is best. The mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are improved
only by being used. The faculties are called into no exercise by doing a
thing merely because others do it, no more than by believing a thing
only because others believe it. If the grounds of an opinion are not
conclusive to the person's own reason, his reason cannot be
strengthened, but is likely to be weakened by his adopting it: and if
the inducements to an act are not such as are consentaneous to his own
feelings and character (where affection, or the rights of others, are
not concerned), it is so much done towards rendering his feelings and
character inert and torpid, instead of active and energetic.

He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of life
for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of
imitation. He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his
faculties. He must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to
foresee, activity to gather materials for decision, discrimination to
decide, and when he has decided, firmness and self-control to hold to
his deliberate decision. And these qualities he requires and exercises
exactly in proportion as the part of his conduct which he determines
according to his own judgment and feelings is a large one. It is
possible that he might be guided in some good path, and kept out of
harm's way, without any of these things. But what will be his
comparative worth as a human being? It really is of importance, not only
what men do, but also what manner of men they are that do it. Among the
works of man, which human life is rightly employed in perfecting and
beautifying, the first in importance surely is man himself. Supposing it
were possible to get houses built, corn grown, battles fought, causes
tried, and even churches erected and prayers said, by machinery--by
automatons in human form--it would be a considerable loss to exchange
for these automatons even the men and women who at present inhabit the
more civilised parts of the world, and who assuredly are but starved
specimens of what nature can and will produce. Human nature is not a
machine to be built after a model, and set to do exactly the work
prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to grow and develop
itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward forces
which make it a living thing.

It will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should exercise
their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or
even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a
blind and simply mechanical adhesion to it. To a certain extent it is
admitted, that our understanding should be our own: but there is not the
same willingness to admit that our desires and impulses should be our
own likewise; or that to possess impulses of our own, and of any
strength, is anything but a peril and a snare. Yet desires and impulses
are as much a part of a perfect human being, as beliefs and restraints:
and strong impulses are only perilous when not properly balanced; when
one set of aims and inclinations is developed into strength, while
others, which ought to co-exist with them, remain weak and inactive. It
is not because men's desires are strong that they act ill; it is because
their consciences are weak. There is no natural connection between
strong impulses and a weak conscience. The natural connection is the
other way. To say that one person's desires and feelings are stronger
and more various than those of another, is merely to say that he has
more of the raw material of human nature, and is therefore capable,
perhaps of more evil, but certainly of more good. Strong impulses are
but another name for energy. Energy may be turned to bad uses; but more
good may always be made of an energetic nature, than of an indolent and
impassive one. Those who have most natural feeling, are always those
whose cultivated feelings may be made the strongest. The same strong
susceptibilities which make the personal impulses vivid and powerful,
are also the source from whence are generated the most passionate love
of virtue, and the sternest self-control. It is through the cultivation
of these, that society both does its duty and protects its interests:
not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made, because it knows
not how to make them. A person whose desires and impulses are his
own--are the expression of his own nature, as it has been developed and
modified by his own culture--is said to have a character. One whose
desires and impulses are not his own, has no character, no more than a
steam-engine has a character. If, in addition to being his own, his
impulses are strong, and are under the government of a strong will, he
has an energetic character. Whoever thinks that individuality of
desires and impulses should not be encouraged to unfold itself, must
maintain that society has no need of strong natures--is not the better
for containing many persons who have much character--and that a high
general average of energy is not desirable.

In some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too
much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and
controlling them. There has been a time when the element of spontaneity
and individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard
struggle with it. The difficulty then was, to induce men of strong
bodies or minds to pay obedience to any rules which required them to
control their impulses. To overcome this difficulty, law and discipline,
like the Popes struggling against the Emperors, asserted a power over
the whole man, claiming to control all his life in order to control his
character--which society had not found any other sufficient means of
binding. But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and
the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the
deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences. Things are vastly
changed, since the passions of those who were strong by station or by
personal endowment were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws
and ordinances, and required to be rigorously chained up to enable the
persons within their reach to enjoy any particle of security. In our
times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest, every one
lives as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship. Not only in
what concerns others, but in what concerns only themselves, the
individual, or the family, do not ask themselves--what do I prefer? or,
what would suit my character and disposition? or, what would allow the
best and highest in me to have fair-play, and enable it to grow and
thrive? They ask themselves, what is suitable to my position? what is
usually done by persons of my station and pecuniary circumstances? or
(worse still) what is usually done by persons of a station and
circumstances superior to mine? I do not mean that they choose what is
customary, in preference to what suits their own inclination. It does
not occur to them to have any inclination, except for what is customary.
Thus the mind itself is bowed to the yoke: even in what people do for
pleasure, conformity is the first thing thought of; they like in crowds;
they exercise choice only among things commonly done: peculiarity of
taste, eccentricity of conduct, are shunned equally with crimes: until
by dint of not following their own nature, they have no nature to
follow: their human capacities are withered and starved: they become
incapable of any strong wishes or native pleasures, and are generally
without either opinions or feelings of home growth, or properly their
own. Now is this, or is it not, the desirable condition of human nature?

It is so, on the Calvinistic theory. According to that, the one great
offence of man is Self-will. All the good of which humanity is capable,
is comprised in Obedience. You have no choice; thus you must do, and no
otherwise: "whatever is not a duty, is a sin." Human nature being
radically corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human nature
is killed within him. To one holding this theory of life, crushing out
any of the human faculties, capacities, and susceptibilities, is no
evil: man needs no capacity, but that of surrendering himself to the
will of God: and if he uses any of his faculties for any other purpose
but to do that supposed will more effectually, he is better without
them. That is the theory of Calvinism; and it is held, in a mitigated
form, by many who do not consider themselves Calvinists; the mitigation
consisting in giving a less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will
of God; asserting it to be his will that mankind should gratify some of
their inclinations; of course not in the manner they themselves prefer,
but in the way of obedience, that is, in a way prescribed to them by
authority; and, therefore, by the necessary conditions of the case, the
same for all.

In some such insidious form there is at present a strong tendency to
this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of
human character which it patronises. Many persons, no doubt, sincerely
think that human beings thus cramped and dwarfed, are as their Maker
designed them to be; just as many have thought that trees are a much
finer thing when clipped into pollards, or cut out into figures of
animals, than as nature made them. But if it be any part of religion to
believe that man was made by a good being, it is more consistent with
that faith to believe, that this Being gave all human faculties that
they might be cultivated and unfolded, not rooted out and consumed, and
that he takes delight in every nearer approach made by his creatures to
the ideal conception embodied in them, every increase in any of their
capabilities of comprehension, of action, or of enjoyment. There is a
different type of human excellence from the Calvinistic; a conception of
humanity as having its nature bestowed on it for other purposes than
merely to be abnegated. "Pagan self-assertion" is one of the elements of
human worth, as well as "Christian self-denial."[12] There is a Greek
ideal of self-development, which the Platonic and Christian ideal of
self-government blends with, but does not supersede. It may be better to
be a John Knox than an Alcibiades, but it is better to be a Pericles
than either; nor would a Pericles, if we had one in these days, be
without anything good which belonged to John Knox.

It is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in
themselves, but by cultivating it and calling it forth, within the
limits imposed by the rights and interests of others, that human beings
become a noble and beautiful object of contemplation; and as the works
partake the character of those who do them, by the same process human
life also becomes rich, diversified, and animating, furnishing more
abundant aliment to high thoughts and elevating feelings, and
strengthening the tie which binds every individual to the race, by
making the race infinitely better worth belonging to. In proportion to
the development of his individuality, each person becomes more valuable
to himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to others.
There is a greater fulness of life about his own existence, and when
there is more life in the units there is more in the mass which is
composed of them. As much compression as is necessary to prevent the
stronger specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of
others, cannot be dispensed with; but for this there is ample
compensation even in the point of view of human development. The means
of development which the individual loses by being prevented from
gratifying his inclinations to the injury of others, are chiefly
obtained at the expense of the development of other people. And even to
himself there is a full equivalent in the better development of the
social part of his nature, rendered possible by the restraint put upon
the selfish part. To be held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of
others, develops the feelings and capacities which have the good of
others for their object. But to be restrained in things not affecting
their good, by their mere displeasure, develops nothing valuable, except
such force of character as may unfold itself in resisting the restraint.
If acquiesced in, it dulls and blunts the whole nature. To give any
fair-play to the nature of each, it is essential that different persons
should be allowed to lead different lives. In proportion as this
latitude has been exercised in any age, has that age been noteworthy to
posterity. Even despotism does not produce its worst effects, so long as
Individuality exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is
despotism, by whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes
to be enforcing the will of God or the injunctions of men.

Having said that Individuality is the same thing with development, and
that it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces, or can
produce, well-developed human beings, I might here close the argument:
for what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs,
than that it brings human beings themselves nearer to the best thing
they can be? or what worse can be said of any obstruction to good, than
that it prevents this? Doubtless, however, these considerations will not
suffice to convince those who most need convincing; and it is necessary
further to show, that these developed human beings are of some use to
the undeveloped--to point out to those who do not desire liberty, and
would not avail themselves of it, that they may be in some intelligible
manner rewarded for allowing other people to make use of it without
hindrance.

In the first place, then, I would suggest that they might possibly
learn something from them. It will not be denied by anybody, that
originality is a valuable element in human affairs. There is always need
of persons not only to discover new truths, and point out when what were
once truths are true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and
set the example of more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense
in human life. This cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not
believe that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways
and practices. It is true that this benefit is not capable of being
rendered by everybody alike: there are but few persons, in comparison
with the whole of mankind, whose experiments, if adopted by others,
would be likely to be any improvement on established practice. But these
few are the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a
stagnant pool. Not only is it they who introduce good things which did
not before exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already
existed. If there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect
cease to be necessary? Would it be a reason why those who do the old
things should forget why they are done, and do them like cattle, not
like human beings? There is only too great a tendency in the best
beliefs and practices to degenerate into the mechanical; and unless
there were a succession of persons whose ever-recurring originality
prevents the grounds of those beliefs and practices from becoming merely
traditional, such dead matter would not resist the smallest shock from
anything really alive, and there would be no reason why civilisation
should not die out, as in the Byzantine Empire. Persons of genius, it is
true, are, and are always likely to be, a small minority; but in order
to have them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they grow.
Genius can only breathe freely in an _atmosphere_ of freedom. Persons of
genius are, _ex vi termini_, _more_ individual than any other
people--less capable, consequently, of fitting themselves, without
hurtful compression, into any of the small number of moulds which
society provides in order to save its members the trouble of forming
their own character. If from timidity they consent to be forced into one
of these moulds, and to let all that part of themselves which cannot
expand under the pressure remain unexpanded, society will be little the
better for their genius. If they are of a strong character, and break
their fetters, they become a mark for the society which has not
succeeded in reducing them to commonplace, to point at with solemn
warning as "wild," "erratic," and the like; much as if one should
complain of the Niagara river for not flowing smoothly between its banks
like a Dutch canal.

I insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the
necessity of allowing it to unfold itself freely both in thought and in
practice, being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory,
but knowing also that almost every one, in reality, is totally
indifferent to it. People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man
to write an exciting poem, or paint a picture. But in its true sense,
that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is
not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do
very well without it. Unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at.
Originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use
of. They cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they? If they
could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality. The
first service which originality has to render them, is that of opening
their eyes: which being once fully done, they would have a chance of
being themselves original. Meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever
yet done which some one was not the first to do, and that all good
things which exist are the fruits of originality, let them be modest
enough to believe that there is something still left for it to
accomplish, and assure themselves that they are more in need of
originality, the less they are conscious of the want.

In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real
or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things
throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among
mankind. In ancient history, in the middle ages, and in a diminishing
degree through the long transition from feudality to the present time,
the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great
talents or a high social position, he was a considerable power. At
present individuals are lost in the crowd. In politics it is almost a
triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world. The only
power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while
they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and instincts of
masses. This is as true in the moral and social relations of private
life as in public transactions. Those whose opinions go by the name of
public opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in America they
are the whole white population; in England, chiefly the middle class.
But they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. And
what is a still greater novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions
from dignitaries in Church or State, from ostensible leaders, or from
books. Their thinking is done for them by men much like themselves,
addressing them or speaking in their name, on the spur of the moment,
through the newspapers. I am not complaining of all this. I do not
assert that anything better is compatible, as a general rule, with the
present low state of the human mind. But that does not hinder the
government of mediocrity from being mediocre government. No government
by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political acts
or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of mind which it fosters, ever
did or could rise above mediocrity, except in so far as the sovereign
Many have let themselves be guided (which in their best times they
always have done) by the counsels and influence of a more highly gifted
and instructed One or Few. The initiation of all wise or noble things,
comes and must come from individuals; generally at first from some one
individual. The honour and glory of the average man is that he is
capable of following that initiative; that he can respond internally to
wise and noble things, and be led to them with his eyes open. I am not
countenancing the sort of "hero-worship" which applauds the strong man
of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the world and making
it do his bidding in spite of itself. All he can claim is, freedom to
point out the way. The power of compelling others into it, is not only
inconsistent with the freedom and development of all the rest, but
corrupting to the strong man himself. It does seem, however, that when
the opinions of masses of merely average men are everywhere become or
becoming the dominant power, the counterpoise and corrective to that
tendency would be, the more and more pronounced individuality of those
who stand on the higher eminences of thought. It is in these
circumstances most especially, that exceptional individuals, instead of
being deterred, should be encouraged in acting differently from the
mass. In other times there was no advantage in their doing so, unless
they acted not only differently, but better. In this age the mere
example of nonconformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom,
is itself a service. Precisely because the tyranny of opinion is such as
to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to break
through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric. Eccentricity has
always abounded when and where strength of character has abounded; and
the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional
to the amount of genius, mental vigour, and moral courage which it
contained. That so few now dare to be eccentric, marks the chief danger
of the time.

I have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to
uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these
are fit to be converted into customs. But independence of action, and
disregard of custom are not solely deserving of encouragement for the
chance they afford that better modes of action, and customs more worthy
of general adoption, may be struck out; nor is it only persons of
decided mental superiority who have a just claim to carry on their lives
in their own way. There is no reason that all human existences should be
constructed on some one, or some small number of patterns. If a person
possesses any tolerable amount of common-sense and experience, his own
mode of laying out his existence is the best, not because it is the best
in itself, but because it is his own mode. Human beings are not like
sheep; and even sheep are not undistinguishably alike. A man cannot get
a coat or a pair of boots to fit him, unless they are either made to his
measure, or he has a whole warehouseful to choose from: and is it easier
to fit him with a life than with a coat, or are human beings more like
one another in their whole physical and spiritual conformation than in
the shape of their feet? If it were only that people have diversities of
taste, that is reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after
one model. But different persons also require different conditions for
their spiritual development; and can no more exist healthily in the same
moral, than all the variety of plants can in the same physical,
atmosphere and climate. The same things which are helps to one person
towards the cultivation of his higher nature, are hindrances to another.
The same mode of life is a healthy excitement to one, keeping all his
faculties of action and enjoyment in their best order, while to another
it is a distracting burthen, which suspends or crushes all internal
life. Such are the differences among human beings in their sources of
pleasure, their susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them of
different physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a
corresponding diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain
their fair share of happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and
aesthetic stature of which their nature is capable. Why then should
tolerance, as far as the public sentiment is concerned, extend only to
tastes and modes of life which extort acquiescence by the multitude of
their adherents? Nowhere (except in some monastic institutions) is
diversity of taste entirely unrecognised; a person may, without blame,
either like or dislike rowing, or smoking, or music, or athletic
exercises, or chess, or cards, or study, because both those who like
each of these things, and those who dislike them, are too numerous to be
put down. But the man, and still more the woman, who can be accused
either of doing "what nobody does," or of not doing "what everybody
does," is the subject of as much depreciatory remark as if he or she had
committed some grave moral delinquency. Persons require to possess a
title, or some other badge of rank, or of the consideration of people of
rank, to be able to indulge somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like
without detriment to their estimation. To indulge somewhat, I repeat:
for whoever allow themselves much of that indulgence, incur the risk of
something worse than disparaging speeches--they are in peril of a
commission _de lunatico_, and of having their property taken from them
and given to their relations.[13]

There is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion,
peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration
of individuality. The general average of mankind are not only moderate
in intellect, but also moderate in inclinations: they have no tastes or
wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and they
consequently do not understand those who have, and class all such with
the wild and intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down upon.
Now, in addition to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose
that a strong movement has set in towards the improvement of morals,
and it is evident what we have to expect. In these days such a movement
has set in; much has actually been effected in the way of increased
regularity of conduct, and discouragement of excesses; and there is a
philanthropic spirit abroad, for the exercise of which there is no more
inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of our
fellow-creatures. These tendencies of the times cause the public to be
more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of
conduct, and endeavour to make every one conform to the approved
standard. And that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing
strongly. Its ideal of character is to be without any marked character;
to maim by compression, like a Chinese lady's foot, every part of human
nature which stands out prominently, and tends to make the person
markedly dissimilar in outline to commonplace humanity.

As is usually the case with ideals which exclude one-half of what is
desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior
imitation of the other half. Instead of great energies guided by
vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a
conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, which
therefore can be kept in outward conformity to rule without any strength
either of will or of reason. Already energetic characters on any large
scale are becoming merely traditional. There is now scarcely any outlet
for energy in this country except business. The energy expended in that
may still be regarded as considerable. What little is left from that
employment, is expended on some hobby; which may be a useful, even a
philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a thing
of small dimensions. The greatness of England is now all collective:
individually small, we only appear capable of anything great by our
habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious
philanthropists are perfectly contented. But it was men of another
stamp than this that made England what it has been; and men of another
stamp will be needed to prevent its decline.

The despotism of custom is everywhere the standing hindrance to human
advancement, being in unceasing antagonism to that disposition to aim at
something better than customary, which is called, according to
circumstances, the spirit of liberty, or that of progress or
improvement. The spirit of improvement is not always a spirit of
liberty, for it may aim at forcing improvements on an unwilling people;
and the spirit of liberty, in so far as it resists such attempts, may
ally itself locally and temporarily with the opponents of improvement;
but the only unfailing and permanent source of improvement is liberty,
since by it there are as many possible independent centres of
improvement as there are individuals. The progressive principle,
however, in either shape, whether as the love of liberty or of
improvement, is antagonistic to the sway of Custom, involving at least
emancipation from that yoke; and the contest between the two constitutes
the chief interest of the history of mankind. The greater part of the
world has, properly speaking, no history, because the despotism of
Custom is complete. This is the case over the whole East. Custom is
there, in all things, the final appeal; justice and right mean
conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless some tyrant
intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting. And we see the result.
Those nations must once have had originality; they did not start out of
the ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of life;
they made themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most
powerful nations in the world. What are they now? The subjects or
dependants of tribes whose forefathers wandered in the forests when
theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous temples, but over whom
custom exercised only a divided rule with liberty and progress. A
people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain length of time, and
then stop: when does it stop? When it ceases to possess individuality.
If a similar change should befall the nations of Europe, it will not be
in exactly the same shape: the despotism of custom with which these
nations are threatened is not precisely stationariness. It proscribes
singularity, but it does not preclude change, provided all change
together. We have discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; every
one must still dress like other people, but the fashion may change once
or twice a year. We thus take care that when there is change, it shall
be for change's sake, and not from any idea of beauty or convenience;
for the same idea of beauty or convenience would not strike all the
world at the same moment, and be simultaneously thrown aside by all at
another moment. But we are progressive as well as changeable: we
continually make new inventions in mechanical things, and keep them
until they are again superseded by better; we are eager for improvement
in politics, in education, even in morals, though in this last our idea
of improvement chiefly consists in persuading or forcing other people to
be as good as ourselves. It is not progress that we object to; on the
contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most progressive people
who ever lived. It is individuality that we war against: we should think
we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike; forgetting that
the unlikeness of one person to another is generally the first thing
which draws the attention of either to the imperfection of his own type,
and the superiority of another, or the possibility, by combining the
advantages of both, of producing something better than either. We have a
warning example in China--a nation of much talent, and, in some
respects, even wisdom, owing to the rare good fortune of having been
provided at an early period with a particularly good set of customs, the
work, in some measure, of men to whom even the most enlightened European
must accord, under certain limitations, the title of sages and
philosophers. They are remarkable, too, in the excellence of their
apparatus for impressing, as far as possible, the best wisdom they
possess upon every mind in the community, and securing that those who
have appropriated most of it shall occupy the posts of honour and power.
Surely the people who did this have discovered the secret of human
progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of
the movement of the world. On the contrary, they have become
stationary--have remained so for thousands of years; and if they are
ever to be farther improved, it must be by foreigners. They have
succeeded beyond all hope in what English philanthropists are so
industriously working at--in making a people all alike, all governing
their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and these are
the fruits. The modern _régime_ of public opinion is, in an unorganised
form, what the Chinese educational and political systems are in an
organised; and unless individuality shall be able successfully to assert
itself against this yoke, Europe, notwithstanding its noble antecedents
and its professed Christianity, will tend to become another China.

What is it that has hitherto preserved Europe from this lot? What has
made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a
stationary portion of mankind? Not any superior excellence in them,
which, when it exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their
remarkable diversity of character and culture. Individuals, classes,
nations, have been extremely unlike one another: they have struck out a
great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although
at every period those who travelled in different paths have been
intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent
thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road,
their attempts to thwart each other's development have rarely had any
permanent success, and each has in time endured to receive the good
which the others have offered. Europe is, in my judgment, wholly
indebted to this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided
development. But it already begins to possess this benefit in a
considerably less degree. It is decidedly advancing towards the Chinese
ideal of making all people alike. M. de Tocqueville, in his last
important work, remarks how much more the Frenchmen of the present day
resemble one another, than did those even of the last generation. The
same remark might be made of Englishmen in a far greater degree. In a
passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt, he points out two
things as necessary conditions of human development, because necessary
to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and variety of
situations. The second of these two conditions is in this country every
day diminishing. The circumstances which surround different classes and
individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more
assimilated. Formerly, different ranks, different neighbourhoods,
different trades and professions, lived in what might be called
different worlds; at present, to a great degree in the same.
Comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the
same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their
hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights and
liberties, and the same means of asserting them. Great as are the
differences of position which remain, they are nothing to those which
have ceased. And the assimilation is still proceeding. All the political
changes of the age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and
to lower the high. Every extension of education promotes it, because
education brings people under common influences, and gives them access
to the general stock of facts and sentiments. Improvements in the means
of communication promote it, by bringing the inhabitants of distant
places into personal contact, and keeping up a rapid flow of changes of
residence between one place and another. The increase of commerce and
manufactures promotes it, by diffusing more widely the advantages of
easy circumstances, and opening all objects of ambition, even the
highest, to general competition, whereby the desire of rising becomes no
longer the character of a particular class, but of all classes. A more
powerful agency than even all these, in bringing about a general
similarity among mankind, is the complete establishment, in this and
other free countries, of the ascendency of public opinion in the State.
As the various social eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them
to disregard the opinion of the multitude, gradually become levelled; as
the very idea of resisting the will of the public, when it is positively
known that they have a will, disappears more and more from the minds of
practical politicians; there ceases to be any social support for
non-conformity--any substantive power in society, which, itself opposed
to the ascendency of numbers, is interested in taking under its
protection opinions and tendencies at variance with those of the public.

The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences
hostile to Individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand
its ground. It will do so with increasing difficulty, unless the
intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value--to see
that it is good there should be differences, even though not for the
better, even though, as it may appear to them, some should be for the
worse. If the claims of Individuality are ever to be asserted, the time
is now, while much is still wanting to complete the enforced
assimilation. It is only in the earlier stages that any stand can be
successfully made against the encroachment. The demand that all other
people shall resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on. If
resistance waits till life is reduced _nearly_ to one uniform type, all
deviations from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral,
even monstrous and contrary to nature. Mankind speedily become unable to
conceive diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to
see it.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] _The Sphere and Duties of Government_, from the German of Baron
Wilhelm von Humboldt, pp. 11-13.

[12] Sterling's _Essays_.

[13] There is something both contemptible and frightful in the sort of
evidence on which, of late years, any person can be judicially declared
unfit for the management of his affairs; and after his death, his
disposal of his property can be set aside, if there is enough of it to
pay the expenses of litigation--which are charged on the property
itself. All the minute details of his daily life are pried into, and
whatever is found which, seen through the medium of the perceiving and
describing faculties of the lowest of the low, bears an appearance
unlike absolute commonplace, is laid before the jury as evidence of
insanity, and often with success; the jurors being little, if at all,
less vulgar and ignorant than the witnesses; while the judges, with that
extraordinary want of knowledge of human nature and life which
continually astonishes us in English lawyers, often help to mislead
them. These trials speak volumes as to the state of feeling and opinion
among the vulgar with regard to human liberty. So far from setting any
value on individuality--so far from respecting the rights of each
individual to act, in things indifferent, as seems good to his own
judgment and inclinations, judges and juries cannot even conceive that a
person in a state of sanity can desire such freedom. In former days,
when it was proposed to burn atheists, charitable people used to suggest
putting them in a madhouse instead: it would be nothing surprising
nowadays were we to see this done, and the doers applauding themselves,
because, instead of persecuting for religion, they had adopted so humane
and Christian a mode of treating these unfortunates, not without a
silent satisfaction at their having thereby obtained their deserts.




CHAPTER IV.

OF THE LIMITS TO THE AUTHORITY OF SOCIETY OVER THE INDIVIDUAL.


What, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual
over himself? Where does the authority of society begin? How much of
human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?

Each will receive its proper share, if each has that which more
particularly concerns it. To individuality should belong the part of
life in which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to
society, the part which chiefly interests society.

Though society is not founded on a contract, and though no good purpose
is answered by inventing a contract in order to deduce social
obligations from it, every one who receives the protection of society
owes a return for the benefit, and the fact of living in society renders
it indispensable that each should be bound to observe a certain line of
conduct towards the rest. This conduct consists, first, in not injuring
the interests of one another; or rather certain interests which, either
by express legal provision or by tacit understanding, ought to be
considered as rights; and secondly, in each person's bearing his share
(to be fixed on some equitable principle) of the labours and sacrifices
incurred for defending the society or its members from injury and
molestation. These conditions society is justified in enforcing, at all
costs to those who endeavour to withhold fulfilment. Nor is this all
that society may do. The acts of an individual may be hurtful to others,
or wanting in due consideration for their welfare, without going the
length of violating any of their constituted rights. The offender may
then be justly punished by opinion though not by law. As soon as any
part of a person's conduct affects prejudicially the interests of
others, society has jurisdiction over it, and the question whether the
general welfare will or will not be promoted by interfering with it,
becomes open to discussion. But there is no room for entertaining any
such question when a person's conduct affects the interests of no
persons besides himself, or needs not affect them unless they like (all
the persons concerned being of full age, and the ordinary amount of
understanding). In all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal
and social, to do the action and stand the consequences.

It would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine, to suppose that
it is one of selfish indifference, which pretends that human beings have
no business with each other's conduct in life, and that they should not
concern themselves about the well-doing or well-being of one another,
unless their own interest is involved. Instead of any diminution, there
is need of a great increase of disinterested exertion to promote the
good of others. But disinterested benevolence can find other instruments
to persuade people to their good, than whips and scourges, either of the
literal or the metaphorical sort. I am the last person to undervalue the
self-regarding virtues; they are only second in importance, if even
second, to the social. It is equally the business of education to
cultivate both. But even education works by conviction and persuasion as
well as by compulsion, and it is by the former only that, when the
period of education is past, the self-regarding virtues should be
inculcated. Human beings owe to each other help to distinguish the
better from the worse, and encouragement to choose the former and avoid
the latter. They should be for ever stimulating each other to increased
exercise of their higher faculties, and increased direction of their
feelings and aims towards wise instead of foolish, elevating instead of
degrading, objects and contemplations. But neither one person, nor any
number of persons, is warranted in saying to another human creature of
ripe years, that he shall not do with his life for his own benefit what
he chooses to do with it. He is the person most interested in his own
well-being: the interest which any other person, except in cases of
strong personal attachment, can have in it, is trifling, compared with
that which he himself has; the interest which society has in him
individually (except as to his conduct to others) is fractional, and
altogether indirect: while, with respect to his own feelings and
circumstances, the most ordinary man or woman has means of knowledge
immeasurably surpassing those that can be possessed by any one else. The
interference of society to overrule his judgment and purposes in what
only regards himself, must be grounded on general presumptions; which
may be altogether wrong, and even if right, are as likely as not to be
misapplied to individual cases, by persons no better acquainted with the
circumstances of such cases than those are who look at them merely from
without. In this department, therefore, of human affairs, Individuality
has its proper field of action. In the conduct of human beings towards
one another, it is necessary that general rules should for the most part
be observed, in order that people may know what they have to expect; but
in each person's own concerns, his individual spontaneity is entitled to
free exercise. Considerations to aid his judgment, exhortations to
strengthen his will, may be offered to him, even obtruded on him, by
others; but he himself is the final judge. All errors which he is likely
to commit against advice and warning, are far outweighed by the evil of
allowing others to constrain him to what they deem his good.

I do not mean that the feelings with which a person is regarded by
others, ought not to be in any way affected by his self-regarding
qualities or deficiencies. This is neither possible nor desirable. If he
is eminent in any of the qualities which conduce to his own good, he is,
so far, a proper object of admiration. He is so much the nearer to the
ideal perfection of human nature. If he is grossly deficient in those
qualities, a sentiment the opposite of admiration will follow. There is
a degree of folly, and a degree of what may be called (though the
phrase is not unobjectionable) lowness or depravation of taste, which,
though it cannot justify doing harm to the person who manifests it,
renders him necessarily and properly a subject of distaste, or, in
extreme cases, even of contempt: a person could not have the opposite
qualities in due strength without entertaining these feelings. Though
doing no wrong to any one, a person may so act as to compel us to judge
him, and feel to him, as a fool, or as a being of an inferior order: and
since this judgment and feeling are a fact which he would prefer to
avoid, it is doing him a service to warn him of it beforehand, as of any
other disagreeable consequence to which he exposes himself. It would be
well, indeed, if this good office were much more freely rendered than
the common notions of politeness at present permit, and if one person
could honestly point out to another that he thinks him in fault, without
being considered unmannerly or presuming. We have a right, also, in
various ways, to act upon our unfavourable opinion of any one, not to
the oppression of his individuality, but in the exercise of ours. We are
not bound, for example, to seek his society; we have a right to avoid it
(though not to parade the avoidance), for we have a right to choose the
society most acceptable to us. We have a right, and it may be our duty,
to caution others against him, if we think his example or conversation
likely to have a pernicious effect on those with whom he associates. We
may give others a preference over him in optional good offices, except
those which tend to his improvement. In these various modes a person may
suffer very severe penalties at the hands of others, for faults which
directly concern only himself; but he suffers these penalties only in so
far as they are the natural, and, as it were, the spontaneous
consequences of the faults themselves, not because they are purposely
inflicted on him for the sake of punishment. A person who shows
rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit--who cannot live within moderate
means--who cannot restrain himself from hurtful indulgences--who pursues
animal pleasures at the expense of those of feeling and intellect--must
expect to be lowered in the opinion of others, and to have a less share
of their favourable sentiments; but of this he has no right to complain,
unless he has merited their favour by special excellence in his social
relations, and has thus established a title to their good offices, which
is not affected by his demerits towards himself.

What I contend for is, that the inconveniences which are strictly
inseparable from the unfavourable judgment of others, are the only ones
to which a person should ever be subjected for that portion of his
conduct and character which concerns his own good, but which does not
affect the interests of others in their relations with him. Acts
injurious to others require a totally different treatment. Encroachment
on their rights; infliction on them of any loss or damage not justified
by his own rights; falsehood or duplicity in dealing with them; unfair
or ungenerous use of advantages over them; even selfish abstinence from
defending them against injury--these are fit objects of moral
reprobation, and, in grave cases, of moral retribution and punishment.
And not only these acts, but the dispositions which lead to them, are
properly immoral, and fit subjects of disapprobation which may rise to
abhorrence. Cruelty of disposition; malice and ill-nature; that most
anti-social and odious of all passions, envy; dissimulation and
insincerity; irascibility on insufficient cause, and resentment
disproportioned to the provocation; the love of domineering over others;
the desire to engross more than one's share of advantages (the [Greek:
pleonexia] of the Greeks); the pride which derives gratification from
the abasement of others; the egotism which thinks self and its concerns
more important than everything else, and decides all doubtful questions
in its own favour;--these are moral vices, and constitute a bad and
odious moral character: unlike the self-regarding faults previously
mentioned, which are not properly immoralities, and to whatever pitch
they may be carried, do not constitute wickedness. They may be proofs of
any amount of folly, or want of personal dignity and self-respect; but
they are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach
of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care
for himself. What are called duties to ourselves are not socially
obligatory, unless circumstances render them at the same time duties to
others. The term duty to oneself, when it means anything more than
prudence, means self-respect or self-development; and for none of these
is any one accountable to his fellow-creatures, because for none of them
is it for the good of mankind that he be held accountable to them.

The distinction between the loss of consideration which a person may
rightly incur by defect of prudence or of personal dignity, and the
reprobation which is due to him for an offence against the rights of
others, is not a merely nominal distinction. It makes a vast difference
both in our feelings and in our conduct towards him, whether he
displeases us in things in which we think we have a right to control
him, or in things in which we know that we have not. If he displeases
us, we may express our distaste, and we may stand aloof from a person as
well as from a thing that displeases us; but we shall not therefore feel
called on to make his life uncomfortable. We shall reflect that he
already bears, or will bear, the whole penalty of his error; if he
spoils his life by mismanagement, we shall not, for that reason, desire
to spoil it still further: instead of wishing to punish him, we shall
rather endeavour to alleviate his punishment, by showing him how he may
avoid or cure the evils his conduct tends to bring upon him. He may be
to us an object of pity, perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or
resentment; we shall not treat him like an enemy of society: the worst
we shall think ourselves justified in doing is leaving him to himself,
if we do not interfere benevolently by showing interest or concern for
him. It is far otherwise if he has infringed the rules necessary for the
protection of his fellow-creatures, individually or collectively. The
evil consequences of his acts do not then fall on himself, but on
others; and society, as the protector of all its members, must retaliate
on him; must inflict pain on him for the express purpose of punishment,
and must take care that it be sufficiently severe. In the one case, he
is an offender at our bar, and we are called on not only to sit in
judgment on him, but, in one shape or another, to execute our own
sentence: in the other case, it is not our part to inflict any suffering
on him, except what may incidentally follow from our using the same
liberty in the regulation of our own affairs, which we allow to him in
his.

The distinction here pointed out between the part of a person's life
which concerns only himself, and that which concerns others, many
persons will refuse to admit. How (it may be asked) can any part of the
conduct of a member of society be a matter of indifference to the other
members? No person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a
person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself,
without mischief reaching at least to his near connections, and often
far beyond them. If he injures his property, he does harm to those who
directly or indirectly derived support from it, and usually diminishes,
by a greater or less amount, the general resources of the community. If
he deteriorates his bodily or mental faculties, he not only brings evil
upon all who depended on him for any portion of their happiness, but
disqualifies himself for rendering the services which he owes to his
fellow-creatures generally; perhaps becomes a burthen on their affection
or benevolence; and if such conduct were very frequent, hardly any
offence that is committed would detract more from the general sum of
good. Finally, if by his vices or follies a person does no direct harm
to others, he is nevertheless (it may be said) injurious by his example;
and ought to be compelled to control himself, for the sake of those whom
the sight or knowledge of his conduct might corrupt or mislead.

And even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could be
confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to
abandon to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it? If
protection against themselves is confessedly due to children and persons
under age, is not society equally bound to afford it to persons of
mature years who are equally incapable of self-government? If gambling,
or drunkenness, or incontinence, or idleness, or uncleanliness, are as
injurious to happiness, and as great a hindrance to improvement, as many
or most of the acts prohibited by law, why (it may be asked) should not
law, so far as is consistent with practicability and social convenience,
endeavour to repress these also? And as a supplement to the unavoidable
imperfections of law, ought not opinion at least to organise a powerful
police against these vices, and visit rigidly with social penalties
those who are known to practise them? There is no question here (it may
be said) about restricting individuality, or impeding the trial of new
and original experiments in living. The only things it is sought to
prevent are things which have been tried and condemned from the
beginning of the world until now; things which experience has shown not
to be useful or suitable to any person's individuality. There must be
some length of time and amount of experience, after which a moral or
prudential truth may be regarded as established: and it is merely
desired to prevent generation after generation from falling over the
same precipice which has been fatal to their predecessors.

I fully admit that the mischief which a person does to himself, may
seriously affect, both through their sympathies and their interests,
those nearly connected with him, and in a minor degree, society at
large. When, by conduct of this sort, a person is led to violate a
distinct and assignable obligation to any other person or persons, the
case is taken out of the self-regarding class, and becomes amenable to
moral disapprobation in the proper sense of the term. If, for example,
a man, through intemperance or extravagance, becomes unable to pay his
debts, or, having undertaken the moral responsibility of a family,
becomes from the same cause incapable of supporting or educating them,
he is deservedly reprobated, and might be justly punished; but it is for
the breach of duty to his family or creditors, not for the extravagance.
If the resources which ought to have been devoted to them, had been
diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the moral
culpability would have been the same. George Barnwell murdered his uncle
to get money for his mistress, but if he had done it to set himself up
in business, he would equally have been hanged. Again, in the frequent
case of a man who causes grief to his family by addiction to bad habits,
he deserves reproach for his unkindness or ingratitude; but so he may
for cultivating habits not in themselves vicious, if they are painful to
those with whom he passes his life, or who from personal ties are
dependent on him for their comfort. Whoever fails in the consideration
generally due to the interests and feelings of others, not being
compelled by some more imperative duty, or justified by allowable
self-preference, is a subject of moral disapprobation for that failure,
but not for the cause of it, nor for the errors, merely personal to
himself, which may have remotely led to it. In like manner, when a
person disables himself, by conduct purely self-regarding, from the
performance of some definite duty incumbent on him to the public, he is
guilty of a social offence. No person ought to be punished simply for
being drunk; but a soldier or a policeman should be punished for being
drunk on duty. Whenever, in short, there is a definite damage, or a
definite risk of damage, either to an individual or to the public, the
case is taken out of the province of liberty, and placed in that of
morality or law.

But with regard to the merely contingent, or, as it may be called,
constructive injury which a person causes to society, by conduct which
neither violates any specific duty to the public, nor occasions
perceptible hurt to any assignable individual except himself; the
inconvenience is one which society can afford to bear, for the sake of
the greater good of human freedom. If grown persons are to be punished
for not taking proper care of themselves, I would rather it were for
their own sake, than under pretence of preventing them from impairing
their capacity of rendering to society benefits which society does not
pretend it has a right to exact. But I cannot consent to argue the
point as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to
its ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do
something irrational, and then punishing them, legally or morally, for
it. Society has had absolute power over them during all the early
portion of their existence: it has had the whole period of childhood and
nonage in which to try whether it could make them capable of rational
conduct in life. The existing generation is master both of the training
and the entire circumstances of the generation to come; it cannot indeed
make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself so lamentably
deficient in goodness and wisdom; and its best efforts are not always,
in individual cases, its most successful ones; but it is perfectly well
able to make the rising generation, as a whole, as good as, and a little
better than, itself. If society lets any considerable number of its
members grow up mere children, incapable of being acted on by rational
consideration of distant motives, society has itself to blame for the
consequences. Armed not only with all the powers of education, but with
the ascendency which the authority of a received opinion always
exercises over the minds who are least fitted to judge for themselves;
and aided by the _natural_ penalties which cannot be prevented from
falling on those who incur the distaste or the contempt of those who
know them; let not society pretend that it needs, besides all this, the
power to issue commands and enforce obedience in the personal concerns
of individuals, in which, on all principles of justice and policy, the
decision ought to rest with those who are to abide the consequences. Nor
is there anything which tends more to discredit and frustrate the better
means of influencing conduct, than a resort to the worse. If there be
among those whom it is attempted to coerce into prudence or temperance,
any of the material of which vigorous and independent characters are
made, they will infallibly rebel against the yoke. No such person will
ever feel that others have a right to control him in his concerns, such
as they have to prevent him from injuring them in theirs; and it easily
comes to be considered a mark of spirit and courage to fly in the face
of such usurped authority, and do with ostentation the exact opposite of
what it enjoins; as in the fashion of grossness which succeeded, in the
time of Charles II., to the fanatical moral intolerance of the Puritans.
With respect to what is said of the necessity of protecting society
from the bad example set to others by the vicious or the
self-indulgent; it is true that bad example may have a pernicious
effect, especially the example of doing wrong to others with impunity to
the wrong-doer. But we are now speaking of conduct which, while it does
no wrong to others, is supposed to do great harm to the agent himself:
and I do not see how those who believe this, can think otherwise than
that the example, on the whole, must be more salutary than hurtful,
since, if it displays the misconduct, it displays also the painful or
degrading consequences which, if the conduct is justly censured, must be
supposed to be in all or most cases attendant on it.

But the strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the
public with purely personal conduct, is that when it does interfere, the
odds are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place. On
questions of social morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the
public, that is, of an overruling majority, though often wrong, is
likely to be still oftener right; because on such questions they are
only required to judge of their own interests; of the manner in which
some mode of conduct, if allowed to be practised, would affect
themselves. But the opinion of a similar majority, imposed as a law on
the minority, on questions of self-regarding conduct, is quite as
likely to be wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means, at
the best, some people's opinion of what is good or bad for other people;
while very often it does not even mean that; the public, with the most
perfect indifference, passing over the pleasure or convenience of those
whose conduct they censure, and considering only their own preference.
There are many who consider as an injury to themselves any conduct which
they have a distaste for, and resent it as an outrage to their feelings;
as a religious bigot, when charged with disregarding the religious
feelings of others, has been known to retort that they disregard his
feelings, by persisting in their abominable worship or creed. But there
is no parity between the feeling of a person for his own opinion, and
the feeling of another who is offended at his holding it; no more than
between the desire of a thief to take a purse, and the desire of the
right owner to keep it. And a person's taste is as much his own peculiar
concern as his opinion or his purse. It is easy for any one to imagine
an ideal public, which leaves the freedom and choice of individuals in
all uncertain matters undisturbed, and only requires them to abstain
from modes of conduct which universal experience has condemned. But
where has there been seen a public which set any such limit to its
censorship? or when does the public trouble itself about universal
experience? In its interferences with personal conduct it is seldom
thinking of anything but the enormity of acting or feeling differently
from itself; and this standard of judgment, thinly disguised, is held up
to mankind as the dictate of religion and philosophy, by nine-tenths of
all moralists and speculative writers. These teach that things are right
because they are right; because we feel them to be so. They tell us to
search in our own minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on
ourselves and on all others. What can the poor public do but apply these
instructions, and make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if
they are tolerably unanimous in them, obligatory on all the world?

The evil here pointed out is not one which exists only in theory; and it
may perhaps be expected that I should specify the instances in which the
public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences
with the character of moral laws. I am not writing an essay on the
aberrations of existing moral feeling. That is too weighty a subject to
be discussed parenthetically, and by way of illustration. Yet examples
are necessary, to show that the principle I maintain is of serious and
practical moment, and that I am not endeavouring to erect a barrier
against imaginary evils. And it is not difficult to show, by abundant
instances, that to extend the bounds of what may be called moral police,
until it encroaches on the most unquestionably legitimate liberty of the
individual, is one of the most universal of all human propensities.

As a first instance, consider the antipathies which men cherish on no
better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different
from theirs, do not practise their religious observances, especially
their religious abstinences. To cite a rather trivial example, nothing
in the creed or practice of Christians does more to envenom the hatred
of Mahomedans against them, than the fact of their eating pork. There
are few acts which Christians and Europeans regard with more unaffected
disgust, than Mussulmans regard this particular mode of satisfying
hunger. It is, in the first place, an offence against their religion;
but this circumstance by no means explains either the degree or the kind
of their repugnance; for wine also is forbidden by their religion, and
to partake of it is by all Mussulmans accounted wrong, but not
disgusting. Their aversion to the flesh of the "unclean beast" is, on
the contrary, of that peculiar character, resembling an instinctive
antipathy, which the idea of uncleanness, when once it thoroughly sinks
into the feelings, seems always to excite even in those whose personal
habits are anything but scrupulously cleanly, and of which the sentiment
of religious impurity, so intense in the Hindoos, is a remarkable
example. Suppose now that in a people, of whom the majority were
Mussulmans, that majority should insist upon not permitting pork to be
eaten within the limits of the country. This would be nothing new in
Mahomedan countries.[14] Would it be a legitimate exercise of the moral
authority of public opinion? and if not, why not? The practice is really
revolting to such a public. They also sincerely think that it is
forbidden and abhorred by the Deity. Neither could the prohibition be
censured as religious persecution. It might be religious in its origin,
but it would not be persecution for religion, since nobody's religion
makes it a duty to eat pork. The only tenable ground of condemnation
would be, that with the personal tastes and self-regarding concerns of
individuals the public has no business to interfere.

To come somewhat nearer home: the majority of Spaniards consider it a
gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the Supreme Being, to
worship him in any other manner than the Roman Catholic; and no other
public worship is lawful on Spanish soil. The people of all Southern
Europe look upon a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste,
indecent, gross, disgusting. What do Protestants think of these
perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against
non-Catholics? Yet, if mankind are justified in interfering with each
other's liberty in things which do not concern the interests of others,
on what principle is it possible consistently to exclude these cases? or
who can blame people for desiring to suppress what they regard as a
scandal in the sight of God and man? No stronger case can be shown for
prohibiting anything which is regarded as a personal immorality, than
is made out for suppressing these practices in the eyes of those who
regard them as impieties; and unless we are willing to adopt the logic
of persecutors, and to say that we may persecute others because we are
right, and that they must not persecute us because they are wrong, we
must beware of admitting a principle of which we should resent as a
gross injustice the application to ourselves.

The preceding instances may be objected to, although unreasonably, as
drawn from contingencies impossible among us: opinion, in this country,
not being likely to enforce abstinence from meats, or to interfere with
people for worshipping, and for either marrying or not marrying,
according to their creed or inclination. The next example, however,
shall be taken from an interference with liberty which we have by no
means passed all danger of. Wherever the Puritans have been sufficiently
powerful, as in New England, and in Great Britain at the time of the
Commonwealth, they have endeavoured, with considerable success, to put
down all public, and nearly all private, amusements: especially music,
dancing, public games, or other assemblages for purposes of diversion,
and the theatre. There are still in this country large bodies of
persons by whose notions of morality and religion these recreations are
condemned; and those persons belonging chiefly to the middle class, who
are the ascendant power in the present social and political condition of
the kingdom, it is by no means impossible that persons of these
sentiments may at some time or other command a majority in Parliament.
How will the remaining portion of the community like to have the
amusements that shall be permitted to them regulated by the religious
and moral sentiments of the stricter Calvinists and Methodists? Would
they not, with considerable peremptoriness, desire these intrusively
pious members of society to mind their own business? This is precisely
what should be said to every government and every public, who have the
pretension that no person shall enjoy any pleasure which they think
wrong. But if the principle of the pretension be admitted, no one can
reasonably object to its being acted on in the sense of the majority, or
other preponderating power in the country; and all persons must be ready
to conform to the idea of a Christian commonwealth, as understood by the
early settlers in New England, if a religious profession similar to
theirs should ever succeed in regaining its lost ground, as religions
supposed to be declining have so often been known to do.

To imagine another contingency, perhaps more likely to be realised than
the one last mentioned. There is confessedly a strong tendency in the
modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, accompanied
or not by popular political institutions. It is affirmed that in the
country where this tendency is most completely realised--where both
society and the government are most democratic--the United States--the
feeling of the majority, to whom any appearance of a more showy or
costly style of living than they can hope to rival is disagreeable,
operates as a tolerably effectual sumptuary law, and that in many parts
of the Union it is really difficult for a person possessing a very large
income, to find any mode of spending it, which will not incur popular
disapprobation. Though such statements as these are doubtless much
exaggerated as a representation of existing facts, the state of things
they describe is not only a conceivable and possible, but a probable
result of democratic feeling, combined with the notion that the public
has a right to a veto on the manner in which individuals shall spend
their incomes. We have only further to suppose a considerable diffusion
of Socialist opinions, and it may become infamous in the eyes of the
majority to possess more property than some very small amount, or any
income not earned by manual labour. Opinions similar in principle to
these, already prevail widely among the artisan class, and weigh
oppressively on those who are amenable to the opinion chiefly of that
class, namely, its own members. It is known that the bad workmen who
form the majority of the operatives in many branches of industry, are
decidedly of opinion that bad workmen ought to receive the same wages as
good, and that no one ought to be allowed, through piecework or
otherwise, to earn by superior skill or industry more than others can
without it. And they employ a moral police, which occasionally becomes a
physical one, to deter skilful workmen from receiving, and employers
from giving, a larger remuneration for a more useful service. If the
public have any jurisdiction over private concerns, I cannot see that
these people are in fault, or that any individual's particular public
can be blamed for asserting the same authority over his individual
conduct, which the general public asserts over people in general.

But, without dwelling upon supposititious cases, there are, in our own
day, gross usurpations upon the liberty of private life actually
practised, and still greater ones threatened with some expectation of
success, and opinions proposed which assert an unlimited right in the
public not only to prohibit by law everything which it thinks wrong, but
in order to get at what it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of
things which it admits to be innocent.

Under the name of preventing intemperance, the people of one English
colony, and of nearly half the United States, have been interdicted by
law from making any use whatever of fermented drinks, except for medical
purposes: for prohibition of their sale is in fact, as it is intended to
be, prohibition of their use. And though the impracticability of
executing the law has caused its repeal in several of the States which
had adopted it, including the one from which it derives its name, an
attempt has notwithstanding been commenced, and is prosecuted with
considerable zeal by many of the professed philanthropists, to agitate
for a similar law in this country. The association, or "Alliance" as it
terms itself, which has been formed for this purpose, has acquired some
notoriety through the publicity given to a correspondence between its
Secretary and one of the very few English public men who hold that a
politician's opinions ought to be founded on principles. Lord Stanley's
share in this correspondence is calculated to strengthen the hopes
already built on him, by those who know how rare such qualities as are
manifested in some of his public appearances, unhappily are among those
who figure in political life. The organ of the Alliance, who would
"deeply deplore the recognition of any principle which could be wrested
to justify bigotry and persecution," undertakes to point out the "broad
and impassable barrier" which divides such principles from those of the
association. "All matters relating to thought, opinion, conscience,
appear to me," he says, "to be without the sphere of legislation; all
pertaining to social act, habit, relation, subject only to a
discretionary power vested in the State itself, and not in the
individual, to be within it." No mention is made of a third class,
different from either of these, viz. acts and habits which are not
social, but individual; although it is to this class, surely, that the
act of drinking fermented liquors belongs. Selling fermented liquors,
however, is trading, and trading is a social act. But the infringement
complained of is not on the liberty of the seller, but on that of the
buyer and consumer; since the State might just as well forbid him to
drink wine, as purposely make it impossible for him to obtain it. The
Secretary, however, says, "I claim, as a citizen, a right to legislate
whenever my social rights are invaded by the social act of another." And
now for the definition of these "social rights." "If anything invades my
social rights, certainly the traffic in strong drink does. It destroys
my primary right of security, by constantly creating and stimulating
social disorder. It invades my right of equality, by deriving a profit
from the creation of a misery, I am taxed to support. It impedes my
right to free moral and intellectual development, by surrounding my path
with dangers, and by weakening and demoralising society, from which I
have a right to claim mutual aid and intercourse." A theory of "social
rights," the like of which probably never before found its way into
distinct language--being nothing short of this--that it is the absolute
social right of every individual, that every other individual shall act
in every respect exactly as he ought; that whosoever fails thereof in
the smallest particular, violates my social right, and entitles me to
demand from the legislature the removal of the grievance. So monstrous a
principle is far more dangerous than any single interference with
liberty; there is no violation of liberty which it would not justify;
it acknowledges no right to any freedom whatever, except perhaps to that
of holding opinions in secret, without ever disclosing them: for the
moment an opinion which I consider noxious, passes any one's lips, it
invades all the "social rights" attributed to me by the Alliance. The
doctrine ascribes to all mankind a vested interest in each other's
moral, intellectual, and even physical perfection, to be defined by each
claimant according to his own standard.

Another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful
liberty of the individual, not simply threatened, but long since carried
into triumphant effect, is Sabbatarian legislation. Without doubt,
abstinence on one day in the week, so far as the exigencies of life
permit, from the usual daily occupation, though in no respect
religiously binding on any except Jews, is a highly beneficial custom.
And inasmuch as this custom cannot be observed without a general consent
to that effect among the industrious classes, therefore, in so far as
some persons by working may impose the same necessity on others, it may
be allowable and right that the law should guarantee to each, the
observance by others of the custom, by suspending the greater operations
of industry on a particular day. But this justification, grounded on the
direct interest which others have in each individual's observance of
the practice, does not apply to the self-chosen occupations in which a
person may think fit to employ his leisure; nor does it hold good, in
the smallest degree, for legal restrictions on amusements. It is true
that the amusement of some is the day's work of others; but the
pleasure, not to say the useful recreation, of many, is worth the labour
of a few, provided the occupation is freely chosen, and can be freely
resigned. The operatives are perfectly right in thinking that if all
worked on Sunday, seven days' work would have to be given for six days'
wages: but so long as the great mass of employments are suspended, the
small number who for the enjoyment of others must still work, obtain a
proportional increase of earnings; and they are not obliged to follow
those occupations, if they prefer leisure to emolument. If a further
remedy is sought, it might be found in the establishment by custom of a
holiday on some other day of the week for those particular classes of
persons. The only ground, therefore, on which restrictions on Sunday
amusements can be defended, must be that they are religiously wrong; a
motive of legislation which never can be too earnestly protested
against. "Deorum injuriæ Diis curæ." It remains to be proved that
society or any of its officers holds a commission from on high to
avenge any supposed offence to Omnipotence, which is not also a wrong to
our fellow-creatures. The notion that it is one man's duty that another
should be religious, was the foundation of all the religious
persecutions ever perpetrated, and if admitted, would fully justify
them. Though the feeling which breaks out in the repeated attempts to
stop railway travelling on Sunday, in the resistance to the opening of
Museums, and the like, has not the cruelty of the old persecutors, the
state of mind indicated by it is fundamentally the same. It is a
determination not to tolerate others in doing what is permitted by their
religion, because it is not permitted by the persecutor's religion. It
is a belief that God not only abominates the act of the misbeliever, but
will not hold us guiltless if we leave him unmolested.

I cannot refrain from adding to these examples of the little account
commonly made of human liberty, the language of downright persecution
which breaks out from the press of this country, whenever it feels
called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism. Much might
be said on the unexpected and instructive fact, that an alleged new
revelation, and a religion founded on it, the product of palpable
imposture, not even supported by the _prestige_ of extraordinary
qualities in its founder, is believed by hundreds of thousands, and has
been made the foundation of a society, in the age of newspapers,
railways, and the electric telegraph. What here concerns us is, that
this religion, like other and better religions, has its martyrs; that
its prophet and founder was, for his teaching, put to death by a mob;
that others of its adherents lost their lives by the same lawless
violence; that they were forcibly expelled, in a body, from the country
in which they first grew up; while, now that they have been chased into
a solitary recess in the midst of a desert, many in this country openly
declare that it would be right (only that it is not convenient) to send
an expedition against them, and compel them by force to conform to the
opinions of other people. The article of the Mormonite doctrine which is
the chief provocative to the antipathy which thus breaks through the
ordinary restraints of religious tolerance, is its sanction of polygamy;
which, though permitted to Mahomedans, and Hindoos, and Chinese, seems
to excite unquenchable animosity when practised by persons who speak
English, and profess to be a kind of Christians. No one has a deeper
disapprobation than I have of this Mormon institution; both for other
reasons, and because, far from being in any way countenanced by the
principle of liberty, it is a direct infraction of that principle, being
a mere riveting of the chains of one half of the community, and an
emancipation of the other from reciprocity of obligation towards them.
Still, it must be remembered that this relation is as much voluntary on
the part of the women concerned in it, and who may be deemed the
sufferers by it, as is the case with any other form of the marriage
institution; and however surprising this fact may appear, it has its
explanation in the common ideas and customs of the world, which teaching
women to think marriage the one thing needful, make it intelligible that
many a woman should prefer being one of several wives, to not being a
wife at all. Other countries are not asked to recognise such unions, or
release any portion of their inhabitants from their own laws on the
score of Mormonite opinions. But when the dissentients have conceded to
the hostile sentiments of others, far more than could justly be
demanded; when they have left the countries to which their doctrines
were unacceptable, and established themselves in a remote corner of the
earth, which they have been the first to render habitable to human
beings; it is difficult to see on what principles but those of tyranny
they can be prevented from living there under what laws they please,
provided they commit no aggression on other nations, and allow perfect
freedom of departure to those who are dissatisfied with their ways. A
recent writer, in some respects of considerable merit, proposes (to use
his own words), not a crusade, but a _civilizade_, against this
polygamous community, to put an end to what seems to him a retrograde
step in civilisation. It also appears so to me, but I am not aware that
any community has a right to force another to be civilised. So long as
the sufferers by the bad law do not invoke assistance from other
communities, I cannot admit that persons entirely unconnected with them
ought to step in and require that a condition of things with which all
who are directly interested appear to be satisfied, should be put an end
to because it is a scandal to persons some thousands of miles distant,
who have no part or concern in it. Let them send missionaries, if they
please, to preach against it; and let them, by any fair means (of which
silencing the teachers is not one), oppose the progress of similar
doctrines among their own people. If civilisation has got the better of
barbarism when barbarism had the world to itself, it is too much to
profess to be afraid lest barbarism, after having been fairly got under,
should revive and conquer civilisation. A civilisation that can thus
succumb to its vanquished enemy, must first have become so degenerate,
that neither its appointed priests and teachers, nor anybody else, has
the capacity, or will take the trouble, to stand up for it. If this be
so, the sooner such a civilisation receives notice to quit, the better.
It can only go on from bad to worse, until destroyed and regenerated
(like the Western Empire) by energetic barbarians.

FOOTNOTE:

[14] The case of the Bombay Parsees is a curious instance in point. When
this industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the Persian
fire-worshippers, flying from their native country before the Caliphs,
arrived in Western India, they were admitted to toleration by the Hindoo
sovereigns, on condition of not eating beef. When those regions
afterwards fell under the dominion of Mahomedan conquerors, the Parsees
obtained from them a continuance of indulgence, on condition of
refraining from pork. What was at first obedience to authority became a
second nature, and the Parsees to this day abstain both from beef and
pork. Though not required by their religion, the double abstinence has
had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and custom, in the East,
is a religion.




CHAPTER V.

APPLICATIONS.


The principles asserted in these pages must be more generally admitted
as the basis for discussion of details, before a consistent application
of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be
attempted with any prospect of advantage. The few observations I propose
to make on questions of detail, are designed to illustrate the
principles, rather than to follow them out to their consequences. I
offer, not so much applications, as specimens of application; which may
serve to bring into greater clearness the meaning and limits of the two
maxims which together form the entire doctrine of this Essay, and to
assist the judgment in holding the balance between them, in the cases
where it appears doubtful which of them is applicable to the case.

The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society
for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person
but himself. Advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other
people if thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only
measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or
disapprobation of his conduct. Secondly, that for such actions as are
prejudicial to the interests of others, the individual is accountable
and may be subjected either to social or to legal punishments, if
society is of opinion that the one or the other is requisite for its
protection.

In the first place, it must by no means be supposed, because damage, or
probability of damage, to the interests of others, can alone justify the
interference of society, that therefore it always does justify such
interference. In many cases, an individual, in pursuing a legitimate
object, necessarily and therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to
others, or intercepts a good which they had a reasonable hope of
obtaining. Such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise
from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while those
institutions last; and some would be unavoidable under any institutions.
Whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession, or in a competitive
examination; whoever is preferred to another in any contest for an
object which both desire, reaps benefit from the loss of others, from
their wasted exertion and their disappointment. But it is, by common
admission, better for the general interest of mankind, that persons
should pursue their objects undeterred by this sort of consequences. In
other words, society admits no rights, either legal or moral, in the
disappointed competitors, to immunity from this kind of suffering; and
feels called on to interfere, only when means of success have been
employed which it is contrary to the general interest to permit--namely,
fraud or treachery, and force.

Again, trade is a social act. Whoever undertakes to sell any description
of goods to the public, does what affects the interest of other persons,
and of society in general; and thus his conduct, in principle, comes
within the jurisdiction of society: accordingly, it was once held to be
the duty of governments, in all cases which were considered of
importance, to fix prices, and regulate the processes of manufacture.
But it is now recognised, though not till after a long struggle, that
both the cheapness and the good quality of commodities are most
effectually provided for by leaving the producers and sellers perfectly
free, under the sole check of equal freedom to the buyers for supplying
themselves elsewhere. This is the so-called doctrine of Free Trade,
which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid with, the
principle of individual liberty asserted in this Essay. Restrictions on
trade, or on production for purposes of trade, are indeed restraints;
and all restraint, _quâ_ restraint, is an evil: but the restraints in
question affect only that part of conduct which society is competent to
restrain, and are wrong solely because they do not really produce the
results which it is desired to produce by them. As the principle of
individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine of Free Trade, so
neither is it in most of the questions which arise respecting the limits
of that doctrine: as for example, what amount of public control is
admissible for the prevention of fraud by adulteration; how far sanitary
precautions, or arrangements to protect work-people employed in
dangerous occupations, should be enforced on employers. Such questions
involve considerations of liberty, only in so far as leaving people to
themselves is always better, _cæteris paribus_, than controlling them:
but that they may be legitimately controlled for these ends, is in
principle undeniable. On the other hand, there are questions relating to
interference with trade, which are essentially questions of liberty;
such as the Maine Law, already touched upon; the prohibition of the
importation of opium into China; the restriction of the sale of poisons;
all cases, in short, where the object of the interference is to make it
impossible or difficult to obtain a particular commodity. These
interferences are objectionable, not as infringements on the liberty of
the producer or seller, but on that of the buyer.

One of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, opens a new
question; the proper limits of what may be called the functions of
police; how far liberty may legitimately be invaded for the prevention
of crime, or of accident. It is one of the undisputed functions of
government to take precautions against crime before it has been
committed, as well as to detect and punish it afterwards. The preventive
function of government, however, is far more liable to be abused, to the
prejudice of liberty, than the punitory function; for there is hardly
any part of the legitimate freedom of action of a human being which
would not admit of being represented, and fairly too, as increasing the
facilities for some form or other of delinquency. Nevertheless, if a
public authority, or even a private person, sees any one evidently
preparing to commit a crime, they are not bound to look on inactive
until the crime is committed, but may interfere to prevent it. If
poisons were never bought or used for any purpose except the commission
of murder, it would be right to prohibit their manufacture and sale.
They may, however, be wanted not only for innocent but for useful
purposes, and restrictions cannot be imposed in the one case without
operating in the other. Again, it is a proper office of public authority
to guard against accidents. If either a public officer or any one else
saw a person attempting to cross a bridge which had been ascertained to
be unsafe, and there were no time to warn him of his danger, they might
seize him and turn him back, without any real infringement of his
liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one desires, and he does not
desire to fall into the river. Nevertheless, when there is not a
certainty, but only a danger of mischief, no one but the person himself
can judge of the sufficiency of the motive which may prompt him to incur
the risk: in this case, therefore (unless he is a child, or delirious,
or in some state of excitement or absorption incompatible with the full
use of the reflecting faculty), he ought, I conceive, to be only warned
of the danger; not forcibly prevented from exposing himself to it.
Similar considerations, applied to such a question as the sale of
poisons, may enable us to decide which among the possible modes of
regulation are or are not contrary to principle. Such a precaution, for
example, as that of labelling the drug with some word expressive of its
dangerous character, may be enforced without violation of liberty: the
buyer cannot wish not to know that the thing he possesses has poisonous
qualities. But to require in all cases the certificate of a medical
practitioner, would make it sometimes impossible, always expensive, to
obtain the article for legitimate uses. The only mode apparent to me, in
which difficulties may be thrown in the way of crime committed through
this means, without any infringement, worth taking into account, upon
the liberty of those who desire the poisonous substance for other
purposes, consists in providing what, in the apt language of Bentham, is
called "preappointed evidence." This provision is familiar to every one
in the case of contracts. It is usual and right that the law, when a
contract is entered into, should require as the condition of its
enforcing performance, that certain formalities should be observed, such
as signatures, attestation of witnesses, and the like, in order that in
case of subsequent dispute, there may be evidence to prove that the
contract was really entered into, and that there was nothing in the
circumstances to render it legally invalid: the effect being, to throw
great obstacles in the way of fictitious contracts, or contracts made in
circumstances which, if known, would destroy their validity. Precautions
of a similar nature might be enforced in the sale of articles adapted to
be instruments of crime. The seller, for example, might be required to
enter into a register the exact time of the transaction, the name and
address of the buyer, the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask the
purpose for which it was wanted, and record the answer he received. When
there was no medical prescription, the presence of some third person
might be required, to bring home the fact to the purchaser, in case
there should afterwards be reason to believe that the article had been
applied to criminal purposes. Such regulations would in general be no
material impediment to obtaining the article, but a very considerable
one to making an improper use of it without detection.

The right inherent in society, to ward off crimes against itself by
antecedent precautions, suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim,
that purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with
in the way of prevention or punishment. Drunkenness, for example, in
ordinary cases, is not a fit subject for legislative interference; but I
should deem it perfectly legitimate that a person, who had once been
convicted of any act of violence to others under the influence of drink,
should be placed under a special legal restriction, personal to himself;
that if he were afterwards found drunk, he should be liable to a
penalty, and that if when in that state he committed another offence,
the punishment to which he would be liable for that other offence should
be increased in severity. The making himself drunk, in a person whom
drunkenness excites to do harm to others, is a crime against others. So,
again, idleness, except in a person receiving support from the public,
or except when it constitutes a breach of contract, cannot without
tyranny be made a subject of legal punishment; but if either from
idleness or from any other avoidable cause, a man fails to perform his
legal duties to others, as for instance to support his children, it is
no tyranny to force him to fulfil that obligation, by compulsory labour,
if no other means are available.

Again, there are many acts which, being directly injurious only to the
agents themselves, ought not to be legally interdicted, but which, if
done publicly, are a violation of good manners and coming thus within
the category of offences against others may rightfully be prohibited. Of
this kind are offences against decency; on which it is unnecessary to
dwell, the rather as they are only connected indirectly with our
subject, the objection to publicity being equally strong in the case of
many actions not in themselves condemnable, nor supposed to be so.

There is another question to which an answer must be found, consistent
with the principles which have been laid down. In cases of personal
conduct supposed to be blamable, but which respect for liberty precludes
society from preventing or punishing, because the evil directly
resulting falls wholly on the agent; what the agent is free to do, ought
other persons to be equally free to counsel or instigate? This question
is not free from difficulty. The case of a person who solicits another
to do an act, is not strictly a case of self-regarding conduct. To give
advice or offer inducements to any one, is a social act, and may
therefore, like actions in general which affect others, be supposed
amenable to social control. But a little reflection corrects the first
impression, by showing that if the case is not strictly within the
definition of individual liberty, yet the reasons on which the
principle of individual liberty is grounded, are applicable to it. If
people must be allowed, in whatever concerns only themselves, to act as
seems best to themselves at their own peril, they must equally be free
to consult with one another about what is fit to be so done; to exchange
opinions, and give and receive suggestions. Whatever it is permitted to
do, it must be permitted to advise to do. The question is doubtful, only
when the instigator derives a personal benefit from his advice; when he
makes it his occupation, for subsistence or pecuniary gain, to promote
what society and the state consider to be an evil. Then, indeed, a new
element of complication is introduced; namely, the existence of classes
of persons with an interest opposed to what is considered as the public
weal, and whose mode of living is grounded on the counteraction of it.
Ought this to be interfered with, or not? Fornication, for example, must
be tolerated, and so must gambling; but should a person be free to be a
pimp, or to keep a gambling-house? The case is one of those which lie on
the exact boundary line between two principles, and it is not at once
apparent to which of the two it properly belongs. There are arguments on
both sides. On the side of toleration it may be said, that the fact of
following anything as an occupation, and living or profiting by the
practice of it, cannot make that criminal which would otherwise be
admissible; that the act should either be consistently permitted or
consistently prohibited; that if the principles which we have hitherto
defended are true, society has no business, _as_ society, to decide
anything to be wrong which concerns only the individual; that it cannot
go beyond dissuasion, and that one person should be as free to persuade,
as another to dissuade. In opposition to this it may be contended, that
although the public, or the State, are not warranted in authoritatively
deciding, for purposes of repression or punishment, that such or such
conduct affecting only the interests of the individual is good or bad,
they are fully justified in assuming, if they regard it as bad, that its
being so or not is at least a disputable question: That, this being
supposed, they cannot be acting wrongly in endeavouring to exclude the
influence of solicitations which are not disinterested, of instigators
who cannot possibly be impartial--who have a direct personal interest on
one side, and that side the one which the State believes to be wrong,
and who confessedly promote it for personal objects only. There can
surely, it may be urged, be nothing lost, no sacrifice of good, by so
ordering matters that persons shall make their election, either wisely
or foolishly, on their own prompting, as free as possible from the arts
of persons who stimulate their inclinations for interested purposes of
their own. Thus (it may be said) though the statutes respecting unlawful
games are utterly indefensible--though all persons should be free to
gamble in their own or each other's houses, or in any place of meeting
established by their own subscriptions, and open only to the members and
their visitors--yet public gambling-houses should not be permitted. It
is true that the prohibition is never effectual, and that whatever
amount of tyrannical power is given to the police, gambling-houses can
always be maintained under other pretences; but they may be compelled to
conduct their operations with a certain degree of secrecy and mystery,
so that nobody knows anything about them but those who seek them; and
more than this, society ought not to aim at. There is considerable force
in these arguments; I will not venture to decide whether they are
sufficient to justify the moral anomaly of punishing the accessary, when
the principal is (and must be) allowed to go free; or fining or
imprisoning the procurer, but not the fornicator, the gambling-house
keeper, but not the gambler. Still less ought the common operations of
buying and selling to be interfered with on analogous grounds. Almost
every article which is bought and sold may be used in excess, and the
sellers have a pecuniary interest in encouraging that excess; but no
argument can be founded on this, in favour, for instance, of the Maine
Law; because the class of dealers in strong drinks, though interested in
their abuse, are indispensably required for the sake of their legitimate
use. The interest, however, of these dealers in promoting intemperance
is a real evil, and justifies the State in imposing restrictions and
requiring guarantees, which but for that justification would be
infringements of legitimate liberty.

A further question is, whether the State, while it permits, should
nevertheless indirectly discourage conduct which it deems contrary to
the best interests of the agent; whether, for example, it should take
measures to render the means of drunkenness more costly, or add to the
difficulty of procuring them, by limiting the number of the places of
sale. On this as on most other practical questions, many distinctions
require to be made. To tax stimulants for the sole purpose of making
them more difficult to be obtained, is a measure differing only in
degree from their entire prohibition; and would be justifiable only if
that were justifiable. Every increase of cost is a prohibition, to those
whose means do not come up to the augmented price; and to those who do,
it is a penalty laid on them for gratifying a particular taste. Their
choice of pleasures, and their mode of expending their income, after
satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the State and to
individuals, are their own concern, and must rest with their own
judgment. These considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the
selection of stimulants as special subjects of taxation for purposes of
revenue. But it must be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is
absolutely inevitable; that in most countries it is necessary that a
considerable part of that taxation should be indirect; that the State,
therefore, cannot help imposing penalties, which to some persons may be
prohibitory, on the use of some articles of consumption. It is hence the
duty of the State to consider, in the imposition of taxes, what
commodities the consumers can best spare; and _à fortiori_, to select in
preference those of which it deems the use, beyond a very moderate
quantity, to be positively injurious. Taxation, therefore, of
stimulants, up to the point which produces the largest amount of revenue
(supposing that the State needs all the revenue which it yields) is not
only admissible, but to be approved of.

The question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less
exclusive privilege, must be answered differently, according to the
purposes to which the restriction is intended to be subservient. All
places of public resort require the restraint of a police, and places of
this kind peculiarly, because offences against society are especially
apt to originate there. It is, therefore, fit to confine the power of
selling these commodities (at least for consumption on the spot) to
persons of known or vouched-for respectability of conduct; to make such
regulations respecting hours of opening and closing as may be requisite
for public surveillance, and to withdraw the licence if breaches of the
peace repeatedly take place through the connivance or incapacity of the
keeper of the house, or if it becomes a rendezvous for concocting and
preparing offences against the law. Any further restriction I do not
conceive to be, in principle, justifiable. The limitation in number, for
instance, of beer and spirit-houses, for the express purpose of
rendering them more difficult of access, and diminishing the occasions
of temptation, not only exposes all to an inconvenience because there
are some by whom the facility would be abused, but is suited only to a
state of society in which the labouring classes are avowedly treated as
children or savages, and placed under an education of restraint, to fit
them for future admission to the privileges of freedom. This is not the
principle on which the labouring classes are professedly governed in any
free country; and no person who sets due value on freedom will give his
adhesion to their being so governed, unless after all efforts have been
exhausted to educate them for freedom and govern them as freemen, and it
has been definitively proved that they can only be governed as children.
The bare statement of the alternative shows the absurdity of supposing
that such efforts have been made in any case which needs be considered
here. It is only because the institutions of this country are a mass of
inconsistencies, that things find admittance into our practice which
belong to the system of despotic, or what is called paternal,
government, while the general freedom of our institutions precludes the
exercise of the amount of control necessary to render the restraint of
any real efficacy as a moral education.

It was pointed out in an early part of this Essay, that the liberty of
the individual, in things wherein the individual is alone concerned,
implies a corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate
by mutual agreement such things as regard them jointly, and regard no
persons but themselves. This question presents no difficulty, so long as
the will of all the persons implicated remains unaltered; but since that
will may change, it is often necessary, even in things in which they
alone are concerned, that they should enter into engagements with one
another; and when they do, it is fit, as a general rule, that those
engagements should be kept. Yet in the laws, probably, of every country,
this general rule has some exceptions. Not only persons are not held to
engagements which violate the rights of third parties, but it is
sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an
engagement, that it is injurious to themselves. In this and most other
civilised countries, for example, an engagement by which a person should
sell himself, or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would be null and
void; neither enforced by law nor by opinion. The ground for thus
limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, is
apparent, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. The reason for
not interfering, unless for the sake of others, with a person's
voluntary acts, is consideration for his liberty. His voluntary choice
is evidence that what he so chooses is desirable, or at the least
endurable, to him, and his good is on the whole best provided for by
allowing him to take his own means of pursuing it. But by selling
himself for a slave, he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any future
use of it, beyond that single act. He therefore defeats, in his own
case, the very purpose which is the justification of allowing him to
dispose of himself. He is no longer free; but is thenceforth in a
position which has no longer the presumption in its favour, that would
be afforded by his voluntarily remaining in it. The principle of freedom
cannot require that he should be free not to be free. It is not freedom,
to be allowed to alienate his freedom. These reasons, the force of which
is so conspicuous in this peculiar case, are evidently of far wider
application; yet a limit is everywhere set to them by the necessities of
life, which continually require, not indeed that we should resign our
freedom, but that we should consent to this and the other limitation of
it. The principle, however, which demands uncontrolled freedom of action
in all that concerns only the agents themselves, requires that those who
have become bound to one another, in things which concern no third
party, should be able to release one another from the engagement: and
even without such voluntary release, there are perhaps no contracts or
engagements, except those that relate to money or money's worth, of
which one can venture to say that there ought to be no liberty whatever
of retractation. Baron Wilhelm von Humboldt, in the excellent essay from
which I have already quoted, states it as his conviction, that
engagements which involve personal relations or services, should never
be legally binding beyond a limited duration of time; and that the most
important of these engagements, marriage, having the peculiarity that
its objects are frustrated unless the feelings of both the parties are
in harmony with it, should require nothing more than the declared will
of either party to dissolve it. This subject is too important, and too
complicated, to be discussed in a parenthesis, and I touch on it only so
far as is necessary for purposes of illustration. If the conciseness and
generality of Baron Humboldt's dissertation had not obliged him in this
instance to content himself with enunciating his conclusion without
discussing the premises, he would doubtless have recognised that the
question cannot be decided on grounds so simple as those to which he
confines himself. When a person, either by express promise or by
conduct, has encouraged another to rely upon his continuing to act in a
certain way--to build expectations and calculations, and stake any part
of his plan of life upon that supposition, a new series of moral
obligations arises on his part towards that person, which may possibly
be overruled, but cannot be ignored. And again, if the relation between
two contracting parties has been followed by consequences to others; if
it has placed third parties in any peculiar position, or, as in the case
of marriage, has even called third parties into existence, obligations
arise on the part of both the contracting parties towards those third
persons, the fulfilment of which, or at all events the mode of
fulfilment, must be greatly affected by the continuance or disruption of
the relation between the original parties to the contract. It does not
follow, nor can I admit, that these obligations extend to requiring the
fulfilment of the contract at all costs to the happiness of the
reluctant party; but they are a necessary element in the question; and
even if, as Von Humboldt maintains, they ought to make no difference in
the _legal_ freedom of the parties to release themselves from the
engagement (and I also hold that they ought not to make _much_
difference), they necessarily make a great difference in the _moral_
freedom. A person is bound to take all these circumstances into account,
before resolving on a step which may affect such important interests of
others; and if he does not allow proper weight to those interests, he is
morally responsible for the wrong. I have made these obvious remarks for
the better illustration of the general principle of liberty, and not
because they are at all needed on the particular question, which, on the
contrary, is usually discussed as if the interest of children was
everything, and that of grown persons nothing.

I have already observed that, owing to the absence of any recognised
general principles, liberty is often granted where it should be
withheld, as well as withheld where it should be granted; and one of the
cases in which, in the modern European world, the sentiment of liberty
is the strongest, is a case where, in my view, it is altogether
misplaced. A person should be free to do as he likes in his own
concerns; but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in acting for
another, under the pretext that the affairs of another are his own
affairs. The State, while it respects the liberty of each in what
specially regards himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over
his exercise of any power which it allows him to possess over others.
This obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of the
family relations, a case, in its direct influence on human happiness,
more important than all others taken together. The almost despotic power
of husbands over wives need not be enlarged upon here because nothing
more is needed for the complete removal of the evil, than that wives
should have the same rights, and should receive the protection of law in
the same manner, as all other persons; and because, on this subject, the
defenders of established injustice do not avail themselves of the plea
of liberty, but stand forth openly as the champions of power. It is in
the case of children, that misapplied notions of liberty are a real
obstacle to the fulfilment by the State of its duties. One would almost
think that a man's children were supposed to be literally, and not
metaphorically, a part of himself, so jealous is opinion of the smallest
interference of law with his absolute and exclusive control over them;
more jealous than of almost any interference with his own freedom of
action: so much less do the generality of mankind value liberty than
power. Consider, for example, the case of education. Is it not almost a
self-evident axiom, that the State should require and compel the
education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born
its citizen? Yet who is there that is not afraid to recognise and
assert this truth? Hardly any one indeed will deny that it is one of the
most sacred duties of the parents (or, as law and usage now stand, the
father), after summoning a human being into the world, to give to that
being an education fitting him to perform his part well in life towards
others and towards himself. But while this is unanimously declared to be
the father's duty, scarcely anybody, in this country, will bear to hear
of obliging him to perform it. Instead of his being required to make any
exertion or sacrifice for securing education to the child, it is left to
his choice to accept it or not when it is provided gratis! It still
remains unrecognised, that to bring a child into existence without a
fair prospect of being able, not only to provide food for its body, but
instruction and training for its mind, is a moral crime, both against
the unfortunate offspring and against society; and that if the parent
does not fulfil this obligation, the State ought to see it fulfilled, at
the charge, as far as possible, of the parent.

Were the duty of enforcing universal education once admitted, there
would be an end to the difficulties about what the State should teach,
and how it should teach, which now convert the subject into a mere
battle-field for sects and parties, causing the time and labour which
should have been spent in educating, to be wasted in quarrelling about
education. If the government would make up its mind to _require_ for
every child a good education, it might save itself the trouble of
_providing_ one. It might leave to parents to obtain the education where
and how they pleased, and content itself with helping to pay the school
fees of the poorer class of children, and defraying the entire school
expenses of those who have no one else to pay for them. The objections
which are urged with reason against State education, do not apply to the
enforcement of education by the State, but to the State's taking upon
itself to direct that education; which is a totally different thing.
That the whole or any large part of the education of the people should
be in State hands, I go as far as any one in deprecating. All that has
been said of the importance of individuality of character, and diversity
in opinions and modes of conduct, involves, as of the same unspeakable
importance, diversity of education. A general State education is a mere
contrivance for moulding people to be exactly like one another; and as
the mould in which it casts them is that which pleases the predominant
power in the government, whether this be a monarch, a priesthood, an
aristocracy, or the majority of the existing generation, in proportion
as it is efficient and successful, it establishes a despotism over the
mind, leading by natural tendency to one over the body. An education
established and controlled by the State, should only exist, if it exist
at all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the
purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain
standard of excellence. Unless, indeed, when society in general is in so
backward a state that it could not or would not provide for itself any
proper institutions of education, unless the government undertook the
task; then, indeed, the government may, as the less of two great evils,
take upon itself the business of schools and universities, as it may
that of joint stock companies, when private enterprise, in a shape
fitted for undertaking great works of industry, does not exist in the
country. But in general, if the country contains a sufficient number of
persons qualified to provide education under government auspices, the
same persons would be able and willing to give an equally good education
on the voluntary principle, under the assurance of remuneration afforded
by a law rendering education compulsory, combined with State aid to
those unable to defray the expense.

The instrument for enforcing the law could be no other than public
examinations, extending to all children, and beginning at an early age.
An age might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to
ascertain if he (or she) is able to read. If a child proves unable, the
father, unless he has some sufficient ground of excuse, might be
subjected to a moderate fine, to be worked out, if necessary, by his
labour, and the child might be put to school at his expense. Once in
every year the examination should be renewed, with a gradually extending
range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition, and what is
more, retention, of a certain minimum of general knowledge, virtually
compulsory. Beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary examinations
on all subjects, at which all who come up to a certain standard of
proficiency might claim a certificate. To prevent the State from
exercising, through these arrangements, an improper influence over
opinion, the knowledge required for passing an examination (beyond the
merely instrumental parts of knowledge, such as languages and their use)
should, even in the higher class of examinations, be confined to facts
and positive science exclusively. The examinations on religion,
politics, or other disputed topics, should not turn on the truth or
falsehood of opinions, but on the matter of fact that such and such an
opinion is held, on such grounds, by such authors, or schools, or
churches. Under this system, the rising generation would be no worse off
in regard to all disputed truths, than they are at present; they would
be brought up either churchmen or dissenters as they now are, the state
merely taking care that they should be instructed churchmen, or
instructed dissenters. There would be nothing to hinder them from being
taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same schools where they
were taught other things. All attempts by the state to bias the
conclusions of its citizens on disputed subjects, are evil; but it may
very properly offer to ascertain and certify that a person possesses the
knowledge, requisite to make his conclusions, on any given subject,
worth attending to. A student of philosophy would be the better for
being able to stand an examination both in Locke and in Kant, whichever
of the two he takes up with, or even if with neither: and there is no
reasonable objection to examining an atheist in the evidences of
Christianity, provided he is not required to profess a belief in them.
The examinations, however, in the higher branches of knowledge should, I
conceive, be entirely voluntary. It would be giving too dangerous a
power to governments, were they allowed to exclude any one from
professions, even from the profession of teacher, for alleged deficiency
of qualifications: and I think, with Wilhelm von Humboldt, that degrees,
or other public certificates of scientific or professional acquirements,
should be given to all who present themselves for examination, and stand
the test; but that such certificates should confer no advantage over
competitors, other than the weight which may be attached to their
testimony by public opinion.

It is not in the matter of education only, that misplaced notions of
liberty prevent moral obligations on the part of parents from being
recognised, and legal obligations from being imposed, where there are
the strongest grounds for the former always, and in many cases for the
latter also. The fact itself, of causing the existence of a human being,
is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life. To
undertake this responsibility--to bestow a life which may be either a
curse or a blessing--unless the being on whom it is to be bestowed will
have at least the ordinary chances of a desirable existence, is a crime
against that being. And in a country either over-peopled, or threatened
with being so, to produce children, beyond a very small number, with
the effect of reducing the reward of labour by their competition, is a
serious offence against all who live by the remuneration of their
labour. The laws which, in many countries on the Continent, forbid
marriage unless the parties can show that they have the means of
supporting a family, do not exceed the legitimate powers of the state:
and whether such laws be expedient or not (a question mainly dependent
on local circumstances and feelings), they are not objectionable as
violations of liberty. Such laws are interferences of the state to
prohibit a mischievous act--an act injurious to others, which ought to
be a subject of reprobation, and social stigma, even when it is not
deemed expedient to superadd legal punishment. Yet the current ideas of
liberty, which bend so easily to real infringements of the freedom of
the individual, in things which concern only himself, would repel the
attempt to put any restraint upon his inclinations when the consequence
of their indulgence is a life, or lives, of wretchedness and depravity
to the offspring, with manifold evils to those sufficiently within reach
to be in any way affected by their actions. When we compare the strange
respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange want of respect for
it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right to do harm
to others, and no right at all to please himself without giving pain to
any one.

I have reserved for the last place a large class of questions respecting
the limits of government interference, which, though closely connected
with the subject of this Essay, do not, in strictness, belong to it.
These are cases in which the reasons against interference do not turn
upon the principle of liberty: the question is not about restraining the
actions of individuals, but about helping them: it is asked whether the
government should do, or cause to be done, something for their benefit,
instead of leaving it to be done by themselves, individually, or in
voluntary combination.

The objections to government interference, when it is not such as to
involve infringement of liberty, may be of three kinds.

The first is, when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by
individuals than by the government. Speaking generally, there is no one
so fit to conduct any business, or to determine how or by whom it shall
be conducted, as those who are personally interested in it. This
principle condemns the interferences, once so common, of the
legislature, or the officers of government, with the ordinary processes
of industry. But this part of the subject has been sufficiently enlarged
upon by political economists, and is not particularly related to the
principles of this Essay.

The second objection is more nearly allied to our subject. In many
cases, though individuals may not do the particular thing so well, on
the average, as the officers of government, it is nevertheless desirable
that it should be done by them, rather than by the government, as a
means to their own mental education--a mode of strengthening their
active faculties, exercising their judgment, and giving them a familiar
knowledge of the subjects with which they are thus left to deal. This is
a principal, though not the sole, recommendation of jury trial (in cases
not political); of free and popular local and municipal institutions; of
the conduct of industrial and philanthropic enterprises by voluntary
associations. These are not questions of liberty, and are connected with
that subject only by remote tendencies; but they are questions of
development. It belongs to a different occasion from the present to
dwell on these things as parts of national education; as being, in
truth, the peculiar training of a citizen, the practical part of the
political education of a free people, taking them out of the narrow
circle of personal and family selfishness, and accustoming them to the
comprehension of joint interests, the management of joint
concerns--habituating them to act from public or semi-public motives,
and guide their conduct by aims which unite instead of isolating them
from one another. Without these habits and powers, a free constitution
can neither be worked nor preserved, as is exemplified by the too-often
transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it does not
rest upon a sufficient basis of local liberties. The management of
purely local business by the localities, and of the great enterprises of
industry by the union of those who voluntarily supply the pecuniary
means, is further recommended by all the advantages which have been set
forth in this Essay as belonging to individuality of development, and
diversity of modes of action. Government operations tend to be
everywhere alike. With individuals and voluntary associations, on the
contrary, there are varied experiments, and endless diversity of
experience. What the State can usefully do, is to make itself a central
depository, and active circulator and diffuser, of the experience
resulting from many trials. Its business is to enable each
experimentalist to benefit by the experiments of others, instead of
tolerating no experiments but its own.

The third, and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of
government, is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power.
Every function superadded to those already exercised by the government,
causes its influence over hopes and fears to be more widely diffused,
and converts, more and more, the active and ambitious part of the public
into hangers-on of the government, or of some party which aims at
becoming the government. If the roads, the railways, the banks, the
insurance offices, the great joint-stock companies, the universities,
and the public charities, were all of them branches of the government;
if, in addition, the municipal corporations and local boards, with all
that now devolves on them, became departments of the central
administration; if the employés of all these different enterprises were
appointed and paid by the government, and looked to the government for
every rise in life; not all the freedom of the press and popular
constitution of the legislature would make this or any other country
free otherwise than in name. And the evil would be greater, the more
efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was
constructed--the more skilful the arrangements for obtaining the best
qualified hands and heads with which to work it. In England it has of
late been proposed that all the members of the civil service of
government should be selected by competitive examination, to obtain for
those employments the most intelligent and instructed persons
procurable; and much has been said and written for and against this
proposal. One of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents, is
that the occupation of a permanent official servant of the State does
not hold out sufficient prospects of emolument and importance to attract
the highest talents, which will always be able to find a more inviting
career in the professions, or in the service of companies and other
public bodies. One would not have been surprised if this argument had
been used by the friends of the proposition, as an answer to its
principal difficulty. Coming from the opponents it is strange enough.
What is urged as an objection is the safety-valve of the proposed
system. If indeed all the high talent of the country _could_ be drawn
into the service of the government, a proposal tending to bring about
that result might well inspire uneasiness. If every part of the business
of society which required organised concert, or large and comprehensive
views, were in the hands of the government, and if government offices
were universally filled by the ablest men, all the enlarged culture and
practised intelligence in the country, except the purely speculative,
would be concentrated in a numerous bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest
of the community would look for all things: the multitude for direction
and dictation in all they had to do; the able and aspiring for personal
advancement. To be admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy, and when
admitted, to rise therein, would be the sole objects of ambition. Under
this régime, not only is the outside public ill-qualified, for want of
practical experience, to criticise or check the mode of operation of the
bureaucracy, but even if the accidents of despotic or the natural
working of popular institutions occasionally raise to the summit a ruler
or rulers of reforming inclinations, no reform can be effected which is
contrary to the interest of the bureaucracy. Such is the melancholy
condition of the Russian empire, as is shown in the accounts of those
who have had sufficient opportunity of observation. The Czar himself is
powerless against the bureaucratic body; he can send any one of them to
Siberia, but he cannot govern without them, or against their will. On
every decree of his they have a tacit veto, by merely refraining from
carrying it into effect. In countries of more advanced civilisation and
of a more insurrectionary spirit, the public, accustomed to expect
everything to be done for them by the State, or at least to do nothing
for themselves without asking from the State not only leave to do it,
but even how it is to be done, naturally hold the State responsible for
all evil which befalls them, and when the evil exceeds their amount of
patience, they rise against the government and make what is called a
revolution; whereupon somebody else, with or without legitimate
authority from the nation, vaults into the seat, issues his orders to
the bureaucracy, and everything goes on much as it did before; the
bureaucracy being unchanged, and nobody else being capable of taking
their place.

A very different spectacle is exhibited among a people accustomed to
transact their own business. In France, a large part of the people
having been engaged in military service, many of whom have held at least
the rank of non-commissioned officers, there are in every popular
insurrection several persons competent to take the lead, and improvise
some tolerable plan of action. What the French are in military affairs,
the Americans are in every kind of civil business; let them be left
without a government, every body of Americans is able to improvise one,
and to carry on that or any other public business with a sufficient
amount of intelligence, order, and decision. This is what every free
people ought to be: and a people capable of this is certain to be free;
it will never let itself be enslaved by any man or body of men because
these are able to seize and pull the reins of the central
administration. No bureaucracy can hope to make such a people as this do
or undergo anything that they do not like. But where everything is done
through the bureaucracy, nothing to which the bureaucracy is really
adverse can be done at all. The constitution of such countries is an
organisation of the experience and practical ability of the nation, into
a disciplined body for the purpose of governing the rest; and the more
perfect that organisation is in itself, the more successful in drawing
to itself and educating for itself the persons of greatest capacity from
all ranks of the community, the more complete is the bondage of all, the
members of the bureaucracy included. For the governors are as much the
slaves of their organisation and discipline, as the governed are of the
governors. A Chinese mandarin is as much the tool and creature of a
despotism as the humblest cultivator. An individual Jesuit is to the
utmost degree of abasement the slave of his order, though the order
itself exists for the collective power and importance of its members.

It is not, also, to be forgotten, that the absorption of all the
principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal,
sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of the body
itself. Banded together as they are--working a system which, like all
systems, necessarily proceeds in a great measure by fixed rules--the
official body are under the constant temptation of sinking into indolent
routine, or, if they now and then desert that mill-horse round, of
rushing into some half-examined crudity which has struck the fancy of
some leading member of the corps: and the sole check to these closely
allied, though seemingly opposite, tendencies, the only stimulus which
can keep the ability of the body itself up to a high standard, is
liability to the watchful criticism of equal ability outside the body.
It is indispensable, therefore, that the means should exist,
independently of the government, of forming such ability, and furnishing
it with the opportunities and experience necessary for a correct
judgment of great practical affairs. If we would possess permanently a
skilful and efficient body of functionaries--above all, a body able to
originate and willing to adopt improvements; if we would not have our
bureaucracy degenerate into a pedantocracy, this body must not engross
all the occupations which form and cultivate the faculties required for
the government of mankind.

To determine the point at which evils, so formidable to human freedom
and advancement, begin, or rather at which they begin to predominate
over the benefits attending the collective application of the force of
society, under its recognised chiefs, for the removal of the obstacles
which stand in the way of its well-being; to secure as much of the
advantages of centralised power and intelligence, as can be had without
turning into governmental channels too great a proportion of the general
activity, is one of the most difficult and complicated questions in the
art of government. It is, in a great measure, a question of detail, in
which many and various considerations must be kept in view, and no
absolute rule can be laid down. But I believe that the practical
principle in which safety resides, the ideal to be kept in view, the
standard by which to test all arrangements intended for overcoming the
difficulty, may be conveyed in these words: the greatest dissemination
of power consistent with efficiency; but the greatest possible
centralisation of information, and diffusion of it from the centre.
Thus, in municipal administration, there would be, as in the New England
States, a very minute division among separate officers, chosen by the
localities, of all business which is not better left to the persons
directly interested; but besides this, there would be, in each
department of local affairs, a central superintendence, forming a branch
of the general government. The organ of this superintendence would
concentrate, as in a focus, the variety of information and experience
derived from the conduct of that branch of public business in all the
localities, from everything analogous which is done in foreign
countries, and from the general principles of political science. This
central organ should have a right to know all that is done, and its
special duty should be that of making the knowledge acquired in one
place available for others. Emancipated from the petty prejudices and
narrow views of a locality by its elevated position and comprehensive
sphere of observation, its advice would naturally carry much authority;
but its actual power, as a permanent institution, should, I conceive, be
limited to compelling the local officers to obey the laws laid down for
their guidance. In all things not provided for by general rules, those
officers should be left to their own judgment, under responsibility to
their constituents. For the violation of rules, they should be
responsible to law, and the rules themselves should be laid down by the
legislature; the central administrative authority only watching over
their execution, and if they were not properly carried into effect,
appealing, according to the nature of the case, to the tribunal to
enforce the law, or to the constituencies to dismiss the functionaries
who had not executed it according to its spirit. Such, in its general
conception, is the central superintendence which the Poor Law Board is
intended to exercise over the administrators of the Poor Rate throughout
the country. Whatever powers the Board exercises beyond this limit, were
right and necessary in that peculiar case, for the cure of rooted habits
of maladministration in matters deeply affecting not the localities
merely, but the whole community; since no locality has a moral right to
make itself by mismanagement a nest of pauperism, necessarily
overflowing into other localities, and impairing the moral and physical
condition of the whole labouring community. The powers of administrative
coercion and subordinate legislation possessed by the Poor Law Board
(but which, owing to the state of opinion on the subject, are very
scantily exercised by them), though perfectly justifiable in a case of
first-rate national interest, would be wholly out of place in the
superintendence of interests purely local. But a central organ of
information and instruction for all the localities, would be equally
valuable in all departments of administration. A government cannot have
too much of the kind of activity which does not impede, but aids and
stimulates, individual exertion and development. The mischief begins
when, instead of calling forth the activity and powers of individuals
and bodies, it substitutes its own activity for theirs; when, instead of
informing, advising, and, upon occasion, denouncing, it makes them work
in fetters, or bids them stand aside and does their work instead of
them. The worth of a State, in the long run, is the worth of the
individuals composing it; and a State which postpones the interests of
_their_ mental expansion and elevation, to a little more of
administrative skill, or of that semblance of it which practice gives,
in the details of business; a State which dwarfs its men, in order that
they may be more docile instruments in its hands even for beneficial
purposes, will find that with small men no great thing can really be
accomplished; and that the perfection of machinery to which it has
sacrificed everything, will in the end avail it nothing, for want of the
vital power which, in order that the machine might work more smoothly,
it has preferred to banish.



                     Principles Of Political Economy

                                    By

                             John Stuart Mill

                Abridged, with Critical, Bibliographical,

                   and Explanatory Notes, and a Sketch

                   of the History of Political Economy,

                                    By

                       J. Laurence Laughlin, Ph. D.

      Assistant Professor of Political Economy in Harvard University

                        A Text-Book For Colleges.

                                New York:

                         D. Appleton And Company,

                         1, 3, and 5 Bond Street.

                                   1885





CONTENTS


Preface.
Introductory.
   A Sketch Of The History Of Political Economy.
   Books For Consultation (From English, French, And German Authors).
   Preliminary Remarks.
Book I. Production.
   Chapter I. Of The Requisites Of Production.
      § 1. The requisites of production.
      § 2. The Second Requisite of Production, Labor.
      § 3. Of Capital as a Requisite of Production.
   Chapter II. Of Unproductive Labor.
      § 1. Definition of Productive and Unproductive Labor.
      § 2. Productive and Unproductive Consumption.
      § 3. Distinction Between Labor for the Supply of Productive
      Consumption and Labor for the Supply of Unproductive Consumption.
   Chapter III. Of Capital.
      § 1. Capital is Wealth Appropriated to Reproductive Employment.
      § 2. More Capital Devoted to Production than Actually Employed in
      it.
      § 3. Examination of Cases Illustrative of the Idea of Capital.
   Chapter IV. Fundamental Propositions Respecting Capital.
      § 1. Industry is Limited by Capital.
      § 2. Increase of Capital gives Increased Employment to Labor,
      Without Assignable Bounds.
      § 3. Capital is the result of Saving, and all Capital is Consumed.
      § 4. Capital is kept up by Perpetual Reproduction, as shown by the
      Recovery of Countries from Devastation.
      § 5. Effects of Defraying Government Expenditure by Loans.
      § 6. Demand for Commodities is not Demand for Labor.
   Chapter V. On Circulating And Fixed Capital.
      § 1. Fixed and Circulating Capital.
      § 2. Increase of Fixed Capital, when, at the Expense of Circulating,
      might be Detrimental to the Laborers.
      § 3. —This seldom, if ever, occurs.
   Chapter VI. Of Causes Affecting The Efficiency Of Production.
      § 1. General Causes of Superior Productiveness.
      § 2. Combination and Division of Labor Increase Productiveness.
      § 3. Advantages of Division of Labor.
      § 4. Production on a Large and Production on a Small Scale.
   Chapter VII. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Labor.
      § 1. The Law of the Increase of Production Depends on those of Three
      Elements—Labor. Capital, and Land.
      § 2. The Law of Population.
      § 3. By what Checks the Increase of Population is Practically
      Limited.
   Chapter VIII. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Capital.
      § 1. Means for Saving in the Surplus above Necessaries.
      § 2. Motive for Saving in the Surplus above Necessaries.
      § 3. Examples of Deficiency in the Strength of this Desire.
      § 4. Examples of Excess of this Desire.
   Chapter IX. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Production From Land.
      § 1. The Law of Production from the Soil, a Law of Diminishing
      Return in Proportion to the Increased Application of Labor and
      Capital.
      § 2. Antagonist Principle to the Law of Diminishing Return; the
      Progress of Improvements in Production.
      § 3. —In Railways.
      § 4. —In Manufactures.
      § 5. Law Holds True of Mining.
   Chapter X. Consequences Of The Foregoing Laws.
      § 1. Remedies for Weakness of the Principle of Accumulation.
      § 2. Even where the Desire to Accumulate is Strong, Population must
      be Kept within the Limits of Population from Land.
      § 3. Necessity of Restraining Population not superseded by Free
      Trade in Food.
      § 4. —Nor by Emigration.
Book II. Distribution.
   Chapter I. Of Property.
      § 1. Individual Property and its opponents.
      § 2. The case for Communism against private property presented.
      § 3. The Socialists who appeal to state-help.
      § 4. Of various minor schemes, Communistic and Socialistic.
      § 5.  The Socialist objections to the present order of Society
      examined.
      § 6. Property in land different from property in Movables.
   Chapter II. Of Wages.
      § 1. Of Competition and Custom.
      § 2. The Wages-fund, and the Objections to it Considered.
      § 3. Examination of some popular Opinions respecting Wages.
      § 4. Certain rare Circumstances excepted, High Wages imply
      Restraints on Population.
      § 5. Due Restriction of Population the only Safeguard of a
      Laboring-Class.
   Chapter III. Of Remedies For Low Wages.
      § 1. A Legal or Customary Minimum of Wages, with a Guarantee of
      Employment.
      § 2. —Would Require as a Condition Legal Measures for Repression of
      Population.
      § 3. Allowances in Aid of Wages and the Standard of Living.
      § 4. Grounds for Expecting Improvement in Public Opinion on the
      Subject of Population.
      § 5. Twofold means of Elevating the Habits of the Laboring-People;
      by Education, and by Foreign and Home Colonization.
   Chapter IV. Of The Differences Of Wages In Different Employments.
      § 1. Differences of Wages Arising from Different Degrees of
      Attractiveness in Different Employments.
      § 2.  Differences arising from Natural Monopolies.
      § 3.  Effect on Wages of the Competition of Persons having other
      Means of Support.
      § 4. Wages of Women, why Lower than those of Men.
      § 5. Differences of Wages Arising from Laws, Combinations, or
      Customs.
   Chapter V. Of Profits.
      § 1. Profits include Interest and Risk; but, correctly speaking, do
      not include Wages of Superintendence.
      § 2. The Minimum of Profits; what produces Variations in the Amount
      of Profits.
      § 3. General Tendency of Profits to an Equality.
      § 4. The Cause of the Existence of any Profit; the Advances of
      Capitalists consist of Wages of Labor.
      § 5. The Rate of Profit depends on the Cost of Labor.
   Chapter VI. Of Rent.
      § 1. Rent the Effect of a Natural Monopoly.
      § 2. No Land can pay Rent except Land of such Quality or Situation
      as exists in less Quantity than the Demand.
      § 3. The Rent of Land is the Excess of its Return above the Return
      to the worst Land in Cultivation.
      § 4. —Or to the Capital employed in the least advantageous
      Circumstances.
      § 5. Opposing Views of the Law of Rent.
      § 6. Rent does not enter into the Cost of Production of Agricultural
      Produce.
Book III. Exchange.
   Chapter I. Of Value.
      § 1. Definitions of Value in Use, Exchange Value, and Price.
      § 2. Conditions of Value: Utility, Difficulty of Attainment, and
      Transferableness.
      § 3. Commodities limited in Quantity by the law of Demand and
      Supply: General working of this Law.
      § 4. Miscellaneous Cases falling under this Law.
      § 5. Commodities which are Susceptible of Indefinite Multiplication
      without Increase of Cost. Law of their Value Cost of Production.
      § 6. The Value of these Commodities confirm, in the long run, to
      their Cost of Production through the operation of Demand and Supply.
   Chapter II. Ultimate Analysis Of Cost Of Production.
      § 1. Of Labor, the principal Element in Cost of Production.
      § 2. Wages affect Values, only if different in different
      employments; “non-competing groups.”
      § 3. Profits an element in Cost of Production.
      § 4. Cost of Production properly represented by sacrifice, or cost,
      to the Laborer as well as to the Capitalist; the relation of this
      conception to the Cost of Labor.
      § 5. When profits vary from Employment to Employment, or are spread
      over unequal lengths of Time, they affect Values accordingly.
      § 6. Occasional Elements in Cost of Production; taxes and
      ground-rent.
   Chapter III. Of Rent, In Its Relation To Value.
      § 1. Commodities which are susceptible of indefinite Multiplication,
      but not without increase of Cost. Law of their Value, Cost of
      Production in the most unfavorable existing circumstances.
      § 2. Such commodities, when Produced in circumstances more
      favorable, yield a Rent equal to the difference of Cost.
      § 3. Rent of Mines and Fisheries and ground-rent of Buildings, and
      cases of gain analogous to Rent.
      § 4. _Résumé_ of the laws of value of each of the three classes of
      commodities.
   Chapter IV. Of Money.
      § 1. The three functions of Money—a Common Denominator of Value, a
      Medium of Exchange, a “Standard of Value”.
      § 2. Gold and Silver, why fitted for those purposes.
      § 3. Money a mere contrivance for facilitating exchanges, which does
      not affect the laws of value.
   Chapter V. Of The Value Of Money, As Dependent On Demand And Supply.
      § 1. Value of Money, an ambiguous expression.
      § 2. The Value of Money depends on its quantity.
      § 3. —Together with the Rapidity of Circulation.
      § 4. Explanations and Limitations of this Principle.
   Chapter VI. Of The Value Of Money, As Dependent On Cost Of Production.
      § 1. The value of Money, in a state of Freedom, conforms to the
      value of the Bullion contained in it.
      § 2. —Which is determined by the cost of production.
      § 3. This law, how related to the principle laid down in the
      preceding chapter.
   Chapter VII. Of A Double Standard And Subsidiary Coins.
      § 1. Objections to a Double Standard.
      § 2. The use of the two metals as money, and the management of
      Subsidiary Coins.
      § 3. The experience of the United States with a double standard from
      1792 to 1883.
   Chapter VIII. Of Credit, As A Substitute For Money.
      § 1. Credit not a creation but a Transfer of the means of
      Production.
      § 2. In what manner it assists Production.
      § 3. Function of Credit in economizing the use of Money.
      § 4. Bills of Exchange.
      § 5. Promissory Notes.
      § 6. Deposits and Checks.
   Chapter IX. Influence Of Credit On Prices.
      § 1. What acts on prices is Credit, in whatever shape given.
      § 2. Credit a purchasing Power, similar to Money.
      § 3. Great extensions and contractions of Credit. Phenomena of a
      commercial crisis analyzed.
      § 4. Influence of the different forms of Credit on Prices.
      § 5. On what the use of Credit depends.
      § 6. What is essential to the idea of Money?
   Chapter X. Of An Inconvertible Paper Currency.
      § 1. What determines the value of an inconvertible paper money?
      § 2. If regulated by the price of Bullion, as inconvertible Currency
      might be safe, but not Expedient.
      § 3. Examination of the doctrine that an inconvertible Current is
      safe, if representing actual Property.
      § 4. Experiments with paper Money in the United States.
      § 5. Examination of the gain arising from the increase and issue of
      paper Currency.
      § 6. _Résumé_ of the subject of money.
   Chapter XI. Of Excess Of Supply.
      § 1. The theory of a general Over-Supply of Commodities stated.
      § 2. The supply of commodities in general can not exceed the power
      of Purchase.
      § 3. There can never be a lack of Demand arising from lack of Desire
      to Consume.
      § 4. Origin and Explanation of the notion of general Over-Supply.
   Chapter XII. Of Some Peculiar Cases Of Value.
      § 1. Values of commodities which have a joint cost of production.
      § 2. Values of the different kinds of agricultural produce.
   Chapter XIII. Of International Trade.
      § 1. Cost of Production not a regulator of international values.
      Extension of the word “international.”
      § 2. Interchange of commodities between distance places determined
      by differences not in their absolute, but in the comparative, costs
      of production.
      § 3. The direct benefits of commerce consist in increased Efficiency
      of the productive powers of the World.
      § 4. —Not in a Vent for exports, nor in the gains of Merchants.
      § 5. Indirect benefits of Commerce, Economical and Moral; still
      greater than the Direct.
   Chapter XIV. Of International Values.
      § 1. The values of imported commodities depend on the Terms of
      international interchange.
      § 2. The values of foreign commodities depend, not upon Cost of
      Production, but upon Reciprocal Demand and Supply.
      § 3. —As illustrated by trade in cloth and linen between England and
      Germany.
      § 4. The conclusion states in the Equation of International Demand.
      § 5. The cost to a country of its imports depends not only on the
      ratio of exchange, but on the efficiency of its labor.
   Chapter XV. Of Money Considered As An Imported Commodity.
      § 1. Money imported on two modes; as a Commodity, and as a medium of
      Exchange.
      § 2. As a commodity, it obeys the same laws of Value as other
      imported Commodities.
   Chapter XVI. Of The Foreign Exchanges.
      § 1. Money passes from country to country as a Medium of Exchange,
      through the Exchanges.
      § 2. Distinction between Variations in the Exchanges which are
      self-adjusting and those which can only be rectified through Prices.
   Chapter XVII. Of The Distribution Of The Precious Metals Through The
   Commercial World.
      § 1. The substitution of money for barter makes no difference in
      exports and imports, nor in the Law of international Values.
      § 2. The preceding Theorem further illustrated.
      § 3. The precious metals, as money, are of the same Value, and
      distribute themselves according to the same Law, with the precious
      metals as a Commodity.
      § 4. International payments entering into the “financial account.”
   Chapter XVIII. Influence Of The Currency On The Exchanges And On
   Foreign Trade.
      § 1. Variations in the exchange, which originate in the Currency.
      § 2. Effect of a sudden increase of a metallic Currency, or of the
      sudden creation of Bank-Notes or other substitutes for Money.
      § 3. Effect of the increase of an inconvertible paper Currency. Real
      and nominal exchange.
   Chapter XIX. Of The Rate Of Interest.
      § 1. The Rate of Interest depends on the Demand and Supply of Loans.
      § 2. Circumstances which Determine the Permanent Demand and Supply
      of Loans.
      § 3. Circumstances which Determine the Fluctuations.
      § 4. The Rate of Interest not really Connected with the value of
      Money, but often confounded with it.
      § 5. The Rate of Interest determines the price of land and of
      Securities.
   Chapter XX. Of The Competition Of Different Countries In The Same
   Market.
      § 1. Causes which enable one Country to undersell another.
      § 2. High wages do not prevent one Country from underselling
      another.
      § 3. Low wages enable a Country to undersell another, when Peculiar
      to certain branches of Industry.
      § 4. —But not when common to All.
      § 5. Low profits as affecting the carrying Trade.
   Chapter XXI. Of Distribution, As Affected By Exchange.
      § 1. Exchange and money make no Difference in the law of Wages.
      § 2. In the law of Rent.
      § 3. —Nor in the law of Profits.
Book IV. Influence Of The Progress Of Society On Production And
Distribution.
   Chapter I. Influence Of The Progress Of Industry And Population On
   Values And Prices.
      § 1. Tendency of the progress of society toward increased Command
      over the powers of Nature; increased Security, and increased
      Capacity of Co-Operation.
      § 2. Tendency to a Decline of the Value and Cost of Production of
      all Commodities.
      § 3. —except the products of Agriculture and Mining, which have a
      tendency to Rise.
      § 4. —that tendency from time to time Counteracted by Improvements
      in Production.
      § 5. Effect of the Progress of Society in moderating fluctuations of
      Value.
   Chapter II. Influence Of The Progress Of Industry And Population On
   Rents, Profits, And Wages.
      § 1. Characteristic features of industrial Progress.
      § 2. First two cases, Population and Capital increasing, the arts of
      production stationary.
      § 3. The arts of production advancing, capital and population
      stationary.
      § 4. Theoretical results, if all three Elements progressive.
      § 5. Practical Results.
   Chapter III. Of The Tendency Of Profits To A Minimum.
      § 1. Different Theories as to the fall of Profits.
      § 2. What determines the minimum rate of Profit?
      § 3. In old and opulent countries, profits habitually near to the
      minimum.
      § 4. —prevented from reaching it by commercial revulsions.
      § 5. —by improvements in Production.
      § 6. —by the importation of cheap Necessaries and Implements.
      § 7. —by the emigration of Capital.
   Chapter IV. Consequences Of The Tendency Of Profits To A Minimum, And
   The Stationary State.
      § 1. Abstraction of Capital not necessarily a national loss.
      § 2. In opulent countries, the extension of machinery not
      detrimental but beneficial to Laborers.
      § 3. Stationary state of wealth and population dreaded by some
      writers, but not in itself undesirable.
   Chapter V. On The Possible Futurity Of The Laboring-Classes.
      § 1. The possibility of improvement while Laborers remain merely
      receivers of Wages.
      § 2.—through small holdings, by which the landlord’s gain is shared.
      § 3. —through co-operation, by which the manager’s wages are shared.
      § 4.  Distributive Co-operation.
      § 5. Productive Co-Operation.
      § 6. Industrial Partnership.
      § 7. People’s Banks.
Book V. On The Influence Of Government.
   Chapter I. On The General Principles Of Taxation.
      § 1. Four fundamental rules of Taxation.
      § 2. Grounds of the principle of Equality of Taxation.
      § 3. Should the same percentage be levied on all amounts of Income?
      § 4. Should the same percentage be levied on Perpetual and on
      Terminable Incomes?
      § 5. The increase of the rent of land from natural causes a fit
      subject of peculiar Taxation.
      § 6. Taxes falling on Capital not necessarily objectionable.
   Chapter II. Of Direct Taxes.
      § 1. Direct taxes either on income or expenditure.
      § 2. Taxes on rent.
      § 3. —on profits.
      § 4. —on Wages.
      § 5. —on Income.
      § 6. A House-Tax.
   Chapter III. Of Taxes On Commodities, Or Indirect Taxes.
      § 1. A Tax on all commodities would fall on Profits.
      § 2. Taxes on particular commodities fall on the consumer.
      § 3. Peculiar effects of taxes on Necessaries.
      § 4. —how modified by the tendency of profits to a minimum.
      § 5. Effects of discriminating Duties.
      § 6. Effects produced on international Exchange by Duties on Exports
      and on Imports.
   Chapter IV. Comparison Between Direct And Indirect Taxation.
      § 1. Arguments for and against direct Taxation.
      § 2. What forms of indirect taxation are most eligible?
      § 3. Practical rules for indirect taxation.
      § 4. Taxation systems of the United States and other Countries.
      § 5. A _Résumé_ of the general principles of taxation.
   Chapter V. Of A National Debt.
      § 1. Is it desirable to defray extraordinary public expenses by
      loans?
      § 2. Not desirable to redeem a national Debt by a general
      Contribution.
      § 3. In what cases desirable to maintain a surplus revenue for the
      redemption of Debt.
   Chapter VI. Of An Interference Of Government Grounded On Erroneous
   Theories.
      § 1. The doctrine of Protection to Native Industry.
      § 2. —had its origin in the Mercantile System.
      § 3. —supported by pleas of national subsistence and national
      defense.
      § 4. —on the ground of encouraging young industries; colonial
      policy.
      § 5. —on the ground of high wages.
      § 6. —on the ground of creating a diversity of industries.
      § 7. —on the ground that it lowers prices.
Appendix I. Bibliographies.
Appendix II. Examination Questions.
Footnotes






PREFACE.


An experience of five years with Mr. Mill’s treatise in the class-room not
only convinced me of the great usefulness of what still remains one of the
most lucid and systematic books yet published which cover the whole range
of the study, but I have also been convinced of the need of such additions
as should give the results of later thinking, without militating against
the general tenor of Mr. Mill’s system; of such illustrations as should
fit it better for American students, by turning their attention to the
application of principles in the facts around us; of a bibliography which
should make it easier to get at the writers of other schools who offer
opposing views on controverted questions; and of some attempts to lighten
those parts of his work in which Mr. Mill frightened away the reader by an
appearance of too great abstractness, and to render them, if possible,
more easy of comprehension to the student who first approaches Political
Economy through this author. Believing, also, that the omission of much
that should properly be classed under the head of Sociology, or Social
Philosophy, would narrow the field to Political Economy alone, and aid,
perhaps, in clearer ideas, I was led to reduce the two volumes into one,
with, of course, the additional hope that the smaller book would tempt
some readers who might hesitate to attack his larger work. In consonance
with the above plan, I have abridged Mr. Mill’s treatise, yet have always
retained his own words; although it should be said that they are not
always his consecutive words. Everything in the larger type on the page is
taken literally from Mr. Mill, and, whenever it has been necessary to use
a word to complete the sense, it has been always inserted in square
brackets. All additional matter introduced by me has been printed in a
smaller but distinctive type. The reader can see at a glance which part of
the page is Mr. Mill’s and which my own.

It has seemed necessary to make the most additions to the original
treatise under the subjects of the Wages Question; of Wages of
Superintendence; of Socialism; of Cost of Production; of Bimetallism; of
the Paper Money experiments in this country; of International Values; of
the Future of the Laboring-Classes (in which the chapter was entirely
rewritten); and of Protection. The treatment of Land Tenures has not been
entirely omitted, but it does not appear as a separate subject, because it
has at present less value as an elementary study for American students.
The chapters on Land Tenures, the English currency discussion, and much of
Book V, on the Influence of Government, have been simply omitted. In one
case I have changed the order of the chapters, by inserting Chap. XV of
Book III, treating of a standard of value, under the chapter treating of
money and its functions. In other respects, the same order has been
followed as in the original work.

Wherever it has seemed possible, American illustrations have been inserted
instead of English or Continental ones.

To interest the reader in home problems, twenty-four charts have been
scattered throughout the volume, which bear upon our own conditions, with
the expectation, also, that the different methods of graphic
representation here presented would lead students to apply them to other
questions. They are mainly such as I have employed in my class-room. The
use and preparation of such charts ought to be encouraged. The earlier
pages of the volume have been given up to a “Sketch of the History of
Political Economy,” which aims to give the story of how we have arrived at
our present knowledge of economic laws. The student who has completed Mill
will then have a very considerable bibliography of the various schools and
writers from which to select further reading, and to select this reading
so that it may not fall wholly within the range of one class of writers.
But, for the time that Mill is being first studied, I have added a list of
the most important books for consultation. I have also collected, in
Appendix I, some brief bibliographies on the Tariff, on Bimetallism, and
on American Shipping, which may be of use to those who may not have the
means of inquiring for authorities, and in Appendix II a number of
questions and problems for the teacher’s use.

In some cases I have omitted Mr. Mill’s statement entirely, and put in its
stead a simpler form of the same exposition which I believed would be more
easily grasped by a student. Of such cases, the argument to show that
Demand for Commodities is not Demand for Labor, the Doctrine of
International Values, and the Effect of the Progress of Society on wages,
profits, and rent, are examples. Whether I have succeeded or not, must be
left for the experience of the teacher to determine. Many small figures
and diagrams have been used throughout the text, in order to suggest the
concrete means of getting a clear grasp of a principle.

In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness to several friends
for assistance in the preparation of this volume, among whom are Professor
Charles F. Dunbar, Dr. F. W. Taussig, Dr. A. B. Hart, and Mr. Edward
Atkinson.

J. LAURENCE LAUGHLIN.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY, CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS,
_September, 1884._

      [Illustration: Population Map of eastern United States, 1830]

                                 Chart I


          [Illustration: Population Map of United States, 1880]

                                 Chart II





INTRODUCTORY.




A Sketch Of The History Of Political Economy.


    GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.—There is no satisfactory general history of
    political economy in English. Blanqui’s “Histoire de l’économie
    politique en Europe” (Paris, 1837) is disproportioned and
    superficial, and he labors under the disadvantage of not
    understanding the English school of economists. He studies to give
    the history of economic facts, rather than of economic laws. The
    book has been translated into English (New York, 1880).

    Villeneuve-Bargemont, in his “Histoire de l’économie politique”
    (Paris, 1841), aims to oppose a “Christian political economy” to
    the “English” political economy, and indulges in religious
    discussions.

    Travers Twiss, “View of the Progress of Political Economy in
    Europe since the Sixteenth Century” (London, 1847), marked an
    advance by treating the subject in the last four centuries, and by
    separating the history of principles from the history of facts. It
    is brief, and only a sketch. Julius Kautz has published in German
    the best existing history, “Die geschichtliche Entwickelung der
    National-Oekonomie und ihrer Literatur” (Vienna, 1860). (See
    Cossa, “Guide to the Study of Political Economy,” page 80.) Cossa
    in his book has furnished a vast amount of information about
    writers, classified by epochs and countries, and a valuable
    discussion of the divisions of political economy by various
    writers, and its relation to other sciences. It is a very
    desirable little hand-book. McCulloch, in his “Introduction to the
    Wealth of Nations,” gives a brief sketch of the growth of economic
    doctrine. The editor begs to acknowledge his great indebtedness
    for information to his colleague, Professor Charles F. Dunbar, of
    Harvard University.


Systematic study for an understanding of the laws of political economy is
to be found no farther back than the sixteenth century. The history of
political economy is not the history of economic institutions, any more
than the history of mathematics is the history of every object possessing
length, breadth, and thickness. Economic history is the story of the
gradual evolution in the thought of men of an understanding of the laws
which to-day constitute the science we are studying. It is essentially
modern.(1)

Aristotle(2) and Xenophon had some comprehension of the theory of money,
and Plato(3) had defined its functions with some accuracy. The economic
laws of the Romans were all summed up in the idea of enriching the
metropolis at the expense of the dependencies. During the middle ages no
systematic study was undertaken, and the nature of economic laws was not
even suspected.

It is worth notice that the first glimmerings of political economy came to
be seen through the discussions on money, and the extraordinary movements
of gold and silver. About the time of Charles V, the young study was born,
accompanied by the revival of learning, the Reformation, the discovery of
America, and the great fall in the value of gold and silver. Modern
society was just beginning, and had already brought manufactures into
existence—woolens in England, silks in France, Genoa, and Florence; Venice
had become the great commercial city of the world; the Hanseatic League
was carrying goods from the Mediterranean to the Baltic; and the Jews of
Lombardy had by that time brought into use the bill of exchange. While the
supply of the precious metals had been tolerably constant hitherto, the
steady increase of business brought about a fall of prices. From the
middle of the fourteenth to the end of the fifteenth century the
purchasing power of money increased in the ratio of four to ten. Then into
this situation came the great influx of gold and silver from the New
World. Prices rose unequally; the trading and manufacturing classes were
flourishing, while others were depressed. In the sixteenth century the
price of wheat tripled, but wages only doubled; the laboring-classes of
England deteriorated, while others were enriched, producing profound
social changes and the well-known flood of pauperism, together with the
rise of the mercantile classes. Then new channels of trade were opened to
the East and West. Of course, men saw but dimly the operation of these
economic causes; although the books now began to hint at the right
understanding of the movements and the true laws of money.

Even before this time, however, Nicole Orêsme, Bishop of Lisieux (died
1382), had written intelligently on money;(4) but, about 1526, the
astronomer Copernicus gave a very good exposition of some of the functions
of money. But he, as well as Latimer,(5) while noticing the economic
changes, gave no correct explanation. The Seigneur de Malestroit, a
councilor of the King of France, however, by his errors drew out Jean
Bodin(6) to say that the rise of prices was due to the abundance of money
brought from America. But he was in advance of his time, as well as
William Stafford,(7) the author of the first English treatise on money,
which showed a perfect insight into the subject. Stafford distinctly
grasped the idea that the high prices brought no loss to merchants, great
gain to those who held long leases, and loss to those who did not buy and
sell; that, in reality, commodities were exchanged when money was passed
from hand to hand.

Such was the situation(8) which prefaced the first general system destined
to be based on supposed economic considerations, wrongly understood, to be
sure, but vigorously carried out. I refer to the well-known mercantile
system which over-spread Europe.(9) Spain, as the first receiver of
American gold and silver, attributed to it abnormal power, and by heavy
duties and prohibitions tried to keep the precious metals to herself. This
led to a general belief in the tenets of the mercantile system, and its
adoption by all Europe. 1. It was maintained that, where gold and silver
abounded, there would be found no lack of the necessaries of life; 2.
Therefore governments should do all in their power to secure an abundance
of money. Noting that commerce and political power seemed to be in the
hands of the states having the greatest quantity of money, men wished
mainly to create such a relation of exports and imports of goods as would
bring about an importation of money. The natural sequence of this was, the
policy of creating a favorable “balance of trade” by increasing exports
and diminishing imports, thus implying that the gain in international
trade was not a mutual one. The error consisted in supposing that a nation
could sell without buying, and in overlooking the instrumental character
of money. The errors even went so far as to create prohibitory
legislation, in the hope of shutting out imported goods and keeping the
precious metals at home. The system spread over Europe, so that France
(1544) and England (1552) forbade the export of specie. But, with the more
peaceful conditions at the end of the sixteenth century, the expansion of
commerce, the value of money became steadier, and prices advanced more
slowly.

Italian writers were among the first to discuss the laws of money
intelligently,(10) but a number of acute Englishmen enriched the
literature of the subject,(11) and it may be said that any modern study of
political economy received its first definite impulse from England and
France.

The prohibition of the export of coin was embarrassing to the East India
Company and to merchants; and Mun tried to show that freedom of
exportation would increase the amount of gold and silver in a country,
since the profits in foreign trade would bring back more than went out. It
probably was not clear to them, however, that the export of bullion to the
East was advantageous, because the commodities brought back in return were
more valuable in England than the precious metals. The purpose of the
mercantilists was to increase the amount of gold and silver in the
country. Mun, with some penetration, had even pointed out that too much
money was an evil; but in 1663 the English Parliament removed the
restriction on the exportation of coin. The balance-of-trade heresy, that
exports should always exceed imports (as if merchants would send out goods
which, when paid for in commodities, should be returned in a form of less
value than those sent out!), was the outcome of the mercantile system, and
it has continued in the minds of many men to this day. The policy which
aimed at securing a favorable balance of trade, and the plan of protecting
home industries, had the same origin. If all consumable goods were
produced at home, and none imported, that would increase exports, and
bring more gold and silver into the country. As all the countries of
Europe had adopted the mercantile theory after 1664, retaliatory and
prohibitory tariffs were set up against each other by England, France,
Holland, and Germany. Then, because it was seen that large sums were paid
for carrying goods, in order that no coin should be required to pay
foreigners in any branch of industry, navigation laws were enacted, which
required goods to be imported only in ships belonging to the importing
nation. These remnants of the mercantile system continue to this day in
the shipping laws of this and other countries.(12)

A natural consequence of the navigation acts, and of the mercantile
system, was the so-called colonial policy, by which the colonies were
excluded from all trade except with the mother-country. A plantation like
New England, which produced commodities in competition with England, was
looked upon with disfavor for her enterprise; and all this because of the
fallacy, at the foundation of the mercantile system, that the gain in
international trade is not mutual, but that what one country gains another
must lose.(13)

An exposition of mercantilism would not be complete without a statement of
the form it assumed in France under the guidance of Colbert,(14) the great
minister of Louis XIV, from 1661 to 1683. In order to create a favorable
balance of trade, he devoted himself to fostering home productions, by
attempts to abolish vexatious tolls and customs within the country, and by
an extraordinary system of supervision in manufacturing establishments
(which has been the stimulus to paternal government from which France has
never since been able to free herself). Processes were borrowed from
England, Germany, and Sweden, and new establishments for making tapestries
and silk goods sprang up; even the sizes of fabrics were regulated by
Colbert, and looms unsuitable for these sizes destroyed. In 1671
wool-dyers were given a code of detailed instructions as to the processes
and materials that might be used. Long after, French industry felt the
difficulty of struggling with stereotyped processes. His system, however,
naturally resulted in a series of tariff measures (in 1664 and 1667).
Moderate duties on the exportation of raw materials were first laid on,
followed by heavy customs imposed on the importation of foreign goods. The
shipment of coin was forbidden; but Colbert’s criterion of prosperity was
the favorable balance of trade. French agriculture was overlooked. The
tariff of 1667 was based on the theory that foreigners must of necessity
buy French wines, lace, and wheat; that the French could sell, but not
buy; but the act of 1667 cut off the demand for French goods, and
Portuguese wines came into the market. England and Holland retaliated and
shut off the foreign markets from France. The wine and wheat growers of
the latter country were ruined, and the rural population came to the verge
of starvation. Colbert’s last years were full of misfortune and
disappointment; and a new illustration was given of the fallacy that the
gain from international trade was not mutual.

From this time, economic principles began to be better apprehended. It is
to be noted that the first just observations arose from discussions upon
money, and thence upon international trade. So far England has furnished
the most acute writers: now France became the scene of a new movement.
Marshal Vauban,(15) the great soldier, and Boisguillebert(16) both began
to emphasize the truth that wealth really consists, not in money alone,
but in an abundance of commodities; that countries which have plenty of
gold and silver are not wealthier than others, and that money is only a
medium of exchange. It was not, however, until 1750 that evidences of any
real advance began to appear; for Law’s famous scheme (1716-1720) only
served as a drag upon the growth of economic truth. But in the middle of
the eighteenth century an intellectual revival set in: the “Encyclopædia”
was published, Montesquieu wrote his “l’Ésprit des Lois,” Rousseau was
beginning to write, and Voltaire was at the height of his power. In this
movement political economy had an important share, and there resulted the
first school of Economists, termed the Physiocrats.

The founder and leader of this new body of economic thinkers was François
Quesnay,(17) a physician and favorite at the court of Louis XV. Passing by
his ethical basis of a natural order of society, and natural rights of
man, his main doctrine, in brief, was that the cultivation of the soil was
the only source of wealth; that labor in other industries was sterile; and
that freedom of trade was a necessary condition of healthy distribution.
While known as the “Economists,” they were also called the
“Physiocrats,”(18) or the “Agricultural School.” Quesnay and his followers
distinguished between the creation of wealth (which could only come from
the soil) and the union of these materials, once created, by labor in
other occupations. In the latter case the laborer did not, in their
theory, produce wealth. A natural consequence of this view appeared in a
rule of taxation, by which all the burdens of state expenditure were laid
upon the landed proprietors alone, since they alone received a surplus of
wealth (the famous _net produit_) above their sustenance and expenses of
production. This position, of course, did not recognize the old mercantile
theory that foreign commerce enriched a nation solely by increasing the
quantity of money. To a physiocrat the wealth of a community was increased
not by money, but by an abundant produce from its own soil. In fact,
Quesnay argued that the right of property included the right to dispose of
it freely at home or abroad, unrestricted by the state. This doctrine was
formulated in the familiar expression, “_Laissez faire, laissez
passer_.”(19) Condorcet and Condillac favored the new ideas. The
“Economists” became the fashion in France; and even included in their
number Joseph II of Austria, the Kings of Spain, Poland, Sweden, Naples,
Catharine of Russia, and the Margrave of Baden.(20) Agriculture,
therefore, received a great stimulus.

Quesnay had many vigorous supporters, of whom the most conspicuous was the
Marquis de Mirabeau(21) (father of him of the Revolution), and the
culmination of their popularity was reached about 1764. A feeling that the
true increase of wealth was not in a mere increase of money, but in the
products of the soil, led them naturally into a reaction against
mercantilism, but also made them dogmatic and overbearing in their
one-sided system, which did not recognize that labor in all industries
created wealth. As the mercantile system found a great minister in Colbert
to carry those opinions into effect on a national scale, so the
Physiocrats found in Turgot(22) a minister, under Louis XVI, who gave them
a national field in which to try the doctrines of the new school.
Benevolently devoted to bettering the condition of the people while
Intendant of Limoges (1751), he was made comptroller-general of the
finances by Louis XVI in 1774. Turgot had the ability to separate
political economy from politics, law, and ethics. His system of freeing
industry from governmental interference resulted in abolishing many
abuses, securing a freer movement of grain, and in lightening the
taxation. But the rigidity of national prejudices was too strong to allow
him success. He had little tact, and raised many difficulties in his way.
The proposal to abolish the _corvées_ (compulsory repair of roads by the
peasants), and substitute a tax on land, brought his king into a costly
struggle (1776), and attempts to undermine Turgot’s power were successful.
With his downfall ended the influence of the Economists. The last of them
was Dupont de Nemours,(23) who saw a temporary popularity of the
Physiocrats in the early years of the French Revolution, when the
Constituent Assembly threw the burden of taxes on land. But the fire
blazed up fitfully for a moment, only to die away entirely.

All this, however, was the slow preparation for a newer and greater
movement in political economy than had yet been known, and which laid the
foundation of the modern study as it exists to-day. The previous
discussions on money and the prominence given to agriculture and economic
considerations by the Economists made possible the great achievements of
Adam Smith and the English school. A reaction in England against the
mercantile system produced a complete revolution in political economy.
Vigorous protests against mercantilism had appeared long before,(24) and
the true functions of money had come to be rightly understood.(25) More
than that, many of the most important doctrines had been either discussed,
or been given to the public in print. It is at least certain that hints of
much that made so astonishing an effect in Adam Smith’s “Wealth of
Nations” (1776) had been given to the world before the latter was written.
To what sources, among the minor writers, he was most indebted, it is hard
to say. Two, at least, deserve considerable attention, David Hume and
Richard Cantillon. The former published his “Economic Essays” in 1752,
which contained what even now would be considered enlightened views on
money, interest, balance of trade, commerce, and taxation; and a personal
friendship existed between Hume and Adam Smith dating back as far as 1748,
when the latter was lecturing in Edinburgh on rhetoric. The extent of
Cantillon’s acquirements and Adam Smith’s possible indebtedness to him
have been but lately recognized. In a recent study(26) on Cantillon, the
late Professor Jevons has pointed out that the former anticipated many of
the doctrines later ascribed to Adam Smith, Malthus, and Ricardo. Certain
it is that the author of the “Wealth of Nations” took the truth wherever
he found it, received substantial suggestions from various sources, but,
after having devoted himself in a peculiarly successful way to collecting
facts, he wrought out of all he had gathered the first rounded system of
political economy the world had yet known; which pointed out that labor
was at the basis of production, not merely in agriculture, as the French
school would have it, but in all industries; and which battered down all
the defenses of the mediæval mercantile system. In a marked degree Adam
Smith(27) combined a logical precision and a power of generalizing results
out of confused data with a practical and intuitive regard for facts which
are absolutely necessary for great achievements in the science of
political economy. At Glasgow (1751-1764) Adam Smith gave lectures on
natural theology, ethical philosophy, jurisprudence, and political
economy, believing that these subjects were complementary to each other.

A connected and comprehensive grasp of principles was the great
achievement of Adam Smith;(28) for, although the “Wealth of Nations” was
naturally not without faults, it has been the basis of all subsequent
discussion and advance in political economy. In Books I and II his own
system is elucidated, while Book IV contains his discussion of the
Agricultural School and the attacks on the mercantile system. Seeing
distinctly that labor was the basis of all production (not merely in
agriculture), he shows (Books I and II) that the wealth of a country
depends on the skill with which its labor is applied, and upon the
proportion of productive to unproductive laborers. The gains from division
of labor are explained, and money appears as a necessary instrument after
society has reached such a division. He is then led to discuss prices
(market price) and value; and, since from the price a distribution takes
place among the factors of production, he is brought to wages, profit, and
rent. The functions of capital are explained in general; the separation of
fixed from circulating capital is made; and he discusses the influence of
capital on the distribution of productive and unproductive labor; the
accumulation of capital, money, paper money, and interest. He, therefore,
gets a connected set of ideas on production, distribution, and exchange.
On questions of production not much advance has been made since his day;
and his rules of taxation are now classic. He attacked vigorously the
balance-of-trade theory, and the unnatural diversion of industry in
England by prohibitions, bounties, and the arbitrary colonial system. In
brief, he held that a plan for the regulation of industry by the
Government was indefensible, and that to direct private persons how to
employ their capital was either hurtful or useless. He taught that a
country will be more prosperous if its neighbors are prosperous, and that
nations have no interest in injuring each other. It was, however, but
human that his work should have been somewhat defective.(29) A new period
in the history of political economy, however, begins with Adam Smith. As
Roscher says, he stands in the center of economic history.

New writers now appear who add gradually stone after stone to the good
foundation already laid, and raise the edifice to fairer proportions. The
first considerable addition comes from a contribution by a country
clergyman, Thomas Robert Malthus,(30) in his “Essay on the Principles of
Population” (1798). Against the view of Pitt that “the man who had a large
family was a benefactor to his country,” Malthus argued conclusively that
“a perfectly happy and virtuous community, by physical law, is constrained
to increase very rapidly.... By nature human food increases in a slow
arithmetical ratio; man himself increases in a quick geometrical ratio,
unless want and vice stop him.” In his second edition (1803), besides the
positive check of vice and want, he gave more importance to the negative
check of “self-restraint, moral and prudential.” The whole theory was
crudely stated at first; and it raised the cry that such a doctrine was
inconsistent with the belief in a benevolent Creator. In its essence, the
law of population is simply that a tendency and ability exist in mankind
to increase its numbers faster than subsistence, and that this result
actually will happen unless checks retard it, or new means of getting
subsistence arise. If an undue increase of population led to vice and
misery, in Malthus’s theory, he certainly is not to be charged with
unchristian feelings if he urged a self-restraint by which that evil
result should be avoided. Malthus’s doctrines excited great discussion:
Godwin says that by 1820 thirty or forty answers to the essay had been
written; and they have continued to appear. The chief contributions have
been by A. H. Everett, “New Ideas on Population” (1823), who believed that
an increase of numbers increased productive power; by M. T. Sadler, “Law
of Population” (1830), who taught that human fertility varied inversely
with numbers, falling off with density of population; by Sir Archibald
Alison, “Principles of Population” (1840), who reasoned inductively that
the material improvement of the human race is a proof that man can produce
more than he consumes, or that in the progress of society preventive
checks necessarily arise; by W. R. Greg, “Enigmas of Life” (1873); and by
Herbert Spencer, “Westminster Review” (April, 1852), and “Principles of
Biology,” (part vi, ch. xii and xiii), who worked out a physiological
check, in that with a mental development out of lower stages there comes
an increased demand upon the nervous energy which causes a diminution of
fertility. Since Darwin’s studies it has been very generally admitted that
it is the innate _tendency_ of all organic life to increase until numbers
press upon the limit of food-production; not that population has always
done so in every country.(31) Malthus’s teachings resulted in the modern
poor-house system, beginning with 1834 in England, and they corrected some
of the abuses of indiscriminate charity.

While Adam Smith had formulated very correctly the laws of production, in
his way Malthus was adding to the means by which a better knowledge of the
principles of distribution was to be obtained; and the next advance, owing
to the sharp discussions of the time on the corn laws, was, by a natural
progress, to the law of diminishing returns and rent. An independent
discovery of the law of rent is to be assigned to no less than four
persons,(32) but for the full perception of its truth and its connection
with other principles of political economy the credit has been rightly
given to David Ricardo,(33) next to Adam Smith without question the
greatest economist of the English school. Curiously enough, although Adam
Smith was immersed in abstract speculations, his “homely sagacity” led him
to the most practical results; but while Ricardo was an experienced and
successful man of business, he it was, above all others, who established
the abstract political economy, in the sense of a body of scientific laws
to which concrete phenomena, in spite of temporary inconsistencies, must
in the end conform. His work, therefore, supplemented that of Adam Smith;
and there are very few doctrines fully worked out to-day of which hints
have not been found in Ricardo’s wonderfully compact statements. With no
graces of exposition, his writings seem dry, but are notwithstanding mines
of valuable suggestions.

In the field of distribution and exchange Ricardo made great additions.
Malthus and West had shown that rent was not an element in cost of
production; but both Malthus and Ricardo seemed to have been familiar with
the doctrine of rent long before the former published his book. Ricardo,
however, saw into its connection with other parts of a system of
distribution.(34) The Malthusian doctrine of a pressure of population on
subsistence naturally forced a recognition of the law of diminishing
returns from land;(35) then as soon as different qualities of land were
simultaneously cultivated, the best necessarily gave larger returns than
the poorest; and the idea that the payment of rent was made for a superior
instrument, and in proportion to its superiority over the poorest
instrument which society found necessary to use, resulted in the law of
rent. Ricardo, moreover, carried out this principle as it affected wages,
profits, values, and the fall of profits; but did not give sufficient
importance to the operation of forces in the form of improvements acting
in opposition to the tendency toward lessened returns. The theory of rent
still holds its place, although it has met with no little opposition.(36)
A doctrine, quite as important in its effects on free exchange, was
clearly established by Ricardo, under the name of the doctrine of
“Comparative Cost,” which is the reason for the existence of any and all
international trade.

The work of Adam Smith was soon known to other countries, apart from
translations. A most lucid and attractive exposition was given to the
French by J. B. Say, “Traité d’économie politique” (1803), followed, after
lecturing in Paris from 1815-1830, by a more complete treatise,(37) “Cours
complète d’économie politique” (1828). While not contributing much that
was new, Say did a great service by popularizing previous results in a
happy and lively style, combined with good arrangement, and many
illustrations. The theory that general demand and supply are identical is
his most important contribution to the study. Although he translated
Ricardo’s book, he did not grasp the fact that rent did not enter into
price. Say’s work was later supplemented by an Italian, Pellegrino
Rossi,(38) who, in his “Cours d’économie politique” (1843-1851),
naturalized the doctrines of Malthus and Ricardo on French soil. His work
is of solid value, and he and Say have given rise to an active school of
political economy in France. In Switzerland, Sismondi expounded Adam
Smith’s results in his “De la richesse commerciale” (1803), but was soon
led into a new position, explained in his “Nouveaux principes d’économie
politique” (1819). This has made him the earliest and most distinguished
of the humanitarian economists. Seeing the sufferings caused by
readjustments of industries after the peace, and the warehouses filled
with unsold goods, he thought the excess of production over the power of
consumption was permanent, and attacked division of labor, labor-saving
machinery, and competition. Discoveries which would supersede labor he
feared would continue, and the abolition of patents, together with the
limitation of population,(39) was urged. These arguments furnished
excellent weapons to the socialistic agitators. Heinrich Storch(40) aimed
to spread the views of Adam Smith(41) in Russia, by his “Cours d’économie
politique” (1815). Without further developing the theory of political
economy, he produced a book of exceptional merit by pointing out the
application of the principles to Russia, particularly in regard to the
effect of a progress of wealth on agriculture and manufactures; to the
natural steps by which a new country changes from agriculture to a
manufacturing _régime_; and to finance and currency, with an account of
Russian depreciated paper since Catharine II.

For the next advance, we must again look to England. Passing by
McCulloch(42) and Senior, a gifted writer, the legitimate successor of
Ricardo is John Stuart Mill.(43) His father, James Mill,(44) introduced
him into a circle of able men, of which Bentham was the ablest, although
his father undoubtedly exercised the chief influence over his training.
While yet but twenty-three, in his first book, “Essays on some Unsettled
Questions of Political Economy” (1829-1830), he gained a high position as
an economist. In one form or another, all his additions to the study are
to be found here in a matured condition. The views on productive and
unproductive consumption, profits, economic methods, and especially his
very clever investigation on international values, were there presented.
His “Logic” (1843) contains (Book VI) a careful statement of the relation
of political economy to other sciences, and of the proper economic method
to be adopted in investigations. Through his “Principles of Political
Economy” (1848) he has exercised a remarkable influence upon men in all
lands; not so much because of great originality, since, in truth, he only
put Ricardo’s principles in better and more attractive form, but chiefly
by a method of systematic treatment more lucid and practical than had been
hitherto reached, by improving vastly beyond the dry treatises of his
predecessors (including Ricardo, who was concise and dull), by infusing a
human element into his aims, and by illustrations and practical
applications. Even yet, however, some parts of his book show the tendency
to too great a fondness for abstract statement, induced probably by a
dislike to slighting his reasons (due to his early training), and by the
limits of his book, which obliged him to omit many possible illustrations.
With a deep sympathy for the laboring-classes, he was tempted into the
field of sociology in this book, although he saw distinctly that political
economy was but one of the sciences, a knowledge of which was necessary to
a legislator in reaching a decision upon social questions. Mill shows an
advance beyond Ricardo in this treatise, by giving the study a more
practical direction. Although it is usual to credit Mill with originating
the laws of international values, yet they are but a development of
Ricardo’s doctrine of international trade, and Mill’s discussions of the
progress of society toward the stationary state were also hinted at,
although obscurely, by Ricardo. In the volumes of Mr. Mill the subject is
developed as symmetrically as a proof in geometry. While he held strongly
to free trade,(45) he gave little space to the subject in his book. All in
all, his book yet remains the best systematic treatise in the English
language, although much has been done since his day.(46)

He who has improved upon previous conceptions, and been the only one to
make any very important advance in the science since Mill’s day, is J. E.
Cairnes,(47) in his “Leading Principles of Political Economy newly
expounded” (1874). Scarcely any previous writer has equaled him in logical
clearness, originality, insight into economic phenomena, and lucidity of
style. He subjected value, supply and demand, cost of production, and
international trade, to a rigid investigation, which has given us actual
additions to our knowledge of the study. The wages-fund theory was
re-examined, and was stated in a new form, although Mr. Mill had given it
up. Cairnes undoubtedly has given it its best statement. His argument on
free trade (Part III, chapter iv) is the ablest and strongest to be found
in modern writers. This volume is, however, not a systematic treatise on
all the principles of political economy; but no student can properly pass
by these great additions for the right understanding of the science. His
“Logical Method of Political Economy” (1875) is a clear and able statement
of the process to be adopted in an economic investigation, and is a book
of exceptional merit and usefulness, especially in view of the rising
differences in the minds of economists as to method.

A group of English writers of ability in this period have written in such
a way as to win for them mention in connection with Cairnes and Mill.
Professor W. Stanley Jevons(48) put himself in opposition to the methods
of the men just mentioned, and applied the mathematical process to
political economy, but without reaching new results. His most serviceable
work has been in the study of money, which appears in an excellent form,
“The Money and Mechanism of Exchange” (1875), and in an investigation
which showed a fall of the value of gold since the discoveries of 1849. In
this latter he has furnished a model for any subsequent investigator. Like
Professor Jevons, T. E. Cliffe Leslie(49) opposed the older English school
(the so-called “orthodox”), but in the different way of urging with great
ability the use of the historical method, of which more will be said in
speaking of later German writers.(50) He also distinguished himself by a
study of land tenures, in his “Land Systems and Industrial Economy of
Ireland, England, and Continental Countries” (1870), which was a brilliant
exposition of the advantages of small holdings.

By far the ablest of the group, both by reason of his natural gifts and
his training as a banker and financial editor, was Walter Bagehot.(51) In
his “Economic Studies” (1880) he has discussed with a remarkable economic
insight the postulates of political economy, and the position of Adam
Smith, Ricardo, and Malthus; in his “Lombard Street” (fourth edition,
1873), the money market is pictured with a vivid distinctness which
implies the possession of rare qualities for financial writing; indeed, it
is in this practical way also, as editor of the London “Economist,”(52)
that he made his great reputation.

Of living English economists, Professor Henry Fawcett,(53) in his “Manual
of Political Economy” (1865; sixth edition, 1883), is a close follower of
Mill, giving special care to co-operation, silver, nationalization of
land, and trades-unions. He is an exponent of the strict wages-fund
theory, and a vigorous free-trader. Professor J. E. Thorold Rogers, of
Oxford, also holds aloof from the methods of the old school. His greatest
contribution has been a “History of Agriculture and Prices in England,”
from 1255 to 1793, in four volumes(54) (1866-1882).

Of all the writers(55) since Cairnes, it may be said that, while adding to
the data with which political economy has to do, and putting principles to
the test of facts, they have made no actual addition to the existing body
of principles; although questions of distribution and taxation are
certainly not yet fully settled, as is seen by the wide differences of
opinion expressed on subjects falling within these heads by writers of
to-day.

It now remains to complete this sketch of the growth of political economy
by a brief account of the writers on the Continent and in the United
States, beginning with France. About the time of the founding of the
London “Economist” (1844) and “The Statistical Journal” (1839) in England,
there was established in Paris the “Journal des Économistes” (1842), which
contains many valuable papers. On the whole, the most popular writer since
J. B. Say has been Bastiat,(56) who aspired to be the French Cobden. He
especially urged a new(57) view of value, which he defined as the relation
established by an exchange of services; that nature’s products are
gratuitous, so that man can not exact anything except for a given service.
Chiefly as a foe of protection, which he regarded as qualified socialism,
he has won a reputation for popular and clever writing; and he was led to
believe in a general harmony of interests between industrial classes; but
in general he can not be said to have much influenced the course of French
thought. On value, rent, and population, he is undoubtedly unsound. A
writer of far greater depth than Bastiat, with uncommon industry and wide
knowledge, was Michel Chevalier,(58) easily the first among modern French
economists. He has led in the discussion upon the fall of gold,
protection, banking, and particularly upon money; an ardent free-trader,
he had influence enough to induce France to enter into the commercial
treaty of 1860 with England. One of the ablest writers on special topics
is Levasseur,(59) who has given us a history of the working-classes before
and since the Revolution, and the best existing monograph on John Law. The
most industrious and reliable of the recent writers is the well-known
statistician, Maurice Block,(60) while less profound economists were J. A.
Blanqui(61) and Wolowski.(62) The latter devoted himself enthusiastically
to banks of issue, and bimetallism. A small group gave themselves up
chiefly to studies on agriculture and land-tenures—H. Passy,(63) Laveleye,
and Lavergne.(64) The latter is by far the most important, as shown by his
“L’économie rurale de la France depuis 1789” (1857), which gives a means
of comparing recent French agriculture with that before the Revolution, as
described in Arthur Young’s “Travels in France” (1789). The best
systematic treatise in French is the “Précis de la science économique”
(1862), by Antoine-Élise Cherbuliez,(65) a Genevan. The French were the
first to produce an alphabetical encyclopædia of economics, by Coquelin
and Guillaumin, entitled the “Dictionnaire de l’économie politique”
(1851-1853, third edition, 1864). Courcelle-Seneuil,(66) by his “Traité
théorique et pratique d’économie politique” (second edition, 1867); and
Baudrillart, by a good compendium. Joseph Garnier, Dunoyer,(67) Paul
Leroy-Beaulieu,(68) Reybaud,(69) De Parieu,(70) Léon Say,(71) Boiteau, and
others, have done excellent work in France, and Walras(72) in Switzerland.

As Cobden had an influence on Bastiat, so both had an influence in Germany
in creating what has been styled by opponents the “Manchester school,” led
by Prince-Smith (died 1874). They have worked to secure complete liberty
of commerce and industry, and include in their numbers many men of ability
and learning. Yearly congresses have been organized for the purpose of
disseminating liberal ideas, and an excellent review, the
“Vierteljahrschrift für Volkswirthschaft, Politik, und
Kulturgeschichte,”(73) has been established. They have devoted themselves
successfully to reforms of labor-laws, interest, workingmen’s dwellings,
the money system, and banking, and strive for the abolition of protective
duties. Schulze-Delitzsch has acquired a deserved reputation for the
creation of people’s banks, and other forms of co-operation. The
translator of Mill into German, Adolph Soetbeer,(74) is the most eminent
living authority on the production of the precious metals, and a vigorous
monometallist. The school is represented in the “Handwörterbuch der
Volkswirthschaftslehre” (1865) of Reutzsch. The other writers of this
group are Von Böhmert,(75) Faucher, Braun, Wolff, Michaelis,
Emminghaus,(76) Wirth,(77) Hertzka, and Von Holtzendorf. The best known of
the German protectionists is Friedrich List, the author of “Das nationale
System der politischen Oekonomie” (1841), whose doctrines are very similar
to those of H. C. Carey in this country.(78) An able writer on
administrative functions and finance(79) is Lorenz Stein, of Vienna.

But German economists are of interest, inasmuch as they have established a
new school who urge the use of the historical method in political economy,
and it is about the question of method that much of the interest of to-day
centers. In 1814 Savigny introduced this method into jurisprudence, and
about 1850 it was applied to political economy. The new school claim that
the English “orthodox” writers begin by an _a priori_ process, and by
deductions reach conclusions which are possibly true of imaginary cases,
but are not true of man as he really acts. They therefore assert that
economic laws can only be truly discovered by induction, or a study of
phenomena first, as the means of reaching a generalization. To them
Bagehot(80) answers that scientific bookkeeping, or collections of facts,
in themselves give no results ending in scientific laws; for instance,
since the facts of banking change and vary every day, no one can by
induction alone reach any laws of banking; or, for example, the study of a
panic from the concrete phenomena would be like trying to explain the
bursting of a boiler without a theory of steam. More lately,(81) since it
seems that the new school claim that induction does not preclude
deduction, and as the old school never intended to disconnect themselves
from “comparing conclusions with external facts,” there is not such a
cause of difference as has previously appeared. Doubtless the insistence
upon the merits of induction will be fruitful of good to “orthodox”
writers, in the more general resort to the collection of statistics and
means of verification. It is suggestive also that the leaders of the new
school in Germany and England have reached no different results by their
new method, and in the main agree with the laws evolved by the old English
school. The economist does not pretend that his assumptions are
descriptions of economic conditions existing at a given time; he simply
considers them as forces (often acting many on one point or occasion) to
be inquired into separately, inasmuch as concrete phenomena are the
resultants of several forces, not to be known until we know the separate
operation of each of the conjoined forces.

The most prominent of the new school is Wilhelm Roscher,(82) of Leipsic,
who wrote a systematic treatise, “System der Volkswirthschaft” (1854,
sixteenth edition, 1883), in the first division of which the notes contain
a marvelous collection of facts and authorities. He agrees in results with
Adam Smith, Ricardo, Malthus, and Mill, but does not seem to have known
much of Cairnes. This book, however, is only a first of four treatises
eventually intended to include the political economy of (2) agriculture,
(3) industry and commerce, and (4) the state and commune. The ablest
contemporary of Roscher, who was probably the first to urge the historical
method, is Karl Knies,(83) in “Die politische Oekonomie vom Standpunkte
der geschichtlichen Methode” (1853, second edition, 1881-1883). The third
of the group who founded the historical school is Bruno Hildebrand,(84) of
Jena, author of “Die Nationalökonomie der Gegenwart und Zukunft” (1848).

The German mind has always been familiar with the interference of the
state, and a class of writers has arisen, not only advocating the
inductive method, but strongly imbued with a belief in a close connection
of the state with industry; and, inasmuch as the essence of modern
socialism is a resort to state-help, this body of men, with Wagner at
their head, has received the name of “Socialists(85) of the Chair,” and
now wield a wide influence in Germany. Of these writers,(86) Wagner,
Engel, Schmoller, Von Scheel, Brentano, Held, Schönberg, and Schäffle are
the most prominent.

The historical school has received the adhesion of Émile de Laveleye,(87)
in Belgium, and other economists in England and the United States. While
Cliffe Leslie has been the most vigorous opponent of the methods of the
old school, there have been many others of less distinction. Indeed, the
period, the close of which is marked by J. R. McCulloch’s book, was one in
which the old school had seemingly come to an end of its progress, from
too close an adhesion to deductions from assumed premises. Mill’s great
merit was that he began the movement to better adapt political economy to
society as it actually existed; and the historical school will probably
give a most desirable impetus to the same results, even though its
exaggerated claims as to the true method(88) can not possibly be admitted.

Italian writers have not received hitherto the attention they deserve.
After 1830, besides Rossi, who went to France, there was Romagnosi, who
dealt more with the relations of economics to other studies; Cattanes, who
turned to rural questions and free trade (combating the German, List);
Scialoja, at the University of Turin; and Francesco Ferrara, also at Turin
from 1849 to 1858. The latter was a follower of Bastiat and Carey, as
regards value and rent, and at the same time was a radical believer in
_laissez-faire_. Since the union of Italy there has been a new interest in
economic study, as with us after our war. The most eminent living Italian
economist is said to be Angelo Messedaglia, holding a chair at Padua since
1858. He has excelled in statistical and financial subjects, and is now
engaged on a treatise on money, “Moneta,” of which one part has been
issued (1882). Marco Minghetti and Fedele Lampertico stand above others,
the former for a study of the connection of political economy with morals,
and for his public career as a statesman; the latter for his studies on
paper money and other subjects. Carlo Ferrais presented a good monograph
on “Money and the Forced Currency” (1879); and Boccardo issued a library
of selected works of the best economists, and a large Dictionary of
Political Economy, “Dizionario universale di Economia Politica e di
Commercio” (2 vols., second edition, 1875). Luigi Luzzati is a vigorous
advocate of co-operation; and Elia Lattes has made a serious study of the
early Venetian banks.

Political economy has gained little from American writers. Of our
statesmen none have made any additions to the science, and only Hamilton
and Gallatin can properly be called economists. Hamilton, in his famous
“Report on Manufactures” (1791), shared in some of the erroneous
conceptions of his day; but this paper, together with his reports on a
national bank and the public credit, are evidences of a real economic
power. Gallatin’s “Memorial in Favor of Tariff Reform” (1832) is as able
as Hamilton’s report on manufactures, and a strong argument against
protection. Both men made a reputation as practical financiers.

“With few exceptions, the works produced in the United States have been
prepared as text-books(89) by authors engaged in college instruction, and
therefore chiefly interested in bringing principles previously worked out
by others within the easy comprehension of undergraduate students.”(90) Of
these exceptions, Alexander H. Everett’s “New Ideas on Population”(91)
(1822), forms a valuable part in the discussion which followed the
appearance of Malthus’s “Essay.” The writer, however, who has drawn most
attention, at home and abroad, for a vigorous attack on the doctrines of
Ricardo is Henry Charles Carey.(92) Beginning with “The Rate of Wages”
(1835), he developed a new theory of value (see “Principles of Political
Economy,” 1837-1840), “which he defined as a measure of the resistance to
be overcome in obtaining things required for use, or the measure of the
power of nature over man. In simpler terms, value is measured by the cost
of reproduction. The value of every article thus declines as the arts
advance, while the general command of commodities constantly increases.
This causes a constant fall in the value of accumulated capital as
compared with the results of present labor, from which is inferred a
tendency toward harmony rather than divergence of interests between
capitalist and laborer.” This theory of value(93) he applied to land, and
even to man, in his desire to give it universality. He next claimed to
have discovered a law of increasing production from land in his “Past,
Present, and Future” (1848), which was diametrically opposed to Ricardo’s
law of diminishing returns. His proof was an historical one, that in fact
the poorer, not the richer lands, were first taken into cultivation. This,
however, did not explain the fact that different grades of land are
simultaneously under cultivation, on which Ricardo’s doctrine of rent is
based. The constantly increasing production of land naturally led Carey to
believe in the indefinite increase of population. He, however, was
logically brought to accept the supposed law of an ultimate limit to
numbers suggested by Herbert Spencer, based on a diminution of human
fertility. He tried to identify physical and social laws, and fused his
political economy in a system of “Social Science” (1853), and his “Unity
of Law” (1872). From about 1845 he became a protectionist, and his
writings were vigorously controversial. In his doctrines on money he is
distinctly a mercantilist;(94) but, by his earnest attacks on all that has
been gained in the science up to his day, he has done a great service in
stimulating inquiry and causing a better statement of results. While
undoubtedly the best known of American writers, yet, because of a prolix
style and an illogical habit of mind, he has had no extended influence on
his countrymen.(95)

The effect of the civil war is now beginning to show itself in an
unmistakable drift toward the investigation of economic questions, and
there is a distinctly energetic tone which may bring new contributions
from American writers. General Francis A. Walker,(96) in his study on “The
Wages Question” (1876), has combated the wages-fund theory, and proposed
in its place a doctrine that wages are paid out of the product, and not
out of accumulated capital. Professor W. G. Sumner(97) is a vigorous
writer in the school of Mill and Cairnes, and has done good work in the
cause of sound money doctrines. Both General Walker and Professor Sumner
hold to the method of economic investigation as expounded by Mr. Cairnes;
although several younger economists show the influence of the German
school. Professor A. L. Perry,(98) of Williams College, adopted Bastiat’s
theory of value. He also accepts the wages-fund theory, rejects the law of
Malthus, and, although believing in the law of diminishing returns from
land, regards rent as the reward for a service rendered. Another writer,
Henry George,(99) has gained an abnormal prominence by a plausible book,
“Progress and Poverty” (1880), which rejects the doctrine of Malthus, and
argues that the increase of production of any kind augments the demand for
land, and so raises its value. His conclusions lead him to advocate the
nationalization of land. Although in opposition to almost all that
political economy has yet produced, his writing has drawn to him very
unusual notice. The increasing interest in social questions, and the
general lack of economic training, which prevents a right estimate of his
reasoning by people in general, sufficiently account for the wide
attention he has received.

Of late, however, new activity has been shown in the establishment of
better facilities for the study of political economy in the principal
seats of learning—Harvard, Yale, Cornell, Columbia, Michigan, and
Pennsylvania: and a “Cyclopædia of Political Science” (1881-1884, three
volumes) has been published by J. J. Lalor, after the example of the
French dictionaries.




Books For Consultation (From English, French, And German Authors).


GENERAL TREATISES FORMING A PARALLEL COURSE OF READING WITH MILL.

Professor Fawcett’s “Manual of Political Economy” (London, sixth edition,
1883) is a brief statement of Mill’s book, with additional matter on the
precious metals, slavery, trades-unions, co-operation, local taxation,
etc.

Antoine-Élise Cherbuliez’s “Précis de la science économique” (Paris, 1862,
2 vols.) follows the same arrangement as Mill, and is considered the best
treatise on economic science in the French language. He is methodical,
profound, and clear, and separates pure from applied political economy.

Other excellent books in French are: Courcelle-Seneuil’s “Traité théorique
et pratique d’économie politique” (1858), (Paris, second edition, 1867, 2
vols.), and a compendium by Henri Baudrillart, “Manuel d’économie
politique” (third edition, 1872).

Roscher’s “Principles of Political Economy” is a good example of the
German historical method; its notes are crowded with facts; but the
English translation (New York, 1878) is badly done. There is an excellent
translation of it into French by Wolowski.

A desirable elementary work, “The Economics of Industry” (London, 1879),
was prepared by Mr. and Mrs. Marshall.

Professor Jevons wrote a “Primer of Political Economy” (1878), which is a
simple, bird’s-eye view of the subject in a very narrow compass.

IMPORTANT GENERAL WORKS.

Adam Smith’s “Wealth of Nations” (1776). The edition of McCulloch is
perhaps more serviceable than that of J. E. T. Rogers.

Ricardo’s “Principles of Political Economy and Taxation” (1817).

J. S. Mill’s “Principles of Political Economy” (2 vols., 1848—sixth
edition, 1865).

Schönberg’s “Handbuch der politischen Oekonomie” (1882). This is a large
co-operative treatise by twenty-one writers from the historical school.

Cairnes’s “Leading Principles of Political Economy” (1874); “Logical
Method” (1875), lectures first delivered in Dublin in 1857.

Carey’s “Social Science” (1877). This has been abridged in one volume by
Kate McKean.

F. A. Walker’s “Political Economy” (1883). This author differs from other
economists, particularly on wages and questions of distribution.

H. George’s “Progress and Poverty” (1879). In connection with this, read
F. A. Walker’s “Land and Rent” (1884).

TREATISES ON SPECIAL SUBJECTS.

W. T. Thornton’s “On Labor” (1869).

McLeod’s “Theory and Practice of Banking” (second edition, 1875-1876).

M. Block’s “Traité théorique et pratique de statistique” (1878).

Goschen’s “Theory of Foreign Exchanges” (eighth edition, 1875).

J. Caird’s “Landed Interest” (fourth edition, 1880), treating of English
land and the food-supply.

W. G. Sumner’s “History of American Currency” (1874).

John Jay Knox’s “United States Notes” (1884).

Jevons’s “Money and the Mechanism of Exchange” (1875).

Tooke and Newmarch’s “History of Prices” (1837-1856), in six volumes.

Leroy-Beaulieu’s “Traité de la science des finances” (1883). This is an
extended work, in two volumes, on taxation and finance; “Essai sur la
répartition des richesses” (second edition, 1883).

F. A. Walker’s “The Wages Question” (1876); “Money” (1878).

L. Reybaud’s “Études sur les réformateurs contemporains, ou socialistes
modernes” (seventh edition, 1864).

DICTIONARIES.

McCulloch’s “Commercial Dictionary” (new and enlarged edition, 1882).

Lalor’s “Cyclopædia of Political Science” (1881-84) is devoted to articles
on political science, political economy, and American history.

Coquelin and Guillaumin’s “Dictionnaire de l’économie politique”
(1851-1853, third edition, 1864), in two large volumes.

REPORTS AND STATISTICS.

The “Compendiums of the Census” for 1840, 1850, 1860, and 1870, are
desirable. The volumes of the tenth census (1880) are of great value for
all questions; as is also F. A. Walker’s “Statistical Atlas” (1874).

The United States Bureau of Statistics issues quarterly statements; and
annually a report on “Commerce and Navigation,” and another on the
“Internal Commerce of the United States.”

The “Statistical Abstract” is an annual publication, by the same
department, compact and useful. It dates only from 1878.

The Director of the Mint issues an annual report dealing with the precious
metals and the circulation. Its tables are important.

The Comptroller of the Currency (especially during the administration of
J. J. Knox) has given important annual reports upon the banking systems of
the United States.

The reports of the Secretary of the Treasury deal with the general
finances of the United States. These, with the two last mentioned, are
bound together in the volume of “Finance Reports,” but often shorn of
their tables.

There are valuable special reports to Congress of commissioners on the
tariff, shipping, and other subjects, published by the Government.

The report on the “International Monetary Conference of 1878” contains a
vast quantity of material on monetary questions.

The British parliamentary documents contain several annual “Statistical
Abstracts” of the greatest value, of which the one relating to other
European states is peculiarly convenient and useful. These can always be
purchased at given prices.

A. R. Spofford’s “American Almanac” is an annual of great usefulness.




Preliminary Remarks.


Writers on Political Economy profess to teach, or to investigate, the
nature of Wealth, and the laws of its production and distribution;
including, directly or remotely, the operation of all the causes by which
the condition of mankind, or of any society of human beings, in respect to
this universal object of human desire, is made prosperous or the reverse.


    It will be noticed that political economy does not include ethics,
    legislation, or the science of government. The results of
    political economy are offered to the statesman, who reaches a
    conclusion after weighing them in connection with moral and
    political considerations. Political Economy is distinct from
    Sociology; although it is common to include in the former
    everything which concerns social life. Some writers distinguish
    between the pure, or abstract science, and the applied art, and we
    can speak of a science of political economy only in the sense of a
    body of abstract laws or formulas. This, however, does not make
    political economy less practical than physics, for, after a
    principle is ascertained, its operation is to be observed in the
    same way that we study the force of gravitation in a falling
    stone, even when retarded by opposing forces. An economic force,
    or tendency, can be likewise distinctly observed, although other
    influences, working at the same time, prevent the expected effect
    from following its cause. It is, in short, the aim of political
    economy to investigate the laws which govern the phenomena of
    material wealth. (Cf. Cossa, “Guide,” chap. iii.)


While the [Mercantile] system prevailed, it was assumed, either expressly
or tacitly, in the whole policy of nations, that wealth consisted solely
of money; or of the precious metals, which, when not already in the state
of money, are capable of being directly converted into it. According to
the doctrines then prevalent, whatever tended to heap up money or bullion
in a country added to its wealth.


    More correctly the Mercantilists (in the sixteenth and seventeenth
    centuries) held that where money was most plentiful, there would
    be found the greatest abundance of the necessaries of life.(100)


Whatever sent the precious metals out of a country impoverished it. If a
country possessed no gold or silver mines, the only industry by which it
could be enriched was foreign trade, being the only one which could bring
in money. Any branch of trade which was supposed to send out more money
than it brought in, however ample and valuable might be the returns in
another shape, was looked upon as a losing trade. Exportation of goods was
favored and encouraged (even by means extremely onerous to the real
resources of the country), because, the exported goods being stipulated to
be paid for in money, it was hoped that the returns would actually be made
in gold and silver. Importation of anything, other than the precious
metals, was regarded as a loss to the nation of the whole price of the
things imported; unless they were brought in to be re-exported at a
profit, or unless, being the materials or instruments of some industry
practiced in the country itself, they gave the power of producing
exportable articles at smaller cost, and thereby effecting a larger
exportation. The commerce of the world was looked upon as a struggle among
nations, which could draw to itself the largest share of the gold and
silver in existence; and in this competition no nation could gain
anything, except by making others lose as much, or, at the least,
preventing them from gaining it.

The Mercantile Theory could not fail to be seen in its true character when
men began, even in an imperfect manner, to explore into the foundations of
things. Money, as money, satisfies no want; its worth to any one consists
in its being a convenient shape in which to receive his incomings of all
sorts, which incomings he afterwards, at the times which suit him best,
converts into the forms in which they can be useful to him. The difference
between a country with money, and a country altogether without it, would
be only one of convenience; a saving of time and trouble, like grinding by
water instead of by hand, or (to use Adam Smith’s illustration) like the
benefit derived from roads; and to mistake money for wealth is the same
sort of error as to mistake the highway, which may be the easiest way of
getting to your house or lands, for the house and lands themselves.

Money, being the instrument of an important public and private purpose, is
rightly regarded as wealth; but everything else which serves any human
purpose, and which nature does not afford gratuitously, is wealth also. To
be wealthy is to have a large stock of useful articles, or the means of
purchasing them. Everything forms, therefore, a part of wealth, which has
a power of purchasing; for which anything useful or agreeable would be
given in exchange. Things for which nothing could be obtained in exchange,
however useful or necessary they may be, are not wealth in the sense in
which the term is used in Political Economy. Air, for example, though the
most absolute of necessaries, bears no price in the market, because it can
be obtained gratuitously; to accumulate a stock of it would yield no
profit or advantage to any one; and the laws of its production and
distribution are the subject of a very different study from Political
Economy. It is possible to imagine circumstances in which air would be a
part of wealth. If it became customary to sojourn long in places where the
air does not naturally penetrate, as in diving-bells sunk in the sea, a
supply of air artificially furnished would, like water conveyed into
houses, bear a price: and, if from any revolution in nature the atmosphere
became too scanty for the consumption, or could be monopolized, air might
acquire a very high marketable value. In such a case, the possession of
it, beyond his own wants, would be, to its owner, wealth; and the general
wealth of mankind might at first sight appear to be increased, by what
would be so great a calamity to them. The error would lie in not
considering that, however rich the possessor of air might become at the
expense of the rest of the community, all persons else would be poorer by
all that they were compelled to pay for what they had before obtained
without payment.

Wealth, then, may be defined, all useful or agreeable things which possess
exchangeable value; or, in other words, all useful or agreeable things
except those which can be obtained, in the quantity desired, without labor
or sacrifice.


    This is the usual definition of wealth. Henry George (see
    “Progress and Poverty,” pp. 34-37) regards wealth as consisting
    “of natural products that have been secured, moved, combined,
    separated, or in other ways _modified by human exertion_, so as to
    fit them for the gratification of human desires.... Nothing which
    Nature supplies to man without his labor is wealth.... All things
    which have an exchange value are, therefore, not wealth. Only such
    things can be wealth the production of which increases and the
    destruction of which decreases the aggregate of wealth....
    Increase in land values does not represent increase in the common
    wealth, for what land-owners gain by higher prices the tenants or
    purchasers who must pay them will lose.” Jevons (“Primer,” p. 13)
    defines wealth very properly as what is transferable, limited in
    supply, and useful. F. A. Walker defines wealth as comprising “all
    articles of value and nothing else” (“Political Economy,” p. 5).
    Levasseur’s definition (“Précis,” p. 15) is, “all material objects
    possessing utility” (i.e., the power to satisfy a want). (Cf.
    various definitions in Roscher’s “Political Economy,” section 9,
    note 3.) Perry (“Political Economy,” p. 99) rejects the term
    _wealth_ as a clog to progress in the science, and adopts
    _property_ in its stead, defining it as that “which can be bought
    or sold.” Cherbuliez (“Précis,” p. 70) defines wealth as the
    material product of nature appropriated by labor for the wants of
    man. Carey (“Social Science,” i, 186) asserts that wealth consists
    in the power to command Nature’s services, including in wealth
    such intangible things as mental qualities.





BOOK I. PRODUCTION.




Chapter I. Of The Requisites Of Production.



§ 1. The Requisites of Production are Two: Labor, and Appropriate Natural
Objects.


    There is a third requisite of production, capital (see page 58).
    Since the limitation to only two requisites applies solely to a
    primitive condition of existence, so soon as the element of _time_
    enters into production, then a store of capital becomes necessary;
    that is, so soon as production requires such a term that during
    the operation the laborer can not at the same time provide himself
    with subsistence, then capital is a requisite of production. This
    takes place also under any general division of labor in a
    community. When one man is making a pin-head, he must be supplied
    with food by some person until the pins are finished and
    exchanged.


Labor is either bodily or mental; or, to express the distinction more
comprehensively, either muscular or nervous; and it is necessary to
include in the idea, not solely the exertion itself, but all feelings of a
disagreeable kind, all bodily inconvenience or mental annoyance, connected
with the employment of one’s thoughts, or muscles, or both, in a
particular occupation.


    The word “sacrifice” conveys a just idea of what the laborer
    undergoes, and it corresponds to the abstinence of the capitalist.


Of the other requisite—appropriate natural objects—it is to be remarked
that some objects exist or grow up spontaneously, of a kind suited to the
supply of human wants. There are caves and hollow trees capable of
affording shelter; fruits, roots, wild honey, and other natural products,
on which human life can be supported; but even here a considerable
quantity of labor is generally required, not for the purpose of creating,
but of finding and appropriating them.

Of natural powers, some are unlimited, others limited in quantity. By an
unlimited quantity is of course not meant literally, but practically
unlimited: a quantity beyond the use which can in any, or at least in
present circumstances, be made of it. Land is, in some newly settled
countries, practically unlimited in quantity: there is more than can be
used by the existing population of the country, or by any accession likely
to be made to it for generations to come. But, even there, land favorably
situated with regard to markets, or means of carriage, is generally
limited in quantity: there is not so much of it as persons would gladly
occupy and cultivate, or otherwise turn to use. In all old countries, land
capable of cultivation, land at least of any tolerable fertility, must be
ranked among agents limited in quantity. Coal, metallic ores, and other
useful substances found in the earth, are still more limited than land.

For the present I shall only remark that, so long as the quantity of a
natural agent is practically unlimited, it can not, unless susceptible of
artificial monopoly, bear any value in the market, since no one will give
anything for what can be obtained gratis. But as soon as a limitation
becomes practically operative—as soon as there is not so much of the thing
to be had as would be appropriated and used if it could be obtained for
asking—the ownership or use of the natural agent acquires an exchangeable
value.


    Rich lands in our Western Territories a few years ago could be had
    practically for the asking; but now, since railways and an
    increase of population have brought them nearer to the markets,
    they have acquired a distinct exchange value. The value of a
    commodity (it may be anticipated) is the quantity of other things
    for which it can be exchanged.


When more water-power is wanted in a particular district than there are
falls of water to supply it, persons will give an equivalent for the use
of a fall of water. When there is more land wanted for cultivation than a
place possesses, or than it possesses of a certain quality and certain
advantages of situation, land of that quality and situation may be sold
for a price, or let for an annual rent.



§ 2. The Second Requisite of Production, Labor.


    It is now our purpose to describe the second requisite of
    production, labor, and point out that it can be either direct or
    indirect. This division and subdivision can be seen from the
    classification given below. Under the head of indirect labor are
    to be arranged all the many employments subsidiary to the
    production of any one article, and which, as they furnish but a
    small part of labor for the one article (e.g., bread), are
    subsidiary to the production of a vast number of other articles;
    and hence we see the interdependence of one employment on another,
    which comes out so conspicuously at the time of a commercial
    depression.

    “We think it little to sit down to a table covered with articles
    from all quarters of the globe and from the remotest isles of the
    sea—with tea from China, coffee from Brazil, spices from the East,
    and sugar from the West Indies; knives from Sheffield, made with
    iron from Sweden and ivory from Africa; with silver from Mexico
    and cotton from South Carolina; all being lighted with oil brought
    from New Zealand or the Arctic Circle. Still less do we think of
    the great number of persons whose united agency is required to
    bring any one of these finished products to our homes—of the
    merchants, insurers, sailors, ship-builders, cordage and sail
    makers, astronomical-instrument makers, men of science, and
    others, before a pound of tea can appear in our market.”(101)


The labor(102) which terminates in the production of an article fitted for
some human use is either employed directly about the thing, or in previous
operations destined to facilitate, perhaps essential to the possibility
of, the subsequent ones. In making bread, for example, the labor employed
about the thing itself is that of the baker; but the labor of the miller,
though employed directly in the production not of bread but of flour, is
equally part of the aggregate sum of labor by which the bread is produced;
as is also the labor of the sower, and of the reaper. Some may think that
all these persons ought to be considered as employing their labor directly
about the thing; the corn, the flour, and the bread being one substance in
three different states. Without disputing about this question of mere
language, there is still the plowman, who prepared the ground for the
seed, and whose labor never came in contact with the substance in any of
its states; and the plow-maker, whose share in the result was still more
remote. We must add yet another kind of labor; that of transporting the
produce from the place of its production to the place of its destined use:
the labor of carrying the corn to market, and from market to the miller’s,
the flour from the miller’s to the baker’s, and the bread from the baker’s
to the place of its final consumption.


    Besides the two classes of indirect laborers here mentioned, those
    engaged in producing materials and those in transportation, there
    are several others who are paid fractions out of the bread.
    Subsidiary to the direct labor of the bread-maker is the labor of
    all those who make the instruments employed in the process (as,
    e.g., the oven). Materials are completely changed in character by
    one use, as when the coal is burned, or the flour baked into
    bread; while an instrument, like an oven, is capable of remaining
    intact throughout many operations. The producer of materials and
    the transporter are paid by the bread-maker in the price of his
    coal and flour when left at his door, so that the price of the
    loaf is influenced by these payments. Those persons, moreover,
    who, like the police and officers of our government, act to
    protect property and life, are also to be classed as laborers
    indirectly aiding in the production of the given article, bread
    (and by his taxes the bread-maker helps pay the wages of these
    officials). Shading off into a more distant, although essential,
    connection is another class—that of those laborers who train human
    beings in the branches of knowledge necessary to the attainment of
    proper skill in managing the processes and instruments of an
    industry. The acquisition of the rudiments of education, and, in
    many cases, the most profound knowledge of chemistry, physics and
    recondite studies, are essential to production; and teachers are
    indirect laborers in producing almost every article in the market.
    In this country, especially, are inventors a class of indirect
    laborers essential to all ultimate production as it now goes on.
    The improvements in the instruments of production are the results
    of an inventive ability which has made American machinery known
    all over the world. They, too, as well as the teacher, are paid (a
    small fraction, of course) out of the ultimate result, by an
    indirect path, and materially change the ease or difficulty,
    cheapness or dearness, of production in nearly every branch of
    industry. In the particular illustration given they have improved
    the ovens, ranges, and stoves, so that the same or better articles
    are produced at a less cost than formerly. All these indirect
    laborers receive, in the way of remuneration, a fraction, some
    more, some less (the farther they are removed from the direct
    process), of the value of the final result.



§ 3. Of Capital as a Requisite of Production.


    But another set of laborers are to be placed in distinct contrast
    with these, so far as the grounds on which they receive their
    remuneration is concerned. These are the men engaged previously in
    providing the subsistence, and articles by which the former
    classes of labor can carry on their operations.


The previous employment of labor is an indispensable condition to every
productive operation, on any other than the very smallest scale. Except
the labor of the hunter and fisher, there is scarcely any kind of labor to
which the returns are immediate. Productive operations require to be
continued a certain time before their fruits are obtained. Unless the
laborer, before commencing his work, possesses a store of food, or can
obtain access to the stores of some one else, in sufficient quantity to
maintain him until the production is completed, he can undertake no labor
but such as can be carried on at odd intervals, concurrently with the
pursuit of his subsistence.


    The possession of capital is thus a third requisite of production,
    together with land and labor, as noted above. Henry George
    (“Progress and Poverty,” chap. iv) holds an opposite opinion: “The
    subsistence of the laborers who built the Pyramids was drawn, not
    from a previously hoarded stock” (does he not forget the story of
    Joseph’s store of corn?), “but from the constantly recurring crops
    of the Nile Valley.”


He can not obtain food itself in any abundance; for every mode of so
obtaining it requires that there be already food in store. Agriculture
only brings forth food after the lapse of months; and, though the labors
of the agriculturist are not necessarily continuous during the whole
period, they must occupy a considerable part of it. Not only is
agriculture impossible without food produced in advance, but there must be
a very great quantity in advance to enable any considerable community to
support itself wholly by agriculture. A country like England or the United
States is only able to carry on the agriculture of the present year
because that of past years has provided, in those countries or somewhere
else, sufficient food to support their agricultural population until the
next harvest. They are only enabled to produce so many other things
besides food, because the food which was in store at the close of the last
harvest suffices to maintain not only the agricultural laborers, but a
large industrious population besides.

The claim to remuneration founded on the possession of food, available for
the maintenance of laborers, is of another kind; remuneration for
abstinence, not for labor. If a person has a store of food, he has it in
his power to consume it himself in idleness, or in feeding others to
attend on him, or to fight for him, or to sing or dance for him. If,
instead of these things, he gives it to productive laborers to support
them during their work, he can, and naturally will, claim a remuneration
from the produce. He will not be content with simple repayment; if he
receives merely that, he is only in the same situation as at first, and
has derived no advantage from delaying to apply his savings to his own
benefit or pleasure. He will look for some equivalent for this
forbearance:(103) he will expect his advance of food to come back to him
with an increase, called, in the language of business, a profit; and the
hope of this profit will generally have been a part of the inducement
which made him accumulate a stock, by economizing in his own consumption;
or, at any rate, which made him forego the application of it, when
accumulated, to his personal ease or satisfaction.




Chapter II. Of Unproductive Labor.



§ 1. Definition of Productive and Unproductive Labor.


Labor is indispensable to production, but has not always production for
its effect. There is much labor, and of a high order of usefulness, of
which production is not the object. Labor has accordingly been
distinguished into Productive and Unproductive. Productive labor means
labor productive of wealth. We are recalled, therefore, to the question
touched upon in our [Preliminary Remarks], what Wealth is.

By Unproductive Labor, on the contrary, will be understood labor which
does not terminate in the creation of material wealth. And all labor,
according to our present definition, must be classed as unproductive,
which terminates in a permanent benefit, however important, provided that
an increase of material products forms no part of that benefit. The labor
of saving a friend’s life is not productive, unless the friend is a
productive laborer, and produces more than he consumes.


    The principle on which the distinction is made is perfectly clear,
    but in many cases persons may be misled chiefly in regard to
    matters of fact. A clergyman may at first sight be classed as an
    unproductive laborer; but, until we know the facts, we can not
    apply the principle of our definition. Unless we know that no
    clergyman, by inculcating rules of morality and self-control, ever
    caused an idler or wrong-doer to become a steady laborer, we can
    not say that a clergyman is a laborer unproductive of material
    wealth. Likewise the army, or the officers of our government at
    Washington, may or may not have aided in producing material wealth
    according as they do or do not, in fact, accomplish the protective
    purposes for which they exist. So with teachers. There is,
    however, no disparagement implied in the word unproductive; it is
    merely an economic question, and has to do only with forces
    affecting the production of wealth.


Unproductive may be as useful as productive labor; it may be more useful,
even in point of permanent advantage; or its use may consist only in
pleasurable sensation, which when gone leaves no trace; or it may not
afford even this, but may be absolute waste. In any case, society or
mankind grow no richer by it, but poorer. All material products consumed
by any one while he produces nothing are so much subtracted, for the time,
from the material products which society would otherwise have possessed.

To be wasted, however, is a liability not confined to unproductive labor.
Productive labor may equally be waste, if more of it is expended than
really conduces to production. If defect of skill in laborers, or of
judgment in those who direct them, causes a misapplication of productive
industry, labor is wasted. Productive labor may render a nation poorer, if
the wealth it produces, that is, the increase it makes in the stock of
useful or agreeable things, be of a kind not immediately wanted: as when a
commodity is unsalable, because produced in a quantity beyond the present
demand; or when speculators build docks and warehouses before there is any
trade.



§ 2. Productive and Unproductive Consumption.


The distinction of Productive and Unproductive is applicable to
Consumption as well as to Labor. All the members of the community are not
laborers, but all are consumers, and consume either unproductively or
productively. Whoever contributes nothing directly or indirectly to
production is an unproductive consumer. The only productive consumers are
productive laborers; the labor of direction being of course included, as
well as that of execution. But the consumption even of productive laborers
is not all of it Productive Consumption. There is unproductive consumption
by productive consumers. What they consume in keeping up or improving
their health, strength, and capacities of work, or in rearing other
productive laborers to succeed them, is Productive Consumption. But
consumption on pleasures or luxuries, whether by the idle or by the
industrious, since production is neither its object nor is in any way
advanced by it, must be reckoned Unproductive: with a reservation,
perhaps, of a certain quantum of enjoyment which may be classed among
necessaries, since anything short of it would not be consistent with the
greatest efficiency of labor. That alone is productive consumption which
goes to maintain and increase the productive powers of the community;
either those residing in its soil, in its materials, in the number and
efficiency of its instruments of production, or in its people.

I grant that no labor really tends to the enrichment of society, which is
employed in producing things for the use of unproductive consumers. The
tailor who makes a coat for a man who produces nothing is a productive
laborer; but in a few weeks or months the coat is worn out, while the
wearer has not produced anything to replace it, and the community is then
no richer by the labor of the tailor than if the same sum had been paid
for a stall at the opera. Nevertheless, society has been richer by the
labor while the coat lasted. These things also [such as lace and
pine-apples] are wealth until they have been consumed.



§ 3. Distinction Between Labor for the Supply of Productive Consumption
and Labor for the Supply of Unproductive Consumption.


We see, however, by this, that there is a distinction more important to
the wealth of a community than even that between productive and
unproductive labor; the distinction, namely, between labor for the supply
of productive, and for the supply of unproductive, consumption; between
labor employed in keeping up or in adding to the productive resources of
the country, and that which is employed otherwise. Of the produce of the
country, a part only is destined to be consumed productively; the
remainder supplies the unproductive consumption of producers, and the
entire consumption of the unproductive class. Suppose that the proportion
of the annual produce applied to the first purpose amounts to half; then
one half the productive laborers of the country are all that are employed
in the operations on which the permanent wealth of the country depends.
The other half are occupied from year to year and from generation to
generation in producing things which are consumed and disappear without
return; and whatever this half consume is as completely lost, as to any
permanent effect on the national resources, as if it were consumed
unproductively. Suppose that this second half of the laboring population
ceased to work, and that the government maintained them in idleness for a
whole year: the first half would suffice to produce, as they had done
before, their own necessaries and the necessaries of the second half, and
to keep the stock of materials and implements undiminished: the
unproductive classes, indeed, would be either starved or obliged to
produce their own subsistence, and the whole community would be reduced
during a year to bare necessaries; but the sources of production would be
unimpaired, and the next year there would not necessarily be a smaller
produce than if no such interval of inactivity had occurred; while if the
case had been reversed, if the first half of the laborers had suspended
their accustomed occupations, and the second half had continued theirs,
the country at the end of the twelvemonth would have been entirely
impoverished. It would be a great error to regret the large proportion of
the annual produce, which in an opulent country goes to supply
unproductive consumption. That so great a surplus should be available for
such purposes, and that it should be applied to them, can only be a
subject of congratulation.

This principle may be seen by the following classification:

(A) Idlers; or unproductive laborers—e.g., actors.
(B) Productive laborers—e.g., farmers.
   (C) Producing wealth for productive consumption, one half the annual
produce.
   (D) Producing wealth for unproductive consumption (A), one half the
annual produce.

Group D are productive laborers, and their _own necessaries_ are
productively consumed, but they are supplied by C, who keep themselves and
D in existence. So long as C work, both C and D can go on producing. If D
stopped working, they could be still subsisted as before by C; but A would
be forced to produce for themselves. But, if C stopped working, D and C
would be left without the necessaries of life, and would be obliged to
cease their usual work. In this way it may be seen how much more important
to the increase of material wealth C are than D, who labor “for the supply
of unproductive consumption.” Of course, group D are desirable on other
than economic grounds, because their labor represents what can be enjoyed
beyond the necessities of life.




Chapter III. Of Capital.



§ 1. Capital is Wealth Appropriated to Reproductive Employment.


It has been seen in the preceding chapters that besides the primary and
universal requisites of production, labor and natural agents, there is
another requisite without which no productive operations beyond the rude
and scanty beginnings of primitive industry are possible—namely, a stock,
previously accumulated, of the products of former labor. This accumulated
stock of the produce of labor is termed Capital. What capital does for
production is, to afford the shelter, protection, tools, and materials
which the work requires, and to feed and otherwise maintain the laborers
during the process. These are the services which present labor requires
from past, and from the produce of past, labor. Whatever things are
destined for this use—destined to supply productive labor with these
various prerequisites—are Capital.


    Professor Fawcett, “Manual” (chap. ii), says: “Since the laborer
    must be fed by previously accumulated food, ... some of the
    results of past labor are required to be set aside to sustain the
    laborer while producing. The third requisite of production,
    therefore, is a fund reserved from consumption, and devoted to
    sustain those engaged in future production.... Capital is not
    confined to the food which feeds the laborers, but includes
    machinery, buildings, and, in fact, every product due to man’s
    labor which can be applied to assist his industry” (chap. iv).
    General Walker (“Political Economy,” pages 68-70) defines capital
    as that portion of wealth (excluding unimproved land and natural
    agents) which is employed in the production of new forms of
    wealth. Henry George (“Progress and Poverty,” page 41) returns to
    Adam Smith’s definition: “That part of a man’s stock which he
    expects to yield him a revenue is called his capital.” Cherbuliez
    (“Précis,” page 70) points out the increasing interdependence of
    industrial operations as society increases in wealth, and that
    there is not a single industry which does not demand the use of
    products obtained by previous labor. “These auxiliary products
    accumulated with a view to the production to which they are
    subservient” form what is called capital. Carey (“Social Science,”
    iii, page 48) regards as capital all things which in any way form
    the machinery by which society obtains wealth. Roscher’s
    definition is, “Every product laid by for purposes of further
    production.” (“Political Economy,” section 42.) By some, labor is
    regarded as capital.(104)


A manufacturer, for example, has one part of his capital in the form of
buildings, fitted and destined for carrying on this branch of manufacture.
Another part he has in the form of machinery. A third consists, if he be a
spinner, of raw cotton, flax, or wool; if a weaver, of flaxen, woolen,
silk, or cotton thread; and the like, according to the nature of the
manufacture. Food and clothing for his operatives it is not the custom of
the present age that he should directly provide; and few capitalists,
except the producers of food or clothing, have any portion worth
mentioning of their capital in that shape. Instead of this, each
capitalist has money, which he pays to his work-people, and so enables
them to supply themselves. What, then, is his capital? Precisely that part
of his possessions, whatever it be, which he designs to employ in carrying
on fresh production. It is of no consequence that a part, or even the
whole of it, is in a form in which it can not directly supply the wants of
laborers.


    Care should be taken to distinguish between wealth, capital, and
    money. Capital may be succinctly defined as _saved wealth devoted
    to reproduction_, and the relations of the three terms mentioned
    may be illustrated by the following figure: The area of the
    circle, A, represents the wealth of a country; the area of the
    inscribed circle, B, the quantity out of the whole wealth which is
    saved and devoted to reproduction and called capital. But money is
    only one part of capital, as shown by the area of circle C.
    Wherefore, it can be plainly seen that not all capital, B, is
    money; that not all wealth, A, is capital, although all capital is
    necessarily wealth as included within it. It is not always
    understood that money is merely a convenient article by which
    other forms of wealth are exchanged against each other, and that a
    man may have capital without ever having any actual money in his
    possession. In times of commercial depression, that which is
    capital to-day may not to-morrow satisfy any desires (i.e., not be
    in demand), and so for the time it may, so to speak, drop entirely
    out of our circles above. For the moment, not having an exchange
    value, it can not be wealth, and so can the less be capital.


[Illustration. Outer circle A, enclosing inner circle B, with small circle
                     C overlapping edge of circle B.]

Suppose, for instance, that the capitalist is a hardware manufacturer, and
that his stock in trade, over and above his machinery, consists at present
wholly in iron goods. Iron goods can not feed laborers. Nevertheless, by a
mere change of the destination of the iron goods, he can cause laborers to
be fed. Suppose that [the capitalist changed into wages what he had before
spent] in buying plate and jewels; and, in order to render the effect
perceptible, let us suppose that the change takes place on a considerable
scale, and that a large sum is diverted from buying plate and jewels to
employing productive laborers, whom we shall suppose to have been
previously, like the Irish peasantry, only half employed and half fed. The
laborers, on receiving their increased wages, will not lay them out in
plate and jewels, but in food. There is not, however, additional food in
the country; nor any unproductive laborers or animals, as in the former
case, whose food is set free for productive purposes. Food will therefore
be imported if possible; if not possible, the laborers will remain for a
season on their short allowance: but the consequence of this change in the
demand for commodities, occasioned by the change in the expenditure of
capitalists from unproductive to productive, is that next year more food
will be produced, and less plate and jewelry. So that again, without
having had anything to do with the food of the laborers directly, the
conversion by individuals of a portion of their property, no matter of
what sort, from an unproductive destination to a productive, has had the
effect of causing more food to be appropriated to the consumption of
productive laborers. The distinction, then, between Capital and
Not-capital, does not lie in the kind of commodities, but in the mind of
the capitalist—in his will to employ them for one purpose rather than
another; and all property, however ill adapted in itself for the use of
laborers, is a part of capital, so soon as it, or the value to be received
from it, is set apart for productive reinvestment.



§ 2. More Capital Devoted to Production than Actually Employed in it.


As whatever of the produce of the country is devoted to production is
capital, so, conversely, the whole of the capital of the country is
devoted to production. This second proposition, however, must be taken
with some limitations and explanations. (1) A fund may be seeking for
productive employment, and find none adapted to the inclinations of its
possessor: it then is capital still, but unemployed capital. (2) Or the
stock may consist of unsold goods, not susceptible of direct application
to productive uses, and not, at the moment, marketable: these, until sold,
are in the condition of unemployed capital.


    This is not an important distinction. The goods are doubtless
    marketable at some price, if offered low enough. If no one wants
    them, then, by definition, they are not wealth so long as that
    condition exists.


(3) [Or] suppose that the Government lays a tax on the production in one
of its earlier stages, as, for instance, by taxing the material. The
manufacturer has to advance the tax, before commencing the manufacture,
and is therefore under a necessity of having a larger accumulated fund
than is required for, or is actually employed in, the production which he
carries on. He must have a larger capital to maintain the same quantity of
productive labor; or (what is equivalent) with a given capital he
maintains less labor. (4) For another example: a farmer may enter on his
farm at such a time of the year that he may be required to pay one, two,
or even three quarters’ rent before obtaining any return from the produce.
This, therefore, must be paid out of his capital.

(5) Finally, that large portion of the productive capital of a country
which is employed in paying the wages and salaries of laborers, evidently
is not, all of it, strictly and indispensably necessary for production. As
much of it as exceeds the actual necessaries of life and health (an excess
which in the case of skilled laborers is usually considerable) is not
expended in supporting labor, but in remunerating it, and the laborers
could wait for this part of their remuneration until the production is
completed.


    The previous accumulation of commodities requisite for production
    must inevitably be large enough to cover necessaries, but need not
    be more, if the laborer is willing to wait for the additional
    amount of his wages (the amount of his unproductive consumption)
    until the completion of the industrial operation. In fact,
    however, the accumulation must be sufficient to pay the laborer
    all his wages from week to week, by force of custom (wherever
    there is any considerable division of labor), and also sufficient
    to purchase tools and materials. The various elements of capital
    are materials, instruments, and subsistence, giving “instruments”
    its wide signification which includes money (the tool of
    exchange), and other necessary appliances of each special kind of
    production.


In truth, it is only after an abundant capital had already been
accumulated that the practice of paying in advance any remuneration of
labor beyond a bare subsistence could possibly have arisen: since whatever
is so paid is not really applied to production, but to the unproductive
consumption of productive laborers, indicating a fund for production
sufficiently ample to admit of habitually diverting a part of it to a mere
convenience.

It will be observed that I have assumed that the laborers are always
subsisted from capital:(105) and this is obviously the fact, though the
capital need not necessarily be furnished by a person called a capitalist.

The peasant does not subsist this year on the produce of this year’s
harvest, but on that of the last. The artisan is not living on the
proceeds of the work he has in hand, but on those of work previously
executed and disposed of. Each is supported by a small capital of his own,
which he periodically replaces from the produce of his labor. The large
capitalist is, in like manner, maintained from funds provided in advance.



§ 3. Examination of Cases Illustrative of the Idea of Capital.


That which is virtually capital to the individual is or is not capital to
the nation, according as the fund which by the supposition he has not
dissipated has or has not been dissipated by somebody else.


    Let the reader consider, in the four following suppositions,
    whether or not the given capital has wholly dropped out of the
    circle in the diagram, page 67. In (3) and (4) the wealth is
    entirely dissipated; as it can not longer be in circle A, it can
    not, of course, be in circle B.


(1.) For example, let property of the value of ten thousand pounds,
belonging to A, be lent to B, a farmer or manufacturer, and employed
profitably in B’s occupation. It is as much capital as if it belonged to
B. A is really a farmer or manufacturer, not personally, but in respect of
his property. Capital worth ten thousand pounds is employed in
production—in maintaining laborers and providing tools and materials—which
capital belongs to A, while B takes the trouble of employing it, and
receives for his remuneration the difference between the profit which it
yields and the interest he pays to A. This is the simplest case.

(2.) Suppose next that A’s ten thousand pounds, instead of being lent to
B, are lent on mortgage to C, a landed proprietor, by whom they are
employed in improving the productive powers of his estate, by fencing,
draining, road-making, or permanent manures. This is productive
employment. The ten thousand pounds are sunk, but not dissipated. They
yield a permanent return; the land now affords an increase of produce,
sufficient in a few years, if the outlay has been judicious, to replace
the amount, and in time to multiply it manifold. Here, then, is a value of
ten thousand pounds, employed in increasing the produce of the country.
This constitutes a capital, for which C, if he lets his land, receives the
returns in the nominal form of increased rent; and the mortgage entitles A
to receive from these returns, in the shape of interest, such annual sum
as has been agreed on.

(3.) Suppose, however, that C, the borrowing landlord, is a spendthrift,
who burdens his land not to increase his fortune but to squander it,
expending the amount in equipages and entertainments. In a year or two it
is dissipated, and without return. A is as rich as before; he has no
longer his ten thousand pounds, but he has a lien on the land, which he
could still sell for that amount. C, however, is ten thousand pounds
poorer than formerly; and nobody is richer. It may be said that those are
richer who have made profit out of the money while it was being spent. No
doubt if C lost it by gaming, or was cheated of it by his servants, that
is a mere transfer, not a destruction, and those who have gained the
amount may employ it productively. But if C has received the fair value
for his expenditure in articles of subsistence or luxury, which he has
consumed on himself, or by means of his servants or guests, these articles
have ceased to exist, and nothing has been produced to replace them: while
if the same sum had been employed in farming or manufacturing, the
consumption which would have taken place would have been more than
balanced at the end of the year by new products, created by the labor of
those who would in that case have been the consumers. By C’s prodigality,
that which would have been consumed with a return is consumed without
return. C’s tradesmen may have made a profit during the process; but, if
the capital had been expended productively, an equivalent profit would
have been made by builders, fencers, tool-makers, and the tradespeople who
supply the consumption of the laboring-classes; while, at the expiration
of the time (to say nothing of an increase), C would have had the ten
thousand pounds or its value replaced to him, which now he has not. There
is, therefore, on the general result, a difference, to the disadvantage of
the community, of at least ten thousand pounds, being the amount of C’s
unproductive expenditure. To A, the difference is not material, since his
income is secured to him, and while the security is good, and the market
rate of interest the same, he can always sell the mortgage at its original
value. To A, therefore, the lien of ten thousand pounds on C’s estate is
virtually a capital of that amount; but is it so in reference to the
community? It is not. A had a capital of ten thousand pounds, but this has
been extinguished—dissipated and destroyed by C’s prodigality. A now
receives his income, not from the produce of his capital, but from some
other source of income belonging to C, probably from the rent of his land,
that is, from payments made to him by farmers out of the produce of
_their_ capital.

(4.) Let us now vary the hypothesis still further, and suppose that the
money is borrowed, not by a landlord, but by the state. A lends his
capital to Government to carry on a war: he buys from the state what are
called government securities; that is, obligations on the Government to
pay a certain annual income. If the Government employed the money in
making a railroad, this might be a productive employment, and A’s property
would still be used as capital; but since it is employed in war, that is,
in the pay of officers and soldiers who produce nothing, and in destroying
a quantity of gunpowder and bullets without return, the Government is in
the situation of C, the spendthrift landlord, and A’s ten thousand pounds
are so much national capital which once existed, but exists no
longer—virtually thrown into the sea, as wealth or production is
concerned; though for other reasons the employment of it may have been
justifiable. A’s subsequent income is derived, not from the produce of his
own capital, but from taxes drawn from the produce of the remaining
capital of the community; to whom his capital is not yielding any return,
to indemnify them for the payment; it is all lost and gone, and what he
now possesses is a claim on the returns to other people’s capital and
industry.

The breach in the capital of the country was made when the Government
spent A’s money: whereby a value of ten thousand pounds was withdrawn or
withheld from productive employment, placed in the fund for unproductive
consumption, and destroyed without equivalent.


    The United States had borrowed in the late civil war, by August
    31, 1865, $2,845,907,626; and, to June 30, 1881, the Government
    had paid in interest on its bonds, “from taxes drawn from the
    produce of the remaining capital,” $1,270,596,784, as an income to
    bondholders. From this can be seen the enormous waste of wealth to
    the United States during the war, and consequently the less
    existing capital to-day in this country; since, under the same
    inducements to save, the smaller the outside circle (wealth), the
    less the inside circle (capital) must be.




Chapter IV. Fundamental Propositions Respecting Capital.



§ 1. Industry is Limited by Capital.


The first of these propositions is, that industry is limited by capital.
To employ labor in a manufacture is to invest capital in the manufacture.
This implies that industry can not be employed to any greater extent than
there is capital to invest. The proposition, indeed, must be assented to
as soon as it is distinctly apprehended. The expression “applying capital”
is of course metaphorical: what is really applied is labor; capital being
an indispensable condition. The food of laborers and the materials of
production have no productive power; but labor can not exert its
productive power unless provided with them. There can be no more industry
than is supplied with materials to work up and food to eat. Self-evident
as the thing is, it is often forgotten that the people of a country are
maintained and have their wants supplied, not by the produce of present
labor, but of past.


    Therefore, as capital increases, more labor can be employed. When
    the Pittsburg rioters, in 1877, destroyed property, or the product
    of past labor, they did not realize then that that property might,
    but now could never again, be employed for productive purposes,
    and thereby support laborers.


They consume what has been produced, not what is about to be produced.
Now, of what has been produced, a part only is allotted to the support of
productive labor; and there will not and can not be more of that labor
than the portion so allotted (which is the capital of the country) can
feed, and provide with the materials and instruments of production.

Because industry is limited by capital, we are not, however, to infer that
it always reaches that limit. There may not be as many laborers obtainable
as the capital would maintain and employ. This has been known to occur in
new colonies, where capital has sometimes perished uselessly for want of
labor.


    In the farming districts of our Middle and Western States, in
    harvest-time, crops have been often of late years ruined because
    farm-hands could not be obtained. In earlier days, President John
    Adams was unable to hire a man in Washington to cut wood in the
    surrounding forests with which to warm the White House.


The unproductive consumption of productive laborers, the whole of which is
now supplied by capital, might cease, or be postponed, until the produce
came in; and additional productive laborers might be maintained with the
amount.

[Governments] can create capital. They may lay on taxes, and employ the
amount productively. They may do what is nearly equivalent: they may lay
taxes on income or expenditure, and apply the proceeds toward paying off
the public debts. The fund-holder, when paid off, would still desire to
draw an income from his property, most of which, therefore, would find its
way into productive employment, while a great part of it would have been
drawn from the fund for unproductive expenditure, since people do not
wholly pay their taxes from what they would have saved, but partly, if not
chiefly, from what they would have spent.



§ 2. Increase of Capital gives Increased Employment to Labor, Without
Assignable Bounds.


While, on the one hand, industry is limited by capital, so, on the other,
every increase of capital gives, or is capable of giving, additional
employment to industry; and this without assignable limit. I do not mean
to deny that the capital, or part of it, may be so employed as not to
support laborers, being fixed in machinery, buildings, improvement of
land, and the like. In any large increase of capital a considerable
portion will generally be thus employed, and will only co-operate with
laborers, not maintain them.


    It will be remembered, however, that subsistence is but one part
    or element of capital; that instruments and materials form a large
    part of capital. But still the question of mere maintenance is
    rightfully discussed, because it is asserted to-day that, while
    the rich are growing richer, the poor lack even the food to keep
    them alive; and throughout this discussion Mr. Mill has in view
    the fact that laborers may exist in the community either “half fed
    or unemployed.”


What I do intend to assert is, that the portion which is destined to their
maintenance may (supposing no alteration in anything else) be indefinitely
increased, without creating an impossibility of finding the employment: in
other words, that if there are human beings capable of work, and food to
feed them, they may always be employed in producing something. It is very
much opposed to common doctrines.(106) There is not an opinion more
general among mankind than this, that the unproductive expenditure of the
rich is necessary to the employment of the poor.


    It is to be noticed that, in fact, after the arts have so far
    advanced in a community that mankind can obtain by their exertion
    more than the amount of the mere necessaries of life sufficient on
    the average for the subsistence of all, any further production
    rendered possible to the human race by new discoveries and
    processes is naturally unproductively consumed, and that
    consequently a demand for labor for unproductive consumption is
    essential for the employment of all existing laborers. This,
    however, can be done, because enough capital has been brought into
    existence to create the demand for the labor. Yet it is clear that
    it is not _expenditure_, but capital, by which employment is given
    to the poor.


Suppose that every capitalist came to be of opinion that, not being more
meritorious than a well-conducted laborer, he ought not to fare better;
and accordingly laid by, from conscientious motives, the surplus of his
profits; unproductive expenditure is now reduced to its lowest limit: and
it is asked, How is the increased capital to find employment? Who is to
buy the goods which it will produce? There are no longer customers even
for those which were produced before. The goods, therefore (it is said),
will remain unsold; they will perish in the warehouses, until capital is
brought down to what it was originally, or rather to as much less as the
demand of the customers has lessened. But this is seeing only one half of
the matter. In the case supposed, there would no longer be any demand for
luxuries on the part of capitalists and land-owners. But, when these
classes turn their income into capital, they do not thereby annihilate
their power of consumption; they do but transfer it from themselves to the
laborers to whom they give employment. Now, there are two possible
suppositions in regard to the laborers: either there is, or there is not,
an increase of their numbers proportional to the increase of capital. (1.)
If there is, the case offers no difficulty. The production of necessaries
for the new population takes the place of the production of luxuries for a
portion of the old, and supplies exactly the amount of employment which
has been lost. (2.) But suppose that there is no increase of population.
The whole of what was previously expended in luxuries, by capitalists and
landlords, is distributed among the existing laborers, in the form of
additional wages. We will assume them to be already sufficiently supplied
with necessaries.

What follows? That the laborers become consumers of luxuries; and the
capital previously employed in the production of luxuries is still able to
employ itself in the same manner; the difference being, that the luxuries
are shared among the community generally, instead of being confined to a
few, supposing that the power of their labor were physically sufficient to
produce all this amount of indulgences for their whole number. Thus the
limit of wealth is never deficiency of consumers, but of producers and
productive power. Every addition to capital gives to labor either
additional employment or additional remuneration.


    That laborers should get more (_a_) by capitalists abstaining from
    unproductive expenditure than (_b_) by expenditure in articles
    unproductively consumed is a question difficult for many to
    comprehend, and needs all the elucidation possible. To start with,
    no one ever knew of a community all of whose wants were satisfied:
    in fact, civilization is constantly leading us into new fields of
    enjoyment, and results in a constant differentiation of new
    desires. To satisfy these wants is the spring to nearly all
    production and industry. There can, therefore, be no stop to
    production arising from lack of desire for commodities. “The limit
    of wealth is never deficiency of consumers,” but of productive
    power.

    Now, in supposition (2) of the text, remember that the laborers
    are supposed not to be employed up to their full productive power.
    If all capitalists abstain from unproductive consumption, and
    devote that amount of wealth to production, then, since there can
    be no production without labor, the same number of laborers have
    offered to them in the aggregate a larger sum of articles for
    their exertions, which is equivalent to saying they receive
    additional wages.

    But some persons want to see the process in the concrete, and the
    same principle may be illustrated by a practical case. It is
    supposed that all laborers have the necessaries of life only, but
    none of the comforts, decencies, and luxuries. Let A be a farmer
    in New York, who can also weave carpets, and B a lumberman in
    Maine. A begins to want a better house, and B wishes a carpet,
    both having food, clothing, and shelter. One of the capitalists
    abstaining from unproductive consumption, as above, is X, who,
    knowing the two desires of A and B, presents himself as a
    middle-man (i.e., he gives a market for both men, as is found in
    every center of trade, as well as in a country store), furnishing
    A the tools, materials, etc., and giving him the promise of lumber
    if he will create the carpet, and promising B the carpet if he
    will likewise produce the additional lumber. To be more matter of
    fact, X buys the carpet of A, and sells it to B for the lumber.
    Thus two new articles have been created, and for their exertions A
    has received additional wages (either in the form of lumber, or of
    the money paid him for the carpet), and B has received additional
    wages (either in the form of a carpet, or the money paid him by X
    for the lumber). If A and B are regarded as typifying all the
    laborers, and X all the above capitalists, in the multiplicity of
    actual exchanges, it will be seen that A and B are creating new
    articles to satisfy their own demand, instead of meeting the
    demands of X. If their primary wants are already supplied, then
    they take their additional wages in the form of comforts and
    decencies. When Class X forego their consumption, but add that
    amount to capital, they do not give up their title to that
    capital, but they transfer the use of it, or their consuming
    power, to others for the time being. This question will be more
    fully discussed in § 6.



§ 3. Capital is the result of Saving, and all Capital is Consumed.


A second fundamental theorem respecting capital relates to the source from
which it is derived. It is the result of saving.

If all persons were to expend in personal indulgences all that they
produce, and all the income that they receive from what is produced by
others, capital could not increase. Some saving, therefore, there must
have been, even in the simplest of all states of economical relations;
people must have produced more than they used, or used less than they
produced. Still more must they do so before they can employ other
laborers, or increase their production beyond what can be accomplished by
the work of their own hands. If it were said, for instance, that the only
way to accelerate the increase of capital is by increase of saving, the
idea would probably be suggested of greater abstinence and increased
privation. But it is obvious that whatever increases the productive power
of labor, creates an additional fund to make savings from, and enables
capital to be enlarged, not only without additional privation, but
concurrently with an increase of personal consumption. Nevertheless, there
is here an increase of saving, in the scientific sense. Though there is
more consumed, there is also more spared. There is a greater excess of
production over consumption. To consume less than is produced is saving;
and that is the process by which capital is increased; not necessarily by
consuming less, absolutely.


    The economic idea of saving involves, of course, the intention of
    using the wealth in reproduction. Saving, without this meaning,
    results only in hoarding of wealth, and while hoarded this amount
    is not capital. To explain the process by which capital comes into
    existence, Bastiat has given the well-known illustration of the
    plane in his “Sophisms of Protection.”(107)


A fundamental theorem respecting capital, closely connected with the one
last discussed, is, that although saved, and the result of saving, it is
nevertheless consumed. The word saving does not imply that what is saved
is not consumed, nor even necessarily that its consumption is deferred;
but only that, if consumed immediately, it is not consumed by the person
who saves it. If merely laid by for future use, it is said to be hoarded;
and, while hoarded, is not consumed at all. But, if employed as capital,
it is all consumed, though not by the capitalist. Part is exchanged for
tools or machinery, which are worn out by use; part for seed or materials,
which are destroyed as such by being sown or wrought up, and destroyed
altogether by the consumption of the ultimate product. The remainder is
paid in wages to productive laborers, who consume it for their daily
wants; or if they in their turn save any part, this also is not, generally
speaking, hoarded, but (through savings-banks, benefit clubs, or some
other channel) re-employed as capital, and consumed. To the vulgar, it is
not at all apparent that what is saved is consumed. To them, every one who
saves appears in the light of a person who hoards. The person who expends
his fortune in unproductive consumption is looked upon as diffusing
benefits all around, and is an object of so much favor, that some portion
of the same popularity attaches even to him who spends what does not
belong to him; who not only destroys his own capital, if he ever had any,
but, under pretense of borrowing, and on promise of repayment, possesses
himself of capital belonging to others, and destroys that likewise.

This popular error comes from attending to a small portion only of the
consequences that flow from the saving or the spending; all the effects of
either, which are out of sight, being out of mind. There is, in the one
case, a wearing out of tools, a destruction of material, and a quantity of
food and clothing supplied to laborers, which they destroy by use; in the
other case, there is a consumption, that is to say, a destruction, of
wines, equipages, and furniture. Thus far, the consequence to the national
wealth has been much the same; an equivalent quantity of it has been
destroyed in both cases. But in the spending, this first stage is also the
final stage; that particular amount of the produce of labor has
disappeared, and there is nothing left; while, on the contrary, the saving
person, during the whole time that the destruction was going on, has had
laborers at work repairing it; who are ultimately found to have replaced,
with an increase, the equivalent of what has been consumed.

Almost all expenditure being carried on by means of money, the money comes
to be looked upon as the main feature in the transaction; and since that
does not perish, but only changes hands, people overlook the destruction
which takes place in the case of unproductive expenditure. The money being
merely transferred, they think the wealth also has only been handed over
from the spendthrift to other people. But this is simply confounding money
with wealth. The wealth which has been destroyed was not the money, but
the wines, equipages, and furniture which the money purchased; and, these
having been destroyed without return, society collectively is poorer by
the amount. In proportion as any class is improvident or luxurious, the
industry of the country takes the direction of producing luxuries for
their use; while not only the employment for productive laborers is
diminished, but the subsistence and instruments which are the means of
such employment do actually exist in smaller quantity.



§ 4. Capital is kept up by Perpetual Reproduction, as shown by the
Recovery of Countries from Devastation.


To return to our fundamental theorem. Everything which is produced is
consumed—both what is saved and what is said to be spent—and the former
quite as rapidly as the latter. All the ordinary forms of language tend to
disguise this. When people talk of the ancient wealth of a country, of
riches inherited from ancestors, and similar expressions, the idea
suggested is, that the riches so transmitted were produced long ago, at
the time when they are said to have been first acquired, and that no
portion of the capital of the country was produced this year, except as
much as may have been this year added to the total amount. The fact is far
otherwise. The greater part, in value, of the wealth now existing [in the
United States] has been produced by human hands within the last twelve
months.


    “In the State of Massachusetts it is estimated that the capital,
    on the average, belonging to each individual does not exceed $600,
    and that the average annual product _per capita_ is about $200; so
    that the total capital is the product of only two or three years’
    labor.”(108)


The land subsists, and the land is almost the only thing that subsists.
Everything which is produced perishes, and most things very quickly. Most
kinds of capital are not fitted by their nature to be long preserved.
Westminster Abbey has lasted many centuries, with occasional repairs; some
Grecian sculptures have existed above two thousand years; the Pyramids
perhaps double or treble that time. But these were objects devoted to
unproductive use. Capital is kept in existence from age to age not by
preservation, but by perpetual reproduction; every part of it is used and
destroyed, generally very soon after it is produced, but those who consume
it are employed meanwhile in producing more. The growth of capital is
similar to the growth of population. Every individual who is born, dies,
but in each year the number born exceeds the number who die; the
population, therefore, always increases, though not one person of those
composing it was alive until a very recent date.

This perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital afford the
explanation of what has so often excited wonder, the great rapidity with
which countries recover from a state of devastation. The possibility of a
rapid repair of their disasters mainly depends on whether the country has
been depopulated. If its effective population have not been extirpated at
the time, and are not starved afterward, then, with the same skill and
knowledge which they had before, with their land and its permanent
improvements undestroyed, and the more durable buildings probably
unimpaired, or only partially injured, they have nearly all the requisites
for their former amount of production. If there is as much of food left to
them, or of valuables to buy food, as enables them by any amount of
privation to remain alive and in working condition, they will, in a short
time, have raised as great a produce, and acquired collectively as great
wealth and as great a capital, as before, by the mere continuance of that
ordinary amount of exertion which they are accustomed to employ in their
occupations. Nor does this evince any strength in the principle of saving,
in the popular sense of the term, since what takes place is not
intentional abstinence, but involuntary privation.


    The world has at any given period the power, under existing
    conditions of production and skill, to create a certain amount of
    wealth, as represented by the inner rectangle, W. Each increased
    power of production arising from conquests over Nature’s forces,
    as the use of steam and labor-saving machinery, permits the total
    wealth to be enlarged, as, in the figure, to rectangle W’. For the
    production of wealth are required labor, capital, and land;
    therefore, if the labor and land are not destroyed by war, there
    need not necessarily be in existence all the previous capital. If
    there are the necessaries for all, and only sufficient tools to
    accomplish the work, they will, in a few years, again recreate all
    the wealth that formerly existed, regain the same position as
    before, and go on slowly increasing the total wealth just as fast
    as improvements in the arts of production render it possible.


      [Illustration. Inner rectangle W, surrounded by rectangle W’.]



§ 5. Effects of Defraying Government Expenditure by Loans.


[An application of this truth has been made to the question of raising
government supplies for war purposes.] Loans, being drawn from capital (in
lieu of taxes, which would generally have been paid from income, and made
up in part or altogether by increased economy), must, according to the
principles we have laid down, tend to impoverish the country: yet the
years in which expenditure of this sort has been on the greatest scale
have often been years of great apparent prosperity: the wealth and
resources of the country, instead of diminishing, have given every sign of
rapid increase during the process, and of greatly expanded dimensions
after its close.


    During our civil war, at the same time that wealth was being
    destroyed on an enormous scale, there was a very general feeling
    that trade was good, and large fortunes were made. At the close of
    the war a period of speculation and overtrading continued until it
    was brought to a disastrous close by the panic of 1873. Much of
    this speculation, however, was due to an inflated paper currency.


We will suppose the most unfavorable case possible: that the whole amount
borrowed and destroyed by the Government was abstracted by the lender from
a productive employment in which it had actually been invested. The
capital, therefore, of the country, is this year diminished by so much.
But, unless the amount abstracted is something enormous, there is no
reason in the nature of the case why next year the national capital should
not be as great as ever. The loan can not have been taken from that
portion of the capital of the country which consists of tools, machinery,
and buildings. It must have been wholly drawn from the portion employed in
paying laborers: and the laborers will suffer accordingly. But if none of
them are starved, if their wages can bear such an amount of reduction, or
if charity interposes between them and absolute destitution, there is no
reason that their labor should produce less in the next year than in the
year before. If they produce as much as usual, having been paid less by so
many millions sterling, these millions are gained by their employers. The
breach made in the capital of the country is thus instantly repaired, but
repaired by the privations and often the real misery of the
laboring-class.


    As Mr. Mill points out, during the Napoleonic wars, in France the
    withdrawal of laborers from industry into the army was so large
    that it caused a rise of wages, and a fall in the profits of
    capital; while in England, inasmuch as capital, rather than men,
    was sent to the Continent in the war, the very reverse took place:
    the diversion of “hundreds of millions of capital from productive
    employment” caused a fall of wages, and the prosperity of the
    capitalist class, while the permanent productive resources did not
    fall off.


This leads to the vexed question to which Dr. Chalmers has very
particularly adverted: whether the funds required by a government for
extraordinary unproductive expenditure are best raised by loans, the
interest only being provided by taxes, or whether taxes should be at once
laid on to the whole amount; which is called, in the financial vocabulary,
raising the whole of the supplies within the year. Dr. Chalmers is
strongly for the latter method. He says the common notion is that, in
calling for the whole amount in one year, you require what is either
impossible, or very inconvenient; that the people can not, without great
hardship, pay the whole at once out of their yearly income; and that it is
much better to require of them a small payment every year in the shape of
interest, than so great a sacrifice once for all. To which his answer is,
that the sacrifice is made equally in either case. Whatever is spent can
not but be drawn from yearly income. The whole and every part of the
wealth produced in the country forms, or helps to form, the yearly income
of somebody. The privation which it is supposed must result from taking
the amount in the shape of taxes is not avoided by taking it in a loan.
The suffering is not averted, but only thrown upon the laboring-classes,
the least able, and who least ought, to bear it: while all the
inconveniences, physical, moral, and political, produced by maintaining
taxes for the perpetual payment of the interest, are incurred in pure
loss. Whenever capital is withdrawn from production, or from the fund
destined for production, to be lent to the state and expended
unproductively, that whole sum is withheld from the laboring-classes: the
loan, therefore, is in truth paid off the same year; the whole of the
sacrifice necessary for paying it off is actually made: only it is paid to
the wrong persons, and therefore does not extinguish the claim; and paid
by the very worst of taxes, a tax exclusively on the laboring-class. And,
after having, in this most painful and unjust of ways, gone through the
whole effort necessary for extinguishing the debt, the country remains
charged with it, and with the payment of its interest in perpetuity.


    The United States, for example, borrows capital from A, with which
    it buys stores from B. If the loan all comes from within the
    country, A’s capital is _borrowed_, when the United States should
    have taken that amount outright by taxation. When the money is
    borrowed of A, the laborers undergo the sacrifice, the title to
    the whole sum remains in A’s hands, and the claim against the
    Government by A still exists; while, if the amount were taken by
    taxation, the title to the sum raised is in the state, and it is
    paid to the right person.

    The experience of the United States during the civil war is an
    illustration of this principle. It is asserted that, as a matter
    of fact, the total expenses of the war were defrayed by the
    Northern States, during the four years of its continuance, out of
    surplus earnings; and yet at the close of the conflict a debt of
    $2,800,000,000 was saddled on the country.

    The United States borrowed   $2,400,000,000
    Revenue during that time      1,700,000,000
    Total cost of the war        $4,100,000,000

    In reality we borrowed only about $1,500,000,000 instead of
    $2,400,000,000, since (1) the Government issued paper which
    depreciated, and yet received it at par in subscriptions for
    loans. Moreover, the total cost would have been much reduced had
    we issued no paper and (2) thereby not increased the prices of
    goods to the state, and (3) if no interest account had been
    created by borrowing. But could the country have raised the whole
    sum each year by taxation? In the first fiscal year after the war
    the United States paid in war taxes $650,000,000. At the beginning
    of the struggle, to June 30, 1862, the expenditure was
    $515,000,000, and by June 30, 1863, it had amounted to
    $1,098,000,000; so that $600,000,000 of taxes a year would have
    paid the war expenses, and left us free of debt at the close.

    A confirmatory experience is that of England during the
    Continental wars, 1793-1817:

    Total war expenditures                 £1,060,000,000
    Interest charge on the existing debt      235,000,000
    Total amount required                  £1,295,000,000
    Revenue for that period                 1,145,000,000
    Deficit                                  £150,000,000

    To provide for this deficit, the Government actually increased its
    debt by £600,000,000. A slight additional exertion would have
    provided £150,000,000 more of revenue, and saved £450,000,000 to
    the taxpayers.(109)


The practical state of the case, however, seldom exactly corresponds with
this supposition. The loans of the less wealthy countries are made chiefly
with foreign capital, which would not, perhaps, have been brought in to be
invested on any less security than that of the Government: while those of
rich and prosperous countries are generally made, not with funds withdrawn
from productive employment, but with the new accumulations constantly
making from income, and often with a part of them which, if not so taken,
would have migrated to colonies, or sought other investments abroad.



§ 6. Demand for Commodities is not Demand for Labor.


    Mr. Mill’s statement of the theorem respecting capital, discussed
    in the argument that “demand for commodities is not demand for
    labor,” needs some simplification. For this purpose represent by
    the letters of the alphabet, A, B, C, ... X, Y, Z, the different
    kinds of commodities produced in the world which are exchanged
    against each other in the process of reaching the consumers. This
    exchange of commodities for each other, it need hardly be said,
    does not increase the number or quantity of commodities already in
    existence; since their production, as we have seen, requires labor
    and capital in connection with natural agents. Mere exchange does
    not alter the quantity of commodities produced.

    To produce a plow, for example, the maker must have capital (in
    the form of subsistence, tools, and materials) of which some one
    has foregone the use by a process of saving in order that
    something else, in this case a plow, may be produced. This saving
    must be accomplished first to an amount sufficient to keep
    production going on from day to day. This capital is all consumed,
    but in a longer or shorter term (depending on the particular
    industrial operation) it is reproduced in new forms adapted to the
    existing wants of man. Moreover, without any new exertion of
    abstinence, this amount of capital may be again consumed and
    reproduced, and so go on forever, after once being saved (if never
    destroyed in the mean while, thereby passing out of the category
    not only of capital, but also of wealth). The total capital of the
    country, then, is not the sum of one year’s capital added to that
    of another; but that of last year reproduced in a new form this
    year, plus a fractional increase arising from new savings. But,
    once saved, capital can go on constantly aiding in production
    forever. This plow when made is exchanged (if a plow is wanted,
    and the production is properly adjusted to meet desires) for such
    other products, food, means for repairing tools, etc., as give
    back to the plow-maker all the commodities consumed in its
    manufacture (with an increase, called profit).

    Returning to our illustration of the alphabet, it is evident that
    a certain amount of capital united with labor (constituting what
    may be called a productive engine) lies behind the production of A
    (such as the plow, for example), and to which its existence is
    due. The same is true of Z. Suppose that 5,000 of Z is produced,
    of which 4,000 is enough to reimburse the capital used up by labor
    in the operation, and that the owner of commodity Z spends the
    remaining 1,000 Z in exchange for 1,000 of commodity A. It is
    evident (no money being used as yet) that this exchange of goods
    is regulated entirely by the desires of the two parties to the
    transaction. No more goods are created simply by the exchange; the
    simple process of exchange does not keep the laborers engaged on A
    occupied. And yet the owner of Z had a demand for commodity A; his
    demand was worthless, except through the fact of his production,
    which gave him actual wealth, or purchasing power, in the form of
    Z. His demand for commodity A was not the thing which employed the
    laborers engaged in producing A, although the demand (if known
    beforehand) would cause them to produce A rather than some other
    article—that is, the demand of one quantity of wealth for a
    certain thing determines the _direction_ taken by the owner of
    capital A. But, since the exchange is merely the form in which the
    demand manifests itself, it is clear that the demand does not add
    to production, and so of itself does not employ labor. Of course,
    if there were no desires, there would be no demand, and so no
    production and employment of labor. But we may conclude by
    formulating the proposition, that wealth (Z) offered for
    commodities (A) necessitates the use of other wealth (than Z) as
    capital to support the operation by which those commodities (A)
    are produced. It makes no difference to the existing employment of
    labor what want is supplied by the producers of A, whether it is
    velvet (intended for unproductive consumption) or plows (intended
    for productive consumption). Even if Z is no longer offered in
    exchange for A, and if then A is no longer to be made, the
    laborers formerly occupied in producing A—if warning is given of
    the coming change; if not, loss results—having the plant, can
    produce something else wanted by the owner of Z.

    Now into a community, as here pictured, all laborers supposed to
    be occupied, and all capital employed in producing A, B, C, ... X,
    Y, Z, imagine the coming of a shipwrecked crew. Instead of
    exchanging Z for A, as before, the owner of Z may offer his wealth
    to the crew to dance for him. The essential question is, Is more
    employment offered to labor by this action than the former
    exchange for A? That is, it is a question merely of distribution
    of wealth among the members of a community. The labor engaged on A
    is not thrown out of employment (if they have warning). There is
    no more wealth in existence, but it is differently distributed
    than before: the crew, instead of the former owner, now have 1,000
    of Z. So far as the question of employment is concerned, it makes
    no difference on what terms the crew got it: they might have been
    hired to stand in a row and admire the owner of Z when he goes
    out. But yet it may naturally be assumed that the crew were
    employed productively. In this case, after they have consumed the
    wealth Z, they have brought into existence articles in the place
    of those they consumed. But, although this last operation is
    economically more desirable for the future growth of wealth, yet
    no more laborers for the time were employed than if the crew had
    merely danced. The advantages or disadvantages of productive
    consumption are not to be discussed here. It is intended, however,
    to establish the proposition that _wealth paid out in wages, or
    advanced to producers, itself supports labor_; that wealth offered
    directly to laborers in this way employs more labor than when
    merely offered in exchange for other goods, or, in other words, by
    a demand for commodities; that an increased demand for commodities
    does not involve an increased demand for labor, since this can
    only be created by capital. The essential difference is, that the
    owner of Z in one case, by exchanging goods for A, did not forego
    his consuming power; in the other case, by giving Z to the
    unemployed crew, he actually went through the process of saving by
    foregoing his personal consumption, and handing it over to the
    crew. If the crew use it unproductively, it is in the end the same
    as if the owner of Z had done it; but meanwhile the additional
    laborers were employed. If the crew be employed productively, then
    the saving once made will go on forever, as explained above, and
    the world will be the richer by the wealth this additional capital
    can create.

    It may now be objected that, if A is no longer in demand, the
    laborers in that industry will be thrown out of employment. Out of
    that employment certainly, but not out of every other. One
    thousand of Z was able to purchase certain results of labor and
    capital in industry A, when in the hands of its former owner; and
    now when in the hands of the crew it will control, as purchasing
    power, equivalent results of labor and capital. The crew may not
    want the same articles as the former owner of Z, but they will
    want the equivalents of 1,000 of Z in something, and that
    something will be produced now instead of A. The whole process may
    be represented by this diagram.

    [Illustration, showing interrelationships between A, Z, and Crew.]

    1. Z is exchanged against A, and the crew remain unemployed.

    2. Here the crew possess Z, and they themselves exchange Z for
    whatever A may produce in satisfaction of their wants, and the
    crew are then employed.

    It is possible that the intervention of money blinds some minds to
    a proper understanding of the operations described above. The
    supposition, as given, applies to a condition of barter, but is
    equally true if money is used.(110) Imagine a display of all the
    industries of the world, A, B, C, ... X, Y, Z, presented within
    sight on one large field, and at the central spot the producer of
    gold and silver. When Z is produced, it is taken to the
    gold-counter, and exchanged for money; when A is produced, the
    same is done. Then the former money is given for A, and the latter
    for Z, so that in truth A is exchanged against Z through the
    medium of money, just as before money was considered. Now, it may
    be said by an objector, “If A is not wanted, after it is produced,
    and can not be sold, because the demand from Z has been withdrawn,
    then the capital used for A will not be returned, and the laborers
    in A will be thrown out of employment.” The answer is, of course,
    that the state of things here contemplated is a permanent and
    normal one wherein production is correctly adapted to human
    desires. If A is found not to be wanted, after the production of
    it, an industrial blunder has been committed, and wealth is wasted
    just as when burned up. It is ill-assorted production. The trouble
    is not in a lack of demand for what A may produce (of something
    else), but with the producers of A in not making that for which
    there were desires, from ignorance or lack of early information of
    the disposition of wealth Z. In practice, however, it will be
    found that most goods are made upon “orders,” and, except under
    peculiar circumstances, not actually produced unless a market is
    foreseen. Indeed, as every man knows, the most important function
    of a successful business man is the adaptation of production to
    the market, that is, to the desires of consumers.

    One other form of this question needs brief mention. It is truly
    remarked that a large portion of industrial activity is engaged
    to-day, not in supplying productive consumption, such as food,
    shelter, and clothing, but in supplying the comforts and luxuries
    of low and high alike, or unproductive consumption; now, if there
    were not a demand for luxuries and comforts, many vast industries
    would cease to exist, and labor would be thrown out of employment.
    Is not a demand for such commodities, then, a cause of the present
    employment of labor? No, it is not. Luxuries and comforts are of
    course the objects of human wants; but a desire alone, without
    purchasing power, can not either buy or produce these commodities.
    To obtain a piano, one must produce goods, and this implies the
    possession of capital, by which to bring into existence goods, or
    purchasing power, to be offered for a piano. Nor is this
    sufficient. Even after a man, A, for example, offers purchasing
    power, he will not get a piano unless there exists an accumulation
    of unemployed capital, together with labor ready to manufacture
    the instrument. If capital were all previously occupied, no piano
    could be made, although A stood offering an equivalent in valuable
    goods. It may be said that A himself has the means. He has the
    _wealth_, and if he is willing to forego the use of this wealth,
    or, in other words, save it by devoting it to reproduction in the
    piano industry—that is, create the capital necessary for the
    purpose—then the piano can be made. But this shows again that, not
    a mere desire, but the existence of capital, is necessary to the
    production, and so to the employment of labor. An increased demand
    for commodities, therefore, does not give additional employment to
    labor, unless there be capital to support the labor.

    Some important corollaries result from this proposition: (_a._)
    When a country by legislation creates a home demand for
    commodities, that does not of itself give additional employment to
    labor. If the goods had before been purchased abroad, under free
    discretion, then if produced at home they must require more
    capital and labor, or they would not have been brought from
    foreign countries. If produced at home, it would require, to
    purchase them, more of what was formerly sent abroad; or some must
    do without. The legislation can not, _ipso facto_, create capital,
    and only by an increase of capital can more employment result. It
    is possible, however, that legislation might cause a more
    effective use of existing capital; but that must be a question of
    fact, to be settled by circumstances in each particular case. It
    is not a thing to be governed by principles.

    (_b._) It follows from the above proposition also that taxes
    levied on the rich, and paid by a saving from their consumption of
    luxuries, do not fall on the poor because of a lessened demand for
    commodities; since, as we have seen, that demand does not create
    or diminish the demand for labor. But, if the taxes levied on the
    rich are paid by savings from what the rich would have expended in
    wages, then if the Government spends the amount of revenue thus
    taken in the direct purchase of labor, as of soldiers and sailors,
    the tax does not fall on the laboring-class taken as a whole. When
    the Government takes that wealth which was formerly capital, burns
    it up, or dissipates it in war, it ceases to exist any longer as a
    means of again producing wealth, or of employing labor.




Chapter V. On Circulating And Fixed Capital.



§ 1. Fixed and Circulating Capital.


Of the capital engaged in the production of any commodity, there is a part
which, after being once used, exists no longer as capital; is no longer
capable of rendering service to production, or at least not the same
service, nor to the same sort of production. Such, for example, is the
portion of capital which consists of materials. The tallow and alkali of
which soap is made, once used in the manufacture, are destroyed as alkali
and tallow. In the same division must be placed the portion of capital
which is paid as the wages, or consumed as the subsistence, of laborers.
That part of the capital of a cotton-spinner which he pays away to his
work-people, once so paid, exists no longer as his capital, or as a
cotton-spinner’s capital. Capital which in this manner fulfills the whole
of its office in the production in which it is engaged, by a single use,
is called Circulating Capital. The term, which is not very appropriate, is
derived from the circumstance that this portion of capital requires to be
constantly renewed by the sale of the finished product, and when renewed
is perpetually parted with in buying materials and paying wages; so that
it does its work, not by being kept, but by changing hands.

Another large portion of capital, however, consists in instruments of
production, of a more or less permanent character; which produce their
effect not by being parted with, but by being kept; and the efficacy of
which is not exhausted by a single use. To this class belong buildings,
machinery, and all or most things known by the name of implements or
tools. The durability of some of these is considerable, and their function
as productive instruments is prolonged through many repetitions of the
productive operation. In this class must likewise be included capital sunk
(as the expression is) in permanent improvements of land. So also the
capital expended once for all, in the commencement of an undertaking, to
prepare the way for subsequent operations: the expense of opening a mine,
for example; of cutting canals, of making roads or docks. Other examples
might be added, but these are sufficient. Capital which exists in any of
these durable shapes, and the return to which is spread over a period of
corresponding duration, is called Fixed Capital.

Of fixed capital, some kinds require to be occasionally or periodically
renewed. Such are all implements and buildings: they require, at
intervals, partial renewal by means of repairs, and are at last entirely
worn out. In other cases the capital does not, unless as a consequence of
some unusual accident, require entire renewal. A dock or a canal, once
made, does not require, like a machine, to be made again, unless purposely
destroyed. The most permanent of all kinds of fixed capital is that
employed in giving increased productiveness to a natural agent, such as
land.

To return to the theoretical distinction between fixed and circulating
capital. Since all wealth which is destined to be employed for
reproduction comes within the designation of capital, there are parts of
capital which do not agree with the definition of either species of it;
for instance, the stock of finished goods which a manufacturer or dealer
at any time possesses unsold in his warehouses. But this, though capital
as to its destination, is not yet capital in actual exercise; it is not
engaged in production, but has first to be sold or exchanged, that is,
converted into an equivalent value of some other commodities, and
therefore is not yet either fixed or circulating capital, but will become
either one or the other, or be eventually divided between them.



§ 2. Increase of Fixed Capital, when, at the Expense of Circulating, might
be Detrimental to the Laborers.


There is a great difference between the effects of circulating and those
of fixed capital, on the amount of the gross produce of the country.
Circulating capital being destroyed as such, the result of a single use
must be a reproduction equal to the whole amount of the circulating
capital used, and a profit besides. This, however, is by no means
necessary in the case of fixed capital. Since machinery, for example, is
not wholly consumed by one use, it is not necessary that it should be
wholly replaced from the product of that use. The machine answers the
purpose of its owner if it brings in, during each interval of time, enough
to cover the expense of repairs, and the deterioration in value which the
machine has sustained during the same time, with a surplus sufficient to
yield the ordinary profit on the entire value of the machine.

From this it follows that all increase of fixed capital, when taking place
at the expense of circulating, must be, at least temporarily, prejudicial
to the interests of the laborers. This is true, not of machinery alone,
but of all improvements by which capital is sunk; that is, rendered
permanently incapable of being applied to the maintenance and remuneration
of labor.


    It is highly probable that in the twenty-five years preceding the
    panic of 1873, owing to the progress of invention, those
    industries in the United States employing much machinery were
    unduly stimulated in comparison with other industries, and that
    the readjustment was a slow and painful process. After the
    collapse vast numbers left the manufacturing to enter the
    extractive industries.


The argument relied on by most of those who contend that machinery can
never be injurious to the laboring-class is, that by cheapening production
it creates such an increased demand for the commodity as enables, ere
long, a greater number of persons than ever to find employment in
producing it. The argument does not seem to me to have the weight commonly
ascribed to it. The fact, though too broadly stated, is, no doubt, often
true. The copyists who were thrown out of employment by the invention of
printing were doubtless soon outnumbered by the compositors and pressmen
who took their place; and the number of laboring persons now employed in
the cotton manufacture is many times greater than were so occupied
previously to the inventions of Hargreaves and Arkwright, which shows
that, besides the enormous fixed capital now embarked in the manufacture,
it also employs a far larger circulating capital than at any former time.
But if this capital was drawn from other employments, if the funds which
took the place of the capital sunk in costly machinery were supplied not
by any additional saving consequent on the improvements, but by drafts on
the general capital of the community, what better are the laboring-classes
for the mere transfer?


    There is a machine used for sizing the cotton yarn to prepare it
    for weaving, by which it is dried over a steam cylinder, the wages
    for attendance on which were only two dollars per day, as compared
    with an expenditure for labor of fourteen dollars per day to
    accomplish the same ends before the machine was invented.


All attempts to make out that the laboring-classes as a collective body
_can not_ suffer temporarily by the introduction of machinery, or by the
sinking of capital in permanent improvements, are, I conceive, necessarily
fallacious.(111) That they would suffer in the particular department of
industry to which the change applies is generally admitted, and obvious to
common sense; but it is often said that, though employment is withdrawn
from labor in one department, an exactly equivalent employment is opened
for it in others, because what the consumers save in the increased
cheapness of one particular article enables them to augment their
consumption of others, thereby increasing the demand for other kinds of
labor. This is plausible, but, as was shown in the last chapter, involves
a fallacy; demand for commodities being a totally different thing from
demand for labor. It is true, the consumers have now additional means of
buying other things; but this will not create the other things, unless
there is capital to produce them, and the improvement has not set at
liberty any capital, even if it has not absorbed some from other
employments.


    If the improvement has lowered the cost of production, it has
    often required less capital (as well as less labor) to produce the
    same quantity of goods; or, what is the same thing, an increased
    product with the same capital.



§ 3. —This seldom, if ever, occurs.


Nevertheless, I do not believe that, as things are actually transacted,
improvements in production are often, if ever, injurious, even
temporarily, to the laboring-classes in the aggregate. They would be so if
they took place suddenly to a great amount, because much of the capital
sunk must necessarily in that case be provided from funds already employed
as circulating capital. But improvements are always introduced very
gradually, and are seldom or never made by withdrawing circulating capital
from actual production, but are made by the employment of the annual
increase. I doubt if there would be found a single example of a great
increase of fixed capital, at a time and place where circulating capital
was not rapidly increasing likewise.


    In the United States, while the cost per yard of the manufactured
    goods has decreased, and so made accessible to poorer classes than
    before, the capital engaged in manufactures has increased so as to
    allow a vastly greater number of persons to be employed, as will
    be seen by the following comparison of 1860 with 1880 taken from
    the last census returns. (Compendium, 1880, pp. 928, 930.)


       Number of         Capital        Average     Total amount
       establishments.   (Thousands).   number of   paid in
                                        hands       wages during
                                        employed.   the year.
1860           140,433     $1,009,855   1,311,246   $378,878,966
1880           253,852      2,790,272   2,732,595    947,953,795


    “A hundred years ago, one person in every family of five or six
    must have been absolutely needed to spin and weave by hand the
    fabrics required for the scanty clothing of the people; now one
    person in two hundred or two hundred and fifty only need work in
    the factory to produce the cotton and woolen fabrics of the most
    amply clothed nation of the world.”(112)


To these considerations must be added, that, even if improvements did for
a time decrease the aggregate produce and the circulating capital of the
community, they would not the less tend in the long run to augment both.
This tendency of improvements in production to cause increased
accumulation, and thereby ultimately to increase the gross produce, even
if temporarily diminishing it, will assume a still more decided character
if it should appear that there are assignable limits both to the
accumulation of capital and to the increase of production from the land,
which limits once attained, all further increase of produce must stop; but
that improvements in production, whatever may be their other effects, tend
to throw one or both of these limits farther off. Now, these are truths
which will appear in the clearest light in a subsequent stage of our
investigation. It will be seen that the quantity of capital which will, or
even which can, be accumulated in any country, and the amount of gross
produce which will, or even which can, be raised, bear a proportion to the
state of the arts of production there existing; and that every
improvement, even if for the time it diminish the circulating capital and
the gross produce, ultimately makes room for a larger amount of both than
could possibly have existed otherwise. It is this which is the conclusive
answer to the objections against machinery; and the proof thence arising
of the ultimate benefit to laborers of mechanical inventions, even in the
existing state of society, will hereafter be seen to be conclusive.(113)




Chapter VI. Of Causes Affecting The Efficiency Of Production.



§ 1. General Causes of Superior Productiveness.


The most evident cause of superior productiveness is what are called
natural advantages. These are various. Fertility of soil is one of the
principal. The influence of climate [is another advantage, and] consists
in lessening the physical requirements of the producers.


    In spinning very fine cotton thread, England’s natural climate
    gives in some parts of the country such advantages in proper
    moisture and electric conditions that the operation can be carried
    on out-of-doors; while in the United States it is generally
    necessary to create an artificial atmosphere. In ordinary spinning
    in our country more is accomplished when the wind is in one
    quarter than in another. The dry northwest wind in New England
    reduces the amount of product, while the dry northeast wind in
    England has a similar effect, and it is said has practically
    driven the cotton-spinners from Manchester to Oldham, where the
    climate is more equably moist. The full reasons for these facts
    are not yet ascertained.

    Experts in the woolen industry, also, explain that the quality and
    fiber of wool depend upon the soil and climate where the sheep are
    pastured. When Ohio sheep are transferred to Texas, in a few years
    their wool loses the distinctive quality it formerly possessed,
    and takes on a new character belonging to the breeds of Texas. The
    wool produced by one set of climatic conditions is quite different
    from that of another set, and is used by the manufacturers for
    different purposes.


In hot regions, mankind can exist in comfort with less perfect housing,
less clothing; fuel, that absolute necessary of life in cold climates,
they can almost dispense with, except for industrial uses. They also
require less aliment. Among natural advantages, besides soil and climate,
must be mentioned abundance of mineral productions, in convenient
situations, and capable of being worked with moderate labor. Such are the
coal-fields of Great Britain, which do so much to compensate its
inhabitants for the disadvantages of climate; and the scarcely inferior
resource possessed by this country and the United States, in a copious
supply of an easily reduced iron-ore, at no great depth below the earth’s
surface, and in close proximity to coal-deposits available for working it.
But perhaps a greater advantage than all these is a maritime situation,
especially when accompanied with good natural harbors; and, next to it,
great navigable rivers. These advantages consist indeed wholly in saving
of cost of carriage. But few, who have not considered the subject, have
any adequate notion how great an extent of economical advantage this
comprises.

As the second of the [general] causes of superior productiveness, we may
rank the greater energy of labor. By this is not to be understood
occasional, but regular and habitual energy. The third element which
determines the productiveness of the labor of a community is the skill and
knowledge therein existing, whether it be the skill and knowledge of the
laborers themselves or of those who direct their labor. That the
productiveness of the labor of a people is limited by their knowledge of
the arts of life is self-evident, and that any progress in those arts, any
improved application of the objects or powers of nature to industrial
uses, enables the same quantity and intensity of labor to raise a greater
produce. One principal department of these improvements consists in the
invention and use of tools and machinery.(114)

The deficiency of practical good sense, which renders the majority of the
laboring-class such bad calculators—which makes, for instance, their
domestic economy so improvident, lax, and irregular—must disqualify them
for any but a low grade of intelligent labor, and render their industry
far less productive than with equal energy it otherwise might be. The
moral qualities of the laborers are fully as important to the efficiency
and worth of their labor as the intellectual. Independently of the effects
of intemperance upon their bodily and mental faculties, and of flighty,
unsteady habits upon the energy and continuity of their work (points so
easily understood as not to require being insisted upon), it is well
worthy of meditation how much of the aggregate effect of their labor
depends on their trustworthiness.

Among the secondary causes which determine the productiveness of
productive agents, the most important is Security. By security I mean the
completeness of the protection which society affords to its members.



§ 2. Combination and Division of Labor Increase Productiveness.


In the enumeration of the circumstances which promote the productiveness
of labor, we have left one untouched, which is co-operation, or the
combined action of numbers. Of this great aid to production, a single
department, known by the name of Division of Labor, has engaged a large
share of the attention of political economists; most deservedly, indeed,
but to the exclusion of other cases and exemplifications of the same
comprehensive law. In the lifting of heavy weights, for example, in the
felling of trees, in the sawing of timber, in the gathering of much hay or
corn during a short period of fine weather, in draining a large extent of
land during the short season when such a work may be properly conducted,
in the pulling of ropes on board ship, in the rowing of large boats, in
some mining operations, in the erection of a scaffolding for building, and
in the breaking of stones for the repair of a road, so that the whole of
the road shall always be kept in good order: in all these simple
operations, and thousands more, it is absolutely necessary that many
persons should work together, at the same time, in the same place, and in
the same way. [But] in the present state of society, the breeding and
feeding of sheep is the occupation of one set of people; dressing the wool
to prepare it for the spinner is that of another; spinning it into thread,
of a third; weaving the thread into broadcloth, of a fourth; dyeing the
cloth, of a fifth; making it into a coat, of a sixth; without counting the
multitude of carriers, merchants, factors, and retailers put in
requisition at the successive stages of this progress.

Without some separation of employments, very few things would be produced
at all. Suppose a set of persons, or a number of families, all employed
precisely in the same manner; each family settled on a piece of its own
land, on which it grows by its labor the food required for its own
sustenance, and, as there are no persons to buy any surplus produce where
all are producers, each family has to produce within itself whatever other
articles it consumes. In such circumstances, if the soil was tolerably
fertile, and population did not tread too closely on the heels of
subsistence, there would be, no doubt, some kind of domestic manufactures;
clothing for the family might, perhaps, be spun and woven within it, by
the labor, probably, of the women (a first step in the separation of
employments); and a dwelling of some sort would be erected and kept in
repair by their united labor. But beyond simple food (precarious, too,
from the variations of the seasons), coarse clothing, and very imperfect
lodging, it would be scarcely possible that the family should produce
anything more.

Suppose that a company of artificers, provided with tools, and with food
sufficient to maintain them for a year, arrive in the country and
establish themselves in the midst of the population. These new settlers
occupy themselves in producing articles of use or ornament adapted to the
taste of a simple people; and before their food is exhausted they have
produced these in considerable quantity, and are ready to exchange them
for more food. The economical position of the landed population is now
most materially altered. They have an opportunity given them of acquiring
comforts and luxuries. Things which, while they depended solely upon their
own labor, they never could have obtained, because they could not have
produced, are now accessible to them if they can succeed in producing an
additional quantity of food and necessaries. They are thus incited to
increase the productiveness of their industry. The new settlers constitute
what is called a _market_ for surplus agricultural produce; and their
arrival has enriched the settlement, not only by the manufactured articles
which they produce, but by the food which would not have been produced
unless they had been there to consume it.

There is no inconsistency between this doctrine and the proposition we
before maintained,(115) that a market for commodities does not constitute
employment for labor. The labor of the agriculturists was already provided
with employment; they are not indebted to the demand of the new-comers for
being able to maintain themselves. What that demand does for them is to
call their labor into increased vigor and efficiency; to stimulate them,
by new motives, to new exertions.

From these considerations it appears that a country will seldom have a
productive agriculture unless it has a large town population, or, the only
available substitute, a large export trade in agricultural produce to
supply a population elsewhere. I use the phrase “town population” for
shortness, to imply a population non-agricultural.

It is found that the productive power of labor is increased by carrying
the separation further and further; by breaking down more and more every
process of industry into parts, so that each laborer shall confine himself
to an ever smaller number of simple operations. And thus, in time, arise
those remarkable cases of what is called the division of labor, with which
all readers on subjects of this nature are familiar. Adam Smith’s
illustration from pin-making, though so well known, is so much to the
point that I will venture once more to transcribe it: “The business of
making a pin is divided into about eighteen distinct operations. One man
draws out the wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points
it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the head
requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar
business; to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to
put them into the paper.... I have seen a small manufactory where ten men
only were employed, and where some of them, consequently, performed two or
three distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore
but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could,
when they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins
in a day. There are in a pound upward of four thousand pins of a middling
size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upward of
forty-eight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth
part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four
thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought
separately and independently, and without any of them having been educated
to this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have made
twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day.”



§ 3. Advantages of Division of Labor.


The causes of the increased efficiency given to labor by the division of
employments are some of them too familiar to require specification; but it
is worth while to attempt a complete enumeration of them. By Adam Smith
they are reduced to three: “First, the increase of dexterity in every
particular workman; secondly, the saving of the time which is commonly
lost in passing from one species of work to another; and, lastly, the
invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and abridge
labor, and enable one man to do the work of many.”

(1.) Of these, the increase of dexterity of the individual workman is the
most obvious and universal. It does not follow that because a thing has
been done oftener it will be done better. That depends on the intelligence
of the workman, and on the degree in which his mind works along with his
hands. But it will be done more easily. This is as true of mental
operations as of bodily. Even a child, after much practice, sums up a
column of figures with a rapidity which resembles intuition. The act of
speaking any language, of reading fluently, of playing music at sight, are
cases as remarkable as they are familiar. Among bodily acts, dancing,
gymnastic exercises, ease and brilliancy of execution on a musical
instrument, are examples of the rapidity and facility acquired by
repetition. In simpler manual operations the effect is, of course, still
sooner produced.

(2.) The second advantage enumerated by Adam Smith as arising from the
division of labor is one on which I can not help thinking that more stress
is laid by him and others than it deserves. To do full justice to his
opinion, I will quote his own exposition of it: “It is impossible to pass
very quickly from one kind of work to another, that is carried on in a
different place, and with quite different tools. A country weaver, who
cultivates a small farm, must lose a good deal of time in passing from his
loom to the field, and from the field to his loom. When the two trades can
be carried on in the same workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much
less. It is even in this case, however, very considerable. A man commonly
saunters a little in turning his hand from one sort of employment to
another.” I am very far from implying that these considerations are of no
weight; but I think there are counter-considerations which are overlooked.
If one kind of muscular or mental labor is different from another, for
that very reason it is to some extent a rest from that other; and if the
greatest vigor is not at once obtained in the second occupation, neither
could the first have been indefinitely prolonged without some relaxation
of energy. It is a matter of common experience that a change of occupation
will often afford relief where complete repose would otherwise be
necessary, and that a person can work many more hours without fatigue at a
succession of occupations, than if confined during the whole time to
one.(116) Different occupations employ different muscles, or different
energies of the mind, some of which rest and are refreshed while others
work. Bodily labor itself rests from mental, and conversely. The variety
itself has an invigorating effect on what, for want of a more
philosophical appellation, we must term the animal spirits—so important to
the efficiency of all work not mechanical, and not unimportant even to
that.

(3.) The third advantage attributed by Adam Smith to the division of labor
is, to a certain extent, real. Inventions tending to save labor in a
particular operation are more likely to occur to any one in proportion as
his thoughts are intensely directed to that occupation, and continually
employed upon it.


    This also can not be wholly true. “The founder of the cotton
    manufacture was a barber. The inventor of the power-loom was a
    clergyman. A farmer devised the application of the
    screw-propeller. A fancy-goods shopkeeper is one of the most
    enterprising experimentalists in agriculture. The most remarkable
    architectural design of our day has been furnished by a gardener.
    The first person who supplied London with water was a goldsmith.
    The first extensive maker of English roads was a blind man, bred
    to no trade. The father of English inland navigation was a duke,
    and his engineer was a millwright. The first great builder of iron
    bridges was a stone-mason, and the greatest railway engineer
    commenced his life as a colliery engineer.”(117)


(4.) The greatest advantage (next to the dexterity of the workmen) derived
from the minute division of labor which takes place in modern
manufacturing industry, is one not mentioned by Adam Smith, but to which
attention has been drawn by Mr. Babbage: the more economical distribution
of labor by classing the work-people according to their capacity.
Different parts of the same series of operations require unequal degrees
of skill and bodily strength; and those who have skill enough for the most
difficult, or strength enough for the hardest parts of the labor, are made
much more useful by being employed solely in them; the operations which
everybody is capable of being left to those who are fit for no others.

The division of labor, as all writers on the subject have remarked, is
limited by the extent of the market. If, by the separation of pin-making
into ten distinct employments, forty-eight thousand pins can be made in a
day, this separation will only be advisable if the number of accessible
consumers is such as to require, every day, something like forty-eight
thousand pins. If there is only a demand for twenty-four thousand, the
division of labor can only be advantageously carried to the extent which
will every day produce that smaller number. The increase of the general
riches of the world, when accompanied with freedom of commercial
intercourse, improvements in navigation, and inland communication by
roads, canals, or railways, tends to give increased productiveness to the
labor of every nation in particular, by enabling each locality to supply
with its special products so much larger a market that a great extension
of the division of labor in their production is an ordinary consequence.
The division of labor is also limited, in many cases, by the nature of the
employment. Agriculture, for example, is not susceptible of so great a
division of occupations as many branches of manufactures, because its
different operations can not possibly be simultaneous.


    (5.) “In the examples given above the advantage obtained was
    derived from the mere fact of the separation of employments,
    altogether independently of the mode in which the separated
    employments were distributed among the _persons_ carrying them on,
    as well as of the _places_ in which they were conducted. But a
    further gain arises when the employments are of a kind which, in
    order to their effective performance, call for special capacities
    in the workman, or special natural resources in the scene of
    operation. There would be a manifest waste of special power in
    compelling to a mere mechanical or routine pursuit a man who is
    fitted to excel in a professional career; and similarly, if a
    branch of industry were established on some site which offered
    greater facilities to an industry of another sort, a waste,
    analogous in character, would be incurred. In a word, while a
    great number of the occupations in which men engage are such as,
    with proper preparation for them, might equally well be carried on
    by any of those engaged in them, or in any of the localities in
    which they are respectively established, there are others which
    demand for their effective performance special personal
    qualifications and special local conditions; and the general
    effectiveness of productive industry will, other things being
    equal, be proportioned to the completeness with which the
    adaptation is accomplished between occupation on the one hand and
    individuals and localities on the other.”(118)



§ 4. Production on a Large and Production on a Small Scale.


Whenever it is essential to the greatest efficiency of labor that many
laborers should combine, the scale of the enterprise must be such as to
bring many laborers together, and the capital must be large enough to
maintain them. Still more needful is this when the nature of the
employment allows, and the extent of the possible market encourages, a
considerable division of labor. The larger the enterprise the further the
division of labor may be carried. This is one of the principal causes of
large manufactories. Every increase of business would enable the whole to
be carried on with a proportionally smaller amount of labor.

As a general rule, the expenses of a business do not increase by any means
proportionally to the quantity of business. Let us take as an example a
set of operations which we are accustomed to see carried on by one great
establishment, that of the Post-Office. Suppose that the business, let us
say only of the letter-post, instead of being centralized in a single
concern, were divided among five or six competing companies. Each of these
would be obliged to maintain almost as large an establishment as is now
sufficient for the whole. Since each must arrange for receiving and
delivering letters in all parts of the town, each must send
letter-carriers into every street, and almost every alley, and this, too,
as many times in the day as is now done by the Post-Office, if the service
is to be as well performed. Each must have an office for receiving letters
in every neighborhood, with all subsidiary arrangements for collecting the
letters from the different offices and redistributing them. To this must
be added the much greater number of superior officers who would be
required to check and control the subordinates, implying not only a
greater cost in salaries for such responsible officers, but the necessity,
perhaps, of being satisfied in many instances with an inferior standard of
qualification, and so failing in the object.

Whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on a large scale
preponderate in any particular case over the more watchful attention and
greater regard to minor gains and losses usually found in small
establishments, can be ascertained, in a state of free competition, by an
unfailing test. Wherever there are large and small establishments in the
same business, that one of the two which in existing circumstances carries
on the production at greatest advantage will be able to undersell the
other. The power of permanently underselling can only, generally speaking,
be derived from increased effectiveness of labor; and this, when obtained
by a more extended division of employment, or by a classification tending
to a better economy of skill, always implies a greater produce from the
same labor, and not merely the same produce from less labor; it increases
not the surplus only, but the gross produce of industry. If an increased
quantity of the particular article is not required, and part of the
laborers in consequence lose their employment, the capital which
maintained and employed them is also set at liberty, and the general
produce of the country is increased by some other application of their
labor.

A considerable part of the saving of labor effected by substituting the
large system of production for the small, is the saving in the labor of
the capitalists themselves. If a hundred producers with small capitals
carry on separately the same business, the superintendence of each concern
will probably require the whole attention of the person conducting it,
sufficiently, at least, to hinder his time or thoughts from being
disposable for anything else; while a single manufacturer possessing a
capital equal to the sum of theirs, with ten or a dozen clerks, could
conduct the whole of their amount of business, and have leisure, too, for
other occupations.

Production on a large scale is greatly promoted by the practice of forming
a large capital by the combination of many small contributions; or, in
other words, by the formation of stock companies. The advantages of the
principle are important, [since] (1) many undertakings require an amount
of capital beyond the means of the richest individual or private
partnership. [Of course] the Government can alone be looked to for any of
those works for which a great combination of means is requisite, because
it can obtain those means by compulsory taxation, and is already
accustomed to the conduct of large operations. For reasons, however, which
are tolerably well known, government agency for the conduct of industrial
operations is generally one of the least eligible of resources when any
other is available. Of [the advantages referred to above] one of the most
important is (2) that which relates to the intellectual and active
qualifications of the directing head. The stimulus of individual interest
is some security for exertion, but exertion is of little avail if the
intelligence exerted is of an inferior order, which it must necessarily be
in the majority of concerns carried on by the persons chiefly interested
in them. Where the concern is large, and can afford a remuneration
sufficient to attract a class of candidates superior to the common
average, it is possible to select for the general management, and for all
the skilled employments of a subordinate kind, persons of a degree of
acquirement and cultivated intelligence which more than compensates for
their inferior interest in the result. It must be further remarked that it
is not a necessary consequence of joint-stock management that the persons
employed, whether in superior or in subordinate offices, should be paid
wholly by fixed salaries. In the case of the managers of joint-stock
companies, and of the superintending and controlling officers in many
private establishments, it is a common enough practice to connect their
pecuniary interest with the interest of their employers, by giving them
part of their remuneration in the form of a percentage on the profits.

The possibility of substituting the large system of production for the
small depends, of course, in the first place, on the extent of the market.
The large system can only be advantageous when a large amount of business
is to be done: it implies, therefore, either a populous and flourishing
community, or a great opening for exportation.

In the countries in which there are the largest markets, the widest
diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise, the greatest annual
increase of capital, and the greatest number of large capitals owned by
individuals, there is a tendency to substitute more and more, in one
branch of industry after another, large establishments for small ones.
These are almost always able to undersell the smaller tradesmen, partly,
it is understood, by means of division of labor, and the economy
occasioned by limiting the employment of skilled agency to cases where
skill is required; and partly, no doubt, by the saving of labor arising
from the great scale of the transactions; as it costs no more time, and
not much more exertion of mind, to make a large purchase, for example,
than a small one, and very much less than to make a number of small ones.
With a view merely to production, and to the greatest efficiency of labor,
this change is wholly beneficial.


    A single large company very often, instead of being a monopoly, is
    generally better than two large companies; for there is little
    likelihood of competition and lower prices when the competitors
    are so few as to be able to agree not to compete. As Mr. Mill says
    in regard to parallel railroads: “No one can desire to see the
    enormous waste of capital and land (not to speak of increased
    nuisance) involved in the construction of a second railway to
    connect the same places already united by an existing one; while
    the two would not do the work better than it could be done by one,
    and after a short time would probably be amalgamated.” The actual
    tendency of charges to diminish on the railways, before the matter
    of parallel railways was suggested is clearly seen by reference to
    Chart V (p. 137).




Chapter VII. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Labor.



§ 1. The Law of the Increase of Production Depends on those of Three
Elements—Labor. Capital, and Land.


Production is not a fixed but an increasing thing. When not kept back by
bad institutions, or a low state of the arts of life, the produce of
industry has usually tended to increase; stimulated not only by the desire
of the producers to augment their means of consumption, but by the
increasing number of the consumers.

We have seen that the essential requisites of production are three—labor,
capital, and natural agents; the term capital including all external and
physical requisites which are products of labor, the term natural agents
all those which are not. The increase of production, therefore, depends on
the properties of these elements. It is a result of the increase either of
the elements themselves, or of their productiveness. We proceed to
consider the three elements successively, with reference to this effect;
or, in other words, the law of the increase of production, viewed in
respect of its dependence, first on Labor, secondly on Capital, and lastly
on Land.



§ 2. The Law of Population.


The increase of labor is the increase of mankind; of population. The power
of multiplication inherent in all organic life may be regarded as
infinite. There are many species of vegetables of which a single plant
will produce in one year the germs of a thousand; if only two come to
maturity, in fourteen years the two will have multiplied to sixteen
thousand and more. It is but a moderate case of fecundity in animals to be
capable of quadrupling their numbers in a single year; if they only do as
much in half a century, ten thousand will have swelled within two
centuries to upward to two millions and a half. The capacity of increase
is necessarily in a geometrical progression: the numerical ratio alone is
different.

To this property of organized beings, the human species forms no
exception. Its power of increase is indefinite, and the actual
multiplication would be extraordinarily rapid, if the power were exercised
to the utmost. It never is exercised to the utmost, and yet, in the most
favorable circumstances known to exist, which are those of a fertile
region colonized from an industrious and civilized community, population
has continued, for several generations, independently of fresh
immigration, to double itself in not much more than twenty years.


    Years.   Population.   Food.
    25          11 mills       x
    25          22 mills      2x
    25          44 mills      3x
    25          88 mills      4x
    25         176 mills      5x

    By this table it will be seen that if population can double itself
    in twenty-five years, and if food can only be increased by as much
    as _x_ (the subsistence of eleven millions) by additional
    application of another equal quantity of labor on the same land in
    each period, then at the end of one hundred years there would be
    the disproportion of one hundred and seventy-six millions of
    people, with subsistence for only fifty-five millions. Of course,
    this is prevented either by checking population to the amount of
    the subsistence; by sending off the surplus population; or by
    bringing in food from new lands.

    In the United States to 1860 population has doubled itself about
    every twenty years, while in France there is practically no
    increase of population. It is stated that the white population of
    the United States between 1790 and 1840 increased 400.4 per cent,
    deducting immigration. The extraordinary advance of population
    with us, where subsistence is easily attainable, is to be seen in
    the chart on the next page (No. III), which shows the striking
    rapidity of increase in the United States when compared with the
    older countries of Europe. The steady demand for land can be seen
    by the gradual westward movement of the center of population, as
    seen in chart No. IV (p. 116), and by the rapid settlement of the
    distant parts of our country, as shown by the two charts
    (frontispieces), which represent to the eye by heavier colors the
    areas of the more densely settled districts in 1830 and in 1880.


                             [Illustration.]

       Chart III: Population of European Countries, XIXth Century.



§ 3. By what Checks the Increase of Population is Practically Limited.


The obstacle to a just understanding of the subject arises from too
confused a notion of the causes which, at most times and places, keep the
actual increase of mankind so far behind the capacity.

The conduct of human creatures is more or less influenced by foresight of
consequences, and by some impulses superior to mere animal instincts; and
they do not, therefore, propagate like swine, but are capable, though in
very unequal degrees, of being withheld by prudence, or by the social
affections, from giving existence to beings born only to misery and
premature death.


    Malthus found an explanation of the anomaly that in the Swiss
    villages, with the longest average duration of life, there were
    the fewest births, by noting that no one married until a
    cow-herd’s cottage became vacant, and precisely because the
    tenants lived so long were the new-comers long kept out of a
    place.


In proportion as mankind rise above the condition of the beast, population
is restrained by the fear of want, rather than by want itself. Even where
there is no question of starvation, many are similarly acted upon by the
apprehension of losing what have come to be regarded as the decencies of
their situation in life. Among the middle classes, in many individual
instances, there is an additional restraint exercised from the desire of
doing more than maintaining their circumstances—of improving them; but
such a desire is rarely found, or rarely has that effect, in the
laboring-classes. If they can bring up a family as they were themselves
brought up, even the prudent among them are usually satisfied. Too often
they do not think even of that, but rely on fortune, or on the resources
to be found in legal or voluntary charity.

                             [Illustration.]

           Chart IV: Westward Movement of Center of Population.


    This, in effect, is the well-known Malthusian doctrine. The
    thorough reader will also consult the original “Essay” of Malthus.
    Mr. Bowen(119) and other writers oppose it, saying it has “no
    relation to the times in which we live, or to any which are near
    at hand.” He thinks the productive power of the whole world
    prevents the necessity of considering the pressure of population
    upon subsistence as an actuality now or in the future. This,
    however, does not deny the existence of Malthus’s principles, but
    opposes them only on the methods of their action. Mr.
    Rickards(120) holds that man’s food—as, e.g., wheat—has the power
    to increase geometrically faster than man; but he omits to
    consider that for the growth of this food land is demanded; that
    land is not capable of such geometrical increase; and that without
    it the food can not be grown. Of course, any extension of the land
    area, as happened when England abolished the corn laws and drew
    her food from our prairies, removes the previous pressure of
    population on subsistence. No believer in the Malthusian doctrine
    is so absurd as to hold that the growth of population actually
    exceeds subsistence, but that there is a “constant _tendency_ in
    all animated life to increase beyond the nourishment prepared for
    it,” no one can possibly doubt. This is not inconsistent with the
    fact that subsistence has at any time increased faster than
    population. It is as if a block of wood on the floor were acted on
    by two opposing forces, one tending to move it forward, one
    backward: if it moves backward, that does not prove the absence of
    any force working to move it forward, but only that the other
    force is the stronger of the two, and that the final motion is the
    resultant of the two forces. It is only near-sighted
    generalization to say that since the block moves forward, there is
    therefore no opposing force to its advance.(121) Mr. Doubleday
    maintains that, as people become better fed, they become
    unprolific. Mr. Mill’s answer, referring to the large families of
    the English peerage, is unfortunate.(122) In Sweden the increase
    of the peasantry is six times that of the middle classes, and
    fourteen times that of the nobility. The diminishing fertility of
    New England families gives a truer explanation, when it is seen
    that with the progress in material wealth later marriages are the
    rule. When New-Englanders emigrate to the Western States, where
    labor is in demand and where it is less burdensome to have large
    families, there is no question as to their fertility.(123)


(1.) In a very backward state of society, like that of Europe in the
middle ages, and many parts of Asia at present, population is kept down by
actual starvation. The starvation does not take place in ordinary years,
but in seasons of scarcity, which in those states of society are much more
frequent and more extreme than Europe is now accustomed to. (2.) In a more
improved state, few, even among the poorest of the people, are limited to
actual necessaries, and to a bare sufficiency of those: and the increase
is kept within bounds, not by excess of deaths, but by limitation of
births.(124) The limitation is brought about in various ways. In some
countries, it is the result of prudent or conscientious self-restraint.
There is a condition to which the laboring-people are habituated; they
perceive that, by having too numerous families, they must sink below that
condition, or fail to transmit it to their children; and this they do not
choose to submit to.

There are other cases in which the prudence and forethought, which perhaps
might not be exercised by the people themselves, are exercised by the
state for their benefit; marriage not being permitted until the
contracting parties can show that they have the prospect of a comfortable
support. There are places, again, in which the restraining cause seems to
be not so much individual prudence, as some general and perhaps even
accidental habit of the country. In the rural districts of England, during
the last century, the growth of population was very effectually repressed
by the difficulty of obtaining a cottage to live in. It was the custom for
unmarried laborers to lodge and board with their employers; it was the
custom for married laborers to have a cottage: and the rule of the English
poor-laws, by which a parish was charged with the support of its
unemployed poor, rendered land-owners averse to promote marriage. About
the end of the century, the great demand for men in war and manufactures
made it be thought a patriotic thing to encourage population: and about
the same time the growing inclination of farmers to live like rich people,
favored as it was by a long period of high prices, made them desirous of
keeping inferiors at a greater distance, and, pecuniary motives arising
from abuses of the poor-laws being superadded, they gradually drove their
laborers into cottages, which the landowners now no longer refused
permission to build.

It is but rarely that improvements in the condition of the
laboring-classes do anything more than give a temporary margin, speedily
filled up by an increase of their numbers. Unless, either by their general
improvement in intellectual and moral culture, or at least by raising
their habitual standard of comfortable living, they can be taught to make
a better use of favorable circumstances, nothing permanent can be done for
them; the most promising schemes end only in having a more numerous but
not a happier people. There is no doubt that [the standard] is gradually,
though slowly, rising in the more advanced countries of Western
Europe.(125) Subsistence and employment in England have never increased
more rapidly than in the last forty years, but every census since 1821
showed a smaller proportional increase of population than that of the
period preceding; and the produce of French agriculture and industry is
increasing in a progressive ratio, while the population exhibits, in every
quinquennial census, a smaller proportion of births to the population.


    This brings forward the near connection between land-tenures and
    population. France is pre-eminently a country of small holdings,
    and it is undoubtedly true that the system has checked the
    thoughtless increase of numbers. On his few hectares, the French
    peasant sees in the size of his farm and the amount of its produce
    the limit of subsistence for himself and his family; as in no
    other way does he see beforehand the results of any lack of food
    from his lack of prudence.(126) From 1790 to 1815 the average
    yearly increase of population was 120,000; from 1815 to 1846, the
    golden age of French agriculture, 200,000; from 1846 to 1856, when
    agriculture was not prosperous, 60,000; from 1856 to 1880 the
    increase has been not more than 36,000 yearly. In France the
    question shapes itself to the peasant proprietor, How many can be
    subsisted by the amount of produce, not on an unlimited area of
    land in other parts of the world, but on this particular property
    of a small size? While in England there are ten births to six
    deaths, in France there are about ten births to every nine
    deaths.(127) In no country has the doctrine of Malthus been more
    attacked than in France, and yet in no other country has there
    been a more marked obedience to its principles in actual practice.
    Since the French are practically not at all an emigrating people,
    population has strictly adapted itself to subsistence. For the
    relative increase of population in France and the United States,
    see also the movement of lines indicating the increase of
    population in chart No. III (p. 114).




Chapter VIII. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Capital.



§ 1. Means for Saving in the Surplus above Necessaries.


The requisites of production being labor, capital, and land, it has been
seen from the preceding chapter that the impediments to the increase of
production do not arise from the first of these elements. But production
has other requisites, and, of these, the one which we shall next consider
is Capital. There can not be more people in any country, or in the world,
than can be supported from the produce of past labor until that of present
labor comes in [although it is not to be supposed that capital consists
wholly of food]. We have next, therefore, to inquire into the conditions
of the increase of capital: the causes by which the rapidity of its
increase is determined, and the necessary limitations of that increase.

Since all capital is the product of saving, that is, of abstinence from
present consumption for the sake of a future good, the increase of capital
must depend upon two things—the amount of the fund from which saving can
be made, and the strength of the dispositions which prompt to it.

(1.) The fund from which saving can be made is the surplus of the produce
of labor, after supplying the necessaries of life to all concerned in the
production (including those employed in replacing the materials, and
keeping the fixed capital in repair). More than this surplus can not be
saved under any circumstances. As much as this, though it never is saved,
always might be. This surplus is the fund from which the enjoyments, as
distinguished from the necessaries of the producers, are provided; it is
the fund from which all are subsisted who are not themselves engaged in
production, and from which all additions are made to capital. The capital
of the employer forms the revenue of the laborers, and, if this exceeds
the necessaries of life, it gives them a surplus which they may either
expend in enjoyments or save.


    It is evident that the whole unproductive consumption of the
    laborer can be saved. When it is considered how enormous a sum is
    spent by the working-classes in drink alone (and also in the great
    reserves of the Trades-Unions collected for purposes of strikes),
    it is indisputable that the laborers have the margin from which
    savings can be made, and by which they themselves may become
    capitalists. The great accumulations in the savings-banks by small
    depositors in the United States also show somewhat how much is
    actually saved. In 1882-1883 there were 2,876,438 persons who had
    deposited in the savings-banks of the United States
    $1,024,856,787, with an average to each depositor of $356.29. The
    unproductive consumption, however, of all classes—not merely that
    of the working-men—is the possible fund which may be saved. That
    being the amount which _can_ be saved, how much _will_ be saved
    depends on the strength of the desire to save.


The greater the produce of labor after supporting the laborers, the more
there is which _can_ be saved. The same thing also partly contributes to
determine how much _will_ be saved. A part of the motive to saving
consists in the prospect of deriving an income from savings; in the fact
that capital, employed in production, is capable of not only reproducing
itself but yielding an increase. The greater the profit that can be made
from capital, the stronger is the motive to its accumulation.



§ 2. Motive for Saving in the Surplus above Necessaries.


But the disposition to save does not wholly depend on the external
inducement to it; on the amount of profit to be made from savings. With
the same pecuniary inducement, the inclination is very different, in
different persons, and in different communities.

(2.) All accumulation involves the sacrifice of a present, for the sake of
a future good.


    This is the fundamental motive underlying the effective desire of
    accumulation, and is far more important than any other. It is, in
    short, the test of civilization. In order to induce the
    laboring-classes to improve their condition and save capital, it
    is absolutely necessary to excite in them (by education or
    religion) a belief in a future gain greater than the present
    sacrifice. It is, to be sure, the whole problem of creating
    character, and belongs to sociology and ethics rather than to
    political economy.


In weighing the future against the present, the uncertainty of all things
future is a leading element; and that uncertainty is of very different
degrees. “All circumstances,” therefore, “increasing the probability of
the provision we make for futurity being enjoyed by ourselves or others,
tend” justly and reasonably “to give strength to the effective desire of
accumulation. Thus a healthy climate or occupation, by increasing the
probability of life, has a tendency to add to this desire. When engaged in
safe occupations and living in healthy countries, men are much more apt to
be frugal, than in unhealthy or hazardous occupations and in climates
pernicious to human life. Sailors and soldiers are prodigals. In the West
Indies, New Orleans, the East Indies, the expenditure of the inhabitants
is profuse. The same people, coming to reside in the healthy parts of
Europe, and not getting into the vortex of extravagant fashion, live
economically. War and pestilence have always waste and luxury among the
other evils that follow in their train. For similar reasons, whatever
gives security to the affairs of the community is favorable to the
strength of this principle. In this respect the general prevalence of law
and order and the prospect of the continuance of peace and tranquillity
have considerable influence.”(128)


    It is asserted that the prevalence of homicide in certain parts of
    the United States has had a vital influence in retarding the
    material growth of those sections. The Southern States have
    received but a very small fraction (from ten to thirteen per cent)
    of foreign immigration. “A country where law and order prevail to
    perfection may find its material prosperity checked by a deadly
    and fatal climate; or, on the other hand, a people may destroy all
    the advantages accruing from matchless natural resources and
    climate by persistent disregard of life and property. A rather
    startling confirmation of this economic truth is afforded by the
    fact that homicide has been as destructive of life in the South as
    yellow fever. Although there have been forty thousand deaths from
    yellow fever since the war, the deaths from homicide, for the same
    period, have been even greater.”(129) The influence of the old
    slave _régime_, and its still existing influences, in checking
    foreign immigration into the South can be seen by the colored
    chart, No. VIII, showing the relative density of foreign-born
    inhabitants in the several parts of the United States. The deeper
    color shows the greater foreign-born population.


The more perfect the security, the greater will be the effective strength
of the desire of accumulation. Where property is less safe, or the
vicissitudes ruinous to fortunes are more frequent and severe, fewer
persons will save at all, and, of those who do, many will require the
inducement of a higher rate of profit on capital to make them prefer a
doubtful future to the temptation of present enjoyment.

In the circumstances, for example, of a hunting tribe, “man may be said to
be necessarily improvident, and regardless of futurity, because, in this
state, the future presents nothing which can be with certainty either
foreseen or governed.... Besides a want of the motives exciting to provide
for the needs of futurity through means of the abilities of the present,
there is a want of the habits of perception and action, leading to a
constant connection in the mind of those distant points, and of the series
of events serving to unite them. Even, therefore, if motives be awakened
capable of producing the exertion necessary to effect this connection,
there remains the task of training the mind to think and act so as to
establish it.”



§ 3. Examples of Deficiency in the Strength of this Desire.


For instance: “Upon the banks of the St. Lawrence there are several little
Indian villages. The cleared land is rarely, I may almost say never,
cultivated, nor are any inroads made in the forest for such a purpose. The
soil is, nevertheless, fertile, and, were it not, manure lies in heaps by
their houses. Were every family to inclose half an acre of ground, till
it, and plant it in potatoes and maize, it would yield a sufficiency to
support them one half the year. They suffer, too, every now and then,
extreme want, insomuch that, joined to occasional intemperance, it is
rapidly reducing their numbers. This, to us, so strange apathy proceeds
not, in any great degree, from repugnance to labor; on the contrary, they
apply very diligently to it when its reward is immediate. It is evidently
not the necessary labor that is the obstacle to more extended culture, but
the distant return from that labor. I am assured, indeed, that among some
of the more remote tribes, the labor thus expended much exceeds that given
by the whites. On the Indian, succeeding years are too distant to make
sufficient impression; though, to obtain what labor may bring about in the
course of a few months, he toils even more assiduously than the white
man.”

This view of things is confirmed by the experience of the Jesuits, in
their interesting efforts to civilize the Indians of Paraguay. The real
difficulty was the improvidence of the people; their inability to think
for the future; and the necessity accordingly of the most unremitting and
minute superintendence on the part of their instructors. “Thus at first,
if these gave up to them the care of the oxen with which they plowed,
their indolent thoughtlessness would probably leave them at evening still
yoked to the implement. Worse than this, instances occurred where they cut
them up for supper, thinking, when reprehended, that they sufficiently
excused themselves by saying they were hungry.”

As an example intermediate, in the strength of the effective desire of
accumulation, between the state of things thus depicted and that of modern
Europe, the case of the Chinese deserves attention. “Durability is one of
the chief qualities, marking a high degree of the effective desire of
accumulation. The testimony of travelers ascribes to the instruments
formed by the Chinese a very inferior durability to similar instruments
constructed by Europeans. The houses, we are told, unless of the higher
ranks, are in general of unburnt bricks, of clay, or of hurdles plastered
with earth; the roofs, of reeds fastened to laths. A greater degree of
strength in the effective desire of accumulation would cause them to be
constructed of materials requiring a greater present expenditure, but
being far more durable. From the same cause, much land, that in other
countries would be cultivated, lies waste. All travelers take notice of
large tracts of lands, chiefly swamps, which continue in a state of
nature. To bring a swamp into tillage is generally a process to complete
which requires several years. It must be previously drained, the surface
long exposed to the sun, and many operations performed, before it can be
made capable of bearing a crop. Though yielding, probably, a very
considerable return for the labor bestowed on it, that return is not made
until a long time has elapsed. The cultivation of such land implies a
greater strength of the effective desire of accumulation than exists in
the empire. The amount of self-denial would seem to be small. It is their
great deficiency in forethought and frugality in this respect which is the
cause of the scarcities and famines that frequently occur.”

That it is defect of providence, not defect of industry, that limits
production among the Chinese, is still more obvious than in the case of
the semi-agriculturized Indians. “Where the returns are quick, where the
instruments formed require but little time to bring the events for which
they were formed to an issue,” it is well known that “the great progress
which has been made in the knowledge of the arts suited to the nature of
the country and the wants of its inhabitants” makes industry energetic and
effective. “What marks the readiness with which labor is forced to form
the most difficult materials into instruments, where these instruments
soon bring to an issue the events for which they are formed, is the
frequent occurrence, on many of their lakes and rivers, of structures
resembling the floating gardens of the Peruvians, rafts covered with
vegetable soil and cultivated. Labor in this way draws from the materials
on which it acts very speedy returns. Nothing can exceed the luxuriance of
vegetation when the quickening powers of a genial sun are ministered to by
a rich soil and abundant moisture. It is otherwise, as we have seen, in
cases where the return, though copious, is distant. European travelers are
surprised at meeting these little floating farms by the side of swamps
which only require draining to render them tillable.”

When a country has carried production as far as in the existing state of
knowledge it can be carried with an amount of return corresponding to the
average strength of the effective desire of accumulation in that country,
it has reached what is called the stationary state; the state in which no
further addition will be made to capital, unless there takes place either
some improvement in the arts of production, or an increase in the strength
of the desire to accumulate. In the stationary state, though capital does
not on the whole increase, some persons grow richer and others poorer.
Those whose degree of providence is below the usual standard become
impoverished, their capital perishes, and makes room for the savings of
those whose effective desire of accumulation exceeds the average. These
become the natural purchasers of the lands, manufactories, and other
instruments of production owned by their less provident countrymen.

In China, if that country has really attained, as it is supposed to have
done, the stationary state, accumulation has stopped when the returns to
capital are still as high as is indicated by a rate of interest legally
twelve per cent, and practically varying (it is said) between eighteen and
thirty-six. It is to be presumed, therefore, that no greater amount of
capital than the country already possesses can find employment at this
high rate of profit, and that any lower rate does not hold out to a
Chinese sufficient temptation to induce him to abstain from present
enjoyment. What a contrast with Holland, where, during the most
flourishing period of its history, the government was able habitually to
borrow at two per cent, and private individuals, on good security, at
three!



§ 4. Examples of Excess of this Desire.


In [the United States and] the more prosperous countries of Europe, there
are to be found abundance of prodigals: still, in a very numerous portion
of the community, the professional, manufacturing, and trading classes,
being those who, generally speaking, unite more of the means with more of
the motives for saving than any other class, the spirit of accumulation is
so strong that the signs of rapidly increasing wealth meet every eye: and
the great amount of capital seeking investment excites astonishment,
whenever peculiar circumstances turning much of it into some one channel,
such as railway construction or foreign speculative adventure, bring the
largeness of the total amount into evidence.

There are many circumstances which, in England, give a peculiar force to
the accumulating propensity. The long exemption of the country from the
ravages of war and the far earlier period than elsewhere at which property
was secure from military violence or arbitrary spoliation have produced a
long-standing and hereditary confidence in the safety of funds when
trusted out of the owner’s hands, which in most other countries is of much
more recent origin, and less firmly established.


    The growth of deposit-banking in Great Britain, therefore,
    advances with enormous strides, while in Continental countries it
    makes very little headway. The disturbed condition of the country
    in France, owing to wars, leads the thrifty to hoard instead of
    depositing their savings. But in the United States the same growth
    is seen as among the English. The net deposits of the national
    banks of the United States in 1871 were $636,000,000, but in 1883
    they had increased more than 83 per cent to $1,168,000,000.
    Deposit accounts are the rule even with small tradesmen; and the
    savings-banks of Massachusetts alone show deposits in 1882-1883 of
    $241,311,362, and those of New York of $412,147,213. The United
    States also escapes from the heavy taxation which in Europe is
    imposed to maintain an extravagant army and navy chest. The effect
    of institutions, moreover, in stimulating the growth of material
    prosperity is far more true of the United States than of England,
    for the barriers raised against the movement from lower to higher
    social classes in the latter country are non-existent here, and
    consequently there is more stimulus toward acquiring the means of
    bettering a man’s social condition.


The geographical causes which have made industry rather than war the
natural source of power and importance to Great Britain [and the United
States] have turned an unusual proportion of the most enterprising and
energetic characters into the direction of manufactures and commerce; into
supplying their wants and gratifying their ambition by producing and
saving, rather than by appropriating what has been produced and saved.
Much also depended on the better political institutions of this country,
which, by the scope they have allowed to individual freedom of action,
have encouraged personal activity and self-reliance, while, by the liberty
they confer of association and combination, they facilitate industrial
enterprise on a large scale. The same institutions, in another of their
aspects, give a most direct and potent stimulus to the desire of acquiring
wealth. The earlier decline of feudalism [in England] having removed or
much weakened invidious distinctions between the originally trading
classes and those who had been accustomed to despise them, and a polity
having grown up which made wealth the real source of political influence,
its acquisition was invested with a factitious value independent of its
intrinsic utility. And, inasmuch as to be rich without industry has always
hitherto constituted a step in the social scale above those who are rich
by means of industry, it becomes the object of ambition to save not merely
as much as will afford a large income while in business, but enough to
retire from business and live in affluence on realized gains.

In [the United States,] England, and Holland, then, for a long time past,
and now in most other countries in Europe, the second requisite of
increased production, increase of capital, shows no tendency to become
deficient. So far as that element is concerned, production is susceptible
of an increase without any assignable bounds. The limitation to
production, not consisting in any necessary limit to the increase of the
other two elements, labor and capital, must turn upon the properties of
the only element which is inherently, and in itself, limited in quantity.
It must depend on the properties of land.




Chapter IX. Of The Law Of The Increase Of Production From Land.



§ 1. The Law of Production from the Soil, a Law of Diminishing Return in
Proportion to the Increased Application of Labor and Capital.


Land differs from the other elements of production, labor, and capital, in
not being susceptible of indefinite increase. Its extent is limited, and
the extent of the more productive kinds of it more limited still. It is
also evident that the quantity of produce capable of being raised on any
given piece of land is not indefinite. This limited quantity of land and
limited productiveness of it are the real limits to the increase of
production.

The limitation to production from the properties of the soil is not like
the obstacle opposed by a wall, which stands immovable in one particular
spot, and offers no hindrance to motion short of stopping it entirely. We
may rather compare it to a highly elastic and extensible band, which is
hardly ever so violently stretched that it could not possibly be stretched
any more, yet the pressure of which is felt long before the final limit is
reached, and felt more severely the nearer that limit is approached.

After a certain, and not very advanced, stage in the progress of
agriculture—as soon, in fact, as mankind have applied themselves to
cultivation with any energy, and have brought to it any tolerable
tools—from that time it is the law of production from the land, that in
any given state of agricultural skill and knowledge, by increasing the
labor, the produce is not increased in an equal degree; doubling the labor
does not double the produce; or, to express the same thing in other words,
every increase of produce is obtained by a more than proportional increase
in the application of labor to the land. This general law of agricultural
industry is the most important proposition in political economy. Were the
law different, nearly all the phenomena of the production and distribution
of wealth would be other than they are.


    It is not generally considered that in the United States, where in
    many sparsely settled parts of the country new land is constantly
    being brought into cultivation, an additional population under
    existing conditions of agricultural skill can be maintained with
    constantly increasing returns up to a certain point before the law
    of diminishing returns begins to operate. Where more laborers are
    necessary, and more capital wanted, to co-operate in a new country
    before all the land can give its maximum product, in such a stage
    of cultivation it can not be said that the law of diminishing
    returns has yet practically set in.


When, for the purpose of raising an increase of produce, recourse is had
to inferior land, it is evident that, so far, the produce does not
increase in the same proportion with the labor. The very meaning of
inferior land is land which with equal labor returns a smaller amount of
produce. Land may be inferior either in fertility or in situation. The one
requires a greater proportional amount of labor for growing the produce,
the other for carrying it to market. If the land A yields a thousand
quarters of wheat to a given outlay in wages, manure, etc., and, in order
to raise another thousand, recourse must be had to the land B, which is
either less fertile or more distant from the market, the two thousand
quarters will cost more than twice as much labor as the original thousand,
and the produce of agriculture will be increased in a less ratio than the
labor employed in procuring it.

Instead of cultivating the land B, it would be possible, by higher
cultivation, to make the land A produce more. It might be plowed or
harrowed twice instead of once, or three times instead of twice; it might
be dug instead of being plowed; after plowing, it might be gone over with
a hoe instead of a harrow, and the soil more completely pulverized; it
might be oftener or more thoroughly weeded; the implements used might be
of higher finish, or more elaborate construction; a greater quantity or
more expensive kinds of manure might be applied, or, when applied, they
might be more carefully mixed and incorporated with the soil.


    The example of market-gardens in the vicinity of great cities and
    towns shows how the intensive culture permits an increase of labor
    and capital with larger returns. These lands, by their situation,
    are superior lands for this particular purpose, although they
    might be inferior lands as regards absolute productiveness when
    compared with the rich wheat-lands of Dakota. New England and New
    Jersey farms, generally speaking, no longer attempt the culture of
    grains, but (when driven out of that culture by the great railway
    lines which have opened up the West) they have arranged themselves
    in a scale of adaptability for stock, grass, fruit, dairy, or
    vegetable farming; and have thereby given greater profits to their
    owners than the same land did under the old _régime_. Even on
    lands where any grain can still be grown, corn, buckwheat, barley,
    oats, and rye, cover the cultivated areas instead of wheat.


Inferior lands, or lands at a greater distance from the market, of course
yield an inferior return, and an increasing demand can not be supplied
from them unless at an augmentation of cost, and therefore of price. If
the additional demand could continue to be supplied from the superior
lands, by applying additional labor and capital, at no greater
proportional cost than that at which they yield the quantity first
demanded of them, the owners or farmers of those lands could undersell all
others, and engross the whole market. Lands of a lower degree of fertility
or in a more remote situation might indeed be cultivated by their
proprietors, for the sake of subsistence or independence; but it never
could be the interest of any one to farm them for profit. That a profit
can be made from them, sufficient to attract capital to such an
investment, is a proof that cultivation on the more eligible lands has
reached a point beyond which any greater application of labor and capital
would yield, at the best, no greater return than can be obtained at the
same expense from less fertile or less favorably situated lands.

“It is long,” says a late traveler in the United States,(130) “before an
English eye becomes reconciled to the lightness of the crops and the
careless farming (as we should call it) which is apparent. One forgets
that, where land is so plentiful and labor so dear as it is here, a
totally different principle must be pursued from that which prevails in
populous countries, and that the consequence will of course be a want of
tidiness, as it were, and finish, about everything which requires labor.”
Of the two causes mentioned, the plentifulness of land seems to me the
true explanation, rather than the dearness of labor; for, however dear
labor may be, when food is wanted, labor will always be applied to
producing it in preference to anything else. But this labor is more
effective for its end by being applied to fresh soil than if it were
employed in bringing the soil already occupied into higher cultivation.


    The Western movement of what might be called the “wheat-center” is
    quite perceptible. Until recently Minnesota has been a great
    wheat-producing State, and vast tracts of land were there planted
    with that grain when the soil was first broken. The profits on the
    first few crops have been enormous, but it is now said to be more
    desirable for wheat-growers to move onward to newer lands, and to
    sell the land to cultivators of a different class (of fruit and
    varied products), who produce for a denser population. So that (in
    1884) Dakota, instead of Minnesota, has become the district of the
    greatest wheat production.(131)


Only when no soils remain to be broken up, but such as either from
distance or inferior quality require a considerable rise of price to
render their cultivation profitable, can it become advantageous to apply
the high farming of Europe to any American lands; except, perhaps, in the
immediate vicinity of towns, where saving in cost of carriage may
compensate for great inferiority in the return from the soil itself.

The principle which has now been stated must be received, no doubt, with
certain explanations and limitations. Even after the land is so highly
cultivated that the mere application of additional labor, or of an
additional amount of ordinary dressing, would yield no return proportioned
to the expense, it may still happen that the application of a much greater
additional labor and capital to improving the soil itself, by draining or
permanent manures, would be as liberally remunerated by the produce as any
portion of the labor and capital already employed. It would sometimes be
much more amply remunerated. This could not be, if capital always sought
and found the most advantageous employment.



§ 2. Antagonist Principle to the Law of Diminishing Return; the Progress
of Improvements in Production.


That the produce of land increases, _cæteris paribus_, in a diminishing
ratio to the increase in the labor employed, is, as we have said (allowing
for occasional and temporary exceptions), the universal law of
agricultural industry. This principle, however, has been denied. So much
so, indeed, that (it is affirmed) the worst land now in cultivation
produces as much food per acre, and even as much to a given amount of
labor, as our ancestors contrived to extract from the richest soils in
England.


    The law of diminishing returns is the physical fact upon which the
    economic doctrine of rent is based, and requires careful
    attention. Carey asserts, instead, that there is a law of
    increasing productiveness, since, as men grow in numbers and
    intelligence, there arises an ability to get more from the
    soil.(132) Some objectors even deny that different grades of land
    are cultivated, and that there is no need of taking inferior soils
    into cultivation. If this were true, why would not one half an
    acre of land be as good as a whole State? Johnston(133) says: “In
    a country and among poor settlers ... poor land is a relative
    term. Land is called poor which is not suitable to a poor man,
    which on mere clearing and burning will not yield good first
    crops. Thus that which is poor land for a poor man may prove rich
    land to a rich man.”(134) Moreover, as is constantly the case in
    our country, it often happens that a railway may bring new lands
    into competition with old lands in a given market; of which the
    most conspicuous example is the competition of Western
    grain-fields with the Eastern farms. In these older districts,
    before the competition came, there was a given series of grades in
    the cultivated land; after the railway was built there was a
    disarrangement of the old series, some going out of cultivation,
    some remaining, and some of the new lands entering the list. The
    result is a new series of grades better suited to satisfy the
    wants of men.


This, however, does not prove that the law of which we have been speaking
does not exist, but only that there is some antagonizing principle at
work, capable for a time of making head against the law. Such an agency
there is, in habitual antagonism to the law of diminishing return from
land; and to the consideration of this we shall now proceed. It is no
other than the progress of civilization. The most obvious [part of it] is
the progress of agricultural knowledge, skill, and invention. Improved
processes of agriculture are of two kinds: (1) some enable the land to
yield a greater absolute produce, without an equivalent increase of labor;
(2) others have not the power of increasing the produce, but have that of
diminishing the labor and expense by which it is obtained. (1.) Among the
first are to be reckoned the disuse of fallows, by means of the rotation
of crops; and the introduction of new articles of cultivation capable of
entering advantageously into the rotation. The change made in agriculture
toward the close of the last century, by the introduction of
turnip-husbandry, is spoken of as amounting to a revolution. Next in order
comes the introduction of new articles of food, containing a greater
amount of sustenance, like the potato, or more productive species or
varieties of the same plant, such as the Swedish turnip. In the same class
of improvements must be placed a better knowledge of the properties of
manures, and of the most effectual modes of applying them; the
introduction of new and more powerful fertilizing agents, such as guano,
and the conversion to the same purpose of substances previously wasted;
inventions like subsoil-plowing or tile-draining, by which the produce of
some kinds of lands is so greatly multiplied; improvements in the breed or
feeding of laboring cattle; augmented stock, of the animals which consume
and convert into human food what would otherwise be wasted; and the like.
(2.) The other sort of improvements, those which diminish labor, but
without increasing the capacity of the land to produce, are such as the
improved construction of tools; the introduction of new instruments which
spare manual labor, as the winnowing and thrashing machines. These
improvements do not add to the productiveness of the land, but they are
equally calculated with the former to counteract the tendency in the cost
of production of agricultural produce, to rise with the progress of
population and demand.



§ 3. —In Railways.


Analogous in effect to this second class of agricultural improvements are
improved means of communication. Good roads are equivalent to good tools.
It is of no consequence whether the economy of labor takes place in
extracting the produce from the soil, or in conveying it to the place
where it is to be consumed.


    The functions performed by railways in the system of production is
    highly important. They are among the most influential causes
    affecting the cost of producing commodities, particularly those
    which satisfy the primary wants of man, of which food is the
    chief. The amount of tonnage carried is enormous; and the cost of
    this service to the producers and consumers of the United States
    is a question of very great magnitude. The serious reduction in
    the cost of transportation on the railways will be a surprise to
    all who have not followed the matter very closely; the more so,
    that it has been brought about by natural causes, and independent
    of legislation. Corn, meat, and dairy products form, it is said,
    at least 50 per cent, and coal and timber about 30 per cent, of
    the tonnage moved on all the railways of the United States. If a
    lowered cost of transportation has come about, it has then cost
    less to move the main articles of immediate necessity. Had the
    charge in 1880 remained as high even as it was from 1866 to 1869,
    the number of tons carried in 1880 would have cost the United
    States from $500,000,000 to $800,000,000 more than the charge
    actually made, owing to the reductions by the railways. It seems,
    however, that this process of reduction culminated about 1879. In
    order to show the facts of this process, note the changes in the
    following chart, No. V. The railways of the State of New York are
    taken, but the same is also true of those of Ohio:


    Chart V.

    _Cost of 20 Barrels of Flour, 10 Beef, 10 Pork, 100 Bushels Wheat,
    100 Corn, 100 Oats, 100 Pounds Butter, 100 Lard, and 100 Fleece
    Wool, in New York City, at the Average of each Year, Compiled by
    Months, in Gold; Compared Graphically with the Decrease in the
    Charge per Ton per Mile, on all the Railroads of the State of New
    York, during the Same Period._

    Year.   Price in      Charge for     Decrease in    Decrease in
            gold of       carrying one   the railroad   the profits
            staple farm   ton one        expenses per   of the
            products.     mile.          ton. (Cents)   railroads
            (Dollars)     (Cents)                       for carrying
                                                        one ton.
                                                        (Cents)
    1870         776.02         1.7016         1.1471          .5545
    1871         735.33         1.7005         1.1450          .5555
    1872         675.92         1.6645         1.1490          .5155
    1873         662.50         1.6000         1.0864          .5136
    1874         748.54         1.4480          .9730          .4750
    1875         696.40         1.3039          .9587          .3452
    1876         651.74         1.1604          .8561          .3043
    1877         751.95         1.0590          .7740          .2850
    1878         569.81          .9994          .6900          .3094
    1879         568.34          .8082          .5847          .2295
    1880         631.32          .9220          .6030          .3190
    1881         703.10          .8390          .5880          .2510
    1882         776.12          .8170          .6010          .2160
    1883         662.11          .8990          .6490          .2500

    In 1855 the charge per ton per mile was 3.27 cents, as compared
    with 0.89 in 1883.

    Tons moved 1 m. in 1883 by    9,286,216,628
    railroads of N.Y.
    At rate of 1855, would cost    $303,659,283
    Actual cost in 1883              83,464,919
    Saving to the State            $220,194,364

    The explanation of this reduced cost is given by Mr. Edward
    Atkinson(135) as (1) the competition of water-ways, (2) the
    competition of one railway with another, and (3) the competition
    of other countries, which forces our railways to try to lay our
    staple products down in foreign markets at a price which will
    warrant continued shipment. Besides these reasons, much ought also
    (4) to be assigned to the progress of inventions and the reduced
    cost of steel and all appliances necessary to the railways.

    The large importance of the railways shows itself in an influence
    on general business prosperity, and as a place for large
    investments of a rapidly growing capital. The building of
    railways, however, has been going on, at some times with greater
    speed than at others. Instead of 33,908 miles of railways at the
    close of our war, we have now (1884) over 120,000 miles. How the
    additional mileage has been built year by year, with two distinct
    eras of increased building—one from 1869 to 1873, and another from
    1879 to 1884—may be seen by the shorter lines of the subjoined
    chart, No. VI.

    That speculation has been excited at different times by the
    opening up of our Western country, there can be no doubt. And if a
    comparison be made with Chart No. XVII (Book IV, Chap. III), which
    gives the total grain-crops of the United States, it will be seen
    that since 1879, although our population has increased from 12-½
    per cent to 14 per cent, our grain-crops only 5 per cent, yet our
    railway mileage has increased 40 per cent.

    The extent to which the United States has carried
    railway-building, as compared with European countries, although we
    have a very much greater area, is distinctly shown by Chart No.
    VII. This application of one form of improvement to oppose the law
    of diminishing returns in the United States has produced
    extraordinary results, especially when we consider that we are
    probably not yet using all our best lands, or, in other words,
    that we have not yet felt the law of diminishing returns in some
    large districts.


Chart VI.

_Miles of Railroad in Operation on the 1st January in each Year, and the
Miles added in the Year Ensuing._

Year.   Miles of Railroad.   Miles added.
1865                33,908          1,177
1866                35,085          1,716
1867                36,801          2,449
1868                39,250          2,979
1869                42,229          4,615
1870                46,844          6,070
1871                52,914          7,379
1872                60,293          5,878
1873                66,171          4,107
1874                70,278          2,105
1875                72,383          1,713
1876                74,096          2,712
1877                76,808          2,281
1878                79,089          2,687
1879                81,776          4,721
1880                86,497          7,048
1881                93,545          9,789
1882               103,334         11,591
1883               114,925          6,618

Railways and canals are virtually a diminution of the cost of production
of all things sent to market by them; and literally so of all those the
appliances and aids for producing which they serve to transmit. By their
means land can be cultivated, which would not otherwise have remunerated
the cultivators without a rise of price. Improvements in navigation have,
with respect to food or materials brought from beyond sea, a corresponding
effect.



§ 4. —In Manufactures.


From similar considerations, it appears that many purely mechanical
improvements, which have, apparently, at least, no peculiar connection
with agriculture, nevertheless enable a given amount of food to be
obtained with a smaller expenditure of labor. A great improvement in the
process of smelting iron would tend to cheapen agricultural implements,
diminish the cost of railroads, of wagons and carts, ships, and perhaps
buildings, and many other things to which iron is not at present applied,
because it is too costly; and would thence diminish the cost of production
of food. The same effect would follow from an improvement in those
processes of what may be termed manufacture, to which the material of food
is subjected after it is separated from the ground. The first application
of wind or water power to grind corn tended to cheapen bread as much as a
very important discovery in agriculture would have done; and any great
improvement in the construction of corn-mills would have, in proportion, a
similar influence.

Those manufacturing improvements which can not be made instrumental to
facilitate, in any of its stages, the actual production of food, and
therefore do not help to counteract or retard the diminution of the
proportional return to labor from the soil, have, however, another effect,
which is practically equivalent. What they do not prevent, they yet, in
some degree, compensate for.(136)

Chart VII.

_Ratio of Miles of Railroad to the Areas of States and Countries—United
States and Europe. The relative proportion is 1 Mile Railroad to 4 Square
Miles of Area._

No.   Name.           Rank in Size.   Relative.
  1   Massachusetts              67          98
  2   Belgium                    62          96
  3   England and                29          88
      Wales
  4   New Jersey                 62          81
  5   Connecticut                68          80
  6   Rhode Island               71          65
  7   Ohio                       44          60
  8   Illinois                   32          59
  9   Pennsylvania               40          55
 10   Delaware                   69          53
 11   Indiana                    50          52
 12   New Hampshire              65          45
 13   Switzerland                59          44
 14   New York                   39          41
 15   Iowa                       33          39
 16   German Empire               4          38
 17   Scotland                   52          37
 18   Maryland                   63          36
 19   Vermont                    64          35
 20   Ireland                    51          29
 21   Michigan                   31          28
 22   France                      5          27
 23   Denmark                    60          26
 24   Netherlands                57          25
 25   Missouri                   26          24
 26   Wisconsin                  34          23
 27   Austrian                    3          21
      Empire
 28   Virginia                   45          19
 29   Italy                      13          18
 30   Georgia                    30          17
 31   Kansas                     22          16
 32   Kentucky                   46          15
 33   South                      49          14
      Carolina
 34   Tennessee                  42          14
 35   Minnesota                  21          13
 36   Alabama                    36          13
 37   West Virginia              55          12
 38   Roumania                   41          12
 39   North                      37          12
      Carolina
 40   Maine                      48          12
 41   Nebraska                   23          10
 42   Mississippi                38           9
 43   Spain                       6           9
 44   Portugal                   47           9
 45   Sweden                      7           9
 46   Arkansas                   35           8
 47   Louisiana                  43           8
 48   Colorado                   16           8
 49   California                  8           7
 50   Turkey                     27           7
 51   Texas                       2           7
 52   Utah                       20           6
 53   Florida                    28           6
 54   Dakota                      7           6
 55   Russia in                   1           5
      Europe
 56   Nevada                     15           5
 57   Norway                     11           5
 58   Oregon                     18           4
 59   Bulgaria                   54           4
 60   New Mexico                 12           3
 61   Wyoming                    17           2
 62   Indian                     25           2
      Territory
 63   Washington                 24           1
 64   Arizona                    14           1
 65   Idaho                      19           1
 66   Greece                     58           0
 67   Montana                    10           0
 68   Bosnia and                 53           0
      Herzegovina
 69   Servia                     56           0
 70   Eastern                    61           0
      Roumelia
 71   Montenegro                 70           0
 72   Andorra                    72           0

(The United States have substantially one mile of railway to each 540
inhabitants. Europe has one mile to each 3,000 inhabitants, if Russia be
included; about one mile to each 2,540, exclusive of Russia.)

The materials of manufactures being all drawn from the land, and many of
them from agriculture, which supplies in particular the entire material of
clothing, the general law of production from the land, the law of
diminishing return, must in the last resort be applicable to manufacturing
as well as to agricultural history. As population increases, and the power
of the land to yield increased produce is strained harder and harder, any
additional supply of material, as well as of food, must be obtained by a
more than proportionally increasing expenditure of labor. But the cost of
the material forming generally a very small portion of the entire cost of
the manufacture, the agricultural labor concerned in the production of
manufactured goods is but a small fraction of the whole labor worked up in
the commodity.


    Mr. Babbage(137) gives an interesting illustration of this
    principle. Bar-iron of the value of £1 became worth, when
    manufactured into—

                                         £
    Slit-iron, for nails              1.10
    Natural steel                     1.42
    Horseshoes                        2.55
    Gun-barrels, ordinary             9.10
    Wood-saws                        14.28
    Scissors, best                  446.94
    Penknife-blades                 657.14
    Sword-handles, polished steel   972.82

    It can not, however, be said of such manufactures as coarse cotton
    cloth, wherein the increased cost of raw cotton causes an
    immediate effect upon the price of the cloth, that the cost of the
    materials forms but a small portion of the cost of the
    manufacture.(138)


All the labor [not engaged in preparing materials] tends constantly and
strongly toward diminution, as the amount of production increases.
Manufactures are vastly more susceptible than agriculture of mechanical
improvements and contrivances for saving labor. In manufactures,
accordingly, the causes tending to increase the productiveness of industry
preponderate greatly over the one cause which tends to diminish it; and
the increase of production, called forth by the progress of society, takes
place, not at an increasing, but at a continually diminishing proportional
cost. This fact has manifested itself in the progressive fall of the
prices and values of almost every kind of manufactured goods during two
centuries past; a fall accelerated by the mechanical inventions of the
last seventy or eighty years, and susceptible of being prolonged and
extended beyond any limit which it would be safe to specify. The benefit
might even extend to the poorest class. The increased cheapness of
clothing and lodging might make up to them for the augmented cost of their
food.

There is, thus, no possible improvement in the arts of production which
does not in one or another mode exercise an antagonistic influence to the
law of diminishing return to agricultural labor. Nor is it only industrial
improvements which have this effect. Improvements in government, and
almost every kind of moral and social advancement, operate in the same
manner. We may say the same of improvements in education. The intelligence
of the workman is a most important element in the productiveness of labor.
The carefulness, economy, and general trustworthiness of laborers are as
important as their intelligence. Friendly relations and a community of
interest and feeling between laborers and employers are eminently so. In
the rich and idle classes, increased mental energy, more solid
instruction, and stronger feelings of conscience, public spirit, or
philanthropy, would qualify them to originate and promote the most
valuable improvements, both in the economical resources of their country
and in its institutions and customs.



§ 5. Law Holds True of Mining.


We must observe that what we have said of agriculture is true, with little
variation, of the other occupations which it represents; of all the arts
which extract materials from the globe. Mining industry, for example,
usually yields an increase of produce at a more than proportional increase
of expense.

It does worse, for even its customary annual produce requires to be
extracted by a greater and greater expenditure of labor and capital. As a
mine does not reproduce the coal or ore taken from it, not only are all
mines at last exhausted, but even when they as yet show no signs of
exhaustion they must be worked at a continually increasing cost; shafts
must be sunk deeper, galleries driven farther, greater power applied to
keep them clear of water; the produce must be lifted from a greater depth,
or conveyed a greater distance. The law of diminishing return applies
therefore to mining in a still more unqualified sense than to agriculture;
but the antagonizing agency, that of improvements in production, also
applies in a still greater degree. Mining operations are more susceptible
of mechanical improvements than agricultural: the first great application
of the steam-engine was to mining; and there are unlimited possibilities
of improvement in the chemical processes by which the metals are
extracted. There is another contingency, of no unfrequent occurrence,
which avails to counterbalance the progress of all existing mines toward
exhaustion: this is, the discovery of new ones, equal or superior in
richness.


    Professor Jevons has applied this economic law to the industrial
    situation of England.(139) While explaining that the supply of
    cheap coal is the basis of English manufacturing prosperity, yet
    he insists that, if the demand for coal is constantly increasing,
    the point must inevitably be reached in the future when the
    increased supply can be obtained only at a higher cost. When coal
    costs England as much as it does any other nation, then her
    exclusive industrial advantage will cease to exist. In the United
    States the outlying iron deposits of Lake Superior, Lake
    Champlain, and Pennsylvania, so geologists tell us, will find
    competition arising from the new grades of greater productiveness
    in the richer deposits of States like Alabama. In that case we
    shall be going from poorer to better grades of iron-mines, but
    after the change is made a series of different grades of
    productiveness will be established as before.


To resume: all natural agents which are limited in quantity are not only
limited in their ultimate productive power, but, long before that power is
stretched to the utmost, they yield to any additional demands on
progressively harder terms. This law may, however, be suspended, or
temporarily controlled, by whatever adds to the general power of mankind
over nature, and especially by any extension of their knowledge, and their
consequent command, of the properties and powers of natural agents.




Chapter X. Consequences Of The Foregoing Laws.



§ 1. Remedies for Weakness of the Principle of Accumulation.


From the preceding exposition it appears that the limit to the increase of
production is twofold: from deficiency of capital, or of land. Production
comes to a pause, either because the effective desire of accumulation is
not sufficient to give rise to any further increase of capital, or
because, however disposed the possessors of surplus income may be to save
a portion of it, the limited land at the disposal of the community does
not permit additional capital to be employed with such a return as would
be an equivalent to them for their abstinence.

In countries where the principle of accumulation is as weak as it is in
the various nations of Asia, the desideratum economically considered is an
increase of industry, and of the effective desire of accumulation. The
means are, first, a better government: more complete security of property;
moderate taxes, and freedom from arbitrary exaction under the name of
taxes; a more permanent and more advantageous tenure of land, securing to
the cultivator as far as possible the undivided benefits of the industry,
skill, and economy he may exert. Secondly, improvement of the public
intelligence. Thirdly, the introduction of foreign arts, which raise the
returns derivable from additional capital to a rate corresponding to the
low strength of the desire of accumulation.


    An excellent example of what might be done by this process is to
    be seen under our very eyes in the present development of Mexico,
    to which American capital and enterprise have been so prominently
    drawn of late. All these proposed remedies, if put into use in
    Mexico, would undoubtedly result in a striking increase of wealth.



§ 2. Even where the Desire to Accumulate is Strong, Population must be
Kept within the Limits of Population from Land.


But there are other countries, and England [and the United States are] at
the head of them, in which neither the spirit of industry nor the
effective desire of accumulation need any encouragement. In these
countries there would never be any deficiency of capital, if its increase
were never checked or brought to a stand by too great a diminution of its
returns. It is the tendency of the returns to a progressive diminution
which causes the increase of production to be often attended with a
deterioration in the condition of the producers; and this tendency, which
would in time put an end to increase of production altogether, is a result
of the necessary and inherent conditions of production from the land.


    This, of course, is based on the supposition that no new lands,
    such as those of the United States, can be opened for cultivation.
    If there is no prohibition to the importation of cheaper food, new
    and richer land in any part of the world, within reach of the
    given country, is an influence which works against the tendency.
    Yet the tendency, or economic law, is there all the same, forever
    working.


In all countries which have passed beyond a very early stage in the
progress of agriculture, every increase in the demand for food, occasioned
by increased population, will always, unless there is a simultaneous
improvement in production, diminish the share which on a fair division
would fall to each individual. An increased production, in default of
unoccupied tracts of fertile land, or of fresh improvements tending to
cheapen commodities, can never be obtained but by increasing the labor in
more than the same proportion. The population must either work harder or
eat less, or obtain their usual food by sacrificing a part of their other
customary comforts. Whenever this necessity is postponed, it is because
the improvements which facilitate production continue progressive; because
the contrivances of mankind for making their labor more effective keep up
an equal struggle with Nature, and extort fresh resources from her
reluctant powers as fast as human necessities occupy and engross the old.

From this results the important corollary, that the necessity of
restraining population is not, as many persons believe, peculiar to a
condition of great inequality of property. A greater number of people can
not, in any given state of civilization, be collectively so well provided
for as a smaller. The niggardliness of nature,(140) not the injustice of
society, is the cause of the penalty attached to over-population. An
unjust distribution of wealth does not even aggravate the evil, but, at
most, causes it to be somewhat earlier felt. It is in vain to say that all
mouths which the increase of mankind calls into existence bring with them
hands. The new mouths require as much food as the old ones, and the hands
do not produce as much.

After a degree of density has been attained, sufficient to allow the
principal benefits of combination of labor, all further increase tends in
itself to mischief, so far as regards the average condition of the people;
but the progress of improvement has a counteracting operation, and allows
of increased numbers without any deterioration, and even consistently with
a higher average of comfort. Improvement must here be understood in a wide
sense, including not only new industrial inventions, or an extended use of
those already known, but improvements in institutions, education,
opinions, and human affairs generally, provided they tend, as almost all
improvements do, to give new motives or new facilities to production.


    The increase in the population of the United States has been
    enormous, as already seen, but the increase of production has been
    still greater, owing to the fertility of our land, to improvements
    in the arts, and to our great genius for invention, as may be seen
    by the following table (amounts in the second column are given in
    millions).(141) The steady increase of the valuation of our wealth
    goes on faster than the increase of population, so that it
    manifests itself in a larger average wealth to each inhabitant.

    Decades.   Valuation.   Per cent    Population.   Per cent    Per
                            of                        of          capital
                            increase.                 increase.   valuation.
    1800           $1,742          ..     5,308,483          ..         $328
    1810            2,382          37     7,239,881          36          329
    1820            3,734          57     9,633,882          33          386
    1830            4,328          16    12,866,020          34          336
    1840            6,124          41    17,069,453          33          359
    1850            8,800          44    23,191,876          36          379
    1860           16,160          84    31,443,321          35          514
    1870           30,068          86    38,558,371          23          780
    1880           40,000          33    50,155,783          30          798


If the productive powers of the country increase as rapidly as advancing
numbers call for an augmentation of produce, it is not necessary to obtain
that augmentation by the cultivation of soils more sterile than the worst
already under culture, or by applying additional labor to the old soils at
a diminished advantage; or at all events this loss of power is compensated
by the increased efficiency with which, in the progress of improvement,
labor is employed in manufactures. In one way or the other, the increased
population is provided for, and all are as well off as before. But if the
growth of human power over nature is suspended or slackened, and
population does not slacken its increase; if, with only the existing
command over natural agencies, those agencies are called upon for an
increased produce; this greater produce will not be afforded to the
increased population, without either demanding on the average a greater
effort from each, or on the average reducing each to a smaller ration out
of the aggregate produce.

Ever since the great mechanical inventions of Watt, Arkwright, and their
contemporaries, the return to labor has probably increased as fast as the
population; and would even have outstripped it, if that very augmentation
of return had not called forth an additional portion of the inherent power
of multiplication in the human species. During the twenty or thirty years
last elapsed, so rapid has been the extension of improved processes of
agriculture [in England], that even the land yields a greater produce in
proportion to the labor employed; the average price of corn had become
decidedly lower, even before the repeal of the corn laws had so materially
lightened, for the time being, the pressure of population upon production.
But though improvement may during a certain space of time keep up with, or
even surpass, the actual increase of population, it assuredly never comes
up to the rate of increase of which population is capable: and nothing
could have prevented a general deterioration in the condition of the human
race, were it not that population has in fact been restrained. Had it been
restrained still more, and the same improvements taken place, there would
have been a larger dividend than there now is, for the nation or the
species at large. The new ground wrung from nature by the improvements
would not have been all tied up in the support of mere numbers. Though the
gross produce would not have been so great, there would have been a
greater produce per head of the population.



§ 3. Necessity of Restraining Population not superseded by Free Trade in
Food.


When the growth of numbers outstrips the progress of improvement, and a
country is driven to obtain the means of subsistence on terms more and
more unfavorable, by the inability of its land to meet additional demands
except on more onerous conditions, there are two expedients, by which it
may hope to mitigate that disagreeable necessity, even though no change
should take place in the habits of the people with respect to their rate
of increase. One of these expedients is the importation of food from
abroad. The other is emigration.

The admission of cheaper food from a foreign country is equivalent to an
agricultural invention by which food could be raised at a similarly
diminished cost at home. It equally increases the productive power of
labor. The return was before, so much food for so much labor employed in
the growth of food: the return is now, a greater quantity of food for the
same labor employed in producing cottons or hardware, or some other
commodity to be given in exchange for food. The one improvement, like the
other, throws back the decline of the productive power of labor by a
certain distance: but in the one case, as in the other, it immediately
resumes its course; the tide which has receded, instantly begins to
readvance. It might seem, indeed, that, when a country draws its supply of
food from so wide a surface as the whole habitable globe, so little
impression can be produced on that great expanse by any increase of mouths
in one small corner of it that the inhabitants of the country may double
and treble their numbers without feeling the effect in any increased
tension of the springs of production, or any enhancement of the price of
food throughout the world. But in this calculation several things are
overlooked.

In the first place, the foreign regions from which corn can be imported do
not comprise the whole globe, but those parts of it almost alone which are
in the immediate neighborhood of coasts or navigable rivers; and of such
there is not, in the productive regions of the earth, so great a multitude
as to suffice during an indefinite time for a rapidly growing demand,
without an increasing strain on the productive powers of the soil.

In the next place, even if the supply were drawn from the whole instead of
a small part of the surface of the exporting countries, the quantity of
food would still be limited, which could be obtained from them without an
increase of the proportional cost. The countries which export food may be
divided into two classes: those in which the effective desire of
accumulation is strong, and those in which it is weak. In Australia and
the United States of America, the effective desire of accumulation is
strong; capital increases fast, and the production of food might be very
rapidly extended. But in such countries population also increases with
extraordinary rapidity. Their agriculture has to provide for their own
expanding numbers, as well as for those of the importing countries. They
must, therefore, from the nature of the case, be rapidly driven, if not to
less fertile, at least what is equivalent, to remoter and less accessible
lands, and to modes of cultivation like those of old countries, less
productive in proportion to the labor and expense.


    The extraordinary resources of the United States are scarcely
    understood even by Americans. Chart No. XVIII (see Book IV, Chap.
    III) may give some idea of the agricultural possibilities of our
    land. It will be seen from this that the quantity of fertile land
    in but one of our States—Texas—is greater than that of
    Austria-Hungary.


But the countries which have at the same time cheap food and great
industrial prosperity are few, being only those in which the arts of
civilized life have been transferred full-grown to a rich and uncultivated
soil. Among old countries, those which are able to export food, are able
only because their industry is in a very backward state, because capital,
and hence population, have never increased sufficiently to make food rise
to a higher price. Such countries are Russia, Poland, and Hungary.

The law, therefore, of diminishing return to industry, whenever population
makes a more rapid progress than improvement, is not solely applicable to
countries which are fed from their own soil, but in substance applies
quite as much to those which are willing to draw their food from any
accessible quarter that can afford it cheapest.



§ 4. —Nor by Emigration.


Besides the importation of corn, there is another resource which can be
invoked by a nation whose increasing numbers press hard, not against their
capital, but against the productive capacity of their land: I mean
Emigration, especially in the form of Colonization. Of this remedy the
efficacy as far as it goes is real, since it consists in seeking elsewhere
those unoccupied tracts of fertile land which, if they existed at home,
would enable the demand of an increasing population to be met without any
falling off in the productiveness of labor. Accordingly, when the region
to be colonized is near at hand, and the habits and tastes of the people
sufficiently migratory, this remedy is completely effectual. The migration
from the older parts of the American Confederation to the new Territories,
which is to all intents and purposes colonization, is what enables
population to go on unchecked throughout the Union without having yet
diminished the return to industry, or increased the difficulty of earning
a subsistence.


    How strictly true this is may be seen by examining the map given
    in the last census returns,(142) showing the residence of the
    natives of the State of New York. The greater or less frequency of
    natives of New York, residing in other States, is shown by
    different degrees of shading on the map. A large district westward
    as far as the Mississippi shows a density of natives of New York
    of from two to six to a square mile, and a lesser density from
    Minnesota to Indian Territory, on the other side of the
    Mississippi. The same is shown of other older States. The
    explanation of the movement can not be anything else than the same
    as that for the larger movement from Europe to America.


There is no probability that even under the most enlightened arrangements
(in older countries) a permanent stream of emigration could be kept up,
sufficient to take off, as in America, all that portion of the annual
increase (when proceeding at its greatest rapidity) which, being in excess
of the progress made during the same short period in the arts of life,
tends to render living more difficult for every averagely situated
individual in the community. And, unless this can be done, emigration can
not, even in an economical point of view, dispense with the necessity of
checks to population.

The influence of immigration to the United States from European countries,
in lessening the tension in the relation between food and numbers, is one
of the most marked events in this century. The United States has received
about one fourth of its total population in 1880 from abroad since the
foundation of the republic, as will be seen by this table:

Total Immigration Into The United States.

Periods.        Numbers.
From        250,000(143)
1789-1820
1820-1830        151,824
1831-1840        599,125
1841-1850      1,713,251
1851-1860      2,598,214
1861-1870      2,491,451
1871-1880      2,812,191
1881-1883      2,061,745
Total         12,677,801

Of this number, 5,333,991 came from the British Isles, of which 3,367,624
were Irish.

There came 3,860,624 Germans, 593,021 Scandinavians, and 334,064 French.
(See United States “Statistical Abstract,” 1878, 1880, 1883.)

The causes operating on this movement of men—a movement unequaled in
history—are undoubtedly economic. Like the migration of the early Teutonic
races from the Baltic to Southern Europe, it is due to the pressure of
numbers on subsistence.

A still more interesting study is that of the causes which attempt to
explain the direction of this stream after it has reached our shores. It
is a definite fact that the old slave States have hitherto received
practically none of this vast foreign immigration.(144) The actual
distribution of the foreign born in the United States is to be seen in a
most interesting way by aid of the colored map, Chart No. VIII, giving the
different densities of foreign-born population in different parts of the
Union. It seems almost certain that the general belief hitherto in the
insecurity of life and property in the old slave States has worked against
the material prosperity of that section.

The different ages of the native- and foreign-born inhabitants of the
United States may be seen from the accompanying diagrams(145) comparing
the aggregate population of the United States with the foreign-born. This
may profitably be compared with a similar diagram relating to the Chinese
in the United States (Book II, Chap. III, § 3).

Aggregate: 1870. The figures give the number of thousands of each sex.

Decade of Life.   Males.   Females.
              1      136        132
              2      115        114
              3       87         90
              4       62         63
              5       47         44
              6       31         27
              7       17         15
              8        7          7
              9        2          2

Foreign: 1870.

Decade of Life.   Males.   Females.
              1       24         23
              2       48         49
              3      128        114
              4      134        113
              5      107         84
              6       60         44
              7       27         23
              8        9          9
              9        2          2





BOOK II. DISTRIBUTION.




Chapter I. Of Property.



§ 1. Individual Property and its opponents.


The laws and conditions of the Production of Wealth partake of the
character of physical truths. There is nothing optional or arbitrary in
them. It is not so with the Distribution of Wealth. That is a matter of
human institution solely. The things once there, mankind, individually or
collectively, can do with them as they like. They can place them at the
disposal of whomsoever they please, and on whatever terms. The
Distribution of Wealth depends on the laws and customs of society. The
rules by which it is determined are what the opinions and feelings of the
ruling portion of the community make them, and are very different in
different ages and countries; and might be still more different, if
mankind so chose. We have here to consider, not the causes, but the
consequences, of the rules according to which wealth may be distributed.
Those, at least, are as little arbitrary, and have as much the character
of physical laws, as the laws of production.

We proceed, then, to the consideration of the different modes of
distributing the produce of land and labor, which have been adopted in
practice, or may be conceived in theory. Among these, our attention is
first claimed by that primary and fundamental institution, on which,
unless in some exceptional and very limited cases, the economical
arrangements of society have always rested, though in its secondary
features it has varied, and is liable to vary. I mean, of course, the
institution of individual property.

Private property, as an institution, did not owe its origin to any of
those considerations of utility which plead for the maintenance of it when
established. Enough is known of rude ages, both from history and from
analogous states of society in our own time, to show that tribunals (which
always precede laws) were originally established, not to determine rights,
but to repress violence and terminate quarrels. With this object chiefly
in view, they naturally enough gave legal effect to first occupancy, by
treating as the aggressor the person who first commenced violence, by
turning, or attempting to turn, another out of possession.

In considering the institution of property as a question in social
philosophy, we must leave out of consideration its actual origin in any of
the existing nations of Europe. We may suppose a community unhampered by
any previous possession; a body of colonists, occupying for the first time
an uninhabited country. (1.) If private property were adopted, we must
presume that it would be accompanied by none of the initial inequalities
and injustice which obstruct the beneficial operation of the principle in
old society. Every full-grown man or woman, we must suppose, would be
secured in the unfettered use and disposal of his or her bodily and mental
faculties; and the instruments of production, the land and tools, would be
divided fairly among them, so that all might start, in respect to outward
appliances, on equal terms. It is possible also to conceive that, in this
original apportionment, compensation might be made for the injuries of
nature, and the balance redressed by assigning to the less robust members
of the community advantages in the distribution, sufficient to put them on
a par with the rest. But the division, once made, would not again be
interfered with; individuals would be left to their own exertions and to
the ordinary chances for making an advantageous use of what was assigned
to them. (2.) If individual property, on the contrary, were excluded, the
plan which must be adopted would be to hold the land and all instruments
of production as the joint property of the community, and to carry on the
operations of industry on the common account. The direction of the labor
of the community would devolve upon a magistrate or magistrates, whom we
may suppose elected by the suffrages of the community, and whom we must
assume to be voluntarily obeyed by them. The division of the produce would
in like manner be a public act. The principle might either be that of
complete equality, or of apportionment to the necessities or deserts of
individuals, in whatever manner might be conformable to the ideas of
justice or policy prevailing in the community.

The assailants of the principle of individual property may be divided into
two classes: (1) those whose scheme implies absolute equality in the
distribution of the physical means of life and enjoyment, and (2) those
who admit inequality, but grounded on some principle, or supposed
principle, of justice or general expediency, and not, like so many of the
existing social inequalities, dependent on accident alone. The
characteristic name for this [first] economical system is Communism, a
word of Continental origin, only of late introduced into this country. The
word Socialism, which originated among the English Communists, and was
assumed by them as a name to designate their own doctrine, is now, on the
Continent, employed in a larger sense; not necessarily implying Communism,
or the entire abolition of private property, but applied to any system
which requires that the land and the instruments of production should be
the property, not of individuals, but of communities, or associations, or
of the government.


    It should be said, moreover, that Socialism is to-day used in the
    distinct sense of a system which abolishes private property, and
    places the control of the capital, labor, and combined industries
    of the country in the hands of the state. The essence of modern
    socialism is the appeal to state-help and the weakening of
    individual self-help. Collectivism is also a term now used by
    German and French writers to describe an organization of the
    industries of a country under a collective instead of an
    individual management. Collectivism is but the French expression
    for the system of state socialism.



§ 2. The case for Communism against private property presented.


The objection ordinarily made to a system of community of property and
equal distribution of the produce, that each person would be incessantly
occupied in evading his fair share of the work, points, undoubtedly, to a
real difficulty. But those who urge this objection forget to how great an
extent the same difficulty exists under the system on which nine tenths of
the business of society is now conducted. And though the “master’s eye,”
when the master is vigilant and intelligent, is of proverbial value, it
must be remembered that, in a Socialist farm or manufactory, each laborer
would be under the eye, not of one master, but of the whole community. If
Communistic labor might be less vigorous than that of a peasant
proprietor, or a workman laboring on his own account, it would probably be
more energetic than that of a laborer for hire, who has no personal
interest in the matter at all.

Another of the objections to Communism is that if every member of the
community were assured of subsistence for himself and any number of
children, on the sole condition of willingness to work, prudential
restraint on the multiplication of mankind would be at an end, and
population would start forward at a rate which would reduce the community
through successive stages of increasing discomfort to actual starvation.
But Communism is precisely the state of things in which opinion might be
expected to declare itself with greatest intensity against this kind of
selfish intemperance. An augmentation of numbers which diminished the
comfort or increased the toil of the mass would then cause (which now it
does not) immediate and unmistakable inconvenience to every individual in
the association; inconvenience which could not then be imputed to the
avarice of employers, or the unjust privileges of the rich.

A more real difficulty is that of fairly apportioning the labor of the
community among its members. There are many kinds of work, and by what
standard are they to be measured one against another? Who is to judge how
much cotton-spinning, or distributing goods from the stores, or
brick-laying, or chimney-sweeping, is equivalent to so much plowing?
Besides, even in the same kind of work, nominal equality of labor would be
so great a real inequality that the feeling of justice would revolt
against its being enforced. All persons are not equally fit for all labor;
and the same quantity of labor is an unequal burden on the weak and the
strong, the hardy and the delicate, the quick and the slow, the dull and
the intelligent.(146)

If, therefore, the choice were to be made between Communism with all its
chances and the present state of society with all its sufferings and
injustices, all the difficulties, great or small, of Communism, would be
but as dust in the balance. But, to make the comparison applicable, we
must compare Communism at its best with the _régime_ of individual
property, not as it is, but as it might be made. The laws of property have
never yet conformed to the principles on which the justification of
private property rests. They have made property of things which never
ought to be property, and absolute property where only a qualified
property ought to exist. Private property, in every defense made of it, is
supposed to mean the guarantee to individuals of the fruits of their own
labor and abstinence. The guarantee to them of the fruits of the labor and
abstinence of others, transmitted to them without any merit or exertion of
their own, is not of the essence of the institution, but a mere incidental
consequence, which, when it reaches a certain height, does not promote,
but conflicts with the ends which render private property legitimate. To
judge of the final destination of the institution of property, we must
suppose everything rectified which causes the institution to work in a
manner opposed to that equitable principle, of proportion between
remuneration and exertion, on which, in every vindication of it that will
bear the light, it is assumed to be grounded. We must also suppose two
conditions realized, without which neither Communism nor any other laws or
institutions could make the condition of the mass of mankind other than
degraded and miserable. One of these conditions is, universal education;
the other, a due limitation of the numbers of the community. With these,
there could be no poverty, even under the present social institutions:
and, these being supposed, the question of socialism is not, as generally
stated by Socialists, a question of flying to the sole refuge against the
evils which now bear down humanity, but a mere question of comparative
advantages, which futurity must determine. We are too ignorant either of
what individual agency in its best form, or socialism in its best form,
can accomplish, to be qualified to decide which of the two will be the
ultimate form of human society.

If a conjecture may be hazarded, the decision will probably depend mainly
on one consideration, viz., which of the two systems is consistent with
the greatest amount of human liberty and spontaneity. It is yet to be
ascertained whether the communistic scheme would be consistent with that
multiform development of human nature, those manifold unlikenesses, that
diversity of tastes and talents, and variety of intellectual points of
view, which not only form a great part of the interest of human life, but,
by bringing intellects into stimulating collision and by presenting to
each innumerable notions that he would not have conceived of himself, are
the mainspring of mental and moral progression.



§ 3. The Socialists who appeal to state-help.


    For general purposes, a clearer understanding of the various
    schemes may be gained by observing that (1) one class of
    socialists intend to include the state itself within their plan,
    and (2) another class aim to form separate communities inside the
    state, and under its protection.

    Of this first system there are no present examples; but the object
    of most of the socialistic organizations in the United States and
    Europe is to strive for the assumption by the state of the
    production and distribution of wealth.(147) At present the most
    active Socialists are to be found in Germany. The origin of this
    influence, however, is to be traced to France.(148) Louis
    Blanc,(149) in his “Organisation du Travail,” considers property
    the great scourge of society. The Government, he asserts, should
    regulate production; raise money to be appropriated without
    interest for creating state workshops, in which the workmen should
    elect their own overseers, and all receive the same wages; and the
    sums needed should be raised from the abolition of collateral
    inheritance. The important practical part of his scheme was that
    the great state workshops, aided by the Government, would make
    private competition in those industries impossible, and thus bring
    about the change from the private to the socialistic system.

    The founder of modern German socialism was Karl Marx,(150) and
    almost the only Socialist who pretended to economic knowledge. He
    aimed his attack on the present social system against the question
    of value, by asserting that the amount of labor necessary for the
    production of an article is the sole measure of its exchange
    value. It follows from this that the right of property in the
    article vests wholly in the laborer, while the capitalist, if he
    claims a share of the product, is nothing less than a robber. No
    just system, he avers, can properly exist so long as the rate of
    wages is fixed by free contract between the employer and laborer;
    therefore the only remedy is the nationalization of all the
    elements of production, land, tools, materials, and all existing
    appliances, which involves, of course, the destruction of the
    institution of private property. An obvious weakness in this
    scheme is the provision that the Government should determine what
    goods are to be produced, and that every one is bound to perform
    that work which is assigned by the state. In this there is no
    choice of work, and the tyranny of one master would be supplanted
    by the tyranny of a greater multiplex master in the officers of
    Government. Moreover, it can not be admitted that exchange value
    is determined by the quantity of labor alone. Every one knows that
    the result of ten days’ labor of a skilled watch-maker does not
    exchange for the result of ten days’ labor of an unskilled hodman.
    Of two men making shoes, one may produce a good the other a poor
    article, although both may work the same length of time; so that
    their exchange value ought not to be determined by the mere
    quantity of labor expended. Above all, Marx would extend the
    equality of wages for the same time to the manager and
    superintendent also. In other words, he proposes to take away all
    the incentives to the acquirement or exercise of superior and
    signal ability in every work of life, the result of which would
    inevitably lead to a deadening extension of mediocrity.

    This system gained an undue attention because it was made the
    instrument of a socialist propaganda under the leadership of
    Ferdinand Lassalle.(151) This active leader, in 1863, founded the
    German “Workingmen’s Union,” a year earlier than the
    “International(152) Association.” In 1869 Liebknecht and his
    friends established the “Social Democratic Workingmen’s Party,”
    which after some difficulties absorbed the followers of Lassalle
    in a congress at Gotha in 1875, and form the present Socialist
    party in Germany. Their programme,(153) as announced at Gotha, is
    as follows:

    I. Labor is the source of all riches and of all culture. As
    general profitable labor can only be done by the human society,
    the whole product of labor belongs to society—i.e., to all its
    members—who have the same duties and the same right to work, each
    according to his reasonable wants.

    In the present society the means of work are the monopoly of the
    class of capitalists. The class of workingmen thus become
    dependent on them, and consequently are given over to all degrees
    of misery and servitude.

    In order to emancipate labor it is requisite that the means of
    work be transformed into the common property of society, that all
    production be regulated by associations, and that the entire
    product of labor be turned over to society and justly distributed
    for the benefit of all.

    None but the working-class itself can emancipate labor, as in
    relation to it all other classes are only a reactionary mass.

    II. Led by these principles, the German Social Workingmen’s party,
    by all legal means, strives for a free state and society, the
    breaking down of the iron laws of wages by abolishing the system
    of hired workingmen, by abolishing exploitation in every shape,
    and doing away with all social and political inequality.

    The German Social Workingmen’s party, although first working
    within its national confines, is fully conscious of the
    international character of the general workingmen’s movement, and
    is resolved to fulfill all duties which it imposes on each
    workingman in order to realize the fraternity of all men.

    The German Social Workingmen’s party, for the purpose of preparing
    the way, and for the solution of the social problem, demands the
    creation of social productive associations, to be supported by the
    state government, and under the control of the working-people. The
    productive associations are to be founded in such numbers that the
    social organization of the whole production can be effected by
    them.

    The German Social Workingmen’s party requires as the basis of
    state government:

    1. Universal, equal, direct, and secret suffrage, which, beginning
    with the twentieth year, obliges all citizens to vote in all
    State, county, and town elections. Election-day must be a Sunday
    or a holiday.

    2. Direct legislation by the people; decision as to war and peace
    by the people.

    3. General capability of bearing arms; popular defense in place of
    standing armies.

    4. Abolition of all exceptional laws, especially those relating to
    the press, public meetings, and associations—in short, of all laws
    which hinder the free expression of ideas and thought.

    5. Gratuitous administration of justice by the people.

    6. General and equal, popular and gratuitous education by the
    Government in all classes and institutes of learning; general duty
    to attend school; religion to be declared a private affair.

    The German Social Workingmen’s party insists on realizing in the
    present state of society:

    1. The largest possible extension of political rights and freedom
    in conformity to the above six demands.

    2. A single progressive income-tax for State, counties, and towns,
    instead of those which are imposed at present, and in place of
    indirect taxes, which unequally burden the people.

    3. Unlimited right of combination.

    4. A normal working-day corresponding with the wants of society;
    prohibition of Sunday labor.

    5. Prohibition of children’s work and of women’s work, so far as
    it injures their health and morality.

    6. Protective laws for the life and health of workingmen; sanitary
    control of their dwellings; superintendence of mines, factories,
    industry, and home work by officers chosen by the workingmen; an
    effectual law guaranteeing the responsibility of employers.

    7. Regulation of prison-work.

    8. Unrestricted self-government of all banks established for the
    mutual assistance of workingmen.

    The above scheme also represents very well the character of the
    Socialist agitators in the United States, who are themselves
    chiefly foreigners, and have foreign conceptions of socialism. On
    this form of socialism it is interesting to have Mr. Mill’s later
    opinions(154) in his own words.


“Among those who call themselves Socialists, two kinds of persons may be
distinguished. There are, in the first place, (1) those whose plans for a
new order of society, in which private property and individual competition
are to be superseded and other motives to action substituted, are on the
scale of a village community or township, and would be applied to an
entire country by the multiplication of such self-acting units; of this
character are the systems of Owen, of Fourier, and the more thoughtful and
philosophic Socialists generally. The other class (2) who are more a
product of the Continent than of Great Britain, and may be called the
revolutionary Socialists, propose to themselves a much bolder stroke.
Their scheme is the management of the whole productive resources of the
country by one central authority, the general Government. And with this
view some of them avow as their purpose that the working-classes, or
somebody in their behalf, should take possession of all the property of
the country, and administer it for the general benefit. The aim of that is
to substitute the new rule for the old at a single stroke, and to exchange
the amount of good realized under the present system, and its large
possibilities of improvement, for a plunge without any preparation into
the most extreme form of the problem of carrying on the whole round of the
operations of social life without the motive power which has always
hitherto worked the social machinery. It must be acknowledged that those
who would play this game on the strength of their own private opinion,
unconfirmed as yet by any experimental verification, must have a serene
confidence in their own wisdom on the one hand, and a recklessness of
people’s sufferings on the other, which Robespierre and St. Just, hitherto
the typical instances of those united attributes, scarcely came up to.”



§ 4. Of various minor schemes, Communistic and Socialistic.


[Of the schemes to be tried within a state], the two elaborate forms of
non-communistic Socialism known as Saint-Simonism and Fourierism are
totally free from the objections usually urged against Communism. The
Saint-Simonian(155) scheme does not contemplate an equal, but an unequal
division of the produce; it does not propose that all should be occupied
alike, but differently, according to their vocation or capacity; the
function of each being assigned, like grades in a regiment, by the choice
of the directing authority, and the remuneration being by salary,
proportioned to the importance, in the eyes of that authority, of the
function itself, and the merits of the person who fulfills it. But to
suppose that one or a few human beings, howsoever selected, could, by
whatever machinery of subordinate agency, be qualified to adapt each
person’s work to his capacity, and proportion each person’s remuneration
to his merits, is a supposition almost too chimerical to be reasoned
against.(156)

The most skillfully combined, and with the greatest foresight of
objections, of all the forms of Socialism is that commonly known as
Fourierism.(157) This system does not contemplate the abolition of private
property, nor even of inheritance: on the contrary, it avowedly takes into
consideration, as an element in the distribution of the produce, capital
as well as labor. It proposes that the operations of industry should be
carried on by associations of about two thousand members, combining their
labor on a district of about a square league in extent, under the guidance
of chiefs selected by themselves (the “phalanstery”). In the distribution
a certain minimum is first assigned for the subsistence of every member of
the community, whether capable or not of labor. The remainder of the
produce is shared in certain proportions, to be determined beforehand,
among the three elements, Labor, Capital, and Talent. The capital of the
community may be owned in unequal shares by different members, who would
in that case receive, as in any other joint-stock company, proportional
dividends. The claim of each person on the share of the produce
apportioned to talent is estimated by the grade or rank which the
individual occupies in the several groups of laborers to which he or she
belongs, these grades being in all cases conferred by the choice of his or
her companions. The remuneration, when received, would not of necessity be
expended or enjoyed in common; there would be separate _ménages_ for all
who preferred them, and no other community of living is contemplated than
that all the members of the association should reside in the same pile of
buildings; for saving of labor and expense, not only in building, but in
every branch of domestic economy; and in order that, the whole buying and
selling operations of the community being performed by a single agent, the
enormous portion of the produce of industry now carried off by the profits
of mere distributors might be reduced to the smallest amount possible.


    Fourierism was tried in West Virginia by American disciples, and
    it was advocated by Horace Greeley. A modified form appeared in
    the famous community at Brook Farm (near Dedham, Massachusetts),
    which drew there George Ripley, Margaret Fuller, and even George
    William Curtis and Nathaniel Hawthorne.

    There have been many smaller communities established in the United
    States, but it can not be said that they have been successful from
    the point of view either of numbers or material prosperity. The
    followers of Rapp, or the Harmonists, in Pennsylvania and Indiana;
    the Owenites,(158) in Indiana; the community of Zoar, in Ohio; the
    Inspirationists, in New York and Iowa; the Perfectionists, at
    Oneida and Wallingford—are all evidently suffering from the
    difficulties due to the absence of family life, from the
    increasing spirit of personal independence which carries away the
    younger members of the organizations,(159) and the want of that
    executive ability which distinguishes the successful manager in
    private enterprises.



§ 5.  The Socialist objections to the present order of Society examined.


“The attacks(160) on the present social order are vigorous and earnest,
but open to the charge of exaggeration.

“In the first place, it is unhappily true that the wages of ordinary
labor, in all the countries of Europe, are wretchedly insufficient to
supply the physical and moral necessities of the population in any
tolerable measure. But when it is further alleged that even this
insufficient remuneration has a tendency to diminish; that there is, in
the words of M. Louis Blanc, _une baisse continue des salaires_; the
assertion is in opposition to all accurate information, and to many
notorious facts. It has yet to be proved that there is any country in the
civilized world where the ordinary wages of labor, estimated either in
money or in articles of consumption, are declining; while in many they
are, on the whole, on the increase; and an increase which is becoming, not
slower, but more rapid. There are, occasionally, branches of industry
which are being gradually superseded by something else, and in those,
until production accommodates itself to demand, wages are depressed.

“M. Louis Blanc appears to have fallen into the same error which was at
first committed by Malthus and his followers, that of supposing because
population has a greater power of increase than subsistence, its pressure
upon subsistence must be always growing more severe. It is a great point
gained for truth when it comes to be seen that the tendency to
over-population is a fact which Communism, as well as the existing order
of society, would have to deal with. However this may be, experience shows
that in the existing state of society the pressure of population on
subsistence, which is the principal cause of low wages, though a great, is
not an increasing evil; on the contrary, the progress of all that is
called civilization has a tendency to diminish it, partly by the more
rapid increase of the means of employing and maintaining labor, partly by
the increased facilities opened to labor for transporting itself to new
countries and unoccupied fields of employment, and partly by a general
improvement in the intelligence and prudence of the population. It is, of
course, open to discussion what form of society has the greatest power of
dealing successfully with the pressure of population on subsistence, and
on this question there is much to be said for Socialism; but it has no
just claim to be considered as the sole means of preventing the general
and growing degradation of the mass of mankind through the peculiar
tendency of poverty to produce over-population.

“Next, it must be observed that Socialists generally, and even the most
enlightened of them, have a very imperfect and one-sided notion of the
operation of competition. They see half its effects, and overlook the
other half. They forget that competition is a cause of high prices and
values as well as of low; that the buyers of labor and of commodities
compete with one another as well as the sellers; and that, if it is
competition which keeps the prices of labor and commodities as low as they
are, it is competition which keeps them from falling still lower. To meet
this consideration, Socialists are reduced to affirm that, when the
richest competitor has got rid of all his rivals, he commands the market
and can demand any price he pleases. But in the ordinary branches of
industry no one rich competitor has it in his power to drive out all the
smaller ones. Some businesses show a tendency to pass out of the hands of
small producers or dealers into a smaller number of larger ones; but the
cases in which this happens are those in which the possession of a larger
capital permits the adoption of more powerful machinery, more efficient by
more expensive processes, or a better organized and more economical mode
of carrying on business, and this enables the large dealer legitimately
and permanently to supply the commodity cheaper than can be done on the
small scale; to the great advantage of the consumers, and therefore of the
laboring-classes, and diminishing, _pro tanto_, that waste of the
resources of the community so much complained of by Socialists, the
unnecessary multiplication of mere distributors, and of the various other
classes whom Fourier calls the parasites of industry.

“Another point on which there is much misapprehension on the part of
Socialists, as well as of trades-unionists and other partisans of labor
against capital, relates to the proportion in which the produce of the
country is really shared and the amount of what is actually diverted from
those who produce it, to enrich other persons. When, for instance, a
capitalist invests £20,000 in his business, and draws from it an income of
(suppose) £2,000 a year, the common impression is as if he were the
beneficial owner both of the £20,000 and of the £2,000, while the laborers
own nothing but their wages. The truth, however, is that he only obtains
the £2,000 on condition of applying no part of the £20,000 to his own use.
He has the legal control over it, and might squander it if he chose, but
if he did he would not have the £2,000 a year also. For all personal
purposes they have the capital and he has but the profits, which it only
yields to him on condition that the capital itself is employed in
satisfying not his own wants, but those of laborers. Even of his own share
a small part only belongs to him as the owner of capital. The portion of
the produce which falls to capital merely as capital is measured by the
interest of money, since that is all that the owner of capital obtains
when he contributes to production nothing except the capital itself.

“The result of our review of the various difficulties of Socialism has led
us to the conclusion that the various schemes for managing the productive
resources of the country by public instead of private agency have a case
for a trial, and some of them may eventually establish their claims to
preference over the existing order of things, but that they are at present
workable only by the _élite_ of mankind, and have yet to prove their power
of training mankind at large to the state of improvement which they
presuppose.”



§ 6. Property in land different from property in Movables.


It is next to be considered what is included in the idea of private
property and by what considerations the application of the principle
should be bounded.

The institution of property, when limited to its essential elements,
consists in the recognition, in each person, of a right to the exclusive
disposal of what he or she have produced by their own exertions, or
received either by gift or by fair agreement, without force or fraud, from
those who produced it. The foundation of the whole is, the right of
producers to what they themselves have produced. Nothing is implied in
property but the right of each to his (or her) own faculties, to what he
can produce by them, and to whatever he can get for them in a fair market:
together with his right to give this to any other person if he chooses,
and the right of that other to receive and enjoy it.

It follows, therefore, that although the right of bequest, or gift after
death, forms part of the idea of private property, the right of
inheritance, as distinguished from bequest, does not. That the property of
persons who have made no disposition of it during their lifetime should
pass first to their children, and, failing them, to the nearest relations,
may be a proper arrangement or not, but is no consequence of the principle
of private property. I see no reason why collateral inheritance should
exist at all. Mr. Bentham long ago proposed, and other high authorities
have agreed in the opinion, that, if there are no heirs either in the
descending or in the ascending line, the property, in case of intestacy,
should escheat to the state. The parent owes to society to endeavor to
make the child a good and valuable member of it, and owes to the children
to provide, so far as depends on him, such education, and such appliances
and means, as will enable them to start with a fair chance of achieving by
their own exertions a successful life. To this every child has a claim;
and I can not admit that as a child he has a claim to more.

The essential principle of property being to assure to all persons what
they have produced by their labor and accumulated by their abstinence,
this principle can not apply to what is not the produce of labor, the raw
material of the earth. If the land derived its productive power wholly
from nature, and not at all from industry, or if there were any means of
discriminating what is derived from each source, it not only would not be
necessary, but it would be the height of injustice, to let the gift of
nature be engrossed by individuals. [But] the use of the land in
agriculture must indeed, for the time being, be of necessity exclusive;
the same person who has plowed and sown must be permitted to reap.

But though land is not the produce of industry, most of its valuable
qualities are so. Labor is not only requisite for using, but almost
equally so for fashioning, the instrument. Considerable labor is often
required at the commencement, to clear the land for cultivation. In many
cases, even when cleared, its productiveness is wholly the effect of labor
and art. One of the barrenest soils in the world, composed of the material
of the Goodwin Sands, the Pays de Waes in Flanders, has been so fertilized
by industry as to have become one of the most productive in Europe.
Cultivation also requires buildings and fences, which are wholly the
produce of labor. The fruits of this industry can not be reaped in a short
period. The labor and outlay are immediate, the benefit is spread over
many years, perhaps over all future time. A holder will not incur this
labor and outlay when strangers and not himself will be benefited by it.
If he undertakes such improvements, he must have a sufficient period
before him in which to profit by them; and he is in no way so sure of
having always a sufficient period as when his tenure is perpetual.

These are the reasons which form the justification, in an economical point
of view, of property in land. It is seen that they are only valid in so
far as the proprietor of land is its improver. Whenever, in any country,
the proprietor, generally speaking, ceases to be the improver, political
economy has nothing to say in defense of landed property, as there
established.

When the “sacredness of property” is talked of, it should always be
remembered that any such sacredness does not belong in the same degree to
landed property. No man made the land. It is the original inheritance of
the whole species. Its appropriation is wholly a question of general
expediency. When private property in land is not expedient, it is unjust.
The reverse is the case with property in movables, and in all things the
product of labor: over these, the owner’s power both of use and of
exclusion should be absolute, except where positive evil to others would
result from it; but, in the case of land, no exclusive right should be
permitted in any individual which can not be shown to be productive of
positive good. To be allowed any exclusive right at all, over a portion of
the common inheritance, while there are others who have no portion, is
already a privilege. No quantity of movable goods which a person can
acquire by his labor prevents others from acquiring the like by the same
means; but, from the very nature of the case, whoever owns land keeps
others out of the enjoyment of it. When land is not intended to be
cultivated, no good reason can in general be given for its being private
property at all. Even in the case of cultivated land, a man whom, though
only one among millions, the law permits to hold thousands of acres as his
single share, is not entitled to think that all this is given to him to
use and abuse, and deal with as if it concerned nobody but himself. The
rents or profits which he can obtain from it are at his sole disposal; but
with regard to the land, in everything which he does with it, and in
everything which he abstains from doing, he is morally bound, and should,
whenever the case admits, be legally compelled to make his interest and
pleasure consistent with the public good.




Chapter II. Of Wages.



§ 1. Of Competition and Custom.


Political economists generally, and English political economists above
others, have been accustomed to lay almost exclusive stress upon the first
of [two] agencies [competition and custom]; to exaggerate the effect of
competition, and to take into little account the other and conflicting
principle. They are apt to express themselves as if they thought that
competition actually does, in all cases, whatever it can be shown to be
the tendency of competition to do. This is partly intelligible, if we
consider that only through the principle of competition has political
economy any pretension to the character of a science. So far as rents,
profits, wages, prices, are determined by competition, laws may be
assigned for them. Assume competition to be their exclusive regulator, and
principles of broad generality and scientific precision may be laid down,
according to which they will be regulated. The political economist justly
deems this his proper business: and, as an abstract or hypothetical
science, political economy can not be required to do, and indeed can not
do, anything more. But it would be a great misconception of the actual
course of human affairs to suppose that competition exercises in fact this
unlimited sway. I am not speaking of monopolies, either natural or
artificial, or of any interferences of authority with the liberty of
production or exchange. Such disturbing causes have always been allowed
for by political economists. I speak of cases in which there is nothing to
restrain competition; no hindrance to it either in the nature of the case
or in artificial obstacles; yet in which the result is not determined by
competition, but by custom or usage; competition either not taking place
at all, or producing its effect in quite a different manner from that
which is ordinarily assumed to be natural to it.


    As stated by Mr. Cairnes,(161) political economy is a science just
    as is any recognized physical science—astronomy, chemistry,
    physiology. The economic “facts we find existing are the results
    of causes, between which and them the connection is constant and
    invariable. It is, then, the constant relations exhibited in
    economic phenomena that we have in view when we speak of the laws
    of the phenomena of wealth; and in the exposition of these laws
    consists the science of political economy.” It is to be remembered
    that economic laws are _tendencies_, not actual descriptions of
    any given conditions in this or that place.


Competition, in fact, has only become in any considerable degree the
governing principle of contracts, at a comparatively modern period. The
further we look back into history, the more we see all transactions and
engagements under the influence of fixed customs. The relations, more
especially between the land-owner and the cultivator, and the payments
made by the latter to the former, are, in all states of society but the
most modern, determined by the usage of the country. The custom of the
country is the universal rule; nobody thinks of raising or lowering rents,
or of letting land, on other than the customary conditions. Competition,
as a regulator of rent, has no existence.

Prices, whenever there was no monopoly, came earlier under the influence
of competition, and are much more universally subject to it, than rents.
The wholesale trade, in the great articles of commerce, is really under
the dominion of competition. But retail price, the price paid by the
actual consumer, seems to feel very slowly and imperfectly the effect of
competition; and, when competition does exist, it often, instead of
lowering prices, merely divides the gains of the high price among a
greater number of dealers. The influence of competition is making itself
felt more and more through the principal branches of retail trade in the
large towns.

All professional remuneration is regulated by custom. The fees of
physicians, surgeons, and barristers, the charges of attorneys, are nearly
invariable. Not certainly for want of abundant competition in those
professions, but because the competition operates by diminishing each
competitor’s chance of fees, not by lowering the fees themselves.

These observations must be received as a general correction to be applied
whenever relevant, whether expressly mentioned or not, to the conclusions
contained in the subsequent portions of this treatise. Our reasonings
must, in general, proceed as if the known and natural effects of
competition were actually produced by it, in all cases in which it is not
restrained by some positive obstacle. Where competition, though free to
exist, does not exist, or where it exists, but has its natural
consequences overruled by any other agency, the conclusions will fail more
or less of being applicable. To escape error, we ought, in applying the
conclusions of political economy to the actual affairs of life, to
consider not only what will happen supposing the maximum of competition,
but how far the result will be affected if competition falls short of the
maximum.



§ 2. The Wages-fund, and the Objections to it Considered.


Under the head of Wages are to be considered, first, the causes which
determine or influence the wages of labor generally, and secondly, the
differences that exist between the wages of different employments. It is
convenient to keep these two classes of considerations separate; and in
discussing the law of wages, to proceed in the first instance as if there
were no other kind of labor than common unskilled labor, of the average
degree of hardness and disagreeableness.

Competition, however, must be regarded, in the present state of society,
as the principal regulator of wages, and custom or individual character
only as a modifying circumstance, and that in a comparatively slight
degree.

Wages, then, depend mainly upon the demand and supply of labor; or, as it
is often expressed, on the proportion between population and capital. By
population is here meant the number only of the laboring-class, or rather
of those who work for hire; and by capital, only circulating capital, and
not even the whole of that, but the part which is expended in the direct
purchase of labor. To this, however, must be added all funds which,
without forming a part of capital, are paid in exchange for labor, such as
the wages of soldiers, domestic servants, and all other unproductive
laborers. There is unfortunately no mode of expressing, by one familiar
term, the aggregate of what may be called the wages-fund of a country:
and, as the wages of productive labor form nearly the whole of that fund,
it is usual to overlook the smaller and less important part, and to say
that wages depend on population and capital. It will be convenient to
employ this expression, remembering, however, to consider it as
elliptical, and not as a literal statement of the entire truth.

With these limitations of the terms, wages not only depend upon the
relative amount of capital and population, but can not, under the rule of
competition, be affected by anything else. Wages (meaning, of course, the
general rate) can not rise, but by an increase of the aggregate funds
employed in hiring laborers, or a diminution in the number of the
competitors for hire; nor fall, except either by a diminution of the funds
devoted to paying labor, or by an increase in the number of laborers to be
paid.


      [Illustration: Pie chart of Fixed Capital, Raw Materials, and
                               Wages Fund.]

    This is the simple statement of the well-known Wages-Fund Theory,
    which has given rise to no little animated discussion. Few
    economists now assent to this doctrine when stated as above, and
    without changes. The first attack on this explanation of the rate
    of wages came from what is now a very scarce pamphlet, written by
    F. D. Longe, entitled “A Refutation of the Wage-Fund Theory of
    Modern Political Economy” (1866). Because laborers do not really
    compete with each other, he regarded the idea of average wages as
    absurd as the idea of an average price of ships and cloth; he
    declared that there was no predetermined wages-fund necessarily
    expended on labor; and that “demand for commodities” determined
    the amount of wealth devoted to paying wages (p. 46). While the
    so-called wages-fund limits the total amount which the laborers
    _can_ receive, the employer would try to get his workmen at as
    much less than that amount as possible, so that the aggregate fund
    would have no bearing on the actual amount paid in wages. The
    quantity of work to be done, he asserts, determines the quantity
    of labor to be employed. About the same time (but unknown to Mr.
    Longe), W. T. Thornton was studying the same subject, and
    attracted considerable attention by his publication, “On Labor”
    (1868), which in Book II, Chap. I, contained an extended argument
    to show that demand and supply (i.e., the proportion between
    wages-fund and laborers) did not regulate wages, and denied the
    existence of a predetermined wages-fund fixed in amount. His
    attack, however, assumes a very different conception of an
    economic law from that which we think right to insist upon. The
    character of mankind being what it is, it will be for their
    interest to invest so much and no more in labor, and we must
    believe that in this sense there is a predetermination of wealth
    to be paid in wages. In order to make good investments, a certain
    amount must, if capitalists follow their best interests, go to the
    payment of labor.(162) Mr. Thornton’s argument attracted the more
    attention because Mr. Mill(163) admitted that Mr. Thornton had
    induced him to abandon his Wages-Fund Theory. The subject was,
    however, taken up, re-examined by Mr. Cairnes,(164) and stated in
    a truer form. (1.) The total wealth of a country (circle A in the
    diagram) is the outside limit of its capital. How much capital
    will be saved out of this depends upon the effective desire of
    accumulation in the community (as set forth in Book I, Chap.
    VIII). The size of circle B within circle A, therefore, depends on
    the character of the people. The wages-fund, then, depends
    ultimately on the extent of A, and proximately on the extent of B.
    It can never be larger than B. So far, at least, its amount is
    “predetermined” in the economic sense by general laws regarding
    the accumulation of capital and the expectation of profit. Circle
    B contracts and expands under influences which have nothing to do
    with the immediate bargains between capitalists and laborers. (2.)
    Another influence now comes in to affect the amount of capital
    actually paid as wages, one also governed by general causes
    outside the reach of laborer or capitalist, that is, the state of
    the arts of production. In production, the particular conditions
    of each industry will determine how much capital is to be set
    apart for raw material, how much for machinery, buildings, and all
    forms of fixed capital, and how many laborers will be assigned to
    a given machine for a given amount of material. With some kinds of
    hand-made goods the largest share of capital goes to wages, a less
    amount for materials, and a very small proportion for machinery
    and tools. In many branches of agriculture and small farming this
    holds true. The converse, however, is true in many manufactures,
    where machinery is largely used. No two industries will maintain
    the same proportion between the three elements. The nature of the
    industry, therefore, will determine whether a greater or a less
    share of capital will be spent in wages. It is needless to say
    that this condition of things is not one to be changed at the
    demand of either of the two parties to production, Labor and
    Capital; it responds only to the advance of mechanical science or
    general intelligence. It is impossible, then, to escape the
    conclusion that general causes restrict the amount which will,
    under any normal investment, go to the payment of wages. Only
    within the limits set by these forces can any further expansion or
    contraction take place. (3.) Within these limits, of course, minor
    changes may take place, so that the fund can not be said to be
    “fixed” or “absolutely predetermined”; but these changes must take
    place within such narrow limits that they do not much affect the
    practical side of the question. How these changes act, may be seen
    in a part of the following illustration of the above principles:

    Suppose a cotton-mill established in one of the valleys of
    Vermont, for the management of which the owner has $140,000 of
    capital. Of this, $100,000 is given for buildings, machinery, and
    plant. If he turns over his remaining capital ($40,000) each
    month, we will suppose that $28,000 spent in raw materials will
    keep five hundred men occupied at a monthly expenditure of
    $12,000. The present state of cotton-manufacture itself settles
    the relation between a given quantity of raw cotton and a certain
    amount of machinery. A fixed amount of cotton, no more, no less,
    can be spun by each spindle and woven by each loom; and the nature
    of the process determines the number of laborers to each machine.
    This proportion is something which an owner must obey, if he
    expects to compete with other manufacturers: the relationship is
    fixed for, not by, him. Now, each of the five hundred laborers
    being supposed to receive on an average $1.00 a day, imagine an
    influx of a body of French Canadians who offer to work, on an
    average, for eighty cents a day.(165) The five hundred men will
    now receive but $9,600 monthly instead of $12,000, as before, as a
    wages-fund; the monthly payment for wages now is nearly seven per
    cent, while formerly it was nearly nine per cent of the total
    capital invested ($140,000). Thus it will be seen that the
    wages-fund can change with a change in the supply of labor: but
    the point to be noticed is that it is a change in the subdivision,
    $12,000, of the total $140,000. That is, this alteration can take
    place only within the limits set by the nature of the industry.
    Now, if this $2,400 (i.e., $12,000 less $9,600) saved out of the
    wages-fund were to be reinvested, it must necessarily be divided
    between raw materials, fixed capital, and wages in the existing
    relations, that is, only seven per cent of the new $2,400 would be
    added to the wages-fund. It is worth while calling attention to
    this, if for no other reason than to show that in this way a
    change can be readily made in the wages-fund by natural movements;
    and that no one can be so absurd as to say that it is absolutely
    fixed in amount. But it certainly is “predetermined” in the
    economic sense, in that any reinvestments, as well as former
    funds, must necessarily be distributed according to the above
    general principles, independent of the “higgling” in the labor
    market. The following is Mr. Cairnes’s statement of the amount and
    “predetermination” of the wages-fund:

    “I believe that, in the existing state of the national wealth, the
    character of Englishmen being what it is, a certain prospect of
    profit will ‘determine’ a certain proportion of this wealth to
    productive investment; that the amount thus ‘determined’ will
    increase as the field for investment is extended, and that it will
    not increase beyond what this field can find employment for at
    that rate of profit which satisfies English commercial
    expectation. Further, I believe that, investment thus taking
    place, the form which it shall assume will be ‘determined’ by the
    nature of the national industries—‘determined,’ not under acts of
    Parliament, or in virtue of any physical law, but through the
    influence of the investor’s interests; while this, the form of the
    investment, will again ‘determine’ the proportion of the whole
    capital which shall be paid as wages to laborers.”(166) In this
    excellent and masterly conception, the doctrine of a wages-fund is
    not open to the objections usually urged against it. Indeed, with
    the exception of Professor Fawcett, scarcely any economist
    believes in an absolutely fixed wages-fund. In this sense, then,
    and in view of the above explanation, it will be understood what
    is meant by saying that wages depend upon the proportion of the
    wages-fund to the number of the wage-receivers.(167)

    In applying these principles to the question of strikes, it is
    evident enough that if they result in an actual expansion of the
    whole circle B, by forcing saving from unproductive expenditure, a
    real addition, of some extent, may be made to the wages-fund; but
    only by increasing the total capital. If, however, they attempt to
    increase one of the elements of capital, the wages-fund, without
    also adding to the other elements, fixed capital and materials, in
    the proportion fixed by the nature of the industry, they will
    destroy all possibility of continuing that production in the
    normal way, and the capitalist must withdraw from the enterprise.

    Francis A. Walker(168) has also offered a solution of this problem
    in his “Wages Question” (1876), in which he holds that “wages are,
    in a philosophical view of the subject, paid out of the product of
    present industry, and hence that production furnishes the true
    measure of wages” (p. 128). “It is the prospect of a profit in
    production which determines the employer to hire laborers; it is
    the anticipated value of the product which determines how much he
    can pay him” (p. 144). No doubt wages _can_ be (and often are)
    paid out of the current product; but _what_ amount? What is the
    principle of distribution? Wherever the incoming product is a
    moral certainty (and, unless this is true, in no case could wages
    be paid out of the future product), saving is as effective upon it
    as upon the actual accumulations of the past; and the amount of
    the coming product which will be saved and used as capital is
    determined by the same principles which govern the saving of past
    products. An increase of circle A by a larger production makes
    possible an increase of circle B, but whether it will be enlarged
    or not depends on the principle of accumulation. The larger the
    total production of wealth, the greater the _possible_ wages, all
    must admit; but it does not seem clear that General Walker has
    given us a solution of the real question at issue. The larger the
    house you build, the larger the rooms may be; but it does not
    follow that the rooms will be necessarily large—as any inmate of a
    summer hotel will testify.



§ 3. Examination of some popular Opinions respecting Wages.


There are, however, some facts in apparent contradiction to this [the
Wages-Fund] doctrine, which it is incumbent on us to consider and explain.

1. For instance, it is a common saying that wages are high when trade is
good. The demand for labor in any particular employment is more pressing,
and higher wages are paid, when there is a brisk demand for the commodity
produced; and the contrary when there is what is called a stagnation: then
work-people are dismissed, and those who are retained must submit to a
reduction of wages; though in these cases there is neither more nor less
capital than before. This is true; and is one of those complications in
the concrete phenomena which obscure and disguise the operation of general
causes; but it is not really inconsistent with the principles laid down.
Capital which the owner does not employ in purchasing labor, but keeps
idle in his hands, is the same thing to the laborers, for the time being,
as if it did not exist. All capital is, from the variations of trade,
occasionally in this state. A manufacturer, finding a slack demand for his
commodity, forbears to employ laborers in increasing a stock which he
finds it difficult to dispose of; or if he goes on until all his capital
is locked up in unsold goods, then at least he must of necessity pause
until he can get paid for some of them. But no one expects either of these
states to be permanent; if he did, he would at the first opportunity
remove his capital to some other occupation, in which it would still
continue to employ labor. The capital remains unemployed for a time,
during which the labor market is overstocked, and wages fall. Afterward
the demand revives, and perhaps becomes unusually brisk, enabling the
manufacturer to sell his commodity even faster than he can produce it; his
whole capital is then brought into complete efficiency, and, if he is
able, he borrows capital in addition, which would otherwise have gone into
some other employment. These, however, are but temporary fluctuations: the
capital now lying idle will next year be in active employment, that which
is this year unable to keep up with the demand will in its turn be locked
up in crowded warehouses; and wages in these several departments will ebb
and flow accordingly: but nothing can permanently alter general wages,
except an increase or a diminution of capital itself (always meaning by
the term, the funds of all sorts, destined for the payment of labor)
compared with the quantity of labor offering itself to be hired.

2. Again, it is another common notion that high prices make high wages;
because the producers and dealers, being better off, can afford to pay
more to their laborers. I have already said that a brisk demand, which
causes temporary high prices, causes also temporary high wages. But high
prices, in themselves, can only raise wages if the dealers, receiving
more, are induced to save more, and make an addition to their capital, or
at least to their purchases of labor. Wages will probably be temporarily
higher in the employment in which prices have risen, and somewhat lower in
other employments: in which case, while the first half of the phenomenon
excites notice, the other is generally overlooked, or, if observed, is not
ascribed to the cause which really produced it. Nor will the partial rise
of wages last long: for, though the dealers in that one employment gain
more, it does not follow that there is room to employ a greater amount of
savings in their own business: their increasing capital will probably flow
over into other employments, and there counterbalance the diminution
previously made in the demand for labor by the diminished savings of other
classes.


    A clear distinction must be made between real wages and money
    wages; the former is of importance to the laborer as being his
    real receipts. The quantity of commodities satisfying his desires
    which the laborer receives for his exertion constitutes his real
    wages. The mere amount of money he receives for his exertions,
    irrespective of what the money will exchange for, forms his money
    wages. Since the functions of money have not yet been explained,
    it is difficult to discuss the relation between prices and money
    wages here. But, as the total value of the products in a certain
    industry is the sum out of which both money wages and profits are
    paid, this total will rise or fall (efficiency of labor remaining
    the same) with the price of the particular article. If the price
    rises, profits will be greater than elsewhere, and more capital
    will be invested in that one business; that is, the capital will
    be a demand for more labor, and, until equalization is
    accomplished in all trades between wages and profits, money wages
    will be higher in some trades than in others.(169)

    When reference is had to the connection between real wages and
    prices, the question is a different one. General high prices would
    not change general _real wages_. But if high prices cause higher
    money wages in particular branches of trade, then, because the
    movement is not general, there will accrue, to those receiving
    more money, the means to buy more of real wages. And, as in
    practice, changes in prices which arise from an increased demand
    are partial, and not general, it often happens that high prices
    produce high real wages (not general high wages) in some, not in
    all employments. (For a further study of this relation between
    prices and wages the reader is advised to recall this discussion
    in connection with that in a later part of the volume, Book III,
    Chaps. XX and XXI.)


3. Another opinion often maintained is, that wages (meaning of course
money wages) vary with the price of food; rising when it rises, and
falling when it falls. This opinion is, I conceive, only partially true;
and, in so far as true, in no way affects the dependence of wages on the
proportion between capital and labor: since the price of food, when it
affects wages at all, affects them through that law. Dear or cheap food
caused by variety of seasons does not affect wages (unless they are
artificially adjusted to it by law or charity): or rather, it has some
tendency to affect them in the contrary way to that supposed; since in
times of scarcity people generally compete more violently for employment,
and lower the labor market against themselves. But dearness or cheapness
of food, when of a permanent character, and capable of being calculated on
beforehand, may affect wages. (1.) In the first place, if the laborers
have, as is often the case, no more than enough to keep them in working
condition and enable them barely to support the ordinary number of
children, it follows that, if food grows permanently dearer without a rise
of wages, a greater number of the children will prematurely die; and thus
wages will ultimately be higher, but only because the number of people
will be smaller, than if food had remained cheap. (2.) But, secondly, even
though wages were high enough to admit of food’s becoming more costly
without depriving the laborers and their families of necessaries; though
they could bear, physically speaking, to be worse off, perhaps they would
not consent to be so. They might have habits of comfort which were to them
as necessaries, and sooner than forego which, they would put an additional
restraint on their power of multiplication; so that wages would rise, not
by increase of deaths but by diminution of births. In these cases, then,
wages do adapt themselves to the price of food, though after an interval
of almost a generation.(170) If wages were previously so high that they
could bear reduction, to which the obstacle was a high standard of comfort
habitual among the laborers, a rise of the price of food, or any other
disadvantageous change in their circumstances, may operate in two ways:
(_a_) it may correct itself by a rise of wages, brought about through a
gradual effect on the prudential check to population; or (_b_) it may
permanently lower the standard of living of the class, in case their
previous habits in respect of population prove stronger than their
previous habits in respect of comfort. In that case the injury done to
them will be permanent, and their deteriorated condition will become a new
minimum, tending to perpetuate itself as the more ample minimum did
before. It is to be feared that, of the two modes in which the cause may
operate, the last (_b_) is the most frequent, or at all events
sufficiently so to render all propositions, ascribing a self-repairing
quality to the calamities which befall the laboring-classes, practically
of no validity.

The converse case occurs when, by improvements in agriculture, the repeal
of corn laws, or other such causes, the necessaries of the laborers are
cheapened, and they are enabled with the same [money] wages to command
greater comforts than before. Wages will not fall immediately: it is even
possible that they may rise; but they will fall at last, so as to leave
the laborers no better off than before, unless during this interval of
prosperity the standard of comfort regarded as indispensable by the class
is permanently raised. Unfortunately this salutary effect is by no means
to be counted upon: it is a much more difficult thing to raise, than to
lower, the scale of living which the laborers will consider as more
indispensable than marrying and having a family. According to all
experience, a great increase invariably takes place in the number of
marriages in seasons of cheap food and full employment.


    This is to be seen by some brief statistics of marriages in
    Vermont and Massachusetts.

    Year.   Vermont   Massachusetts
    1860      2,179          12,404
    1861      2,188          10,972
    1862      1,962          11,014
    1863      2,007          10,873
    1864      1,804          12,513
    1865      2,569          13,052
    1866      3,001          14,428
    1867      2,857          14,451

    In Vermont, while the average number of marriages was reached in
    1860 and 1861, it fell off on the breaking out of the war; rose in
    1863, under the fair progress of the Northern arms; again fell off
    in 1864, during the period of discouragement; and since 1865 has
    kept a steadily higher average. In manufacturing Massachusetts the
    number fell earlier than in agricultural Vermont, at the beginning
    of the difficulties.

    1856, July to Jan.   6,418
    1857, Jan. to July   5,803
    1857, July to Jan.   5,936
    1858, Jan. to July   4,917
    1858, July to Jan.   5,610

    The effects of the financial panic of 1857, in Massachusetts, show
    a similar movement in the number of marriages. The crisis came in
    October, 1857. In the three months following that date there were
    400 less marriages.


To produce permanent advantage, the temporary cause operating upon them
must be sufficient to make a great change in their condition—a change such
as will be felt for many years, notwithstanding any stimulus which it may
give during one generation to the increase of people. When, indeed, the
improvement is of this signal character, and a generation grows up which
has always been used to an improved scale of comfort, the habits of this
new generation in respect to population become formed upon a higher
minimum, and the improvement in their condition becomes permanent.



§ 4. Certain rare Circumstances excepted, High Wages imply Restraints on
Population.


Wages depend, then, on the proportion between the number of the laboring
population and the capital or other funds devoted to the purchase of
labor; we will say, for shortness, the capital. If wages are higher at one
time or place than at another, if the subsistence and comfort of the class
of hired laborers are more ample, it is for no other reason than because
capital bears a greater proportion to population. It is not the absolute
amount of accumulation or of production that is of importance to the
laboring-class; it is not the amount even of the funds destined for
distribution among the laborers; it is the proportion between those funds
and the numbers among whom they are shared. The condition of the class can
be bettered in no other way than by altering that proportion to their
advantage: and every scheme for their benefit which does not proceed on
this as its foundation is, for all permanent purposes, a delusion.

In countries like North America and the Australian colonies, where the
knowledge and arts of civilized life and a high effective desire of
accumulation coexist with a boundless extent of unoccupied land, the
growth of capital easily keeps pace with the utmost possible increase of
population, and is chiefly retarded by the impracticability of obtaining
laborers enough. All, therefore, who can possibly be born can find
employment without overstocking the market: every laboring family enjoys
in abundance the necessaries, many of the comforts, and some of the
luxuries of life; and, unless in case of individual misconduct, or actual
inability to work, poverty does not, and dependence need not, exist. [In
England] so gigantic has been the progress of the cotton manufacture since
the inventions of Watt and Arkwright, that the capital engaged in it has
probably quadrupled in the time which population requires for doubling.
While, therefore, it has attracted from other employments nearly all the
hands which geographical circumstances and the habits or inclinations of
the people rendered available; and while the demand it created for infant
labor has enlisted the immediate pecuniary interest of the operatives in
favor of promoting, instead of restraining, the increase of population;
nevertheless wages in the great seats of the manufacture are still so high
that the collective earnings of a family amount, on an average of years,
to a very satisfactory sum; and there is as yet no sign of decrease, while
the effect has also been felt in raising the general standard of
agricultural wages in the counties adjoining.

But those circumstances of a country, or of an occupation, in which
population can with impunity increase at its utmost rate, are rare and
transitory. Very few are the countries presenting the needful union of
conditions. Either the industrial arts are backward and stationary, and
capital therefore increases slowly, or, the effective desire of
accumulation being low, the increase soon reaches its limit; or, even
though both these elements are at their highest known degree, the increase
of capital is checked, because there is not fresh land to be resorted to
of as good quality as that already occupied. Though capital should for a
time double itself simultaneously with population, if all this capital and
population are to find employment on the same land, they can not, without
an unexampled succession of agricultural inventions, continue doubling the
produce; therefore, if wages do not fall, profits must; and, when profits
fall, increase of capital is slackened.

Except, therefore, in the very peculiar cases which I have just noticed,
of which the only one of any practical importance is that of a new colony,
or a country in circumstances equivalent to it, it is impossible that
population should increase at its utmost rate without lowering wages. In
no old country does population increase at anything like its utmost rate;
in most, at a very moderate rate: in some countries, not at all. These
facts are only to be accounted for in two ways. Either the whole number of
births which nature admits of, and which happen in some circumstances, do
not take place; or, if they do, a large proportion of those who are born,
die. The retardation of increase results either from mortality or
prudence; from Mr. Malthus’s positive, or from his preventive check: and
one or the other of these must and does exist, and very powerfully too, in
all old societies. Wherever population is not kept down by the prudence
either of individuals or of the state, it is kept down by starvation or
disease.



§ 5. Due Restriction of Population the only Safeguard of a Laboring-Class.


Where a laboring-class who have no property but their daily wages, and no
hope of acquiring it, refrain from over-rapid multiplication, the cause, I
believe, has always hitherto been, either actual legal restraint, or a
custom of some sort which, without intention on their part, insensibly
molds their conduct, or affords immediate inducements not to marry. It is
not generally known in how many countries of Europe direct legal obstacles
are opposed to improvident marriages.

Where there is no general law restrictive of marriage, there are often
customs equivalent to it. When the guilds or trade corporations of the
middle ages were in vigor, their by-laws or regulations were conceived
with a very vigilant eye to the advantage which the trade derived from
limiting competition; and they made it very effectually the interest of
artisans not to marry until after passing through the two stages of
apprentice and journeyman, and attaining the rank of master.

Unhappily, sentimentality rather than common sense usually presides over
the discussions of these subjects. Discussions on the condition of the
laborers, lamentations over its wretchedness, denunciations of all who are
supposed to be indifferent to it, projects of one kind or another for
improving it, were in no country and in no time of the world so rife as in
the present generation; but there is a tacit agreement to ignore totally
the law of wages, or to dismiss it in a parenthesis, with such terms as
“hard-hearted Malthusianism”; as if it were not a thousand times more
hard-hearted to tell human beings that they may, than that they may not,
call into existence swarms of creatures who are sure to be miserable, and
most likely to be depraved!

I ask, then, is it true or not, that if their numbers were fewer they
would obtain higher wages? This is the question, and no other: and it is
idle to divert attention from it, by attacking any incidental position of
Malthus or some other writer, and pretending that to refute that is to
disprove the principle of population. Some, for instance, have achieved an
easy victory over a passing remark of Mr. Malthus, hazarded chiefly by way
of illustration, that the increase of food may perhaps be assumed to take
place in an arithmetical ratio, while population increases in a
geometrical: when every candid reader knows that Mr. Malthus laid no
stress on this unlucky attempt to give numerical precision to things which
do not admit of it, and every person capable of reasoning must see that it
is wholly superfluous to his argument. Others have attached immense
importance to a correction which more recent political economists have
made in the mere language of the earlier followers of Mr. Malthus. Several
writers had said that it is the tendency of population to _increase
faster_ than the means of subsistence. The assertion was true in the sense
in which they meant it, namely, that population would in most
circumstances increase faster than the means of subsistence, if it were
not checked either by mortality or by prudence. But inasmuch as these
checks act with unequal force at different times and places, it was
possible to interpret the language of these writers as if they had meant
that population is usually gaining ground upon subsistence, and the
poverty of the people becoming greater. Under this interpretation of their
meaning, it was urged that the reverse is the truth: that as civilization
advances, the prudential check tends to become stronger, and population to
slacken its rate of increase, relatively to subsistence; and that it is an
error to maintain that population, in any improving community, tends to
increase faster than, or even so fast as, subsistence.(171) The word
tendency(172) is here used in a totally different sense from that of the
writers who affirmed the proposition; but waiving the verbal question, is
it not allowed, on both sides, that in old countries population presses
too closely upon the means of subsistence?




Chapter III. Of Remedies For Low Wages.



§ 1. A Legal or Customary Minimum of Wages, with a Guarantee of
Employment.


The simplest expedient which can be imagined for keeping the wages of
labor up to the desirable point would be to fix them by law; and this is
virtually the object aimed at in a variety of plans which have at
different times been, or still are, current, for remodeling the relation
between laborers and employers. No one, probably, ever suggested that
wages should be absolutely fixed, since the interests of all concerned
often require that they should be variable; but some have proposed to fix
a minimum of wages, leaving the variations above that point to be adjusted
by competition. Another plan, which has found many advocates among the
leaders of the operatives, is that councils should be formed, which in
England have been called local boards of trade, in France “conseils de
prud’hommes,” and other names; consisting of delegates from the
work-people and from the employers, who, meeting in conference, should
agree upon a rate of wages, and promulgate it from authority, to be
binding generally on employers and workmen; the ground of decision being,
not the state of the labor market, but natural equity; to provide that the
workmen shall have _reasonable_ wages, and the capitalist reasonable
profits.


    The one expedient most suggested by politicians and
    labor-reformers in the United States is an eight-hour law,
    mandatory upon all employers. It is to be remembered, however,
    that in very many industries piece-work exists, and if a
    diminution of hours is enforced, that will mean a serious
    reduction in the amount of wages which can be possibly earned in a
    day. Even if all industries were alike in the matter of arranging
    their work, this plan means higher wages for the same work, or the
    same wages for less work, and so an increased cost of labor. This
    would, then, take its effect on profits at once; and the effects
    would be probably seen in a withdrawal of capital from many
    industries, where, as now, the profits are very low. It must be
    recalled, however, that in the United States there has been, under
    the influence of natural causes, unaided by legislation, a very
    marked reduction in the hours of labor, accompanied by an increase
    of wages. For example, in 1840, Rhode Island operatives in the
    carding-room of the cotton-mills worked fourteen hours a day for
    $3.28 a week, while in 1884 they work eleven hours and receive
    $5.40 a week. This result is most probably due to the gain arising
    from the invention of labor-saving machinery.


Others again (but these are rather philanthropists interesting themselves
for the laboring-classes, than the laboring people themselves) are shy of
admitting the interference of authority in contracts for labor: they fear
that if law intervened, it would intervene rashly and ignorantly; they are
convinced that two parties, with opposite interests, attempting to adjust
those interests by negotiation through their representatives on principles
of equity, when no rule could be laid down to determine what was
equitable, would merely exasperate their differences instead of healing
them; but what it is useless to attempt by the legal sanction, these
persons desire to compass by the moral. Every employer, they think,
_ought_ to give _sufficient_ wages; and if he does it not willingly,
should be compelled to it by general opinion; the test of sufficient wages
being their own feelings, or what they suppose to be those of the public.
This is, I think, a fair representation of a considerable body of existing
opinion on the subject.

I desire to confine my remarks to the principle involved in all these
suggestions, without taking into account practical difficulties, serious
as these must at once be seen to be. I shall suppose that by one or other
of these contrivances wages could be kept above the point to which they
would be brought by competition. This is as much as to say, above the
highest rate which can be afforded by the existing capital consistently
with employing all the laborers. For it is a mistake to suppose that
competition merely keeps down wages. It is equally the means by which they
are kept up. When there are any laborers unemployed, these, unless
maintained by charity, become competitors for hire, and wages fall; but
when all who were out of work have found employment, wages will not, under
the freest system of competition, fall lower. There are strange notions
afloat concerning the nature of competition. Some people seem to imagine
that its effect is something indefinite; that the competition of sellers
may lower prices, and the competition of laborers may lower wages, down to
zero, or some unassignable minimum. Nothing can be more unfounded. Goods
can only be lowered in price by competition to the point which calls forth
buyers sufficient to take them off; and wages can only be lowered by
competition until room is made to admit all the laborers to a share in the
distribution of the wages-fund. If they fell below this point, a portion
of capital would remain unemployed for want of laborers; a
counter-competition would commence on the side of capitalists, and wages
would rise.


    The assumption in the last chapter in regard to competition and
    custom should be kept in mind in all this reasoning. As a matter
    of fact, there is not that mobility of labor which insures so free
    an operation of competition that equality of payment always
    exists. In reality there is no competition at all between the
    lower grades of laborers and the higher classes of skilled labor.
    Of course, the _tendency_ is as explained by Mr. Mill, and as time
    goes on there is a distinctly greater mobility of labor visible.
    Vast numbers pass from Scandinavia and other countries of Europe
    to the United States, or from England to Australia, urged by the
    desire to go from a community of low to one of higher wages.


Since, therefore, the rate of wages which results from competition
distributes the whole wages-fund among the whole laboring population, if
law or opinion succeeds in fixing wages above this rate, some laborers are
kept out of employment; and as it is not the intention of the
philanthropists that these should starve, they must be provided for by a
forced increase of the wages-fund—by a compulsory saving. It is nothing to
fix a minimum of wages unless there be a provision that work, or wages at
least, be found for all who apply for it. This, accordingly, is always
part of the scheme, and is consistent with the ideas of more people than
would approve of either a legal or a moral minimum of wages. Popular
sentiment looks upon it as the duty of the rich, or of the state, to find
employment for all the poor. If the moral influence of opinion does not
induce the rich to spare from their consumption enough to set all the poor
at work at “reasonable wages,” it is supposed to be incumbent on the state
to lay on taxes for the purpose, either by local rates or votes of public
money. The proportion between labor and the wages-fund would thus be
modified to the advantage of the laborers, not by restriction of
population, but by an increase of capital.



§ 2. —Would Require as a Condition Legal Measures for Repression of
Population.


If this claim on society could be limited to the existing generation; if
nothing more were necessary than a compulsory accumulation, sufficient to
provide permanent employment at ample wages for the existing numbers of
the people; such a proposition would have no more strenuous supporter than
myself. Society mainly consists of those who live by bodily labor; and if
society, that is, if the laborers, lend their physical force to protect
individuals in the enjoyment of superfluities, they are entitled to do so,
and have always done so, with the reservation of a power to tax those
superfluities for purposes of public utility; among which purposes the
subsistence of the people is the foremost. Since no one is responsible for
having been born, no pecuniary sacrifice is too great to be made by those
who have more than enough, for the purpose of securing enough to all
persons already in existence.

But it is another thing altogether when those who have produced and
accumulated are called upon to abstain from consuming until they have
given food and clothing, not only to all who now exist, but to all whom
these or their descendants may think fit to call into existence. Such an
obligation acknowledged and acted upon, would suspend all checks, both
positive and preventive; there would be nothing to hinder population from
starting forward at its rapidest rate; and as the natural increase of
capital would, at the best, not be more rapid than before, taxation, to
make up the growing deficiency, must advance with the same gigantic
strides. But let them work ever so efficiently, the increasing population
could not, as we have so often shown, increase the produce proportionally;
the surplus, after all were fed, would bear a less and less proportion to
the whole produce and to the population: and the increase of people going
on in a constant ratio, while the increase of produce went on in a
diminishing ratio, the surplus would in time be wholly absorbed; taxation
for the support of the poor would engross the whole income of the country;
the payers and the receivers would be melted down into one mass.

It would be possible for the state to guarantee employment at ample wages
to all who are born. But if it does this, it is bound in self-protection,
and for the sake of every purpose for which government exists, to provide
that no person shall be born without its consent. To give profusely to the
people, whether under the name of charity or of employment, without
placing them under such influences that prudential motives shall act
powerfully upon them, is to lavish the means of benefiting mankind without
attaining the object. But remove the regulation of their wages from their
own control; guarantee to them a certain payment, either by law or by the
feeding of the community; and no amount of comfort that you can give them
will make either them or their descendants look to their own
self-restraint as the proper means for preserving them in that state.


    The famous poor-laws of Elizabeth, enacted in 1601, were at first
    intended to relieve the destitute poor, sick, aged, and impotent,
    but in their administration a share was given to all who _begged_
    it. Employers, of course, found it cheaper to hire labor partly
    paid for by the parish, and the independent farm-laborer who would
    not go on the parish found his own wages lowered by this kind of
    competition. This continued a crying evil until it reached the
    proportions described by May: “As the cost of pauperism, thus
    encouraged, was increasing, the poorer rate-payers were themselves
    reduced to poverty. The soil was ill-cultivated by pauper labor,
    and its rental consumed by parish rates. In a period of fifty
    years, the poor-rates were quadrupled, and had reached, in 1833,
    the enormous amount of £8,600,000. In many parishes they were
    approaching the annual value of the land itself.”(173) The old
    poor-laws were repealed, and there went into effect in 1834 the
    workhouse system, which, while not denying subsistence to all
    those born, required that the giving of aid should be made as
    disagreeable as possible, in order to stimulate among the poor a
    feeling of repugnance to all aid from the community. This is also
    the general idea of poor-relief in the United States.

    The cultivation of the principle of self-help in each laborer is
    certainly the right object at which to aim. In the United States
    voluntary charitable organizations have associated together, in
    some cities, in order to scrutinize all cases of poverty through a
    number of visitors in each district, who advise and counsel the
    unfortunate, but never give money. This system has been very
    successful, and, by basing its operations on the principle of
    self-help, has given the best proof of its right to an increasing
    influence.



§ 3. Allowances in Aid of Wages and the Standard of Living.


Next to the attempts to regulate wages, and provide artificially that all
who are willing to work shall receive an adequate price for their labor,
we have to consider another class of popular remedies, which do not
profess to interfere with freedom of contract; which leave wages to be
fixed by the competition of the market, but, when they are considered
insufficient, endeavor by some subsidiary resource to make up to the
laborers for the insufficiency. Of this nature was the allowance system.
The principle of this scheme being avowedly that of adapting the means of
every family to its necessities, it was a natural consequence that more
should be given to the married than to the single, and to those who had
large families than to those who had not: in fact, an allowance was
usually granted for every child. It is obvious that this is merely another
mode of fixing a minimum of wages.

There is a rate of wages, either the lowest on which the people can, or
the lowest on which they will consent, to live. We will suppose this to be
seven shillings a week. Shocked at the wretchedness of this pittance, the
parish authorities humanely make it up to ten. But the laborers are
accustomed to seven, and though they would gladly have more, will live on
that (as the fact proves) rather than restrain the instinct of
multiplication. Their habits will not be altered for the better by giving
them parish pay. Receiving three shillings from the parish, they will be
as well off as before, though they should increase sufficiently to bring
down wages to four shillings. They will accordingly people down to that
point; or, perhaps, without waiting for an increase of numbers, there are
unemployed laborers enough in the workhouse to produce the effect at once.
It is well known that the allowance system did practically operate in the
mode described, and that under its influence wages sank to a lower rate
than had been known in England before.


    The operation of a low standard upon the wages of those in the
    community who have a higher one, has been seen in the United
    States to a certain extent by the landing on our shores of Chinese
    laborers, who maintain a decidedly lower standard of living than
    either their American or Irish competitors. If they come in such
    numbers as to retain their lower standard by forming a group by
    themselves, and are thereby not assimilated into the body of
    laborers who have a higher standard of comfort, they can, to the
    extent of their ability to do work, drive other laborers out of
    employment. This, moreover, is exactly what was done by the Irish,
    who drove Americans out of the mills of New England, and who are
    now being driven out, probably, by the French Canadians, with a
    standard lower than the Irish. The Chinese come here now without
    their families, as may be seen by the accompanying diagram, in
    which the shaded side represents the males on the left, and the
    unshaded the females on the right, of the perpendicular line.

    Decade.   Males.   Females.
    1              6          4
    2            106         12
    3            351         37
    4            283         15
    5            139          3
    6             32          1
    7             10          0
    8              1          0
    9              0          0

    The horizontal lines show the ages, the largest number being about
    thirty years of age. It will be noted how many come in the prime
    of life, and how few children and females there are.

    It need hardly be said that the economic side of a question is
    here discussed, which requires for its solution many ethical and
    political considerations besides.



§ 4. Grounds for Expecting Improvement in Public Opinion on the Subject of
Population.


By what means, then, is poverty to be contended against? How is the evil
of low wages to be remedied? If the expedients usually recommended for the
purpose are not adapted to it, can no others be thought of? Is the problem
incapable of solution? Can political economy do nothing, but only object
to everything, and demonstrate that nothing can be done? Those who think
it hopeless that the laboring-classes should be induced to practice a
sufficient degree of prudence in regard to the increase of their families,
because they have hitherto stopped short of that point, show an inability
to estimate the ordinary principles of human action. Nothing more would
probably be necessary to secure that result, than an opinion generally
diffused that it was desirable.

But let us try to imagine what would happen if the idea became general
among the laboring-class that the competition of too great numbers was the
principal cause of their poverty. We are often told that the most thorough
perception of the dependence of wages on population will not influence the
conduct of a laboring-man, because it is not the children he himself can
have that will produce any effect in generally depressing the labor
market. True, and it is also true that one soldier’s running away will not
lose the battle; accordingly, it is not that consideration which keeps
each soldier in his rank: it is the disgrace which naturally and
inevitably attends on conduct by any one individual which, if pursued by a
majority, everybody can see would be fatal. Men are seldom found to brave
the general opinion of their class, unless supported either by some
principle higher than regard for opinion, or by some strong body of
opinion elsewhere.

If the opinion were once generally established among the laboring-class
that their welfare required a due regulation of the numbers of families,
the respectable and well-conducted of the body would conform to the
prescription, and only those would exempt themselves from it who were in
the habit of making light of social obligations generally; and there would
be then an evident justification for converting the moral obligation
against bringing children into the world, who are a burden to the
community, into a legal one; just as in many other cases of the progress
of opinion, the law ends by enforcing against recalcitrant minorities
obligations which, to be useful, must be general, and which, from a sense
of their utility, a large majority have voluntarily consented to take upon
themselves.

The dependence of wages on the number of the competitors for employment is
so far from hard of comprehension, or unintelligible to the
laboring-classes, that by great bodies of them it is already recognized
and habitually acted on. It is familiar to all trades-unions: every
successful combination to keep up wages owes its success to contrivances
for restricting the number of competitors; all skilled trades are anxious
to keep down their own numbers, and many impose, or endeavor to impose, as
a condition upon employers, that they shall not take more than a
prescribed number of apprentices. There is, of course, a great difference
between limiting their numbers by excluding other people, and doing the
same thing by a restraint imposed on themselves; but the one as much as
the other shows a clear perception of the relation between their numbers
and their remuneration. The principle is understood in its application to
any one employment, but not to the general mass of employment. For this
there are several reasons: first, the operation of causes is more easily
and distinctly seen in the more circumscribed field; secondly, skilled
artisans are a more intelligent class than ordinary manual laborers; and
the habit of concert, and of passing in review their general condition as
a trade, keeps up a better understanding of their collective interests;
thirdly and lastly, they are the most provident, because they are the best
off, and have the most to preserve.



§ 5. Twofold means of Elevating the Habits of the Laboring-People; by
Education, and by Foreign and Home Colonization.


For the purpose, therefore, of altering the habits of the laboring people,
there is need of a twofold action, directed simultaneously upon their
intelligence and their poverty. An effective national education of the
children of the laboring-class is the first thing needful; and,
coincidently with this, a system of measures which shall (as the
Revolution did in France) extinguish extreme poverty for one whole
generation. Without entering into disputable points, it may be asserted
without scruple that the aim of all intellectual training for the mass of
the people should be to cultivate common sense; to qualify them for
forming a sound practical judgment of the circumstances by which they are
surrounded. [But] education is not compatible with extreme poverty. It is
impossible effectually to teach an indigent population. Toward effecting
this object there are two resources available, without wrong to any one,
without any of the liabilities of mischief attendant on voluntary or legal
charity, and not only without weakening, but on the contrary
strengthening, every incentive to industry, and every motive to
forethought.

The first is a great national measure of colonization. I mean, a grant of
public money, sufficient to remove at once, and establish in the colonies,
a considerable fraction of the youthful agricultural population. It has
been shown by others that colonization on an adequate scale might be so
conducted as to cost the country nothing, or nothing that would not be
certainly repaid; and that the funds required, even by way of advance,
would not be drawn from the capital employed in maintaining labor, but
from that surplus which can not find employment at such profit as
constitutes an adequate remuneration for the abstinence of the possessor,
and which is therefore sent abroad for investment, or wasted at home in
reckless speculations.

The second resource would be to devote all common land, hereafter brought
into cultivation, to raising a class of small proprietors. What I would
propose is, that common land should be divided into sections of five acres
or thereabout, to be conferred in absolute property on individuals of the
laboring-class who would reclaim and bring them into cultivation by their
own labor.


    This suggestion works to the same purpose as the proposal that our
    Government should retain its public lands and aid in the formation
    of a great number of small farmers, rather than, by huge grants,
    to foster large holdings in the Western States and
    Territories.(174)


The preference should be given to such laborers, and there are many of
them, as had saved enough to maintain them until their first crop was got
in, or whose character was such as to induce some responsible person to
advance to them the requisite amount on their personal security. The
tools, the manure, and in some cases the subsistence also, might be
supplied by the parish, or by the state; interest for the advance, at the
rate yielded by the public funds, being laid on as a perpetual quitrent,
with power to the peasant to redeem it at any time for a moderate number
of years’ purchase. These little landed estates might, if it were thought
necessary, be indivisible by law; though, if the plan worked in the manner
designed, I should not apprehend any objectionable degree of subdivision.
In case of intestacy, and in default of amicable arrangement among the
heirs, they might be bought by government at their value, and re-granted
to some other laborer who could give security for the price. The desire to
possess one of these small properties would probably become, as on the
Continent, an inducement to prudence and economy pervading the whole
laboring population; and that great desideratum among a people of hired
laborers would be provided, an intermediate class between them and their
employers; affording them the double advantage of an object for their
hopes, and, as there would be good reason to anticipate, an example for
their imitation.

It would, however, be of little avail that either or both of these
measures of relief should be adopted, unless on such a scale as would
enable the whole body of hired laborers remaining on the soil to obtain
not merely employment, but a large addition to the present wages—such an
addition as would enable them to live and bring up their children in a
degree of comfort and independence to which they have hitherto been
strangers.




Chapter IV. Of The Differences Of Wages In Different Employments.



§ 1. Differences of Wages Arising from Different Degrees of Attractiveness
in Different Employments.


In treating of wages, we have hitherto confined ourselves to the causes
which operate on them generally, and _en masse_; the laws which govern the
remuneration of ordinary or average labor, without reference to the
existence of different kinds of work which are habitually paid at
different rates, depending in some degree on different laws. We will now
take into consideration these differences, and examine in what manner they
affect or are affected by the conclusions already established.

The differences, says [Adam Smith], arise partly “from certain
circumstances in the employments themselves, which either really, or at
least in the imaginations of men, make up for a small pecuniary gain in
some, and counterbalance a great one in others.” These circumstances he
considers to be: “First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the
employments themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the
difficulty and expense of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or
inconstancy of employment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust
which must be reposed in those who exercise them; and, fifthly, the
probability or improbability of success in them.”

(1.) “The wages of labor vary with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness
or dirtiness, the honorableness or dishonorableness of the employment. A
journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns so much in twelve
hours as a collier, who is only a laborer, does in eight. His work is not
quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is carried on in daylight and above
ground. Honor makes a great part of the reward of all honorable
professions. In point of pecuniary gain, all things considered,” their
recompense is, in his opinion, below the average. “Disgrace has the
contrary effect. The trade of a butcher is a brutal and an odious
business; but it is in most places more profitable than the greater part
