earth’s surface, where it manifested itself only as a tendency of all
bodies toward the earth, and might, therefore, be ascribed to a peculiar
property of the earth itself: one of the circumstances, namely, the
proximity of the earth, had not been eliminated. To eliminate this
circumstance required a fresh set of instances in other parts of the
universe: these we could not ourselves create; and though nature had
created them for us, we were placed in very unfavorable circumstances for
observing them. To make these observations, fell naturally to the lot of a
different set of persons from those who studied terrestrial phenomena; and
had, indeed, been a matter of great interest at a time when the idea of
explaining celestial facts by terrestrial laws was looked upon as the
confounding of an indefeasible distinction. When, however, the celestial
motions were accurately ascertained, and the deductive processes
performed, from which it appeared that their laws and those of terrestrial
gravity corresponded, those celestial observations became a set of
instances which exactly eliminated the circumstance of proximity to the
earth; and proved that in the original case, that of terrestrial objects,
it was not the earth, as such, that caused the motion or the pressure, but
the circumstance common to that case with the celestial instances, namely,
the presence of some great body within certain limits of distance.

§ 6. There are, then, three modes of explaining laws of causation, or,
which is the same thing, resolving them into other laws. First, when the
law of an effect of combined causes is resolved into the separate laws of
the causes, together with the fact of their combination. Secondly, when
the law which connects any two links, not proximate, in a chain of
causation, is resolved into the laws which connect each with the
intermediate links. Both of these are cases of resolving one law into two
or more; in the third, two or more are resolved into one: when, after the
law has been shown to hold good in several different classes of cases, we
decide that what is true in each of these classes of cases, is true under
some more general supposition, consisting of what all those classes of
cases have in common. We may here remark that this last operation involves
none of the uncertainties attendant on induction by the Method of
Agreement, since we need not suppose the result to be extended by way of
inference to any new class of cases different from those by the comparison
of which it was engendered.

In all these three processes, laws are, as we have seen, resolved into
laws more general than themselves; laws extending to all the cases which
the former extended to, and others besides. In the first two modes they
are also resolved into laws more certain, in other words, more universally
true than themselves; they are, in fact, proved not to be themselves laws
of nature, the character of which is to be universally true, but _results_
of laws of nature, which may be only true conditionally, and for the most
part. No difference of this sort exists in the third case; since here the
partial laws are, in fact, the very same law as the general one, and any
exception to them would be an exception to it too.

By all the three processes, the range of deductive science is extended;
since the laws, thus resolved, may be thenceforth deduced demonstratively
from the laws into which they are resolved. As already remarked, the same
deductive process which proves a law or fact of causation if unknown,
serves to explain it when known.

The word explanation is here used in its philosophical sense. What is
called explaining one law of nature by another, is but substituting one
mystery for another; and does nothing to render the general course of
nature other than mysterious: we can no more assign a _why_ for the more
extensive laws than for the partial ones. The explanation may substitute a
mystery which has become familiar, and has grown to _seem_ not mysterious,
for one which is still strange. And this is the meaning of explanation, in
common parlance. But the process with which we are here concerned often
does the very contrary: it resolves a phenomenon with which we are
familiar into one of which we previously knew little or nothing; as when
the common fact of the fall of heavy bodies was resolved into the tendency
of all particles of matter toward one another. It must be kept constantly
in view, therefore, that in science, those who speak of explaining any
phenomenon mean (or should mean) pointing out not some more familiar, but
merely some more general, phenomenon, of which it is a partial
exemplification; or some laws of causation which produce it by their joint
or successive action, and from which, therefore, its conditions may be
determined deductively. Every such operation brings us a step nearer
toward answering the question which was stated in a previous chapter as
comprehending the whole problem of the investigation of nature, viz.: what
are the fewest assumptions, which being granted, the order of nature as it
exists would be the result? What are the fewest, general propositions from
which all the uniformities existing in nature could be deduced?

The laws, thus explained or resolved, are sometimes said to be _accounted
for_; but the expression is incorrect, if taken to mean any thing more
than what has been already stated. In minds not habituated to accurate
thinking, there is often a confused notion that the general laws are the
_causes_ of the partial ones; that the law of general gravitation, for
example, causes the phenomenon of the fall of bodies to the earth. But to
assert this would be a misuse of the word cause: terrestrial gravity is
not an effect of general gravitation, but a _case_ of it; that is, one
kind of the particular instances in which that general law obtains. To
account for a law of nature means, and can mean, nothing more than to
assign other laws more general, together with collocations, which laws and
collocations being supposed, the partial law follows without any
additional supposition.




                              Chapter XIII.


Miscellaneous Examples Of The Explanation Of Laws Of Nature.


§ 1. The most striking example which the history of science presents, of
the explanation of laws of causation and other uniformities of sequence
among special phenomena, by resolving them into laws of greater simplicity
and generality, is the great Newtonian generalization; respecting which
typical instance, so much having already been said, it is sufficient to
call attention to the great number and variety of the special observed
uniformities, which are in this case accounted for, either as particular
cases, or as consequences, of one very simple law of universal nature. The
simple fact of a tendency of every particle of matter toward every other
particle, varying inversely as the square of the distance, explains the
fall of bodies to the earth, the revolutions of the planets and
satellites, the motions (so far as known) of comets, and all the various
regularities which have been observed in these special phenomena; such as
the elliptical orbits, and the variations from exact ellipses; the
relation between the solar distances of the planets and the duration of
their revolutions; the precession of the equinoxes; the tides, and a vast
number of minor astronomical truths.

Mention has also been made in the preceding chapter of the explanation of
the phenomena of magnetism from laws of electricity; the special laws of
magnetic agency having been affiliated by deduction to observed laws of
electric action, in which they have ever since been considered to be
included as special cases. An example not so complete in itself, but even
more fertile in consequences, having been the starting-point of the really
scientific study of physiology, is the affiliation, commenced by Bichat,
and carried on by subsequent biologists, of the properties of the bodily
organs, to the elementary properties of the tissues into which they are
anatomically decomposed.

Another striking instance is afforded by Dalton’s generalization, commonly
known as the atomic theory. It had been known from the very commencement
of accurate chemical observation, that any two bodies combine chemically
with one another in only a certain number of proportions; but those
proportions were in each case expressed by a percentage—so many parts (by
weight) of each ingredient, in 100 of the compound (say 35 and a fraction
of one element, 64 and a fraction of the other); in which mode of
statement no relation was perceived between the proportion in which a
given element combines with one substance, and that in which it combines
with others. The great step made by Dalton consisted in perceiving that a
unit of weight might be established for each substance, such that by
supposing the substance to enter into all its combinations in the ratio
either of that unit, or of some low multiple of that unit, all the
different proportions, previously expressed by percentages, were found to
result. Thus 1 being assumed as the unit of hydrogen, if 8 were then taken
as that of oxygen, the combination of one unit of hydrogen with one unit
of oxygen would produce the exact proportion of weight between the two
substances which is known to exist in water; the combination of one unit
of hydrogen with two units of oxygen would produce the proportion which
exists in the other compound of the same two elements, called peroxide of
hydrogen; and the combinations of hydrogen and of oxygen with all other
substances, would correspond with the supposition that those elements
enter into combination by single units, or twos, or threes, of the numbers
assigned to them, 1 and 8, and the other substances by ones or twos or
threes of other determinate numbers proper to each. The result is that a
table of the equivalent numbers, or, as they are called, atomic weights,
of all the elementary substances, comprises in itself, and scientifically
explains, all the proportions in which any substance, elementary or
compound, is found capable of entering into chemical combination with any
other substance whatever.

§ 2. Some interesting cases of the explanation of old uniformities by
newly ascertained laws are afforded by the researches of Professor Graham.
That eminent chemist was the first who drew attention to the distinction
which may be made of all substances into two classes, termed by him
crystalloids and colloids; or rather, of all states of matter into the
crystalloid and the colloidal states, for many substances are capable of
existing in either. When in the colloidal state, their sensible properties
are very different from those of the same substance when crystallized, or
when in a state easily susceptible of crystallization. Colloid substances
pass with extreme difficulty and slowness into the crystalline state, and
are extremely inert in all the ordinary chemical relations. Substances in
the colloid state are almost always, when combined with water, more or
less viscous or gelatinous. The most prominent examples of the state are
certain animal and vegetable substances, particularly gelatine, albumen,
starch, the gums, caramel, tannin, and some others. Among substances not
of organic origin, the most notable instances are hydrated silicic acid,
and hydrated alumina, with other metallic peroxides of the aluminous
class.

Now it is found, that while colloidal substances are easily penetrated by
water, and by the solutions of crystalloid substances, they are very
little penetrable by one another: which enabled Professor Graham to
introduce a highly effective process (termed dialysis) for separating the
crystalloid substances contained in any liquid mixture, by passing them
through a thin septum of colloidal matter, which does not suffer any thing
colloidal to pass, or suffers it only in very minute quantity. This
property of colloids enabled Mr. Graham to account for a number of special
results of observation, not previously explained.

For instance, “while soluble crystalloids are always highly sapid, soluble
colloids are singularly insipid,” as might be expected; for, as the
sentient extremities of the nerves of the palate “are probably protected
by a colloidal membrane,” impermeable to other colloids, a colloid, when
tasted, probably never reaches those nerves. Again, “it has been observed
that vegetable gum is not digested in the stomach; the coats of that organ
dialyse the soluble food, absorbing crystalloids, and rejecting all
colloids.” One of the mysterious processes accompanying digestion, the
secretion of free muriatic acid by the coats of the stomach, obtains a
probable hypothetical explanation through the same law. Finally, much
light is thrown upon the observed phenomena of osmose (the passage of
fluids outward and inward through animal membranes) by the fact that the
membranes are colloidal. In consequence, the water and saline solutions
contained in the animal body pass easily and rapidly through the
membranes, while the substances directly applicable to nutrition, which
are mostly colloidal, are detained by them.(154)

The property which salt possesses of preserving animal substances from
putrefaction is resolved by Liebig into two more general laws, the strong
attraction of salt for water, and the necessity of the presence of water
as a condition of putrefaction. The intermediate phenomenon which is
interpolated between the remote cause and the effect, can here be not
merely inferred but seen; for it is a familiar fact, that flesh upon which
salt has been thrown is speedily found swimming in brine.

The second of the two factors (as they may be termed) into which the
preceding law has been resolved, the necessity of water to putrefaction,
itself affords an additional example of the Resolution of Laws. The law
itself is proved by the Method of Difference, since flesh completely dried
and kept in a dry atmosphere does not putrefy; as we see in the case of
dried provisions and human bodies in very dry climates. A deductive
explanation of this same law results from Liebig’s speculations. The
putrefaction of animal and other azotized bodies is a chemical process, by
which they are gradually dissipated in a gaseous form, chiefly in that of
carbonic acid and ammonia; now to convert the carbon of the animal
substance into carbonic acid requires oxygen, and to convert the azote
into ammonia requires hydrogen, which are the elements of water. The
extreme rapidity of the putrefaction of azotized substances, compared with
the gradual decay of non-azotized bodies (such as wood and the like) by
the action of oxygen alone, he explains from the general law that
substances are much more easily decomposed by the action of two different
affinities upon two of their elements than by the action of only one.

§ 3. Among the many important properties of the nervous system which have
either been first discovered or strikingly illustrated by Dr.
Brown-Séquard, I select the reflex influence of the nervous system on
nutrition and secretion. By reflex nervous action is meant, action which
one part of the nervous system exerts over another part, without any
intermediate action on the brain, and consequently without consciousness;
or which, if it does pass through the brain, at least produces its effects
independently of the will. There are many experiments which prove that
irritation of a nerve in one part of the body may in this manner excite
powerful action in another part; for example, food injected into the
stomach through a divided œsophagus, nevertheless produces secretion of
saliva; warm water injected into the bowels, and various other irritations
of the lower intestines, have been found to excite secretion of the
gastric juice, and so forth. The reality of the power being thus proved,
its agency explains a great variety of apparently anomalous phenomena; of
which I select the following from Dr. Brown-Séquard’s _Lectures on the
Nervous System_:

The production of tears by irritation of the eye, or of the mucous
membrane of the nose;

The secretions of the eye and nose increased by exposure of other parts of
the body to cold;

Inflammation of the eye, especially when of traumatic origin, very
frequently excites a similar affection in the other eye, which may be
cured by section of the intervening nerve;

Loss of sight sometimes produced by neuralgia, and has been known to be at
once cured by the extirpation (for instance) of a carious tooth;

Even cataract has been produced in a healthy eye by cataract in the other
eye, or by neuralgia, or by a wound of the frontal nerve;

The well-known phenomenon of a sudden stoppage of the heart’s action, and
consequent death, produced by irritation of some of the nervous
extremities; _e.g._, by drinking very cold water, or by a blow on the
abdomen, or other sudden excitation of the abdominal sympathetic nerve,
though this nerve may be irritated to any extent without stopping the
heart’s action, if a section be made of the communicating nerves;

The extraordinary effects produced on the internal organs by an extensive
burn on the surface of the body, consisting in violent inflammation of the
tissues of the abdomen, chest, or head, which, when death ensues from this
kind of injury, is one of the most frequent causes of it;

Paralysis and anæsthesia of one part of the body from neuralgia in another
part; and muscular atrophy from neuralgia, even when there is no
paralysis;

Tetanus produced by the lesion of a nerve. Dr. Brown-Séquard thinks it
highly probable that hydrophobia is a phenomenon of a similar nature;

Morbid changes in the nutrition of the brain and spinal cord, manifesting
themselves by epilepsy, chorea, hysteria, and other diseases, occasioned
by lesion of some of the nervous extremities in remote places, as by
worms, calculi, tumors, carious bones, and in some cases even by very
slight irritations of the skin.

§ 4. From the foregoing and similar instances, we may see the importance,
when a law of nature previously unknown has been brought to light, or when
new light has been thrown upon a known law by experiment, of examining all
cases which present the conditions necessary for bringing that law into
action; a process fertile in demonstrations of special laws previously
unsuspected, and explanations of others already empirically known.

For instance, Faraday discovered by experiment, that voltaic electricity
could be evolved from a natural magnet, provided a conducting body were
set in motion at right angles to the direction of the magnet; and this he
found to hold not only of small magnets, but of that great magnet, the
earth. The law being thus established experimentally, that electricity is
evolved, by a magnet, and a conductor moving at right angles to the
direction of its poles, we may now look out for fresh instances in which
these conditions meet. Wherever a conductor moves or revolves at right
angles to the direction of the earth’s magnetic poles, there we may expect
an evolution of electricity. In the northern regions, where the polar
direction is nearly perpendicular to the horizon, all horizontal motions
of conductors will produce electricity; horizontal wheels, for example,
made of metal; likewise all running streams will evolve a current of
electricity, which will circulate round them; and the air thus charged
with electricity may be one of the causes of the Aurora Borealis. In the
equatorial regions, on the contrary, upright wheels placed parallel to the
equator will originate a voltaic circuit, and water-falls will naturally
become electric.

For a second example, it has been proved, chiefly by the researches of
Professor Graham, that gases have a strong tendency to permeate animal
membranes, and diffuse themselves through the spaces which such membranes
inclose, notwithstanding the presence of other gases in those spaces.
Proceeding from this general law, and reviewing a variety of cases in
which gases lie contiguous to membranes, we are enabled to demonstrate or
to explain the following more special laws: 1st. The human or animal body,
when surrounded with any gas not already contained within the body,
absorbs it rapidly; such, for instance, as the gases of putrefying
matters: which helps to explain malaria. 2d. The carbonic acid gas of
effervescing drinks, evolved in the stomach, permeates its membranes, and
rapidly spreads through the system. 3d. Alcohol taken into the stomach
passes into vapor, and spreads through the system with great rapidity
(which, combined with the high combustibility of alcohol, or in other
words its ready combination with oxygen, may perhaps help to explain the
bodily warmth immediately consequent on drinking spirituous liquors). 4th.
In any state of the body in which peculiar gases are formed within it,
these will rapidly exhale through all parts of the body; and hence the
rapidity with which, in certain states of disease, the surrounding
atmosphere becomes tainted. 5th. The putrefaction of the interior parts of
a carcass will proceed as rapidly as that of the exterior, from the ready
passage outward of the gaseous products. 6th. The exchange of oxygen and
carbonic acid in the lungs is not prevented, but rather promoted, by the
intervention of the membrane of the lungs and the coats of the
blood-vessels between the blood and the air. It is necessary, however,
that there should be a substance in the blood with which the oxygen of the
air may immediately combine; otherwise, instead of passing into the blood,
it would permeate the whole organism: and it is necessary that the
carbonic acid, as it is formed in the capillaries, should also find a
substance in the blood with which it can combine; otherwise it would leave
the body at all points, instead of being discharged through the lungs.

§ 5. The following is a deduction which confirms, by explaining, the
empirical generalization, that soda powders weaken the human system. These
powders, consisting of a mixture of tartaric acid with bicarbonate of
soda, from which the carbonic acid is set free, must pass into the stomach
as tartrate of soda. Now, neutral tartrates, citrates, and acetates of the
alkalis are found, in their passage through the system, to be changed into
carbonates; and to convert a tartrate into a carbonate requires an
additional quantity of oxygen, the abstraction of which must lessen the
oxygen destined for assimilation with the blood, on the quantity of which
the vigorous action of the human system partly depends.

The instances of new theories agreeing with and explaining old
empiricisms, are innumerable. All the just remarks made by experienced
persons on human character and conduct, are so many special laws, which
the general laws of the human mind explain and resolve. The empirical
generalizations on which the operations of the arts have usually been
founded, are continually justified and confirmed on the one hand, or
corrected and improved on the other, by the discovery of the simpler
scientific laws on which the efficacy of those operations depends. The
effects of the rotation of crops, of the various manures, and other
processes of improved agriculture, have been for the first time resolved
in our own day into known laws of chemical and organic action, by Davy,
Liebig, and others. The processes of the medical art are even now mostly
empirical: their efficacy is concluded, in each instance, from a special
and most precarious experimental generalization: but as science advances
in discovering the simple laws of chemistry and physiology, progress is
made in ascertaining the intermediate links in the series of phenomena,
and the more general laws on which they depend; and thus, while the old
processes are either exploded, or their efficacy, in so far as real,
explained, better processes, founded on the knowledge of proximate causes,
are continually suggested and brought into use.(155) Many even of the
truths of geometry were generalizations from experience before they were
deduced from first principles. The quadrature of the cycloid is said to
have been first effected by measurement, or rather by weighing a cycloidal
card, and comparing its weight with that of a piece of similar card of
known dimensions.

§ 6. To the foregoing examples from physical science, let us add another
from mental. The following is one of the simple laws of mind: Ideas of a
pleasurable or painful character form associations more easily and
strongly than other ideas, that is, they become associated after fewer
repetitions, and the association is more durable. This is an experimental
law, grounded on the Method of Difference. By deduction from this law,
many of the more special laws which experience shows to exist among
particular mental phenomena may be demonstrated and explained: the ease
and rapidity, for instance, with which thoughts connected with our
passions or our more cherished interests are excited, and the firm hold
which the facts relating to them have on our memory; the vivid
recollection we retain of minute circumstances which accompanied any
object or event that deeply interested us, and of the times and places in
which we have been very happy or very miserable; the horror with which we
view the accidental instrument of any occurrence which shocked us, or the
locality where it took place and the pleasure we derive from any memorial
of past enjoyment; all these effects being proportional to the sensibility
of the individual mind, and to the consequent intensity of the pain or
pleasure from which the association originated. It has been suggested by
the able writer of a biographical sketch of Dr. Priestley in a monthly
periodical,(156) that the same elementary law of our mental constitution,
suitably followed out, would explain a variety of mental phenomena
previously inexplicable, and in particular some of the fundamental
diversities of human character and genius. Associations being of two
sorts, either between synchronous, or between successive impressions; and
the influence of the law which renders associations stronger in proportion
to the pleasurable or painful character of the impressions, being felt
with peculiar force in the synchronous class of associations; it is
remarked by the writer referred to, that in minds of strong organic
sensibility synchronous associations will be likely to predominate,
producing a tendency to conceive things in pictures and in the concrete,
richly clothed in attributes and circumstances, a mental habit which is
commonly called Imagination, and is one of the peculiarities of the
painter and the poet; while persons of more moderate susceptibility to
pleasure and pain will have a tendency to associate facts chiefly in the
order of their succession, and such persons, if they possess mental
superiority, will addict themselves to history or science rather than to
creative art. This interesting speculation the author of the present work
has endeavored, on another occasion, to pursue further, and to examine how
far it will avail toward explaining the peculiarities of the poetical
temperament.(157) It is at least an example which may serve, instead of
many others, to show the extensive scope which exists for deductive
investigation in the important and hitherto so imperfect Science of Mind.

§ 7. The copiousness with which the discovery and explanation of special
laws of phenomena by deduction from simpler and more general ones has here
been exemplified, was prompted by a desire to characterize clearly, and
place in its due position of importance, the Deductive Method; which, in
the present state of knowledge, is destined henceforth irrevocably to
predominate in the course of scientific investigation. A revolution is
peaceably and progressively effecting itself in philosophy, the reverse of
that to which Bacon has attached his name. That great man changed the
method of the sciences from deductive to experimental, and it is now
rapidly reverting from experimental to deductive. But the deductions which
Bacon abolished were from premises hastily snatched up, or arbitrarily
assumed. The principles were neither established by legitimate canons of
experimental inquiry, nor the results tested by that indispensable element
of a rational Deductive Method, verification by specific experience.
Between the primitive method of Deduction and that which I have attempted
to characterize, there is all the difference which exists between the
Aristotelian physics and the Newtonian theory of the heavens.

It would, however, be a mistake to expect that those great
generalizations, from which the subordinate truths of the more backward
sciences will probably at some future period be deduced by reasoning (as
the truths of astronomy are deduced from the generalities of the Newtonian
theory), will be found in all, or even in most cases, among truths now
known and admitted. We may rest assured, that many of the most general
laws of nature are as yet entirely unthought of; and that many others,
destined hereafter to assume the same character, are known, if at all,
only as laws or properties of some limited class of phenomena; just as
electricity, now recognized as one of the most universal of natural
agencies, was once known only as a curious property which certain
substances acquired by friction, of first attracting and then repelling
light bodies. If the theories of heat, cohesion, crystallization, and
chemical action are destined, as there can be little doubt that they are,
to become deductive, the truths which will then be regarded as the
_principia_ of those sciences would probably, if now announced, appear
quite as novel(158) as the law of gravitation appeared to the
contemporaries of Newton; possibly even more so, since Newton’s law, after
all, was but an extension of the law of weight—that is, of a
generalization familiar from of old, and which already comprehended a not
inconsiderable body of natural phenomena. The general laws of a similarly
commanding character, which we still look forward to the discovery of, may
not always find so much of their foundations already laid.

These general truths will doubtless make their first appearance in the
character of hypotheses; not proved, nor even admitting of proof, in the
first instance, but assumed as premises for the purpose of deducing from
them the known laws of concrete phenomena. But this, though their initial,
can not be their final state. To entitle an hypothesis to be received as
one of the truths of nature, and not as a mere technical help to the human
faculties, it must be capable of being tested by the canons of legitimate
induction, and must actually have been submitted to that test. When this
shall have been done, and done successfully, premises will have been
obtained from which all the other propositions of the science will
thenceforth be presented as conclusions, and the science will, by means of
a new and unexpected Induction, be rendered Deductive.




                               Chapter XIV.


Of The Limits To The Explanation Of Laws Of Nature; And Of Hypotheses.


§ 1. The preceding considerations have led us to recognize a distinction
between two kinds of laws, or observed uniformities in nature: ultimate
laws, and what may be termed derivative laws. Derivative laws are such as
are deducible from, and may, in any of the modes which we have pointed
out, be resolved into, other and more general ones. Ultimate laws are
those which can not. We are not sure that any of the uniformities with
which we are yet acquainted are ultimate laws; but we know that there must
be ultimate laws; and that every resolution of a derivative law into more
general laws brings us nearer to them.

Since we are continually discovering that uniformities, not previously
known to be other than ultimate, are derivative, and resolvable into more
general laws; since (in other words) we are continually discovering the
explanation of some sequence which was previously known only as a fact; it
becomes an interesting question whether there are any necessary limits to
this philosophical operation, or whether it may proceed until all the
uniform sequences in nature are resolved into some one universal law. For
this seems, at first sight, to be the ultimatum toward which the progress
of induction by the Deductive Method, resting on a basis of observation
and experiment, is tending. Projects of this kind were universal in the
infancy of philosophy; any speculations which held out a less brilliant
prospect being in these early times deemed not worth pursuing. And the
idea receives so much apparent countenance from the nature of the most
remarkable achievements of modern science, that speculators are even now
frequently appearing, who profess either to have solved the problem, or to
suggest modes in which it may one day be solved. Even where pretensions of
this magnitude are not made, the character of the solutions which are
given or sought of particular classes of phenomena, often involves such
conceptions of what constitutes explanation, as would render the notion of
explaining all phenomena whatever by means of some one cause or law,
perfectly admissible.

§ 2. It is, therefore, useful to remark that the ultimate Laws of Nature
can not possibly be less numerous than the distinguishable sensations or
other feelings of our nature; those, I mean, which are distinguishable
from one another in quality, and not merely in quantity or degree. For
example: since there is a phenomenon _sui generis_, called color, which
our consciousness testifies to be not a particular degree of some other
phenomenon, as heat or odor or motion, but intrinsically unlike all
others, it follows that there are ultimate laws of color; that though the
facts of color may admit of explanation, they never can be explained from
laws of heat or odor alone, or of motion alone, but that, however far the
explanation may be carried, there will always remain in it a law of color.
I do not mean that it might not possibly be shown that some other
phenomenon, some chemical or mechanical action, for example, invariably
precedes, and is the cause of, every phenomenon of color. But though this,
if proved, would be an important extension of our knowledge of nature, it
would not explain how or why a motion, or a chemical action, can produce a
sensation of color; and, however diligent might be our scrutiny of the
phenomena, whatever number of hidden links we might detect in the chain of
causation terminating in the color, the last link would still be a law of
color, not a law of motion, nor of any other phenomenon whatever. Nor does
this observation apply only to color, as compared with any other of the
great classes of sensations; it applies to every particular color, as
compared with others. White color can in no manner be explained
exclusively by the laws of the production of red color. In any attempt to
explain it, we can not but introduce, as one element of the explanation,
the proposition that some antecedent or other produces the sensation of
white.

The ideal limit, therefore, of the explanation of natural phenomena
(toward which as toward other ideal limits we are constantly tending,
without the prospect of ever completely attaining it) would be to show
that each distinguishable variety of our sensations, or other states of
consciousness, has only one sort of cause; that, for example, whenever we
perceive a white color, there is some one condition or set of conditions
which is always present, and the presence of which always produces in us
that sensation. As long as there are several known modes of production of
a phenomenon (several different substances, for instance, which have the
property of whiteness, and between which we can not trace any other
resemblance) so long it is not impossible that one of these modes of
production may be resolved into another, or that all of them may be
resolved into some more general mode of production not hitherto
recognized. But when the modes of production are reduced to one, we can
not, in point of simplification, go any further. This one may not, after
all, be the ultimate mode; there may be other links to be discovered
between the supposed cause and the effect; but we can only further resolve
the known law, by introducing some other law hitherto unknown, which will
not diminish the number of ultimate laws.

In what cases, accordingly, has science been most successful in explaining
phenomena, by resolving their complex laws into laws of greater simplicity
and generality? Hitherto chiefly in cases of the propagation of various
phenomena through space; and, first and principally, the most extensive
and important of all facts of that description, mechanical motion. Now
this is exactly what might be expected from the principles here laid down.
Not only is motion one of the most universal of all phenomena, it is also
(as might be expected from that circumstance) one of those which,
apparently at least, are produced in the greatest number of ways; but the
phenomenon itself is always, to our sensations, the same in every respect
but degree. Differences of duration or of velocity, are evidently
differences in degree only; and differences of direction in space, which
alone has any semblance of being a distinction in kind, entirely disappear
(so far as our sensations are concerned) by a change in our own position;
indeed, the very same motion appears to us, according to our position, to
take place in every variety of direction, and motions in every different
direction to take place in the same. And again, motion in a straight line
and in a curve are no otherwise distinct than that the one is motion
continuing in the same direction, the other is motion which at each
instant changes its direction. There is, therefore, according to the
principles I have stated, no absurdity in supposing that all motion may be
produced in one and the same way, by the same kind of cause. Accordingly,
the greatest achievements in physical science have consisted in resolving
one observed law of the production of motion into the laws of other known
modes of production, or the laws of several such modes into one more
general mode; as when the fall of bodies to the earth, and the motions of
the planets, were brought under the one law of the mutual attraction of
all particles of matter; when the motions said to be produced by magnetism
were shown to be produced by electricity; when the motions of fluids in a
lateral direction, or even contrary to the direction of gravity, were
shown to be produced by gravity; and the like. There is an abundance of
distinct causes of motion still unresolved into one another: gravitation,
heat, electricity, chemical action, nervous action, and so forth; but
whether the efforts of the present generation of savants to resolve all
these different modes of production into one are ultimately successful or
not, the attempt so to resolve them is perfectly legitimate. For, though
these various causes produce, in other respects, sensations intrinsically
different, and are not, therefore, capable of being resolved into one
another, yet, in so far as they all produce motion, it is quite possible
that the immediate antecedent of the motion may in all these different
cases be the same; nor is it impossible that these various agencies
themselves may, as the new doctrines assert, all of them have for their
own immediate antecedent modes of molecular motion.

We need not extend our illustration to other cases, as, for instance, to
the propagation of light, sound, heat, electricity, etc., through space,
or any of the other phenomena which have been found susceptible of
explanation by the resolution of their observed laws into more general
laws. Enough has been said to display the difference between the kind of
explanation and resolution of laws which is chimerical, and that of which
the accomplishment is the great aim of science; and to show into what sort
of elements the resolution must be effected, if at all.(159)

§ 3. As, however, there is scarcely any one of the principles of a true
method of philosophizing which does not require to be guarded against
errors on both sides, I must enter a caveat against another
misapprehension, of a kind directly contrary to the preceding. M. Comte,
among other occasions on which he has condemned, with some asperity, any
attempt to explain phenomena which are “evidently primordial” (meaning,
apparently, no more than that every peculiar phenomenon must have at least
one peculiar and therefore inexplicable law), has spoken of the attempt to
furnish any explanation of the color belonging to each substance, “la
couleur élémentaire propre à chaque substance,” as essentially illusory.
“No one,” says he, “in our time attempts to explain the particular
specific gravity of each substance or of each structure. Why should it be
otherwise as to the specific color, the notion of which is undoubtedly no
less primordial?”(160)

Now although, as he elsewhere observes, a color must always remain a
different thing from a weight or a sound, varieties of color might
nevertheless follow, or correspond to, given varieties of weight, or
sound, or some other phenomenon as different as these are from color
itself. It is one question what a thing is, and another what it depends
on; and though to ascertain the conditions of an elementary phenomenon is
not to obtain any new insight into the nature of the phenomenon itself,
that is no reason against attempting to discover the conditions. The
interdict against endeavoring to reduce distinctions of color to any
common principle, would have held equally good against a like attempt on
the subject of distinctions of sound; which nevertheless have been found
to be immediately preceded and caused by distinguishable varieties in the
vibrations of elastic bodies; though a sound, no doubt, is quite as
different as a color is from any motion of particles, vibratory or
otherwise. We might add, that, in the case of colors, there are strong
positive indications that they are not ultimate properties of the
different kinds of substances, but depend on conditions capable of being
superinduced upon all substances; since there is no substance which can
not, according to the kind of light thrown upon it, be made to assume
almost any color; and since almost every change in the mode of aggregation
of the particles of the same substance is attended with alterations in its
color, and in its optical properties generally.

The really weak point in the attempts which have been made to account for
colors by the vibrations of a fluid, is not that the attempt itself is
unphilosophical, but that the existence of the fluid, and the fact of its
vibratory motion, are not proved, but are assumed, on no other ground than
the facility they are supposed to afford of explaining the phenomena. And
this consideration leads to the important question of the proper use of
scientific hypotheses, the connection of which with the subject of the
explanation of the phenomena of nature, and of the necessary limits to
that explanation, need not be pointed out.

§ 4. An hypothesis is any supposition which we make (either without actual
evidence, or on evidence avowedly insufficient) in order to endeavor to
deduce from it conclusions in accordance with facts which are known to be
real; under the idea that if the conclusions to which the hypothesis leads
are known truths, the hypothesis itself either must be, or at least is
likely to be, true. If the hypothesis relates to the cause or mode of
production of a phenomenon, it will serve, if admitted, to explain such
facts as are found capable of being deduced from it. And this explanation
is the purpose of many, if not most hypotheses. Since explaining, in the
scientific sense, means resolving a uniformity which is not a law of
causation, into the laws of causation from which it results, or a complex
law of causation into simpler and more general ones from which it is
capable of being deductively inferred, if there do not exist any known
laws which fulfill this requirement, we may feign or imagine some which
would fulfill it; and this is making an hypothesis.

An hypothesis being a mere supposition, there are no other limits to
hypotheses than those of the human imagination; we may, if we please,
imagine, by way of accounting for an effect, some cause of a kind utterly
unknown, and acting according to a law altogether fictitious. But as
hypotheses of this sort would not have any of the plausibility belonging
to those which ally themselves by analogy with known laws of nature, and
besides would not supply the want which arbitrary hypotheses are generally
invented to satisfy, by enabling the imagination to represent to itself an
obscure phenomenon in a familiar light, there is probably no hypothesis in
the history of science in which both the agent itself and the law of its
operation were fictitious. Either the phenomenon assigned as the cause is
real, but the law according to which it acts merely supposed; or the cause
is fictitious, but is supposed to produce its effects according to laws
similar to those of some known class of phenomena. An instance of the
first kind is afforded by the different suppositions made respecting the
law of the planetary central force, anterior to the discovery of the true
law, that the force varies as the inverse square of the distance; which
also suggested itself to Newton, in the first instance, as an hypothesis,
and was verified by proving that it led deductively to Kepler’s laws.
Hypotheses of the second kind are such as the vortices of Descartes, which
were fictitious, but were supposed to obey the known laws of rotatory
motion; or the two rival hypotheses respecting the nature of light, the
one ascribing the phenomena to a fluid emitted from all luminous bodies,
the other (now generally received) attributing them to vibratory motions
among the particles of an ether pervading all space. Of the existence of
either fluid there is no evidence, save the explanation they are
calculated to afford of some of the phenomena; but they are supposed to
produce their effects according to known laws: the ordinary laws of
continued locomotion in the one case, and in the other those of the
propagation of undulatory movements among the particles of an elastic
fluid.

According to the foregoing remarks, hypotheses are invented to enable the
Deductive Method to be earlier applied to phenomena. But(161) in order to
discover the cause of any phenomenon by the Deductive Method, the process
must consist of three parts: induction, ratiocination, and verification.
Induction (the place of which, however, may be supplied by a prior
deduction), to ascertain the laws of the causes; ratiocination, to compute
from those laws how the causes will operate in the particular combination
known to exist in the case in hand; verification, by comparing this
calculated effect with the actual phenomenon. No one of these three parts
of the process can be dispensed with. In the deduction which proves the
identity of gravity with the central force of the solar system, all the
three are found. First, it is proved from the moon’s motions, that the
earth attracts her with a force varying as the inverse square of the
distance. This (though partly dependent on prior deductions) corresponds
to the first, or purely inductive, step: the ascertainment of the law of
the cause. Secondly, from this law, and from the knowledge previously
obtained of the moon’s mean distance from the earth, and of the actual
amount of her deflection from the tangent, it is ascertained with what
rapidity the earth’s attraction would cause the moon to fall, if she were
no further off, and no more acted upon by extraneous forces, than
terrestrial bodies are: that is the second step, the ratiocination.
Finally, this calculated velocity being compared with the observed
velocity with which all heavy bodies fall, by mere gravity, toward the
surface of the earth (sixteen feet in the first second, forty-eight in the
second, and so forth, in the ratio of the odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, etc.), the
two quantities are found to agree. The order in which the steps are here
presented was not that of their discovery; but it is their correct logical
order, as portions of the proof that the same attraction of the earth
which causes the moon’s motion causes also the fall of heavy bodies to the
earth: a proof which is thus complete in all its parts.

Now, the Hypothetical Method suppresses the first of the three steps, the
induction to ascertain the law; and contents itself with the other two
operations, ratiocination and verification; the law which is reasoned from
being assumed instead of proved.

This process may evidently be legitimate on one supposition, namely, if
the nature of the case be such that the final step, the verification,
shall amount to, and fulfill the conditions of, a complete induction. We
want to be assured that the law we have hypothetically assumed is a true
one; and its leading deductively to true results will afford this
assurance, provided the case be such that a false law can not lead to a
true result; provided no law, except the very one which we have assumed,
can lead deductively to the same conclusions which that leads to. And this
proviso is often realized. For example, in the very complete specimen of
deduction which we just cited, the original major premise of the
ratiocination, the law of the attractive force, was ascertained in this
mode; by this legitimate employment of the Hypothetical Method. Newton
began by an assumption that the force which at each instant deflects a
planet from its rectilineal course, and makes it describe a curve round
the sun, is a force tending directly toward the sun. He then proved that
if this be so, the planet will describe, as we know by Kepler’s first law
that it does describe, equal areas in equal times; and, lastly, he proved
that if the force acted in any other direction whatever, the planet would
not describe equal areas in equal times. It being thus shown that no other
hypothesis would accord with the facts, the assumption was proved; the
hypothesis became an inductive truth. Not only did Newton ascertain by
this hypothetical process the direction of the deflecting force; he
proceeded in exactly the same manner to ascertain the law of variation of
the quantity of that force. He assumed that the force varied inversely as
the square of the distance; showed that from this assumption the remaining
two of Kepler’s laws might be deduced; and, finally, that any other law of
variation would give results inconsistent with those laws, and
inconsistent, therefore, with the real motions of the planets, of which
Kepler’s laws were known to be a correct expression.

I have said that in this case the verification fulfills the conditions of
an induction; but an induction of what sort? On examination we find that
it conforms to the canon of the Method of Difference. It affords the two
instances, A B C, _a b c_, and B C, _b c_. A represents central force; A B
C, the planets _plus_ a central force; B C, the planets apart from a
central force. The planets with a central force give _a_, areas
proportional to the times; the planets without a central force give _b c_
(a set of motions) without _a_, or with something else instead of _a_.
This is the Method of Difference in all its strictness. It is true, the
two instances which the method requires are obtained in this case, not by
experiment, but by a prior deduction. But that is of no consequence. It is
immaterial what is the nature of the evidence from which we derive the
assurance that A B C will produce _a b c_, and B C only _b c_; it is
enough that we have that assurance. In the present case, a process of
reasoning furnished Newton with the very instances which, if the nature of
the case had admitted of it, he would have sought by experiment.

It is thus perfectly possible, and indeed is a very common occurrence,
that what was an hypothesis at the beginning of the inquiry becomes a
proved law of nature before its close. But in order that this should
happen, we must be able, either by deduction or experiment, to obtain
_both_ the instances which the Method of Difference requires. That we are
able from the hypothesis to deduce the known facts, gives only the
affirmative instance, A B C, _a b c_. It is equally necessary that we
should be able to obtain, as Newton did, the negative instance B C, _b c_;
by showing that no antecedent, except the one assumed in the hypothesis,
would in conjunction with B C produce _a_.

Now it appears to me that this assurance can not be obtained, when the
cause assumed in the hypothesis is an unknown cause imagined solely to
account for _a_. When we are only seeking to determine the precise law of
a cause already ascertained, or to distinguish the particular agent which
is in fact the cause, among several agents of the same kind, one or other
of which it is already known to be, we may then obtain the negative
instance. An inquiry which of the bodies of the solar system causes by its
attraction some particular irregularity in the orbit or periodic time of
some satellite or comet, would be a case of the second description.
Newton’s was a case of the first. If it had not been previously known that
the planets were hindered from moving in straight lines by some force
tending toward the interior of their orbit, though the exact direction was
doubtful; or if it had not been known that the force increased in some
proportion or other as the distance diminished, and diminished as it
increased, Newton’s argument would not have proved his conclusion. These
facts, however, being already certain, the range of admissible
suppositions was limited to the various possible directions of a line, and
the various possible numerical relations between the variations of the
distance, and the variations of the attractive force. Now among these it
was easily shown that different suppositions could not lead to identical
consequences.

Accordingly, Newton could not have performed his second great scientific
operation: that of identifying terrestrial gravity with the central force
of the solar system by the same hypothetical method. When the law of the
moon’s attraction had been proved from the data of the moon itself, then,
on finding the same law to accord with the phenomena of terrestrial
gravity, he was warranted in adopting it as the law of those phenomena
likewise; but it would not have been allowable for him, without any lunar
data, to assume that the moon was attracted toward the earth with a force
as the inverse square of the distance, merely because that ratio would
enable him to account for terrestrial gravity; for it would have been
impossible for him to prove that the observed law of the fall of heavy
bodies to the earth could not result from any force, save one extending to
the moon, and proportional to the inverse square.

It appears, then, to be a condition of the most genuinely scientific
hypothesis, that it be not destined always to remain an hypothesis, but be
of such a nature as to be either proved or disproved by comparison with
observed facts. This condition is fulfilled when the effect is already
known to depend on the very cause supposed, and the hypothesis relates
only to the precise mode of dependence; the law of the variation of the
effect according to the variations in the quantity or in the relations of
the cause. With these may be classed the hypotheses which do not make any
supposition with regard to causation, but only with regard to the law of
correspondence between facts which accompany each other in their
variations, though there may be no relation of cause and effect between
them. Such were the different false hypotheses which Kepler made
respecting the law of the refraction of light. It was known that the
direction of the line of refraction varied with every variation in the
direction of the line of incidence, but it was not known how; that is,
what changes of the one corresponded to the different changes of the
other. In this case any law different from the true one must have led to
false results. And, lastly, we must add to these all hypothetical modes of
merely representing or _describing_ phenomena; such as the hypothesis of
the ancient astronomers that the heavenly bodies moved in circles; the
various hypotheses of eccentrics, deferents, and epicycles, which were
added to that original hypothesis; the nineteen false hypotheses which
Kepler made and abandoned respecting the form of the planetary orbits; and
even the doctrine in which he finally rested, that those orbits are
ellipses, which was but an hypothesis like the rest until verified by
facts.

In all these cases, verification is proof; if the supposition accords with
the phenomena there needs no other evidence of it. But in order that this
may be the case, I conceive it to be necessary, when the hypothesis
relates to causation, that the supposed cause should not only be a real
phenomenon, something actually existing in nature, but should be already
known to exercise, or at least to be capable of exercising, an influence
of some sort over the effect. In any other case, it is no sufficient
evidence of the truth of the hypothesis that we are able to deduce the
real phenomena from it.

Is it, then, never allowable, in a scientific hypothesis, to assume a
cause, but only to ascribe an assumed law to a known cause? I do not
assert this. I only say, that in the latter case alone can the hypothesis
be received as true merely because it explains the phenomena. In the
former case it may be very useful by suggesting a line of investigation
which may possibly terminate in obtaining real proof. But for this
purpose, as is justly remarked by M. Comte, it is indispensable that the
cause suggested by the hypothesis should be in its own nature susceptible
of being proved by other evidence. This seems to be the philosophical
import of Newton’s maxim, (so often cited with approbation by subsequent
writers), that the cause assigned for any phenomenon must not only be such
as if admitted would explain the phenomenon, but must also be a _vera
causa_. What he meant by a _vera causa_ Newton did not indeed very
explicitly define; and Dr. Whewell, who dissents from the propriety of any
such restriction upon the latitude of framing hypotheses, has had little
difficulty in showing(162) that his conception of it was neither precise
nor consistent with itself; accordingly his optical theory was a signal
instance of the violation of his own rule. It is certainly not necessary
that the cause assigned should be a cause already known; otherwise we
should sacrifice our best opportunities of becoming acquainted with new
causes. But what is true in the maxim is, that the cause, though not known
previously, should be capable of being known thereafter; that its
existence should be capable of being detected, and its connection with the
effect ascribed to it should be susceptible of being proved, by
independent evidence. The hypothesis, by suggesting observations and
experiments, puts us on the road to that independent evidence, if it be
really attainable; and till it be attained, the hypothesis ought only to
count for a more or less plausible conjecture.

§ 5. This function, however, of hypotheses, is one which must be reckoned
absolutely indispensable in science. When Newton said, “Hypotheses non
fingo,” he did not mean that he deprived himself of the facilities of
investigation afforded by assuming in the first instance what he hoped
ultimately to be able to prove. Without such assumptions, science could
never have attained its present state; they are necessary steps in the
progress to something more certain; and nearly every thing which is now
theory was once hypothesis. Even in purely experimental science, some
inducement is necessary for trying one experiment rather than another; and
though it is abstractedly possible that all the experiments which have
been tried, might have been produced by the mere desire to ascertain what
would happen in certain circumstances, without any previous conjecture as
to the result; yet, in point of fact, those unobvious, delicate, and often
cumbrous and tedious processes of experiment, which have thrown most light
upon the general constitution of nature, would hardly ever have been
undertaken by the persons or at the time they were, unless it had seemed
to depend on them whether some general doctrine or theory which had been
suggested, but not yet proved, should be admitted or not. If this be true
even of merely experimental inquiry, the conversion of experimental into
deductive truths could still less have been effected without large
temporary assistance from hypotheses. The process of tracing regularity in
any complicated, and at first sight confused, set of appearances, is
necessarily tentative; we begin by making any supposition, even a false
one, to see what consequences will follow from it; and by observing how
these differ from the real phenomena, we learn what corrections to make in
our assumption. The simplest supposition which accords with the more
obvious facts is the best to begin with; because its consequences are the
most easily traced. This rude hypothesis is then rudely corrected, and the
operation repeated; and the comparison of the consequences deducible from
the corrected hypothesis, with the observed facts, suggests still further
correction, until the deductive results are at last made to tally with the
phenomena. “Some fact is as yet little understood, or some law is unknown;
we frame on the subject an hypothesis as accordant as possible with the
whole of the data already possessed; and the science, being thus enabled
to move forward freely, always ends by leading to new consequences capable
of observation, which either confirm or refute, unequivocally, the first
supposition.” Neither induction nor deduction would enable us to
understand even the simplest phenomena, “if we did not often commence by
anticipating on the results; by making a provisional supposition, at first
essentially conjectural, as to some of the very notions which constitute
the final object of the inquiry.”(163) Let any one watch the manner in
which he himself unravels a complicated mass of evidence; let him observe
how, for instance, he elicits the true history of any occurrence from the
involved statements of one or of many witnesses; he will find that he does
not take all the items of evidence into his mind at once, and attempt to
weave them together; he extemporizes, from a few of the particulars, a
first rude theory of the mode in which the facts took place, and then
looks at the other statements one by one, to try whether they can be
reconciled with that provisional theory, or what alterations or additions
it requires to make it square with them. In this way, which has been
justly compared to the Methods of Approximation of mathematicians, we
arrive, by means of hypotheses, at conclusions not hypothetical.(164)

§ 6. It is perfectly consistent with the spirit of the method, to assume
in this provisional manner not only an hypothesis respecting the law of
what we already know to be the cause, but an hypothesis respecting the
cause itself. It is allowable, useful, and often even necessary, to begin
by asking ourselves what cause _may_ have produced the effect, in order
that we may know in what direction to look out for evidence to determine
whether it actually _did_. The vortices of Descartes would have been a
perfectly legitimate hypothesis, if it had been possible, by any mode of
exploration which we could entertain the hope of ever possessing, to bring
the reality of the vortices, as a fact in nature, conclusively to the test
of observation. The vice of the hypothesis was that it could not lead to
any course of investigation capable of converting it from an hypothesis
into a proved fact. It might chance to be _dis_proved, either by some want
of correspondence with the phenomena it purported to explain, or (as
actually happened) by some extraneous fact. “The free passage of comets
through the spaces in which these vortices should have been, convinced men
that these vortices did not exist.”(165) But the hypothesis would have
been false, though no such direct evidence of its falsity had been
procurable. Direct evidence of its truth there could not be.

The prevailing hypothesis of a luminiferous ether, in other respects not
without analogy to that of Descartes, is not in its own nature entirely
cut off from the possibility of direct evidence in its favor. It is well
known that the difference between the calculated and the observed times of
the periodical return of Encke’s comet, has led to a conjecture that a
medium capable of opposing resistance to motion is diffused through space.
If this surmise should be confirmed, in the course of ages, by the gradual
accumulation of a similar variance in the case of the other bodies of the
solar system, the luminiferous ether would have made a considerable
advance toward the character of a _vera causa_, since the existence would
have been ascertained of a great cosmical agent, possessing some of the
attributes which the hypothesis assumes; though there would still remain
many difficulties, and the identification of the ether with the resisting
medium would even, I imagine, give rise to new ones. At present, however,
this supposition can not be looked upon as more than a conjecture; the
existence of the ether still rests on the possibility of deducing from its
assumed laws a considerable number of actual phenomena; and this evidence
I can not regard as conclusive, because we can not have, in the case of
such an hypothesis, the assurance that if the hypothesis be false it must
lead to results at variance with the true facts.

Accordingly, most thinkers of any degree of sobriety allow that an
hypothesis of this kind is not to be received as probably true because it
accounts for all the known phenomena; since this is a condition sometimes
fulfilled tolerably well by two conflicting hypotheses; while there are
probably many others which are equally possible, but which, for want of
any thing analogous in our experience, our minds are unfitted to conceive.
But it seems to be thought that an hypothesis of the sort in question is
entitled to a more favorable reception, if, besides accounting for all the
facts previously known, it has led to the anticipation and prediction of
others which experience afterward verified; as the undulatory theory of
light led to the prediction, subsequently realized by experiment, that two
luminous rays might meet each other in such a manner as to produce
darkness. Such predictions and their fulfillment are, indeed, well
calculated to impress the uninformed, whose faith in science rests solely
on similar coincidences between its prophecies and what comes to pass. But
it is strange that any considerable stress should be laid upon such a
coincidence by persons of scientific attainments. If the laws of the
propagation of light accord with those of the vibrations of an elastic
fluid in as many respects as is necessary to make the hypothesis afford a
correct expression of all or most of the phenomena known at the time, it
is nothing strange that they should accord with each other in one respect
more. Though twenty such coincidences should occur, they would not prove
the reality of the undulatory ether; it would not follow that the
phenomena of light were results of the laws of elastic fluids, but at most
that they are governed by laws partially identical with these; which, we
may observe, is already certain, from the fact that the hypothesis in
question could be for a moment tenable.(166) Cases may be cited, even in
our imperfect acquaintance with nature, where agencies that we have good
reason to consider as radically distinct produce their effects, or some of
their effects, according to laws which are identical. The law, for
example, of the inverse square of the distance, is the measure of the
intensity not only of gravitation, but (it is believed) of illumination,
and of heat diffused from a centre. Yet no one looks upon this identity as
proving similarity in the mechanism by which the three kinds of phenomena
are produced.

According to Dr. Whewell, the coincidence of results predicted from an
hypothesis with facts afterward observed, amounts to a conclusive proof of
the truth of the theory. “If I copy a long series of letters, of which the
last half-dozen are concealed, and if I guess these aright, as is found to
be the case when they are afterward uncovered, this must be because I have
made out the import of the inscription. To say that because I have copied
all that I could see, it is nothing strange that I should guess those
which I can not see, would be absurd, without supposing such a ground for
guessing.”(167) If any one, from examining the greater part of a long
inscription, can interpret the characters so that the inscription gives a
rational meaning in a known language, there is a strong presumption that
his interpretation is correct; but I do not think the presumption much
increased by his being able to guess the few remaining letters without
seeing them; for we should naturally expect (when the nature of the case
excludes chance) that even an erroneous interpretation which accorded with
all the visible parts of the inscription would accord also with the small
remainder; as would be the case, for example, if the inscription had been
designedly so contrived as to admit of a double sense. I assume that the
uncovered characters afford an amount of coincidence too great to be
merely casual; otherwise the illustration is not a fair one. No one
supposes the agreement of the phenomena of light with the theory of
undulations to be merely fortuitous. It must arise from the actual
identity of some of the laws of undulations with some of those of light;
and if there be that identity, it is reasonable to suppose that its
consequences would not end with the phenomena which first suggested the
identification, nor be even confined to such phenomena as were known at
the time. But it does not follow, because some of the laws agree with
those of undulations, that there are any actual undulations; no more than
it followed because some (though not so many) of the same laws agreed with
those of the projection of particles, that there was actual emission of
particles. Even the undulatory hypothesis does not account for all the
phenomena of light. The natural colors of objects, the compound nature of
the solar ray, the absorption of light, and its chemical and vital action,
the hypothesis leaves as mysterious as it found them; and some of these
facts are, at least apparently, more reconcilable with the emission theory
than with that of Young and Fresnel. Who knows but that some third
hypothesis, including all these phenomena, may in time leave the
undulatory theory as far behind as that has left the theory of Newton and
his successors?

To the statement, that the condition of accounting for all the known
phenomena is often fulfilled equally well by two conflicting hypotheses,
Dr. Whewell makes answer that he knows “of no such case in the history of
science, where the phenomena are at all numerous and complicated.”(168)
Such an affirmation, by a writer of Dr. Whewell’s minute acquaintance with
the history of science, would carry great authority, if he had not, a few
pages before, taken pains to refute it,(169) by maintaining that even the
exploded scientific hypotheses might always, or almost always, have been
so modified as to make them correct representations of the phenomena. The
hypothesis of vortices, he tells us, was, by successive modifications,
brought to coincide in its results with the Newtonian theory and with the
facts. The vortices did not, indeed, explain all the phenomena which the
Newtonian theory was ultimately found to account for, such as the
precession of the equinoxes; but this phenomenon was not, at the time, in
the contemplation of either party, as one of the facts to be accounted
for. All the facts which they did contemplate, we may believe on Dr.
Whewell’s authority to have accorded as accurately with the Cartesian
hypothesis, in its finally improved state, as with Newton’s.

But it is not, I conceive, a valid reason for accepting any given
hypothesis, that we are unable to imagine any other which will account for
the facts. There is no necessity for supposing that the true explanation
must be one which, with only our present experience, we could imagine.
Among the natural agents with which we are acquainted, the vibrations of
an elastic fluid may be the only one whose laws bear a close resemblance
to those of light; but we can not tell that there does not exist an
unknown cause, other than an elastic ether diffused through space, yet
producing effects identical in some respects with those which would result
from the undulations of such an ether. To assume that no such cause can
exist, appears to me an extreme case of assumption without evidence. And
at the risk of being charged with want of modesty, I can not help
expressing astonishment that a philosopher of Dr. Whewell’s abilities and
attainments should have written an elaborate treatise on the philosophy of
induction, in which he recognizes absolutely no mode of induction except
that of trying hypothesis after hypothesis until one is found which fits
the phenomena; which one, when found, is to be assumed as true, with no
other reservation than that if, on re-examination, it should appear to
assume more than is needful for explaining the phenomena, the superfluous
part of the assumption should be cut off. And this without the slightest
distinction between the cases in which it may be known beforehand that two
different hypotheses can not lead to the same result, and those in which,
for aught we can ever know, the range of suppositions, all equally
consistent with the phenomena, may be infinite.(170)

Nevertheless, I do not agree with M. Comte in condemning those who employ
themselves in working out into detail the application of these hypotheses
to the explanation of ascertained facts, provided they bear in mind that
the utmost they can prove is, not that the hypothesis is, but that it
_may_ be true. The ether hypothesis has a very strong claim to be so
followed out, a claim greatly strengthened since it has been shown to
afford a mechanism which would explain the mode of production, not of
light only, but also of heat. Indeed, the speculation has a smaller
element of hypothesis in its application to heat, than in the case for
which it was originally framed. We have proof by our senses of the
existence of molecular movement among the particles of all heated bodies;
while we have no similar experience in the case of light. When, therefore,
heat is communicated from the sun to the earth across apparently empty
space, the chain of causation has molecular motion both at the beginning
and end. The hypothesis only makes the motion continuous by extending it
to the middle. Now, motion in a body is known to be capable of being
imparted to another body contiguous to it; and the intervention of a
hypothetical elastic fluid occupying the space between the sun and the
earth, supplies the contiguity which is the only condition wanting, and
which can be supplied by no supposition but that of an intervening medium.
The supposition, notwithstanding, is at best a probable conjecture, not a
proved truth. For there is no proof that contiguity is absolutely required
for the communication of motion from one body to another. Contiguity does
not always exist, to our senses at least, in the cases in which motion
produces motion. The forces which go under the name of attraction,
especially the greatest of all, gravitation, are examples of motion
producing motion without apparent contiguity. When a planet moves, its
distant satellites accompany its motion. The sun carries the whole solar
system along with it in the progress which it is ascertained to be
executing through space. And even if we were to accept as conclusive the
geometrical reasonings (strikingly similar to those by which the
Cartesians defended their vortices) by which it has been attempted to show
that the motions of the ether may account for gravitation itself, even
then it would only have been proved that the supposed mode of production
may be, but not that no other mode can be, the true one.

§ 7. It is necessary, before quitting the subject of hypotheses, to guard
against the appearance of reflecting upon the scientific value of several
branches of physical inquiry, which, though only in their infancy, I hold
to be strictly inductive. There is a great difference between inventing
agencies to account for classes of phenomena, and endeavoring, in
conformity with known laws, to conjecture what former collocations of
known agents may have given birth to individual facts still in existence.
The latter is the legitimate operation of inferring from an observed
effect the existence, in time past, of a cause similar to that by which we
know it to be produced in all cases in which we have actual experience of
its origin. This, for example, is the scope of the inquiries of geology;
and they are no more illogical or visionary than judicial inquiries, which
also aim at discovering a past event by inference from those of its
effects which still subsist. As we can ascertain whether a man was
murdered or died a natural death, from the indications exhibited by the
corpse, the presence or absence of signs of struggling on the ground or on
the adjacent objects, the marks of blood, the footsteps of the supposed
murderers, and so on, proceeding throughout on uniformities ascertained by
a perfect induction without any mixture of hypothesis; so if we find, on
and beneath the surface of our planet, masses exactly similar to deposits
from water, or to results of the cooling of matter melted by fire, we may
justly conclude that such has been their origin; and if the effects,
though similar in kind, are on a far larger scale than any which are now
produced, we may rationally, and without hypothesis, conclude either that
the causes existed formerly with greater intensity, or that they have
operated during an enormous length of time. Further than this no geologist
of authority has, since the rise of the present enlightened school of
geological speculation, attempted to go.

In many geological inquiries it doubtless happens that though the laws to
which the phenomena are ascribed are known laws, and the agents known
agents, those agents are not known to have been present in the particular
case. In the speculation respecting the igneous origin of trap or granite,
the fact does not admit of direct proof that those substances have been
actually subjected to intense heat. But the same thing might be said of
all judicial inquiries which proceed on circumstantial evidence. We can
conclude that a man was murdered, though it is not proved by the testimony
of eye-witnesses that some person who had the intention of murdering him
was present on the spot. It is enough for most purposes, if no other known
cause could have generated the effects shown to have been produced.

                  -------------------------------------

The celebrated speculation of Laplace concerning the origin of the earth
and planets, participates essentially in the inductive character of modern
geological theory. The speculation is, that the atmosphere of the sun
originally extended to the present limits of the solar system; from which,
by the process of cooling, it has contracted to its present dimensions;
and since, by the general principles of mechanics the rotation of the sun
and of its accompanying atmosphere must increase in rapidity as its volume
diminishes, the increased centrifugal force generated by the more rapid
rotation, overbalancing the action of gravitation, has caused the sun to
abandon successive rings of vaporous matter, which are supposed to have
condensed by cooling, and to have become the planets. There is in this
theory no unknown substance introduced on supposition, nor any unknown
property or law ascribed to a known substance. The known laws of matter
authorize us to suppose that a body which is constantly giving out so
large an amount of heat as the sun is, must be progressively cooling, and
that, by the process of cooling it must contract; if, therefore, we
endeavor, from the present state of that luminary, to infer its state in a
time long past, we must necessarily suppose that its atmosphere extended
much farther than at present, and we are entitled to suppose that it
extended as far as we can trace effects such as it might naturally leave
behind it on retiring; and such the planets are. These suppositions being
made, it follows from known laws that successive zones of the solar
atmosphere might be abandoned; that these would continue to revolve round
the sun with the same velocity as when they formed part of its substance;
and that they would cool down, long before the sun itself, to any given
temperature, and consequently to that at which the greater part of the
vaporous matter of which they consisted would become liquid or solid. The
known law of gravitation would then cause them to agglomerate in masses,
which would assume the shape our planets actually exhibit; would acquire,
each about its own axis, a rotatory movement; and would in that state
revolve, as the planets actually do, about the sun, in the same direction
with the sun’s rotation, but with less velocity, because in the same
periodic time which the sun’s rotation occupied when his atmosphere
extended to that point. There is thus, in Laplace’s theory, nothing,
strictly speaking, hypothetical; it is an example of legitimate reasoning
from a present effect to a possible past cause, according to the known
laws of that cause. The theory, therefore, is, as I have said, of a
similar character to the theories of geologists; but considerably inferior
to them in point of evidence. Even if it were proved (which it is not)
that the conditions necessary for determining the breaking off of
successive rings would certainly occur, there would still be a much
greater chance of error in assuming that the existing laws of nature are
the same which existed at the origin of the solar system, than in merely
presuming (with geologists) that those laws have lasted through a few
revolutions and transformations of a single one among the bodies of which
that system is composed.




                               Chapter XV.


Of Progressive Effects; And Of The Continued Action Of Causes.


§ 1. In the last four chapters we have traced the general outlines of the
theory of the generation of derivative laws from ultimate ones. In the
present chapter our attention will be directed to a particular case of the
derivation of laws from other laws, but a case so general, and so
important as not only to repay, but to require, a separate examination.
This is the case of a complex phenomenon resulting from one simple law, by
the continual addition of an effect to itself.

There are some phenomena, some bodily sensations, for example, which are
essentially instantaneous, and whose existence can only be prolonged by
the prolongation of the existence of the cause by which they are produced.
But most phenomena are in their own nature permanent; having begun to
exist, they would exist forever unless some cause intervened having a
tendency to alter or destroy them. Such, for example, are all the facts of
phenomena which we call bodies. Water, once produced, will not of itself
relapse into a state of hydrogen and oxygen; such a change requires some
agent having the power of decomposing the compound. Such, again, are the
positions in space and the movements of bodies. No object at rest alters
its position without the intervention of some conditions extraneous to
itself; and when once in motion, no object returns to a state of rest, or
alters either its direction or its velocity, unless some new external
conditions are superinduced. It, therefore, perpetually happens that a
temporary cause gives rise to a permanent effect. The contact of iron with
moist air for a few hours, produces a rust which may endure for centuries;
or a projectile force which launches a cannon-ball into space, produces a
motion which would continue forever unless some other force counteracted
it.

Between the two examples which we have here given, there is a difference
worth pointing out. In the former (in which the phenomenon produced is a
substance, and not a motion of a substance), since the rust remains
forever and unaltered unless some new cause supervenes, we may speak of
the contact of air a hundred years ago as even the proximate cause of the
rust which has existed from that time until now. But when the effect is
motion, which is itself a change, we must use a different language. The
permanency of the effect is now only the permanency of a series of
changes. The second foot, or inch, or mile of motion is not the mere
prolonged duration of the first foot, or inch, or mile, but another fact
which succeeds, and which may in some respects be very unlike the former,
since it carries the body through a different region of space. Now, the
original projectile force which set the body moving is the remote cause of
all its motion, however long continued, but the proximate cause of no
motion except that which took place at the first instant. The motion at
any subsequent instant is proximately caused by the motion which took
place at the instant preceding. It is on that, and not on the original
moving cause, that the motion at any given moment depends. For, suppose
that the body passes through some resisting medium, which partially
counteracts the effect of the original impulse, and retards the motion;
this counteraction (it need scarcely here be repeated) is as strict an
example of obedience to the law of the impulse, as if the body had gone on
moving with its original velocity; but the motion which results is
different, being now a compound of the effects of two causes acting in
contrary directions, instead of the single effect of one cause. Now, what
cause does the body obey in its subsequent motion? The original cause of
motion, or the actual motion at the preceding instant? The latter; for
when the object issues from the resisting medium, it continues moving, not
with its original, but with its retarded velocity. The motion having once
been diminished, all that which follows is diminished. The effect changes,
because the cause which it really obeys, the proximate cause, the real
cause in fact, has changed. This principle is recognized by mathematicians
when they enumerate among the causes by which the motion of a body is at
any instant determined the _force generated_ by the previous motion; an
expression which would be absurd if taken to imply that this “force” was
an intermediate link between the cause and the effect, but which really
means only the previous motion itself, considered as a cause of further
motion. We must, therefore, if we would speak with perfect precision,
consider each link in the succession of motions as the effect of the link
preceding it. But if, for the convenience of discourse, we speak of the
whole series as one effect, it must be as an effect produced by the
original impelling force; a permanent effect produced by an instantaneous
cause, and possessing the property of self-perpetuation.

Let us now suppose that the original agent or cause, instead of being
instantaneous, is permanent. Whatever effect has been produced up to a
given time, would (unless prevented by the intervention of some new cause)
subsist permanently, even if the cause were to perish. Since, however, the
cause does not perish, but continues to exist and to operate, it must go
on producing more and more of the effect; and instead of a uniform effect,
we have a progressive series of effects, arising from the accumulated
influence of a permanent cause. Thus, the contact of iron with the
atmosphere causes a portion of it to rust; and if the cause ceased, the
effect already produced would be permanent, but no further effect would be
added. If, however, the cause, namely, exposure to moist air, continues,
more and more of the iron becomes rusted, until all which is exposed is
converted into a red powder, when one of the conditions of the production
of rust, namely, the presence of unoxidized iron, has ceased, and the
effect can not any longer be produced. Again, the earth causes bodies to
fall toward it; that is, the existence of the earth at a given instant
causes an unsupported body to move toward it at the succeeding instant;
and if the earth were annihilated, as much of the effect as is already
produced would continue; the object would go on moving in the same
direction, with its acquired velocity, until intercepted by some body or
deflected by some other force. The earth, however, not being annihilated,
goes on producing in the second instant an effect similar and of equal
amount with the first, which two effects being added together, there
results an accelerated velocity; and this operation being repeated at each
successive instant, the mere permanence of the cause, though without
increase, gives rise to a constant progressive increase of the effect, so
long as all the conditions, negative and positive, of the production of
that effect continue to be realized.

It is obvious that this state of things is merely a case of the
Composition of Causes. A cause which continues in action must on a strict
analysis be considered as a number of causes exactly similar, successively
introduced, and producing by their combination the sum of the effects
which they would severally produce if they acted singly. The progressive
rusting of the iron is in strictness the sum of the effects of many
particles of air acting in succession upon corresponding particles of
iron. The continued action of the earth upon a falling body is equivalent
to a series of forces, applied in successive instants, each tending to
produce a certain constant quantity of motion; and the motion at each
instant is the sum of the effects of the new force applied at the
preceding instant, and the motion already acquired. In each instant a
fresh effect, of which gravity is the proximate cause, is added to the
effect of which it was the remote cause; or (to express the same thing in
another manner), the effect produced by the earth’s influence at the
instant last elapsed is added to the sum of the effects of which the
remote causes were the influences exerted by the earth at all the previous
instants since the motion began. The case, therefore, comes under the
principle of a concurrence of causes producing an effect equal to the sum
of their separate effects. But as the causes come into play not all at
once, but successively, and as the effect at each instant is the sum of
the effects of those causes only which have come into action up to that
instant, the result assumes the form of an ascending series; a succession
of sums, each greater than that which preceded it; and we have thus a
progressive effect from the continued action of a cause.

Since the continuance of the cause influences the effect only by adding to
its quantity, and since the addition takes place according to a fixed law
(equal quantities in equal times), the result is capable of being computed
on mathematical principles. In fact, this case, being that of
infinitesimal increments, is precisely the case which the differential
calculus was invented to meet. The questions, what effect will result from
the continual addition of a given cause to itself, and what amount of the
cause, being continually added to itself, will produce a given amount of
the effect, are evidently mathematical questions, and to be treated,
therefore, deductively. If, as we have seen, cases of the Composition of
Causes are seldom adapted for any other than deductive investigation, this
is especially true in the case now examined, the continual composition of
a cause with its own previous effects; since such a case is peculiarly
amenable to the deductive method, while the undistinguishable manner in
which the effects are blended with one another and with the causes, must
make the treatment of such an instance experimentally still more
chimerical than in any other case.

§ 2. We shall next advert to a rather more intricate operation of the same
principle, namely, when the cause does not merely continue in action, but
undergoes, during the same time, a progressive change in those of its
circumstances which contribute to determine the effect. In this case, as
in the former, the total effect goes on accumulating by the continual
addition of a fresh effect to that already produced, but it is no longer
by the addition of equal quantities in equal times; the quantities added
are unequal, and even the quality may now be different. If the change in
the state of the permanent cause be progressive, the effect will go
through a double series of changes, arising partly from the accumulated
action of the cause, and partly from the changes in its action. The effect
is still a progressive effect, produced, however, not by the mere
continuance of a cause, but by its continuance and its progressiveness
combined.

A familiar example is afforded by the increase of the temperature as
summer advances, that is, as the sun draws nearer to a vertical position,
and remains a greater number of hours above the horizon. This instance
exemplifies in a very interesting manner the twofold operation on the
effect, arising from the continuance of the cause, and from its
progressive change. When once the sun has come near enough to the zenith,
and remains above the horizon long enough, to give more warmth during one
diurnal rotation than the counteracting cause, the earth’s radiation, can
carry off, the mere continuance of the cause would progressively increase
the effect, even if the sun came no nearer and the days grew no longer;
but in addition to this, a change takes place in the accidents of the
cause (its series of diurnal positions), tending to increase the quantity
of the effect. When the summer solstice has passed, the progressive change
in the cause begins to take place the reverse way, but, for some time, the
accumulating effect of the mere continuance of the cause exceeds the
effect of the changes in it, and the temperature continues to increase.

Again, the motion of a planet is a progressive effect, produced by causes
at once permanent and progressive. The orbit of a planet is determined
(omitting perturbations) by two causes: first, the action of the central
body, a permanent cause, which alternately increases and diminishes as the
planet draws nearer to or goes farther from its perihelion, and which acts
at every point in a different direction; and, secondly, the tendency of
the planet to continue moving in the direction and with the velocity which
it has already acquired. This force also grows greater as the planet draws
nearer to its perihelion, because as it does so its velocity increases,
and less, as it recedes from its perihelion; and this force as well as the
other acts at each point in a different direction, because at every point
the action of the central force, by deflecting the planet from its
previous direction, alters the line in which it tends to continue moving.
The motion at each instant is determined by the amount and direction of
the motion, and the amount and direction of the sun’s action, at the
previous instant; and if we speak of the entire revolution of the planet
as one phenomenon (which, as it is periodical and similar to itself, we
often find it convenient to do), that phenomenon is the progressive effect
of two permanent and progressive causes, the central force and the
acquired motion. Those causes happening to be progressive in the
particular way which is called periodical, the effect necessarily is so
too; because the quantities to be added together returning in a regular
order, the same sums must also regularly return.

This example is worthy of consideration also in another respect. Though
the causes themselves are permanent, and independent of all conditions
known to us, the changes which take place in the quantities and relations
of the causes are actually caused by the periodical changes in the
effects. The causes, as they exist at any moment, having produced a
certain motion, that motion, becoming itself a cause, reacts upon the
causes, and produces a change in them. By altering the distance and
direction of the central body relatively to the planet, and the direction
and quantity of the force in the direction of the tangent, it alters the
elements which determine the motion at the next succeeding instant. This
change renders the next motion somewhat different; and this difference, by
a fresh reaction upon the causes, renders the next motion again different,
and so on. The original state of the causes might have been such that this
series of actions modified by reactions would not have been periodical.
The sun’s action, and the original impelling force, might have been in
such a ratio to one another, that the reaction of the effect would have
been such as to alter the causes more and more, without ever bringing them
back to what they were at any former time. The planet would then have
moved in a parabola, or an hyperbola, curves not returning into
themselves. The quantities of the two forces were, however, originally
such, that the successive reactions of the effect bring back the causes,
after a certain time, to what they were before; and from that time all the
variations continued to recur again and again in the same periodical
order, and must so continue while the causes subsist and are not
counteracted.

§ 3. In all cases of progressive effects, whether arising from the
accumulation of unchanging or of changing elements, there is a uniformity
of succession not merely between the cause and the effect, but between the
first stages of the effect and its subsequent stages. That a body _in
vacuo_ falls sixteen feet in the first second, forty-eight in the second,
and so on in the ratio of the odd numbers, is as much a uniform sequence
as that when the supports are removed the body falls. The sequence of
spring and summer is as regular and invariable as that of the approach of
the sun and spring; but we do not consider spring to be the cause of
summer; it is evident that both are successive effects of the heat
received from the sun, and that, considered merely in itself, spring might
continue forever without having the slightest tendency to produce summer.
As we have so often remarked, not the conditional, but the unconditional
invariable antecedent is termed the cause. That which would not be
followed by the effect unless something else had preceded, and which if
that something else had preceded, would not have been required, is not the
cause, however invaluable the sequence may in fact be.

It is in this way that most of those uniformities of succession are
generated, which are not cases of causation. When a phenomenon goes on
increasing, or periodically increases and diminishes, or goes through any
continued and unceasing process of variation reducible to a uniform rule
or law of succession, we do not on this account presume that any two
successive terms of the series are cause and effect. We presume the
contrary; we expect to find that the whole series originates either from
the continued action of fixed causes or from causes which go through a
corresponding process of continuous change. A tree grows from half an inch
high to a hundred feet; and some trees will generally grow to that height
unless prevented by some counteracting cause. But we do not call the
seedling the cause of the full-grown tree; the invariable antecedent it
certainly is, and we know very imperfectly on what other antecedents the
sequence is contingent, but we are convinced that it is contingent on
something; because the homogeneousness of the antecedent with the
consequent, the close resemblance of the seedling to the tree in all
respects except magnitude, and the graduality of the growth, so exactly
resembling the progressively accumulating effect produced by the long
action of some one cause, leave no possibility of doubting that the
seedling and the tree are two terms in a series of that description, the
first term of which is yet to seek. The conclusion is further confirmed by
this, that we are able to prove by strict induction the dependence of the
growth of the tree, and even of the continuance of its existence, upon the
continued repetition of certain processes of nutrition, the rise of the
sap, the absorptions and exhalations by the leaves, etc.; and the same
experiments would probably prove to us that the growth of the tree is the
accumulated sum of the effects of these continued processes, were we not,
for want of sufficiently microscopic eyes, unable to observe correctly and
in detail what those effects are.

This supposition by no means requires that the effect should not, during
its progress, undergo many modifications besides those of quantity, or
that it should not sometimes appear to undergo a very marked change of
character. This may be either because the unknown cause consists of
several component elements or agents, whose effects, accumulating
according to different laws, are compounded in different proportions at
different periods in the existence of the organized being; or because, at
certain points in its progress, fresh causes or agencies come in, or are
evolved, which intermix their laws with those of the prime agent.




                               Chapter XVI.


Of Empirical Laws.


§ 1. Scientific inquirers give the name of Empirical Laws to those
uniformities which observation or experiment has shown to exist, but on
which they hesitate to rely in cases varying much from those which have
been actually observed, for want of seeing any reason _why_ such a law
should exist. It is implied, therefore, in the notion of an empirical law,
that it is not an ultimate law; that if true at all, its truth is capable
of being, and requires to be, accounted for. It is a derivative law, the
derivation of which is not yet known. To state the explanation, the _why_,
of the empirical law, would be to state the laws from which it is
derived—the ultimate causes on which it is contingent. And if we knew
these, we should also know what are its limits; under what conditions it
would cease to be fulfilled.

The periodical return of eclipses, as originally ascertained by the
persevering observation of the early Eastern astronomers, was an empirical
law, until the general laws of the celestial motions had accounted for it.
The following are empirical laws still waiting to be resolved into the
simpler laws from which they are derived: the local laws of the flux and
reflux of the tides in different places; the succession of certain kinds
of weather to certain appearances of sky; the apparent exceptions to the
almost universal truth that bodies expand by increase of temperature; the
law that breeds, both animal and vegetable, are improved by crossing; that
gases have a strong tendency to permeate animal membranes; that substances
containing a very high proportion of nitrogen (such as hydrocyanic acid
and morphia) are powerful poisons; that when different metals are fused
together the alloy is harder than the various elements; that the number of
atoms of acid required to neutralize one atom of any base is equal to the
number of atoms of oxygen in the base; that the solubility of substances
in one another depends,(171) at least in some degree, on the similarity of
their elements.

An empirical law, then, is an observed uniformity, presumed to be
resolvable into simpler laws, but not yet resolved into them. The
ascertainment of the empirical laws of phenomena often precedes by a long
interval the explanation of those laws by the Deductive Method; and the
verification of a deduction usually consists in the comparison of its
results with empirical laws previously ascertained.

§ 2. From a limited number of ultimate laws of causation, there are
necessarily generated a vast number of derivative uniformities, both of
succession and co-existence. Some are laws of succession or of
co-existence between different effects of the same cause; of these we had
examples in the last chapter. Some are laws of succession between effects
and their remote causes, resolvable into the laws which connect each with
the intermediate link. Thirdly, when causes act together and compound
their effects, the laws of those causes generate the fundamental law of
the effect, namely, that it depends on the co-existence of those causes.
And, finally, the order of succession or of co-existence which obtains
among effects necessarily depends on their causes. If they are effects of
the same cause, it depends on the laws of that cause; if on different
causes, it depends on the laws of those causes severally, and on the
circumstances which determine their co-existence. If we inquire further
when and how the causes will co-exist, that, again, depends on _their_
causes; and we may thus trace back the phenomena higher and higher, until
the different series of effects meet in a point, and the whole is shown to
have depended ultimately on some common cause; or until, instead of
converging to one point, they terminate in different points, and the order
of the effects is proved to have arisen from the collocation of some of
the primeval causes, or natural agents. For example, the order of
succession and of co-existence among the heavenly motions, which is
expressed by Kepler’s laws, is derived from the co-existence of two
primeval causes, the sun, and the original impulse or projectile force
belonging to each planet.(172) Kepler’s laws are resolved into the laws of
these causes and the fact of their co-existence.

Derivative laws, therefore, do not depend solely on the ultimate laws into
which they are resolvable; they mostly depend on those ultimate laws, and
an ultimate fact; namely, the mode of co-existence of some of the
component elements of the universe. The ultimate laws of causation might
be the same as at present, and yet the derivative laws completely
different, if the causes co-existed in different proportions, or with any
difference in those of their relations by which the effects are
influenced. If, for example, the sun’s attraction, and the original
projectile force, had existed in some other ratio to one another than they
did (and we know of no reason why this should not have been the case), the
derivative laws of the heavenly motions might have been quite different
from what they are. The proportions which exist happen to be such as to
produce regular elliptical motions; any other proportions would have
produced different ellipses, or circular, or parabolic, or hyperbolic
motions, but still regular ones; because the effects of each of the agents
accumulate according to a uniform law; and two regular series of
quantities, when their corresponding terms are added, must produce a
regular series of some sort, whatever the quantities themselves are.

§ 3. Now this last-mentioned element in the resolution of a derivative
law, the element which is not a law of causation, but a collocation of
causes, can not itself be reduced to any law. There is, as formerly
remarked,(173) no uniformity, no _norma_, principle, or rule, perceivable
in the distribution of the primeval natural agents through the universe.
The different substances composing the earth, the powers that pervade the
universe, stand in no constant relation to one another. One substance is
more abundant than others, one power acts through a larger extent of space
than others, without any pervading analogy that we can discover. We not
only do not know of any reason why the sun’s attraction and the force in
the direction of the tangent co-exist in the exact proportion they do, but
we can trace no coincidence between it and the proportions in which any
other elementary powers in the universe are intermingled. The utmost
disorder is apparent in the combination of the causes, which is consistent
with the most regular order in their effects; for when each agent carries
on its own operations according to a uniform law, even the most capricious
combination of agencies will generate a regularity of some sort; as we see
in the kaleidoscope, where any casual arrangement of colored bits of glass
produces by the laws of reflection a beautiful regularity in the effect.

§ 4. In the above considerations lies the justification of the limited
degree of reliance which scientific inquirers are accustomed to place in
empirical laws.

A derivative law which results wholly from the operation of some one
cause, will be as universally true as the laws of the cause itself; that
is, it will always be true except where some one of those effects of the
cause, on which the derivative law depends, is defeated by a counteracting
cause. But when the derivative law results not from different effects of
one cause, but from effects of several causes, we can not be certain that
it will be true under any variation in the mode of co-existence of those
causes, or of the primitive natural agents on which the causes ultimately
depend. The proposition that coal-beds rest on certain descriptions of
strata exclusively, though true on the earth, so far as our observation
has reached, can not be extended to the moon or the other planets,
supposing coal to exist there; because we can not be assured that the
original constitution of any other planet was such as to produce the
different depositions in the same order as in our globe. The derivative
law in this case depends not solely on laws, but on a collocation; and
collocations can not be reduced to any law.

Now it is the very nature of a derivative law which has not yet been
resolved into its elements, in other words, an empirical law, that we do
not know whether it results from the different effects of one cause, or
from effects of different causes. We can not tell whether it depends
wholly on laws, or partly on laws and partly on a collocation. If it
depends on a collocation, it will be true in all the cases in which that
particular collocation exists. But, since we are entirely ignorant, in
case of its depending on a collocation, what the collocation is, we are
not safe in extending the law beyond the limits of time and place in which
we have actual experience of its truth. Since within those limits the law
has always been found true, we have evidence that the collocations,
whatever they are, on which it depends, do really exist within those
limits. But, knowing of no rule or principle to which the collocations
themselves conform, we can not conclude that because a collocation is
proved to exist within certain limits of place or time, it will exist
beyond those limits. Empirical laws, therefore, can only be received as
true within the limits of time and place in which they have been found
true by observation; and not merely the limits of time and place, but of
time, place, and circumstance; for, since it is the very meaning of an
empirical law that we do not know the ultimate laws of causation on which
it is dependent, we can not foresee, without actual trial, in what manner
or to what extent the introduction of any new circumstance may affect it.

§ 5. But how are we to know that a uniformity ascertained by experience is
only an empirical law? Since, by the supposition, we have not been able to
resolve it into any other laws, how do we know that it is not an ultimate
law of causation?

I answer that no generalization amounts to more than an empirical law when
the only proof on which it rests is that of the Method of Agreement. For
it has been seen that by that method alone we never can arrive at causes.
The utmost that the Method of Agreement can do is, to ascertain the whole
of the circumstances common to all cases in which a phenomenon is
produced; and this aggregate includes not only the cause of the
phenomenon, but all phenomena with which it is connected by any derivative
uniformity, whether as being collateral effects of the same cause, or
effects of any other cause which, in all the instances we have been able
to observe, co-existed with it. The method affords no means of determining
which of these uniformities are laws of causation, and which are merely
derivative laws, resulting from those laws of causation and from the
collocation of the causes. None of them, therefore, can be received in any
other character than that of derivative laws, the derivation of which has
not been traced; in other words, empirical laws: in which light all
results obtained by the Method of Agreement (and therefore almost all
truths obtained by simple observation without experiment) must be
considered, until either confirmed by the Method of Difference, or
explained deductively; in other words, accounted for _a priori_.

These empirical laws may be of greater or less authority, according as
there is reason to presume that they are resolvable into laws only, or
into laws and collocations together. The sequences which we observe in the
production and subsequent life of an animal or a vegetable, resting on the
Method of Agreement only, are mere empirical laws; but though the
antecedents in those sequences may not be the causes of the consequents,
both the one and the other are doubtless, in the main, successive stages
of a progressive effect originating in a common cause, and therefore
independent of collocations. The uniformities, on the other hand, in the
order of superposition of strata on the earth, are empirical laws of a
much weaker kind, since they not only are not laws of causation, but there
is no reason to believe that they depend on any common cause; all
appearances are in favor of their depending on the particular collocation
of natural agents which at some time or other existed on our globe, and
from which no inference can be drawn as to the collocation which exists or
has existed in any other portion of the universe.

§ 6. Our definition of an empirical law, including not only those
uniformities which are not known to be laws of causation, but also those
which are, provided there be reason to presume that they are not ultimate
laws; this is the proper place to consider by what signs we may judge that
even if an observed uniformity be a law of causation, it is not an
ultimate, but a derivative law.

The first sign is, if between the antecedent _a_ and the consequent _b_
there be evidence of some intermediate link; some phenomenon of which we
can surmise the existence, though from the imperfection of our senses or
of our instruments we are unable to ascertain its precise nature and laws.
If there be such a phenomenon (which may be denoted by the letter _x_), it
follows that even if _a_ be the cause of _b_, it is but the remote cause,
and that the law, _a_ causes _b_, is resolvable into at least two laws,
_a_ causes _x_, and _x_ causes _b_. This is a very frequent case, since
the operations of nature mostly take place on so minute a scale, that many
of the successive steps are either imperceptible, or very indistinctly
perceived.

Take, for example, the laws of the chemical composition of substances; as
that hydrogen and oxygen being combined, water is produced. All we see of
the process is, that the two gases being mixed in certain proportions, and
heat or electricity being applied, an explosion takes place, the gases
disappear, and water remains. There is no doubt about the law, or about
its being a law of causation. But between the antecedent (the gases in a
state of mechanical mixture, heated or electrified), and the consequent
(the production of water), there must be an intermediate process which we
do not see. For if we take any portion whatever of the water, and subject
it to analysis, we find that it always contains hydrogen and oxygen; nay,
the very same proportions of them, namely, two-thirds, in volume, of
hydrogen, and one-third oxygen. This is true of a single drop; it is true
of the minutest portion which our instruments are capable of appreciating.
Since, then, the smallest perceptible portion of the water contains both
those substances, portions of hydrogen and oxygen smaller than the
smallest perceptible must have come together in every such minute portion
of space; must have come closer together than when the gases were in a
state of mechanical mixture, since (to mention no other reasons) the water
occupies far less space than the gases. Now, as we can not see this
contact or close approach of the minute particles, we can not observe with
what circumstances it is attended, or according to what laws it produces
its effects. The production of water, that is, of the sensible phenomena
which characterize the compound, may be a very remote effect of those
laws. There may be innumerable intervening links; and we are sure that
there must be some. Having full proof that corpuscular action of some kind
takes place previous to any of the great transformations in the sensible
properties of substances, we can have no doubt that the laws of chemical
action, as at present known, are not ultimate, but derivative laws;
however ignorant we may be, and even though we should forever remain
ignorant, of the nature of the laws of corpuscular action from which they
are derived.

In like manner, all the processes of vegetative life, whether in the
vegetable properly so called or in the animal body, are corpuscular
processes. Nutrition is the addition of particles to one another,
sometimes merely replacing other particles separated and excreted,
sometimes occasioning an increase of bulk or weight so gradual that only
after a long continuance does it become perceptible. Various organs, by
means of peculiar vessels, secrete from the blood fluids, the component
particles of which must have been in the blood, but which differ from it
most widely both in mechanical properties and in chemical composition.
Here, then, are abundance of unknown links to be filled up; and there can
be no doubt that the laws of the phenomena of vegetative or organic life
are derivative laws, dependent on properties of the corpuscles, and of
those elementary tissues which are comparatively simple combinations of
corpuscles.

The first sign, then, from which a law of causation, though hitherto
unresolved, may be inferred to be a derivative law, is any indication of
the existence of an intermediate link or links between the antecedent and
the consequent. The second is, when the antecedent is an extremely complex
phenomenon, and its effects, therefore, probably in part at least,
compounded of the effects of its different elements; since we know that
the case in which the effect of the whole is not made up of the effects of
its parts is exceptional, the Composition of Causes being by far the more
ordinary case.

We will illustrate this by two examples, in one of which the antecedent is
the sum of many homogeneous, in the other of heterogeneous, parts. The
weight of a body is made up of the weights of its minute particles; a
truth which astronomers express in its most general terms when they say
that bodies, at equal distances, gravitate to one another in proportion to
their quantity of matter. All true propositions, therefore, which can be
made concerning gravity, are derivative laws; the ultimate law into which
they are all resolvable being, that every particle of matter attracts
every other. As our second example, we may take any of the sequences
observed in meteorology; for instance, a diminution of the pressure of the
atmosphere (indicated by a fall of the barometer) is followed by rain. The
antecedent is here a complex phenomenon, made up of heterogeneous
elements; the column of the atmosphere over any particular place
consisting of two parts, a column of air, and a column of aqueous vapor
mixed with it; and the change in the two together manifested by a fall of
the barometer, and followed by rain, must be either a change in one of
these, or in the other, or in both. We might, then, even in the absence of
any other evidence, form a reasonable presumption, from the invariable
presence of both these elements in the antecedent, that the sequence is
probably not an ultimate law, but a result of the laws of the two
different agents; a presumption only to be destroyed when we had made
ourselves so well acquainted with the laws of both, as to be able to
affirm that those laws could not by themselves produce the observed
result.

There are but few known cases of succession from very complex antecedents
which have not either been actually accounted for from simpler laws, or
inferred with great probability (from the ascertained existence of
intermediate links of causation not yet understood) to be capable of being
so accounted for. It is, therefore, highly probable that all sequences
from complex antecedents are thus resolvable, and that ultimate laws are
in all cases comparatively simple. If there were not the other reasons
already mentioned for believing that the laws of organized nature are
resolvable into simpler laws, it would be almost a sufficient reason that
the antecedents in most of the sequences are so very complex.

§ 7. In the preceding discussion we have recognized two kinds of empirical
laws: those known to be laws of causation, but presumed to be resolvable
into simpler laws; and those not known to be laws of causation at all.
Both these kinds of laws agree in the demand which they make for being
explained by deduction, and agree in being the appropriate means of
verifying such deduction, since they represent the experience with which
the result of the deduction must be compared. They agree, further, in
this, that until explained, and connected with the ultimate laws from
which they result, they have not attained the highest degree of certainty
of which laws are susceptible. It has been shown on a former occasion that
laws of causation which are derivative, and compounded of simpler laws,
are not only, as the nature of the case implies, less general, but even
less certain, than the simpler laws from which they result; not in the
same degree to be relied on as universally true. The inferiority of
evidence, however, which attaches to this class of laws, is trifling,
compared with that which is inherent in uniformities not known to be laws
of causation at all. So long as these are unresolved, we can not tell on
how many collocations, as well as laws, their truth may be dependent; we
can never, therefore, extend them with any confidence to cases in which we
have not assured ourselves, by trial, that the necessary collocation of
causes, whatever it may be, exists. It is to this class of laws alone that
the property, which philosophers usually consider as characteristic of
empirical laws, belongs in all its strictness—the property of being unfit
to be relied on beyond the limits of time, place, and circumstance in
which the observations have been made. These are empirical laws in a more
emphatic sense; and when I employ that term (except where the context
manifestly indicates the reverse) I shall generally mean to designate
those uniformities only, whether of succession or of co-existence, which
are not known to be laws of causation.




                              Chapter XVII.


Of Chance And Its Elimination.


§ 1. Considering, then, as empirical laws only those observed uniformities
respecting which the question whether they are laws of causation must
remain undecided until they can be explained deductively, or until some
means are found of applying the Method of Difference to the case, it has
been shown in the preceding chapter that until a uniformity can, in one or
the other of these modes, be taken out of the class of empirical laws, and
brought either into that of laws of causation or of the demonstrated
results of laws of causation, it can not with any assurance be pronounced
true beyond the local and other limits within which it has been found so
by actual observation. It remains to consider how we are to assure
ourselves of its truth even within those limits; after what quantity of
experience a generalization which rests solely on the Method of Agreement
can be considered sufficiently established, even as an empirical law. In a
former chapter, when treating of the Methods of Direct Induction, we
expressly reserved this question,(174) and the time is now come for
endeavoring to solve it.

We found that the Method of Agreement has the defect of not proving
causation, and can, therefore, only be employed for the ascertainment of
empirical laws. But we also found that besides this deficiency, it labors
under a characteristic imperfection, tending to render uncertain even such
conclusions as it is in itself adapted to prove. This imperfection arises
from Plurality of Causes. Although two or more cases in which the
phenomenon _a_ has been met with may have no common antecedent except A,
this does not prove that there is any connection between _a_ and A, since
_a_ may have many causes, and may have been produced, in these different
instances, not by any thing which the instances had in common, but by some
of those elements in them which were different. We nevertheless observed,
that in proportion to the multiplication of instances pointing to A as the
antecedent, the characteristic uncertainty of the method diminishes, and
the existence of a law of connection between A and _a_ more nearly
approaches to certainty. It is now to be determined after what amount of
experience this certainty may be deemed to be practically attained, and
the connection between A and _a_ may be received as an empirical law.

This question may be otherwise stated in more familiar terms: After how
many and what sort of instances may it be concluded that an observed
coincidence between two phenomena is not the effect of chance?

It is of the utmost importance for understanding the logic of induction,
that we should form a distinct conception of what is meant by chance, and
how the phenomena which common language ascribes to that abstraction are
really produced.

§ 2. Chance is usually spoken of in direct antithesis to law; whatever, it
is supposed, can not be ascribed to any law is attributed to chance. It
is, however, certain that whatever happens is the result of some law; is
an effect of causes, and could have been predicted from a knowledge of the
existence of those causes, and from their laws. If I turn up a particular
card, that is a consequence of its place in the pack. Its place in the
pack was a consequence of the manner in which the cards were shuffled, or
of the order in which they were played in the last game; which, again,
were effects of prior causes. At every stage, if we had possessed an
accurate knowledge of the causes in existence, it would have been
abstractedly possible to foretell the effect.

An event occurring by chance may be better described as a coincidence from
which we have no ground to infer a uniformity—the occurrence of a
phenomenon in certain circumstances, without our having reason on that
account to infer that it will happen again in those circumstances. This,
however, when looked closely into, implies that the enumeration of the
circumstances is not complete. Whatever the fact be, since it has occurred
once, we may be sure that if _all_ the same circumstances were repeated it
would occur again; and not only if all, but there is some particular
portion of those circumstances on which the phenomenon is invariably
consequent. With most of them, however, it is not connected in any
permanent manner; its conjunction with those is said to be the effect of
chance, to be merely casual. Facts casually conjoined are separately the
effects of causes, and therefore of laws; but of different causes, and
causes not connected by any law.

It is incorrect, then, to say that any phenomenon is produced by chance;
but we may say that two or more phenomena are conjoined by chance, that
they co-exist or succeed one another only by chance; meaning that they are
in no way related through causation; that they are neither cause and
effect, nor effects of the same cause, nor effects of causes between which
there subsists any law of co-existence, nor even effects of the same
collocation of primeval causes.

If the same casual coincidence never occurred a second time, we should
have an easy test for distinguishing such from the coincidences which are
the results of a law. As long as the phenomena had been found together
only once, so long, unless we knew some more general laws from which the
coincidence might have resulted, we could not distinguish it from a casual
one; but if it occurred twice, we should know that the phenomena so
conjoined must be in some way connected through their causes.

There is, however, no such test. A coincidence may occur again and again,
and yet be only casual. Nay, it would be inconsistent with what we know of
the order of nature to doubt that every casual coincidence will sooner or
later be repeated, as long as the phenomena between which it occurred do
not cease to exist, or to be reproduced. The recurrence, therefore, of the
same coincidence more than once, or even its frequent recurrence, does not
prove that it is an instance of any law; does not prove that it is not
casual, or, in common language, the effect of chance.

And yet, when a coincidence can not be deduced from known laws, nor proved
by experiment to be itself a case of causation, the frequency of its
occurrence is the only evidence from which we can infer that it is the
result of a law. Not, however, its absolute frequency. The question is not
whether the coincidence occurs often or seldom, in the ordinary sense of
those terms; but whether it occurs more often than chance will account
for; more often than might rationally be expected if the coincidence were
casual. We have to decide, therefore, what degree of frequency in a
coincidence chance will account for; and to this there can be no general
answer. We can only state the principle by which the answer must be
determined; the answer itself will be different in every different case.

Suppose that one of the phenomena, A, exists always, and the other
phenomenon, B, only occasionally; it follows that every instance of B will
be an instance of its coincidence with A, and yet the coincidence will be
merely casual, not the result of any connection between them. The fixed
stars have been constantly in existence since the beginning of human
experience, and all phenomena that have come under human observation have,
in every single instance, co-existed with them; yet this coincidence,
though equally invariable with that which exists between any of those
phenomena and its own cause, does not prove that the stars are its cause,
nor that they are in anywise connected with it. As strong a case of
coincidence, therefore, as can possibly exist, and a much stronger one in
point of mere frequency than most of those which prove laws, does not here
prove a law; why? because, since the stars exist always, they _must_
co-exist with every other phenomenon, whether connected with them by
causation or not. The uniformity, great though it be, is no greater than
would occur on the supposition that no such connection exists.

On the other hand, suppose that we were inquiring whether there be any
connection between rain and any particular wind. Rain, we know,
occasionally occurs with every wind; therefore, the connection, if it
exists, can not be an actual law; but still rain may be connected with
some particular wind through causation; that is, though they can not be
always effects of the same cause (for if so they would regularly
co-exist), there may be some causes common to the two, so that in so far
as either is produced by those common causes, they will, from the laws of
the causes, be found to co-exist. How, then, shall we ascertain this? The
obvious answer is, by observing whether rain occurs with one wind more
frequently than with any other. That, however, is not enough; for perhaps
that one wind blows more frequently than any other; so that its blowing
more frequently in rainy weather is no more than would happen, although it
had no connection with the causes of rain, provided it were not connected
with causes adverse to rain. In England, westerly winds blow during about
twice as great a portion of the year as easterly. If, therefore, it rains
only twice as often with a westerly as with an easterly wind, we have no
reason to infer that any law of nature is concerned in the coincidence. If
it rains more than twice as often, we may be sure that some law is
concerned; either there is some cause in nature which, in this climate,
tends to produce both rain and a westerly wind, or a westerly wind has
itself some tendency to produce rain. But if it rains less than twice as
often, we may draw a directly opposite inference: the one, instead of
being a cause, or connected with causes of the other, must be connected
with causes adverse to it, or with the absence of some cause which
produces it; and though it may still rain much oftener with a westerly
wind than with an easterly, so far would this be from proving any
connection between the phenomena, that the connection proved would be
between rain and an easterly wind, to which, in mere frequency of
coincidence, it is less allied.

Here, then, are two examples: in one, the greatest possible frequency of
coincidence, with no instance whatever to the contrary, does not prove
that there is any law; in the other, a much less frequency of coincidence,
even when non-coincidence is still more frequent, does prove that there is
a law. In both cases the principle is the same. In both we consider the
positive frequency of the phenomena themselves, and how great frequency of
coincidence that must of itself bring about, without supposing any
connection between them, provided there be no repugnance; provided neither
be connected with any cause tending to frustrate the other. If we find a
greater frequency of coincidence than this, we conclude that there is some
connection; if a less frequency, that there is some repugnance. In the
former case, we conclude that one of the phenomena can under some
circumstances cause the other, or that there exists something capable of
causing them both; in the latter, that one of them, or some cause which
produces one of them, is capable of counteracting the production of the
other. We have thus to deduct from the observed frequency of coincidence
as much as may be the effect of chance, that is, of the mere frequency of
the phenomena themselves; and if any thing remains, what does remain is
the residual fact which proves the existence of a law.

The frequency of the phenomena can only be ascertained within definite
limits of space and time; depending as it does on the quantity and
distribution of the primeval natural agents, of which we can know nothing
beyond the boundaries of human observation, since no law, no regularity,
can be traced in it, enabling us to infer the unknown from the known. But
for the present purpose this is no disadvantage, the question being
confined within the same limits as the data. The coincidences occurred in
certain places and times, and within those we can estimate the frequency
with which such coincidences would be produced by chance. If, then, we
find from observation that A exists in one case out of every two, and B in
one case out of every three; then, if there be neither connection nor
repugnance between them, or between any of their causes, the instances in
which A and B will both exist, that is to say will co-exist, will be one
case in every six. For A exists in three cases out of six; and B, existing
in one case out of every three without regard to the presence or absence
of A, will exist in one case out of those three. There will therefore be,
of the whole number of cases, two in which A exists without B; one case of
B without A; two in which neither B nor A exists, and one case out of six
in which they both exist. If, then, in point of fact, they are found to
co-exist oftener than in one case out of six; and, consequently, A does
not exist without B so often as twice in three times, nor B without A so
often as once in every twice, there is some cause in existence which tends
to produce a conjunction between A and B.

Generalizing the result, we may say that if A occurs in a larger
proportion of the cases where B is than of the cases where B is not, then
will B also occur in a larger proportion of the cases where A is than of
the cases where A is not; and there is some connection, through causation,
between A and B. If we could ascend to the causes of the two phenomena, we
should find, at some stage, either proximate or remote, some cause or
causes common to both; and if we could ascertain what these are, we could
frame a generalization which would be true without restriction of place or
time; but until we can do so, the fact of a connection between the two
phenomena remains an empirical law.

§ 3. Having considered in what manner it may be determined whether any
given conjunction of phenomena is casual, or the result of some law, to
complete the theory of chance it is necessary that we should now consider
those effects which are partly the result of chance and partly of law, or,
in other words, in which the effects of casual conjunctions of causes are
habitually blended in one result with the effects of a constant cause.

This is a case of Composition of Causes; and the peculiarity of it is,
that instead of two or more causes intermixing their effects in a regular
manner with those of one another, we have now one constant cause,
producing an effect which is successively modified by a series of variable
causes. Thus, as summer advances, the approach of the sun to a vertical
position tends to produce a constant increase of temperature; but with
this effect of a constant cause, there are blended the effects of many
variable causes, winds, clouds, evaporation, electric agencies and the
like, so that the temperature of any given day depends in part on these
fleeting causes, and only in part on the constant cause. If the effect of
the constant cause is always accompanied and disguised by effects of
variable causes, it is impossible to ascertain the law of the constant
cause in the ordinary manner by separating it from all other causes and
observing it apart. Hence arises the necessity of an additional rule of
experimental inquiry.

When the action of a cause A is liable to be interfered with, not steadily
by the same cause or causes, but by different causes at different times,
and when these are so frequent, or so indeterminate, that we can not
possibly exclude all of them from any experiment, though we may vary them;
our resource is, to endeavor to ascertain what is the effect of all the
variable causes taken together. In order to do this, we make as many
trials as possible, preserving A invariable. The results of these
different trials will naturally be different, since the indeterminate
modifying causes are different in each; if, then, we do not find these
results to be progressive, but, on the contrary, to oscillate about a
certain point, one experiment giving a result a little greater, another a
little less, one a result tending a little more in one direction, another
a little more in the contrary direction; while the average or middle point
does not vary, but different sets of experiments (taken in as great a
variety of circumstances as possible) yield the same mean, provided only
they be sufficiently numerous; then that mean, or average result, is the
part, in each experiment, which is due to the cause A, and is the effect
which would have been obtained if A could have acted alone; the variable
remainder is the effect of chance, that is, of causes the co-existence of
which with the cause A was merely casual. The test of the sufficiency of
the induction in this case is, when any increase of the number of trials
from which the average is struck does not materially alter the average.

This kind of elimination, in which we do not eliminate any one assignable
cause, but the multitude of floating unassignable ones, may be termed the
Elimination of Chance. We afford an example of it when we repeat an
experiment, in order, by taking the mean of different results, to get rid
of the effects of the unavoidable errors of each individual experiment.
When there is no permanent cause, such as would produce a tendency to
error peculiarly in one direction, we are warranted by experience in
assuming that the errors on one side will, in a certain number of
experiments, about balance the errors on the contrary side. We therefore
repeat the experiment, until any change which is produced in the average
of the whole by further repetition, falls within limits of error
consistent with the degree of accuracy required by the purpose we have in
view.(175)

§ 4. In the supposition hitherto made, the effect of the constant cause A
has been assumed to form so great and conspicuous a part of the general
result, that its existence never could be a matter of uncertainty, and the
object of the eliminating process was only to ascertain _how much_ is
attributable to that cause; what is its exact law. Cases, however, occur
in which the effect of a constant cause is so small, compared with that of
some of the changeable causes with which it is liable to be casually
conjoined, that of itself it escapes notice, and the very existence of any
effect arising from a constant cause is first learned by the process which
in general serves only for ascertaining the quantity of that effect. This
case of induction may be characterized as follows: A given effect is known
to be chiefly, and not known not to be wholly, determined by changeable
causes. If it be wholly so produced, then if the aggregate be taken of a
sufficient number of instances, the effects of these different causes will
cancel one another. If, therefore, we do not find this to be the case,
but, on the contrary, after such a number of trials has been made that no
further increase alters the average result, we find that average to be,
not zero, but some other quantity, about which, though small in comparison
with the total effect, the effect nevertheless oscillates, and which is
the middle point in its oscillation; we may conclude this to be the effect
of some constant cause; which cause, by some of the methods already
treated of, we may hope to detect. This may be called _the discovery of a
residual phenomenon by eliminating the effects of chance_.

It is in this manner, for example, that loaded dice may be discovered. Of
course no dice are so clumsily loaded that they must always throw certain
numbers; otherwise the fraud would be instantly detected. The loading, a
constant cause, mingles with the changeable causes which determine what
cast will be thrown in each individual instance. If the dice were not
loaded, and the throw were left to depend entirely on the changeable
causes, these in a sufficient number of instances would balance one
another, and there would be no preponderant number of throws of any one
kind. If, therefore, after such a number of trials that no further
increase of their number has any material effect upon the average, we find
a preponderance in favor of a particular throw; we may conclude with
assurance that there is some constant cause acting in favor of that throw,
or, in other words, that the dice are not fair; and the exact amount of
the unfairness. In a similar manner, what is called the diurnal variation
of the barometer, which is very small compared with the variations arising
from the irregular changes in the state of the atmosphere, was discovered
by comparing the average height of the barometer at different hours of the
day. When this comparison was made, it was found that there was a small
difference, which on the average was constant, however the absolute
quantities might vary, and which difference, therefore, must be the effect
of a constant cause. This cause was afterward ascertained, deductively, to
be the rarefaction of the air, occasioned by the increase of temperature
as the day advances.

§ 5. After these general remarks on the nature of chance, we are prepared
to consider in what manner assurance may be obtained that a conjunction
between two phenomena, which has been observed a certain number of times,
is not casual, but a result of causation, and to be received, therefore,
as one of the uniformities of nature, though (until accounted for _a
priori_) only as an empirical law.

We will suppose the strongest case, namely, that the phenomenon B has
never been observed except in conjunction with A. Even then, the
probability that they are connected is not measured by the total number of
instances in which they have been found together, but by the excess of
that number above the number due to the absolutely frequency of A. If, for
example, A exists always, and therefore co-exists with every thing, no
number of instances of its co-existence with B would prove a connection;
as in our example of the fixed stars. If A be a fact of such common
occurrence that it may be presumed to be present in half of all the cases
that occur, and therefore in half the cases in which B occurs, it is only
the proportional excess above half that is to be reckoned as evidence
toward proving a connection between A and B.

In addition to the question, What is the number of coincidences which, on
an average of a great multitude of trials, may be expected to arise from
chance alone? there is also another question, namely, Of what extent of
deviation from that average is the occurrence credible, from chance alone,
in some number of instances smaller than that required for striking a fair
average? It is not only to be considered what is the general result of the
chances in the long run, but also what are the extreme limits of variation
from the general result, which may occasionally be expected as the result
of some smaller number of instances.

The consideration of the latter question, and any consideration of the
former beyond that already given to it, belong to what mathematicians term
the doctrine of chances, or, in a phrase of greater pretension, the Theory
of Probabilities.




                              Chapter XVIII.


Of The Calculation Of Chances.


§ 1. “Probability,” says Laplace,(176) “has reference partly to our
ignorance, partly to our knowledge. We know that among three or more
events, one, and only one, must happen; but there is nothing leading us to
believe that any one of them will happen rather than the others. In this
state of indecision, it is impossible for us to pronounce with certainty
on their occurrence. It is, however, probable that any one of these
events, selected at pleasure, will not take place; because we perceive
several cases, all equally possible, which exclude its occurrence, and
only one which favors it.

“The theory of chances consists in reducing all events of the same kind to
a certain number of cases equally possible, that is, such that we are
_equally undecided_ as to their existence; and in determining the number
of these cases which are favorable to the event of which the probability
is sought. The ratio of that number to the number of all the possible
cases is the measure of the probability; which is thus a fraction, having
for its numerator the number of cases favorable to the event, and for its
denominator the number of all the cases which are possible.”

To a calculation of chances, then, according to Laplace, two things are
necessary; we must know that of several events some one will certainly
happen, and no more than one; and we must not know, nor have any reason to
expect, that it will be one of these events rather than another. It has
been contended that these are not the only requisites, and that Laplace
has overlooked, in the general theoretical statement, a necessary part of
the foundation of the doctrine of chances. To be able (it has been said)
to pronounce two events equally probable, it is not enough that we should
know that one or the other must happen, and should have no grounds for
conjecturing which. Experience must have shown that the two events are of
equally frequent occurrence. Why, in tossing up a half-penny, do we reckon
it equally probable that we shall throw cross or pile? Because we know
that in any great number of throws, cross and pile are thrown about
equally often; and that the more throws we make, the more nearly the
equality is perfect. We may know this if we please by actual experiment,
or by the daily experience which life affords of events of the same
general character, or, deductively, from the effect of mechanical laws on
a symmetrical body acted upon by forces varying indefinitely in quantity
and direction. We may know it, in short, either by specific experience, or
on the evidence of our general knowledge of nature. But, in one way or the
other, we must know it, to justify us in calling the two events equally
probable; and if we knew it not, we should proceed as much at hap-hazard
in staking equal sums on the result, as in laying odds.

This view of the subject was taken in the first edition of the present
work; but I have since become convinced that the theory of chances, as
conceived by Laplace and by mathematicians generally, has not the
fundamental fallacy which I had ascribed to it.

We must remember that the probability of an event is not a quality of the
event itself, but a mere name for the degree of ground which we, or some
one else, have for expecting it. The probability of an event to one person
is a different thing from the probability of the same event to another, or
to the same person after he has acquired additional evidence. The
probability to me, that an individual of whom I know nothing but his name
will die within the year, is totally altered by my being told the next
minute that he is in the last stage of a consumption. Yet this makes no
difference in the event itself, nor in any of the causes on which it
depends. Every event is in itself certain, not probable; if we knew all,
we should either know positively that it will happen, or positively that
it will not. But its probability to us means the degree of expectation of
its occurrence, which we are warranted in entertaining by our present
evidence.

Bearing this in mind, I think it must be admitted, that even when we have
no knowledge whatever to guide our expectations, except the knowledge that
what happens must be some one of a certain number of possibilities, we may
still reasonably judge, that one supposition is more probable _to us_ than
another supposition; and if we have any interest at stake, we shall best
provide for it by acting conformably to that judgment.

§ 2. Suppose that we are required to take a ball from a box, of which we
only know that it contains balls both black and white, and none of any
other color. We know that the ball we select will be either a black or a
white ball; but we have no ground for expecting black rather than white,
or white rather than black. In that case, if we are obliged to make a
choice, and to stake something on one or the other supposition, it will,
as a question of prudence, be perfectly indifferent which; and we shall
act precisely as we should have acted if we had known beforehand that the
box contained an equal number of black and white balls. But though our
conduct would be the same, it would not be founded on any surmise that the
balls were in fact thus equally divided; for we might, on the contrary,
know by authentic information that the box contained ninety-nine balls of
one color, and only one of the other; still, if we are not told which
color has only one, and which has ninety-nine, the drawing of a white and
of a black ball will be equally probable to us. We shall have no reason
for staking any thing on the one event rather than on the other; the
option between the two will be a matter of indifference; in other words,
it will be an even chance.

But let it now be supposed that instead of two there are three
colors—white, black, and red; and that we are entirely ignorant of the
proportion in which they are mingled. We should then have no reason for
expecting one more than another, and if obliged to bet, should venture our
stake on red, white, or black with equal indifference. But should we be
indifferent whether we betted for or against some one color, as, for
instance, white? Surely not. From the very fact that black and red are
each of them separately equally probable to us with white, the two
together must be twice as probable. We should in this case expect not
white rather than white, and so much rather that we would lay two to one
upon it. It is true, there might, for aught we knew, be more white balls
than black and red together; and if so, our bet would, if we knew more, be
seen to be a disadvantageous one. But so also, for aught we knew, might
there be more red balls than black and white, or more black balls than
white and red, and in such case the effect of additional knowledge would
be to prove to us that our bet was more advantageous than we had supposed
it to be. There is in the existing state of our knowledge a rational
probability of two to one against white; a probability fit to be made a
basis of conduct. No reasonable person would lay an even wager in favor of
white against black and red; though against black alone or red alone he
might do so without imprudence.

The common theory, therefore, of the calculation of chances, appears to be
tenable. Even when we know nothing except the number of the possible and
mutually excluding contingencies, and are entirely ignorant of their
comparative frequency, we may have grounds, and grounds numerically
appreciable, for acting on one supposition rather than on another; and
this is the meaning of Probability.

§ 3. The principle, however, on which the reasoning proceeds, is
sufficiently evident. It is the obvious one that when the cases which
exist are shared among several kinds, it is impossible that _each_ of
those kinds should be a majority of the whole: on the contrary, there must
be a majority against each kind, except one at most; and if any kind has
more than its share in proportion to the total number, the others
collectively must have less. Granting this axiom, and assuming that we
have no ground for selecting any one kind as more likely than the rest to
surpass the average proportion, it follows that we can not rationally
presume this of any, which we should do if we were to bet in favor of it,
receiving less odds than in the ratio of the number of the other kinds.
Even, therefore, in this extreme case of the calculation of probabilities,
which does not rest on special experience at all, the logical ground of
the process is our knowledge—such knowledge as we then have—of the laws
governing the frequency of occurrence of the different cases; but in this
case the knowledge is limited to that which, being universal and
axiomatic, does not require reference to specific experience, or to any
considerations arising out of the special nature of the problem under
discussion.

Except, however, in such cases as games of chance, where the very purpose
in view requires ignorance instead of knowledge, I can conceive no case in
which we ought to be satisfied with such an estimate of chances as this—an
estimate founded on the absolute minimum of knowledge respecting the
subject. It is plain that, in the case of the colored balls, a very slight
ground of surmise that the white balls were really more numerous than
either of the other colors, would suffice to vitiate the whole of the
calculations made in our previous state of indifference. It would place us
in that position of more advanced knowledge, in which the probabilities,
to us, would be different from what they were before; and in estimating
these new probabilities we should have to proceed on a totally different
set of data, furnished no longer by mere counting of possible
suppositions, but by specific knowledge of facts. Such data it should
always be our endeavor to obtain; and in all inquiries, unless on subjects
equally beyond the range of our means of knowledge and our practical uses,
they may be obtained, if not good, at least better than none at all.(177)

It is obvious, too, that even when the probabilities are derived from
observation and experiment, a very slight improvement in the data, by
better observations, or by taking into fuller consideration the special
circumstances of the case, is of more use than the most elaborate
application of the calculus to probabilities founded on the data in their
previous state of inferiority. The neglect of this obvious reflection has
given rise to misapplications of the calculus of probabilities which have
made it the real opprobrium of mathematics. It is sufficient to refer to
the applications made of it to the credibility of witnesses, and to the
correctness of the verdicts of juries. In regard to the first, common
sense would dictate that it is impossible to strike a general average of
the veracity and other qualifications for true testimony of mankind, or of
any class of them; and even if it were possible, the employment of it for
such a purpose implies a misapprehension of the use of averages, which
serve, indeed, to protect those whose interest is at stake, against
mistaking the general result of large masses of instances, but are of
extremely small value as grounds of expectation in any one individual
instance, unless the case be one of those in which the great majority of
individual instances do not differ much from the average. In the case of a
witness, persons of common sense would draw their conclusions from the
degree of consistency of his statements, his conduct under
cross-examination, and the relation of the case itself to his interests,
his partialities, and his mental capacity, instead of applying so rude a
standard (even if it were capable of being verified) as the ratio between
the number of true and the number of erroneous statements which he may be
supposed to make in the course of his life.

Again, on the subject of juries or other tribunals, some mathematicians
have set out from the proposition that the judgment of any one judge or
juryman is, at least in some small degree, more likely to be right than
wrong, and have concluded that the chance of a number of persons
concurring in a wrong verdict is diminished the more the number is
increased; so that if the judges are only made sufficiently numerous, the
correctness of the judgment may be reduced almost to certainty. I say
nothing of the disregard shown to the effect produced on the moral
position of the judges by multiplying their numbers, the virtual
destruction of their individual responsibility, and weakening of the
application of their minds to the subject. I remark only the fallacy of
reasoning from a wide average to cases necessarily differing greatly from
any average. It may be true that, taking all causes one with another, the
opinion of any one of the judges would be oftener right than wrong; but
the argument forgets that in all but the more simple cases, in all cases
in which it is really of much consequence what the tribunal is, the
proposition might probably be reversed; besides which, the cause of error,
whether arising from the intricacy of the case or from some common
prejudice or mental infirmity, if it acted upon one judge, would be
extremely likely to affect all the others in the same manner, or at least
a majority, and thus render a wrong instead of a right decision more
probable the more the number was increased.

These are but samples of the errors frequently committed by men who,
having made themselves familiar with the difficult formulæ which algebra
affords for the estimation of chances under suppositions of a complex
character, like better to employ those formulæ in computing what are the
probabilities to a person half informed about a case than to look out for
means of being better informed. Before applying the doctrine of chances to
any scientific purpose, the foundation must be laid for an evaluation of
the chances, by possessing ourselves of the utmost attainable amount of
positive knowledge. The knowledge required is that of the comparative
frequency with which the different events in fact occur. For the purposes,
therefore, of the present work, it is allowable to suppose that
conclusions respecting the probability of a fact of a particular kind rest
on our knowledge of the proportion between the cases in which facts of
that kind occur, and those in which they do not occur; this knowledge
being either derived from specific experiment, or deduced from our
knowledge of the causes in operation which tend to produce, compared with
those which tend to prevent, the fact in question.

Such calculation of chances is grounded on an induction; and to render the
calculation legitimate, the induction must be a valid one. It is not less
an induction, though it does not prove that the event occurs in all cases
of a given description, but only that out of a given number of such cases
it occurs in about so many. The fraction which mathematicians use to
designate the probability of an event is the ratio of these two numbers;
the ascertained proportion between the number of cases in which the event
occurs and the sum of all the cases, those in which it occurs and in which
it does not occur, taken together. In playing at cross and pile, the
description of cases concerned are throws, and the probability of cross is
one-half, because if we throw often enough cross is thrown about once in
every two throws. In the cast of a die, the probability of ace is
one-sixth; not simply because there are six possible throws, of which ace
is one, and because we do not know any reason why one should turn up
rather than another—though I have admitted the validity of this ground in
default of a better—but because we do actually know, either by reasoning
or by experience, that in a hundred or a million of throws ace is thrown
in about one-sixth of that number, or once in six times.

§ 4. I say, “either by reasoning or by experience,” meaning specific
experience. But in estimating probabilities, it is not a matter of
indifference from which of these two sources we derive our assurance. The
probability of events, as calculated from their mere frequency in past
experience, affords a less secure basis for practical guidance than their
probability as deduced from an equally accurate knowledge of the frequency
of occurrence of their causes.

The generalization that an event occurs in ten out of every hundred cases
of a given description, is as real an induction as if the generalization
were that it occurs in all cases. But when we arrive at the conclusion by
merely counting instances in actual experience, and comparing the number
of cases in which A has been present with the number in which it has been
absent, the evidence is only that of the Method of Agreement, and the
conclusion amounts only to an empirical law. We can make a step beyond
this when we can ascend to the causes on which the occurrence of A or its
non-occurrence will depend, and form an estimate of the comparative
frequency of the causes favorable and of those unfavorable to the
occurrence. These are data of a higher order, by which the empirical law
derived from a mere numerical comparison of affirmative and negative
instances will be either corrected or confirmed, and in either case we
shall obtain a more correct measure of probability than is given by that
numerical comparison. It has been well remarked that in the kind of
examples by which the doctrine of chances is usually illustrated, that of
balls in a box, the estimate of probabilities is supported by reasons of
causation, stronger than specific experience. “What is the reason that in
a box where there are nine black balls and one white, we expect to draw a
black ball nine times as much (in other words, nine times as often,
frequency being the gauge of intensity in expectation) as a white?
Obviously because the local conditions are nine times as favorable;
because the hand may alight in nine places and get a black ball, while it
can only alight in one place and find a white ball; just for the same
reason that we do not expect to succeed in finding a friend in a crowd,
the conditions in order that we and he should come together being many and
difficult. This of course would not hold to the same extent were the white
balls of smaller size than the black, neither would the probability remain
the same; the larger ball would be much more likely to meet the
hand.”(178)

It is, in fact, evident that when once causation is admitted as a
universal law, our expectation of events can only be rationally grounded
on that law. To a person who recognizes that every event depends on
causes, a thing’s having happened once is a reason for expecting it to
happen again, only because proving that there exists, or is liable to
exist, a cause adequate to produce it.(179) The frequency of the
particular event, apart from all surmise respecting its cause, can give
rise to no other induction than that _per enumerationem simplicem_; and
the precarious inferences derived from this are superseded, and disappear
from the field as soon as the principle of causation makes its appearance
there.

Notwithstanding, however, the abstract superiority of an estimate of
probability grounded on causes, it is a fact that in almost all cases in
which chances admit of estimation sufficiently precise to render their
numerical appreciation of any practical value, the numerical data are not
drawn from knowledge of the causes, but from experience of the events
themselves. The probabilities of life at different ages or in different
climates; the probabilities of recovery from a particular disease; the
chances of the birth of male or female offspring; the chances of the
destruction of houses or other property by fire; the chances of the loss
of a ship in a particular voyage, are deduced from bills of mortality,
returns from hospitals, registers of births, of shipwrecks, etc., that is,
from the observed frequency not of the causes, but of the effects. The
reason is, that in all these classes of facts the causes are either not
amenable to direct observation at all, or not with the requisite
precision, and we have no means of judging of their frequency except from
the empirical law afforded by the frequency of the effects. The inference
does not the less depend on causation alone. We reason from an effect to a
similar effect by passing through the cause. If the actuary of an
insurance office infers from his tables that among a hundred persons now
living of a particular age, five on the average will attain the age of
seventy, his inference is legitimate, not for the simple reason that this
is the proportion who have lived till seventy in times past, but because
the fact of their having so lived shows that this is the proportion
existing, at that place and time, between the causes which prolong life to
the age of seventy and those tending to bring it to an earlier close.(180)

§ 5. From the preceding principles it is easy to deduce the demonstration
of that theorem of the doctrine of probabilities which is the foundation
of its application to inquiries for ascertaining the occurrence of a given
event, or the reality of an individual fact. The signs or evidences by
which a fact is usually proved are some of its consequences; and the
inquiry hinges upon determining what cause is most likely to have produced
a given effect. The theorem applicable to such investigations is the Sixth
Principle in Laplace’s “_Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités_,” which
is described by him as the “fundamental principle of that branch of the
Analysis of Chances which consists in ascending from events to their
causes.”(181)

Given an effect to be accounted for, and there being several causes which
might have produced it, but of the presence of which in the particular
case nothing is known; the probability that the effect was produced by any
one of these causes _is as the antecedent probability of the cause,
multiplied by the probability that the cause, if it existed, would have
produced the given effect_.

Let M be the effect, and A, B, two causes, by either of which it might
have been produced. To find the probability that it was produced by the
one and not by the other, ascertain which of the two is most likely to
have existed, and which of them, if it did exist, was most likely to
produce the effect M: the probability sought is a compound of these two
probabilities.

CASE I. Let the causes be both alike in the second respect: either A or B,
when it exists, being supposed equally likely (or equally certain) to
produce M; but let A be in itself twice as likely as B to exist, that is,
twice as frequent a phenomenon. Then it is twice as likely to have existed
in this case, and to have been the cause which produced M.

For, since A exists in nature twice as often as B, in any 300 cases in
which one or other existed, A has existed 200 times and B 100. But either
A or B must have existed wherever M is produced; therefore, in 300 times
that M is produced, A was the producing cause 200 times, B only 100, that
is, in the ratio of 2 to 1. Thus, then, if the causes are alike in their
capacity of producing the effect, the probability as to which actually
produced it is in the ratio of their antecedent probabilities.

CASE II. Reversing the last hypothesis, let us suppose that the causes are
equally frequent, equally likely to have existed, but not equally likely,
if they did exist, to produce M; that in three times in which A occurs, it
produces that effect twice, while B, in three times, produces it only
once. Since the two causes are equally frequent in their occurrence; in
every six times that either one or the other exists, A exists three times
and B three times. A, of its three times, produces M in two; B, of its
three times, produces M in one. Thus, in the whole six times, M is only
produced thrice; but of that thrice it is produced twice by A, once only
by B. Consequently, when the antecedent probabilities of the causes are
equal, the chances that the effect was produced by them are in the ratio
of the probabilities that if they did exist they would produce the effect.

CASE III. The third case, that in which the causes are unlike in both
respects, is solved by what has preceded. For, when a quantity depends on
two other quantities, in such a manner that while either of them remains
constant it is proportional to the other, it must necessarily be
proportional to the product of the two quantities, the product being the
only function of the two which obeys that law of variation. Therefore, the
probability that M was produced by either cause, is as the antecedent
probability of the cause, multiplied by the probability that if it existed
it would produce M. Which was to be demonstrated.

Or we may prove the third case as we proved the first and second. Let A be
twice as frequent as B, and let them also be unequally likely, when they
exist, to produce M; let A produce it twice in four times, B thrice in
four times. The antecedent probability of A is to that of B as 2 to 1; the
probabilities of their producing M are as 2 to 3; the product of these
ratios is the ratio of 4 to 3; and this will be the ratio of the
probabilities that A or B was the producing cause in the given instance.
For, since A is twice as frequent as B, out of twelve cases in which one
or other exists, A exists in 8 and B in 4. But of its eight cases, A, by
the supposition, produces M in only 4, while B of its four cases produces
M in 3. M, therefore, is only produced at all in seven of the twelve
cases; but in four of these it is produced by A, in three by B; hence the
probabilities of its being produced by A and by B are as 4 to 3, and are
expressed by the fractions 4/7 and 3/7. Which was to be demonstrated.

§ 6. It remains to examine the bearing of the doctrine of chances on the
peculiar problem which occupied us in the preceding chapter, namely, how
to distinguish coincidences which are casual from those which are the
result of law; from those in which the facts which accompany or follow one
another are somehow connected through causation.

The doctrine of chances affords means by which, if we knew the _average_
number of coincidences to be looked for between two phenomena connected
only casually, we could determine how often any given deviation from that
average will occur by chance. If the probability of any casual
coincidence, considered in itself, be 1/_m_, the probability that the same
coincidence will be repeated _n_ times in succession is 1/_m_n. For
example, in one throw of a die the probability of ace being 1/6; the
probability of throwing ace twice in succession will be 1 divided by the
square of 6, or 1/36. For ace is thrown at the first throw once in six, or
six in thirty-six times, and of those six, the die being cast again, ace
will be thrown but once; being altogether once in thirty-six times. The
chance of the same cast three times successively is, by a similar
reasoning, 1/63 or 1/216; that is, the event will happen, on a large
average, only once in two hundred and sixteen throws.

We have thus a rule by which to estimate the probability that any given
series of coincidences arises from chance, provided we can measure
correctly the probability of a single coincidence. If we can obtain an
equally precise expression for the probability that the same series of
coincidences arises from causation, we should only have to compare the
numbers. This, however, can rarely be done. Let us see what degree of
approximation can practically be made to the necessary precision.

The question falls within Laplace’s sixth principle, just demonstrated.
The given fact, that is to say, the series of coincidences, may have
originated either in a casual conjunction of causes or in a law of nature.
The probabilities, therefore, that the fact originated in these two modes,
are as their antecedent probabilities, multiplied by the probabilities
that if they existed they would produce the effect. But the particular
combination of chances, if it occurred, or the law of nature if real,
would certainly produce the series of coincidences. The probabilities,
therefore, that the coincidences are produced by the two causes in
question are as the antecedent probabilities of the causes. One of these,
the antecedent probability of the combination of mere chances which would
produce the given result, is an appreciable quantity. The antecedent
probability of the other supposition may be susceptible of a more or less
exact estimation, according to the nature of the case.

In some cases, the coincidence, supposing it to be the result of causation
at all, must be the result of a known cause; as the succession of aces, if
not accidental, must arise from the loading of the die. In such cases we
may be able to form a conjecture as to the antecedent probability of such
a circumstance from the characters of the parties concerned, or other such
evidence; but it would be impossible to estimate that probability with any
thing like numerical precision. The counter-probability, however, that of
the accidental origin of the coincidence, dwindling so rapidly as it does
at each new trial, the stage is soon reached at which the chance of
unfairness in the die, however small in itself, must be greater than that
of a casual coincidence; and on this ground, a practical decision can
generally be come to without much hesitation, if there be the power of
repeating the experiment.

When, however, the coincidence is one which can not be accounted for by
any known cause, and the connection between the two phenomena, if produced
by causation, must be the result of some law of nature hitherto unknown;
which is the case we had in view in the last chapter; then, though the
probability of a casual coincidence may be capable of appreciation, that
of the counter-supposition, the existence of an undiscovered law of
nature, is clearly unsusceptible of even an approximate valuation. In
order to have the data which such a case would require, it would be
necessary to know what proportion of all the individual sequences or
co-existences occurring in nature are the result of law, and what
proportion are mere casual coincidences. It being evident that we can not
form any plausible conjecture as to this proportion, much less appreciate
it numerically, we can not attempt any precise estimation of the
comparitive probabilities. But of this we are sure, that the detection of
an unknown law of nature—of some previously unrecognized constancy of
conjunction among phenomena—is no uncommon event. If, therefore, the
number of instances in which a coincidence is observed, over and above
that which would arise on the average from the mere concurrence of
chances, be such that so great an amount of coincidences from accident
alone would be an extremely uncommon event; we have reason to conclude
that the coincidence is the effect of causation, and may be received
(subject to correction from further experience) as an empirical law.
Further than this, in point of precision, we can not go; nor, in most
cases, is greater precision required, for the solution of any practical
doubt.(182)




                               Chapter XIX.


Of The Extension Of Derivative Laws To Adjacent Cases.


§ 1. We have had frequent occasion to notice the inferior generality of
derivative laws, compared with the ultimate laws from which they are
derived. This inferiority, which affects not only the extent of the
propositions themselves, but their degree of certainty within that extent,
is most conspicuous in the uniformities of co-existence and sequence
obtaining between effects which depend ultimately on different primeval
causes. Such uniformities will only obtain where there exists the same
collocation of those primeval causes. If the collocation varies, though
the laws themselves remain the same, a totally different set of derivative
uniformities may, and generally will, be the result.

Even where the derivative uniformity is between different effects of the
same cause, it will by no means obtain as universally as the law of the
cause itself. If _a_ and _b_ accompany or succeed one another as effects
of the cause A, it by no means follows that A is the only cause which can
produce them, or that if there be another cause, as B, capable of
producing _a_, it must produce _b_ likewise. The conjunction, therefore,
of _a_ and _b_ perhaps does not hold universally, but only in the
instances in which _a_ arises from A. When it is produced by _a_ cause
other than A, _a_ and _b_ may be dissevered. Day (for example) is always
in our experience followed by night; but day is not the cause of night;
both are successive effects of _a_ common cause, the periodical passage of
the spectator into and out of the earth’s shadow, consequent on the
earth’s rotation, and on the illuminating property of the sun. If,
therefore, day is ever produced by a different cause or set of causes from
this, day will not, or at least may not, be followed by night. On the
sun’s own surface, for instance, this may be the case.

Finally, even when the derivative uniformity is itself a law of causation
(resulting from the combination of several causes), it is not altogether
independent of collocations. If a cause supervenes, capable of wholly or
partially counteracting the effect of any one of the conjoined causes, the
effect will no longer conform to the derivative law. While, therefore,
each ultimate law is only liable to frustration from one set of
counteracting causes, the derivative law is liable to it from several.
Now, the possibility of the occurrence of counteracting causes which do
not arise from any of the conditions involved in the law itself depends on
the original collocations.

It is true that, as we formerly remarked, laws of causation, whether
ultimate or derivative, are, in most cases, fulfilled even when
counteracted; the cause produces its effect, though that effect is
destroyed by something else. That the effect may be frustrated, is,
therefore, no objection to the universality of laws of causation. But it
is fatal to the universality of the sequences or co-existences of effects,
which compose the greater part of the derivative laws flowing from laws of
causation. When, from the law of a certain combination of causes, there
results a certain order in the effects; as from the combination of a
single sun with the rotation of an opaque body round its axis, there
results, on the whole surface of that opaque body, an alternation of day
and night; then, if we suppose one of the combined causes counteracted,
the rotation stopped, the sun extinguished, or a second sun superadded,
the truth of that particular law of causation is in no way affected; it is
still true that one sun shining on an opaque revolving body will
alternately produce day and night; but since the sun no longer does shine
on such a body, the derivative uniformity, the succession of day and night
on the given planet, is no longer true. Those derivative uniformities,
therefore, which are not laws of causation, are (except in the rare case
of their depending on one cause alone, not on a combination of causes)
always more or less contingent on collocations; and are hence subject to
the characteristic infirmity of empirical laws—that of being admissible
only where the collocations are known by experience to be such as are
requisite for the truth of the law; that is, only within the conditions of
time and place confirmed by actual observation.

§ 2. This principle, when stated in general terms, seems clear and
indisputable; yet many of the ordinary judgments of mankind, the propriety
of which is not questioned, have at least the semblance of being
inconsistent with it. On what grounds, it may be asked, do we expect that
the sun will rise to-morrow? To-morrow is beyond the limits of time
comprehended in our observations. They have extended over some thousands
of years past, but they do not include the future. Yet we infer with
confidence that the sun will rise to-morrow; and nobody doubts that we are
entitled to do so. Let us consider what is the warrant for this
confidence.

In the example in question, we know the causes on which the derivative
uniformity depends. They are: the sun giving out light, the earth in a
state of rotation and intercepting light. The induction which shows these
to be the real causes, and not merely prior effects of a common cause,
being complete, the only circumstances which could defeat the derivative
law are such as would destroy or counteract one or other of the combined
causes. While the causes exist and are not counteracted, the effect will
continue. If they exist and are not counteracted to-morrow, the sun will
rise to-morrow.

Since the causes, namely, the sun and the earth, the one in the state of
giving out light, the other in a state of rotation, will exist until
something destroys them, all depends on the probabilities of their
destruction, or of their counteraction. We know by observation (omitting
the inferential proofs of an existence for thousands of ages anterior)
that these phenomena have continued for (say) five thousand years. Within
that time there has existed no cause sufficient to diminish them
appreciably, nor which has counteracted their effect in any appreciable
degree. The chance, therefore, that the sun may not rise to-morrow amounts
to the chance that some cause, which has not manifested itself in the
smallest degree during five thousand years, will exist to-morrow in such
intensity as to destroy the sun or the earth, the sun’s light or the
earth’s rotation, or to produce an immense disturbance in the effect
resulting from those causes.

Now, if such a cause will exist to-morrow, or at any future time, some
cause, proximate or remote, of that cause must exist now, and must have
existed during the whole of the five thousand years. If, therefore, the
sun do not rise to-morrow, it will be because some cause has existed, the
effects of which, though during five thousand years they have not amounted
to a perceptible quantity, will in one day become overwhelming. Since this
cause has not been recognized during such an interval of time by observers
stationed on our earth, it must, if it be a single agent, be either one
whose effects develop themselves gradually and very slowly, or one which
existed in regions beyond our observation, and is now on the point of
arriving in our part of the universe. Now all causes which we have
experience of act according to laws incompatible with the supposition that
their effects, after accumulating so slowly as to be imperceptible for
five thousand years, should start into immensity in a single day. No
mathematical law of proportion between an effect and the quantity or
relations of its cause could produce such contradictory results. The
sudden development of an effect of which there was no previous trace
always arises from the coming together of several distinct causes, not
previously conjoined; but if such sudden conjunction is destined to take
place, the causes, or _their_ causes, must have existed during the entire
five thousand years; and their not having once come together during that
period shows how rare that particular combination is. We have, therefore,
the warrant of a rigid induction for considering it probable, in a degree
undistinguishable from certainty, that the known conditions requisite for
the sun’s rising will exist to-morrow.

§ 3. But this extension of derivative laws, not causative, beyond the
limits of observation can only be to _adjacent_ cases. If, instead of
to-morrow, we had said this day twenty thousand years, the inductions
would have been any thing but conclusive. That a cause which, in
opposition to very powerful causes, produced no perceptible effect during
five thousand years, should produce a very considerable one by the end of
twenty thousand, has nothing in it which is not in conformity with our
experience of causes. We know many agents, the effect of which in a short
period does not amount to a perceptible quantity, but by accumulating for
a much longer period becomes considerable. Besides, looking at the immense
multitude of the heavenly bodies, their vast distances, and the rapidity
of the motion of such of them as are known to move, it is a supposition
not at all contradictory to experience that some body may be in motion
toward us, or we toward it, within the limits of whose influence we have
not come during five thousand years, but which in twenty thousand more may
be producing effects upon us of the most extraordinary kind. Or the fact
which is capable of preventing sunrise may be, not the cumulative effect
of one cause, but some new combination of causes; and the chances
favorable to that combination, though they have not produced it once in
five thousand years, may produce it once in twenty thousand. So that the
inductions which authorize us to expect future events, grow weaker and
weaker the further we look into the future, and at length become
inappreciable.

We have considered the probabilities of the sun’s rising to-morrow, as
derived from the real laws; that is, from the laws of the causes on which
that uniformity is dependent. Let us now consider how the matter would
have stood if the uniformity had been known only as an empirical law; if
we had not been aware that the sun’s light and the earth’s rotation (or
the sun’s motion) were the causes on which the periodical occurrence of
daylight depends. We could have extended this empirical law to cases
adjacent in time, though not to so great a distance of time as we can now.
Having evidence that the effects had remained unaltered and been
punctually conjoined for five thousand years, we could infer that the
unknown causes on which the conjunction is dependent had existed
undiminished and uncounteracted during the same period. The same
conclusions, therefore, would follow as in the preceding case, except that
we should only know that during five thousand years nothing had occurred
to defeat perceptibly this particular effect; while, when we know the
causes, we have the additional assurance that during that interval no such
change has been noticeable in the causes themselves as by any degree of
multiplication or length of continuance could defeat the effect.

To this must be added, that when we know the causes, we may be able to
judge whether there exists any known cause capable of counteracting them,
while as long as they are unknown, we can not be sure but that if we did
know them, we could predict their destruction from causes actually in
existence. A bed-ridden savage, who had never seen the cataract of
Niagara, but who lived within hearing of it, might imagine that the sound
he heard would endure forever; but if he knew it to be the effect of a
rush of waters over a barrier of rock which is progressively wearing away,
he would know that within a number of ages which may be calculated it will
be heard no more. In proportion, therefore, to our ignorance of the causes
on which the empirical law depends, we can be less assured that it will
continue to hold good; and the further we look into futurity, the less
improbable is it that some one of the causes, whose co-existence gives
rise to the derivative uniformity, may be destroyed or counteracted. With
every prolongation of time the chances multiply of such an event; that is
to say, its non-occurrence hitherto becomes a less guarantee of its not
occurring within the given time. If, then, it is only to cases which in
point of time are adjacent (or nearly adjacent) to those which we have
actually observed, that _any_ derivative law, not of causation, can be
extended with an assurance equivalent to certainty, much more is this true
of a merely empirical law. Happily, for the purposes of life it is to such
cases alone that we can almost ever have occasion to extend them.

In respect of place, it might seem that a merely empirical law could not
be extended even to adjacent cases; that we could have no assurance of its
being true in any place where it has not been specially observed. The past
duration of a cause is a guarantee for its future existence, unless
something occurs to destroy it; but the existence of a cause in one or any
number of places is no guarantee for its existence in any other place,
since there is no uniformity in the collocations of primeval causes. When,
therefore, an empirical law is extended beyond the local limits within
which it has been found true by observation, the cases to which it is thus
extended must be such as are presumably within the influence of the same
individual agents. If we discover a new planet within the known bounds of
the solar system (or even beyond those bounds, but indicating its
connection with the system by revolving round the sun), we may conclude,
with great probability, that it revolves on its axis. For all the known
planets do so; and this uniformity points to some common cause, antecedent
to the first records of astronomical observation; and though the nature of
this cause can only be matter of conjecture, yet if it be, as is not
unlikely, and as Laplace’s theory supposes, not merely the same kind of
cause, but the same individual cause (such as an impulse given to all the
bodies at once), that cause, acting at the extreme points of the space
occupied by the sun and planets, is likely, unless defeated by some
counteracting cause, to have acted at every intermediate point, and
probably somewhat beyond; and therefore acted, in all probability, upon
the supposed newly-discovered planet.

When, therefore, effects which are always found conjoined can be traced
with any probability to an identical (and not merely a similar) origin, we
may with the same probability extend the empirical law of their
conjunction to all places within the extreme local boundaries within which
the fact has been observed, subject to the possibility of counteracting
causes in some portion of the field. Still more confidently may we do so
when the law is not merely empirical; when the phenomena which we find
conjoined are effects of ascertained causes, from the laws of which the
conjunction of their effects is deducible. In that case, we may both
extend the derivative uniformity over a larger space, and with less
abatement for the chance of counteracting causes. The first, because
instead of the local boundaries of our observation of the fact itself, we
may include the extreme boundaries of the ascertained influence of its
causes. Thus the succession of day and night, we know, holds true of all
the bodies of the solar system except the sun itself; but we know this
only because we are acquainted with the causes. If we were not, we could
not extend the proposition beyond the orbits of the earth and moon, at
both extremities of which we have the evidence of observation for its
truth. With respect to the probability of counteracting causes, it has
been seen that this calls for a greater abatement of confidence, in
proportion to our ignorance of the causes on which the phenomena depend.
On both accounts, therefore, a derivative law which we know how to
resolve, is susceptible of a greater extension to cases adjacent in place,
than a merely empirical law.




                               Chapter XX.


Of Analogy.


§ 1. The word Analogy, as the name of a mode of reasoning, is generally
taken for some kind of argument supposed to be of an inductive nature, but
not amounting to a complete induction. There is no word, however, which is
used more loosely, or in a greater variety of senses, than Analogy. It
sometimes stands for arguments which may be examples of the most rigorous
induction. Archbishop Whately, for instance, following Ferguson and other
writers, defines Analogy conformably to its primitive acceptation, that
which was given to it by mathematicians: Resemblance of Relations. In this
sense, when a country which has sent out colonies is termed the mother
country, the expression is analogical, signifying that the colonies of a
country stand in the same _relation_ to her in which children stand to
their parents. And if any inference be drawn from this resemblance of
relations, as, for instance, that obedience or affection is due from
colonies to the mother country, this is called reasoning by analogy. Or,
if it be argued that a nation is most beneficially governed by an assembly
elected by the people, from the admitted fact that other associations for
a common purpose, such as joint-stock companies, are best managed by a
committee chosen by the parties interested; this, too, is an argument from
analogy in the preceding sense, because its foundation is, not that a
nation is like a joint-stock company, or Parliament like a board of
directors, but that Parliament stands in the same _relation_ to the nation
in which a board of directors stands to a joint-stock company. Now, in an
argument of this nature, there is no inherent inferiority of
conclusiveness. Like other arguments from resemblance, it may amount to
nothing, or it may be a perfect and conclusive induction. The circumstance
in which the two cases resemble, may be capable of being shown to be the
_material_ circumstance; to be that on which all the consequences,
necessary to be taken into account in the particular discussion, depend.
In the example last given, the resemblance is one of relation; the
_fundamentum relationis_ being the management, by a few persons, of
affairs in which a much greater number are interested along with them.
Now, some may contend that this circumstance which is common to the two
cases, and the various consequences which follow from it, have the chief
share in determining all the effects which make up what we term good or
bad administration. If they can establish this, their argument has the
force of a rigorous induction; if they can not, they are said to have
failed in proving the analogy between the two cases; a mode of speech
which implies that when the analogy can be proved, the argument founded on
it can not be resisted.

§ 2. It is on the whole more usual, however, to extend the name of
analogical evidence to arguments from any sort of resemblance, provided
they do not amount to a complete induction; without peculiarly
distinguishing resemblance of relations. Analogical reasoning, in this
sense, may be reduced to the following formula: Two things resemble each
other in one or more respects; a certain proposition is true of the one;
therefore it is true of the other. But we have nothing here by which to
discriminate analogy from induction, since this type will serve for all
reasoning from experience. In the strictest induction, equally with the
faintest analogy, we conclude because A resembles B in one or more
properties, that it does so in a certain other property. The difference
is, that in the case of a complete induction it has been previously shown,
by due comparison of instances, that there is an invariable conjunction
between the former property or properties and the latter property; but in
what is called analogical reasoning, no such conjunction has been made
out. There have been no opportunities of putting in practice the Method of
Difference, or even the Method of Agreement; but we conclude (and that is
all which the argument of analogy amounts to) that a fact _m_, known to be
true of A, is more likely to be true of B if B agrees with A in some of
its properties (even though no connection is known to exist between _m_
and those properties), than if no resemblance at all could be traced
between B and any other thing known to possess the attribute _m_.

To this argument it is of course requisite that the properties common to A
with B shall be merely not known to be connected with _m_; they must not
be properties known to be unconnected with it. If, either by processes of
elimination, or by deduction from previous knowledge of the laws of the
properties in question, it can be concluded that they have nothing to do
with _m_, the argument of analogy is put out of court. The supposition
must be that _m_ is an effect really dependent on some property of A, but
we know not on which. We can not point out any of the properties of A,
which is the cause of _m_, or united with it by any law. After rejecting
all which we know to have nothing to do with it, there remain several
between which we are unable to decide; of which remaining properties, B
possesses one or more. This, accordingly, we consider as affording
grounds, of more or less strength, for concluding by analogy that B
possesses the attribute _m_.

There can be no doubt that every such resemblance which can be pointed out
between B and A, affords some degree of probability, beyond what would
otherwise exist, in favor of the conclusion drawn from it. If B resembled
A in all its ultimate properties, its possessing the attribute _m_ would
be a certainty, not a probability; and every resemblance which can be
shown to exist between them, places it by so much the nearer to that
point. If the resemblance be in an ultimate property, there will be
resemblance in all the derivative properties dependent on that ultimate
property, and of these _m_ may be one. If the resemblance be in a
derivative property, there is reason to expect resemblance in the ultimate
property on which it depends, and in the other derivative properties
dependent on the same ultimate property. Every resemblance which can be
shown to exist, affords ground for expecting an indefinite number of other
resemblances; the particular resemblance sought will, therefore, be
oftener found among things thus known to resemble, than among things
between which we know of no resemblance.

For example, I might infer that there are probably inhabitants in the
moon, because there are inhabitants on the earth, in the sea, and in the
air: and this is the evidence of analogy. The circumstance of having
inhabitants is here assumed not to be an ultimate property, but (as is
reasonable to suppose) a consequence of other properties; and depending,
therefore, in the case of the earth, on some of its properties as a
portion of the universe, but on which of those properties we know not. Now
the moon resembles the earth in being a solid, opaque, nearly spherical
substance, appearing to contain, or to have contained, active volcanoes;
receiving heat and light from the sun, in about the same quantity as our
earth; revolving on its axis; composed of materials which gravitate, and
obeying all the various laws resulting from that property. And I think no
one will deny that if this were all that was known of the moon, the
existence of inhabitants in that luminary would derive from these various
resemblances to the earth, a greater degree of probability than it would
otherwise have; though the amount of the augmentation it would be useless
to attempt to estimate.

If, however, every resemblance proved between B and A, in any point not
known to be immaterial with respect to _m_, forms some additional reason
for presuming that B has the attribute _m_; it is clear, _è contra_, that
every dissimilarity which can be proved between them furnishes a
counter-probability of the same nature on the other side. It is not,
indeed, unusual that different ultimate properties should, in some
particular instances, produce the same derivative property; but on the
whole it is certain that things which differ in their ultimate properties,
will differ at least as much in the aggregate of their derivative
properties, and that the differences which are unknown will, on the
average of cases, bear some proportion to those which are known. There
will, therefore, be a competition between the known points of agreement
and the known points of difference in A and B; and according as the one or
the other may be deemed to preponderate, the probability derived from
analogy will be for or against B’s having the property _m_. The moon, for
instance, agrees with the earth in the circumstances already mentioned;
but differs in being smaller, in having its surface more unequal, and
apparently volcanic throughout, in having, at least on the side next the
earth, no atmosphere sufficient to refract light, no clouds, and (it is
therefore concluded) no water. These differences, considered merely as
such, might perhaps balance the resemblances, so that analogy would afford
no presumption either way. But considering that some of the circumstances
which are wanting on the moon are among those which, on the earth, are
found to be indispensable conditions of animal life, we may conclude that
if that phenomenon does exist in the moon (or at all events on the nearer
side), it must be as an effect of causes totally different from those on
which it depends here; as a consequence, therefore, of the moon’s
differences from the earth, not of the points of agreement. Viewed in this
light, all the resemblances which exist become presumptions against, not
in favor of, the moon’s being inhabited. Since life can not exist there in
the manner in which it exists here, the greater the resemblance of the
lunar world to the terrestrial in other respects, the less reason we have
to believe that it can contain life.

There are, however, other bodies in our system, between which and the
earth there is a much closer resemblance; which possess an atmosphere,
clouds, consequently water (or some fluid analogous to it), and even give
strong indications of snow in their polar regions; while the cold, or
heat, though differing greatly on the average from ours, is, in some parts
at least of those planets, possibly not more extreme than in some regions
of our own which are habitable. To balance these agreements, the
ascertained differences are chiefly in the average light and heat,
velocity of rotation, density of material, intensity of gravity, and
similar circumstances of a secondary kind. With regard to these planets,
therefore, the argument of analogy gives a decided preponderance in favor
of their resembling the earth in any of its derivative properties, such as
that of having inhabitants; though when we consider how immeasurably
multitudinous are those of their properties which we are entirely ignorant
of, compared with the few which we know, we can attach but trifling weight
to any considerations of resemblance in which the known elements bear so
inconsiderable a proportion to the unknown.

Besides the competition between analogy and diversity, there may be a
competition of conflicting analogies. The new case may be similar in some
of its circumstances to cases in which the fact _m_ exists, but in others
to cases in which it is known not to exist. Amber has some properties in
common with vegetable, others with mineral products. A painting of unknown
origin may resemble, in certain of its characters, known works of a
particular master, but in others it may as strikingly resemble those of
some other painter. A vase may bear some analogy to works of Grecian, and
some to those of Etruscan, or Egyptian art. We are of course supposing
that it does not possess any quality which has been ascertained, by a
sufficient induction, to be a conclusive mark either of the one or of the
other.

§ 3. Since the value of an analogical argument inferring one resemblance
from other resemblances without any antecedent evidence of a connection
between them, depends on the extent of ascertained resemblance, compared
first with the amount of ascertained difference, and next with the extent
of the unexplored region of unascertained properties; it follows that
where the resemblance is very great, the ascertained difference very
small, and our knowledge of the subject-matter tolerably extensive, the
argument from analogy may approach in strength very near to a valid
induction. If, after much observation of B, we find that it agrees with A
in nine out of ten of its known properties, we may conclude with a
probability of nine to one, that it will possess any given derivative
property of A. If we discover, for example, an unknown animal or plant,
resembling closely some known one in the greater number of the properties
we observe in it, but differing in some few, we may reasonably expect to
find in the unobserved remainder of its properties, a general agreement
with those of the former; but also a difference corresponding
proportionately to the amount of observed diversity.

It thus appears that the conclusions derived from analogy are only of any
considerable value, when the case to which we reason is an adjacent case;
adjacent, not as before, in place or time, but in circumstances. In the
case of effects of which the causes are imperfectly or not at all known,
when consequently the observed order of their occurrence amounts only to
an empirical law, it often happens that the conditions which have
co-existed whenever the effect was observed, have been very numerous. Now
if a new case presents itself, in which all these conditions do not exist,
but the far greater part of them do, some one or a few only being wanting,
the inference that the effect will occur, notwithstanding this deficiency
of complete resemblance to the cases in which it has been observed, may,
though of the nature of analogy, possess a high degree of probability. It
is hardly necessary to add that, however considerable this probability may
be, no competent inquirer into nature will rest satisfied with it when a
complete induction is attainable; but will consider the analogy as a mere
guide-post, pointing out the direction in which more rigorous
investigations should be prosecuted.

It is in this last respect that considerations of analogy have the highest
scientific value. The cases in which analogical evidence affords in itself
any very high degree of probability, are, as we have observed, only those
in which the resemblance is very close and extensive; but there is no
analogy, however faint, which may not be of the utmost value in suggesting
experiments or observations that may lead to more positive conclusions.
When the agents and their effects are out of the reach of further
observation and experiment, as in the speculations already alluded to
respecting the moon and planets, such slight probabilities are no more
than an interesting theme for the pleasant exercise of imagination; but
any suspicion, however slight, that sets an ingenious person at work to
contrive an experiment, or affords a reason for trying one experiment
rather than another, may be of the greatest benefit to science.

On this ground, though I can not accept as positive truths any of those
scientific hypotheses which are unsusceptible of being ultimately brought
to the test of actual induction, such, for instance, as the two theories
of light, the emission theory of the last century, and the undulatory
theory which predominates in the present, I am yet unable to agree with
those who consider such hypotheses to be worthy of entire disregard. As is
well said by Hartley (and concurred in by a thinker in general so
diametrically opposed to Hartley’s opinions as Dugald Stewart), “any
hypothesis which has so much plausibility as to explain a considerable
number of facts, helps us to digest these facts in proper order, to bring
new ones to light, and make _experimenta crucis_ for the sake of future
inquirers.”(183) If an hypothesis both explains known facts, and has led
to the prediction of others previously unknown, and since verified by
experience, the laws of the phenomenon which is the subject of inquiry
must bear at least a great similarity to those of the class of phenomena
to which the hypothesis assimilates it; and since the analogy which
extends so far may probably extend further, nothing is more likely to
suggest experiments tending to throw light upon the real properties of the
phenomenon, than the following out such an hypothesis. But to this end it
is by no means necessary that the hypothesis be mistaken for a scientific
truth. On the contrary, that illusion is in this respect, as in every
other, an impediment to the progress of real knowledge, by leading
inquirers to restrict themselves arbitrarily to the particular hypothesis
which is most accredited at the time, instead of looking out for every
class of phenomena between the laws of which and those of the given
phenomenon any analogy exists, and trying all such experiments as may tend
to the discovery of ulterior analogies pointing in the same direction.




                               Chapter XXI.


Of The Evidence Of The Law Of Universal Causation.


§ 1. We have now completed our review of the logical processes by which
the laws, or uniformities, of the sequence of phenomena, and those
uniformities in their co-existence which depend on the laws of their
sequence, are ascertained or tested. As we recognized in the commencement,
and have been enabled to see more clearly in the progress of the
investigation, the basis of all these logical operations is the law of
causation.

The validity of all the Inductive Methods depends on the assumption that
every event, or the beginning of every phenomenon, must have some cause;
some antecedent, on the existence of which it is invariably and
unconditionally consequent. In the Method of Agreement this is obvious;
that method avowedly proceeding on the supposition that we have found the
true cause as soon as we have negatived every other. The assertion is
equally true of the Method of Difference. That method authorizes us to
infer a general law from two instances; one, in which A exists together
with a multitude of other circumstances, and B follows; another, in which,
A being removed, and all other circumstances remaining the same, B is
prevented. What, however, does this prove? It proves that B, in the
particular instance, can not have had any other cause than A; but to
conclude from this that A was the cause, or that A will on other occasions
be followed by B, is only allowable on the assumption that B must have
some cause; that among its antecedents in any single instance in which it
occurs, there must be one which has the capacity of producing it at other
times. This being admitted, it is seen that in the case in question that
antecedent can be no other than A; but that if it be no other than A it
must be A, is not proved, by these instances at least, but taken for
granted. There is no need to spend time in proving that the same thing is
true of the other Inductive Methods. The universality of the law of
causation is assumed in them all.

But is this assumption warranted? Doubtless (it may be said) _most_
phenomena are connected as effects with some antecedent or cause, that is,
are never produced unless some assignable fact has preceded them; but the
very circumstance that complicated processes of induction are sometimes
necessary, shows that cases exist in which this regular order of
succession is not apparent to our unaided apprehension. If, then, the
processes which bring these cases within the same category with the rest,
require that we should assume the universality of the very law which they
do not at first sight appear to exemplify, is not this a _petitio
principii_? Can we prove a proposition, by an argument which takes it for
granted? And if not so proved, on what evidence does it rest?

For this difficulty, which I have purposely stated in the strongest terms
it will admit of, the school of metaphysicians who have long predominated
in this country find a ready salvo. They affirm, that the universality of
causation is a truth which we can not help believing; that the belief in
it is an instinct, one of the laws of our believing faculty. As the proof
of this, they say, and they have nothing else to say, that every body does
believe it; and they number it among the propositions, rather numerous in
their catalogue, which may be logically argued against, and perhaps can
not be logically proved, but which are of higher authority than logic, and
so essentially inherent in the human mind, that even he who denies them in
speculation, shows by his habitual practice that his arguments make no
impression upon himself.

Into the merits of this question, considered as one of psychology, it
would be foreign to my purpose to enter here; but I must protest against
adducing, as evidence of the truth of a fact in external nature, the
disposition, however strong or however general, of the human mind to
believe it. Belief is not proof, and does not dispense with the necessity
of proof. I am aware, that to ask for evidence of a proposition which we
are supposed to believe instinctively, is to expose one’s self to the
charge of rejecting the authority of the human faculties; which of course
no one can consistently do, since the human faculties are all which any
one has to judge by; and inasmuch as the meaning of the word evidence is
supposed to be, something which when laid before the mind, induces it to
believe; to demand evidence when the belief is insured by the mind’s own
laws, is supposed to be appealing to the intellect against the intellect.
But this, I apprehend, is a misunderstanding of the nature of evidence. By
evidence is not meant any thing and every thing which produces belief.
There are many things which generate belief besides evidence. A mere
strong association of ideas often causes a belief so intense as to be
unshakable by experience or argument. Evidence is not that which the mind
does or must yield to, but that which it ought to yield to, namely, that,
by yielding to which its belief is kept conformable to fact. There is no
appeal from the human faculties generally, but there is an appeal from one
human faculty to another; from the judging faculty, to those which take
cognizance of fact, the faculties of sense and consciousness. The
legitimacy of this appeal is admitted whenever it is allowed that our
judgments ought to be conformable to fact. To say that belief suffices for
its own justification is making opinion the test of opinion; it is denying
the existence of any outward standard, the conformity of an opinion to
which constitutes its truth. We call one mode of forming opinions right
and another wrong, because the one does, and the other does not, tend to
make the opinion agree with the fact—to make people believe what really
is, and expect what really will be. Now a mere disposition to believe,
even if supposed instinctive, is no guarantee for the truth of the thing
believed. If, indeed, the belief ever amounted to an irresistible
necessity, there would then be no _use_ in appealing from it, because
there would be no possibility of altering it. But even then the truth of
the belief would not follow; it would only follow that mankind were under
a permanent necessity of believing what might possibly not be true; in
other words, that a case might occur in which our senses or consciousness,
if they could be appealed to, might testify one thing, and our reason
believe another. But in fact there is no such permanent necessity. There
is no proposition of which it can be asserted that every human mind must
eternally and irrevocably believe it. Many of the propositions of which
this is most confidently stated, great numbers of human beings have
disbelieved. The things which it has been supposed that nobody could
possibly help believing, are innumerable; but no two generations would
make out the same catalogue of them. One age or nation believes implicitly
what to another seems incredible and inconceivable; one individual has not
a vestige of a belief which another deems to be absolutely inherent in
humanity. There is not one of these supposed instinctive beliefs which is
really inevitable. It is in the power of every one to cultivate habits of
thought which make him independent of them. The habit of philosophical
analysis (of which it is the surest effect to enable the mind to command,
instead of being commanded by, the laws of the merely passive part of its
own nature), by showing to us that things are not necessarily connected in
fact because their ideas are connected in our minds, is able to loosen
innumerable associations which reign despotically over the undisciplined
or early-prejudiced mind. And this habit is not without power even over
those associations which the school of which I have been speaking regard
as connate and instinctive. I am convinced that any one accustomed to
abstraction and analysis, who will fairly exert his faculties for the
purpose, will, when his imagination has once learned to entertain the
notion, find no difficulty in conceiving that in some one, for instance,
of the many firmaments into which sidereal astronomy now divides the
universe, events may succeed one another at random, without any fixed law;
nor can any thing in our experience, or in our mental nature, constitute a
sufficient, or indeed any, reason for believing that this is nowhere the
case.

Were we to suppose (what it is perfectly possible to imagine) that the
present order of the universe were brought to an end, and that a chaos
succeeded in which there was no fixed succession of events, and the past
gave no assurance of the future; if a human being were miraculously kept
alive to witness this change, he surely would soon cease to believe in any
uniformity, the uniformity itself no longer existing. If this be admitted,
the belief in uniformity either is not an instinct, or it is an instinct
conquerable, like all other instincts, by acquired knowledge.

But there is no need to speculate on what might be, when we have positive
and certain knowledge of what has been. It is not true, as a matter of
fact, that mankind have always believed that all the successions of events
were uniform and according to fixed laws. The Greek philosophers, not even
excepting Aristotle, recognized Chance and Spontaneity (τύχη and τὸ
αὐτομάτον) as among the agents in nature; in other words, they believed
that to that extent there was no guarantee that the past had been similar
to itself, or that the future would resemble the past. Even now a full
half of the philosophical world, including the very same metaphysicians
who contend most for the instinctive character of the belief in
uniformity, consider one important class of phenomena, volitions, to be an
exception to the uniformity, and not governed by a fixed law.(184)

§ 2. As was observed in a former place,(185) the belief we entertain in
the universality, throughout nature, of the law of cause and effect, is
itself an instance of induction; and by no means one of the earliest which
any of us, or which mankind in general, can have made. We arrive at this
universal law, by generalization from many laws of inferior generality. We
should never have had the notion of causation (in the philosophical
meaning of the term) as a condition of all phenomena, unless many cases of
causation, or in other words, many partial uniformities of sequence, had
previously become familiar. The more obvious of the particular
uniformities suggest, and give evidence of, the general uniformity, and
the general uniformity, once established, enables us to prove the
remainder of the particular uniformities of which it is made up. As,
however, all rigorous processes of induction presuppose the general
uniformity, our knowledge of the particular uniformities from which it was
first inferred was not, of course, derived from rigorous induction, but
from the loose and uncertain mode of induction _per enumerationem
simplicem_; and the law of universal causation, being collected from
results so obtained, can not itself rest on any better foundation.

It would seem, therefore, that induction _per enumerationem simplicem_ not
only is not necessarily an illicit logical process, but is in reality the
only kind of induction possible; since the more elaborate process depends
for its validity on a law, itself obtained in that inartificial mode. Is
there not then an inconsistency in contrasting the looseness of one method
with the rigidity of another, when that other is indebted to the looser
method for its own foundation?

The inconsistency, however, is only apparent. Assuredly, if induction by
simple enumeration were an invalid process, no process grounded on it
could be valid; just as no reliance could be placed on telescopes, if we
could not trust our eyes. But though a valid process, it is a fallible
one, and fallible in very different degrees: if, therefore, we can
substitute for the more fallible forms of the process, an operation
grounded on the same process in a less fallible form, we shall have
effected a very material improvement. And this is what scientific
induction does.

A mode of concluding from experience must be pronounced untrustworthy when
subsequent experience refuses to confirm it. According to this criterion,
induction by simple enumeration—in other words, generalization of an
observed fact from the mere absence of any known instance to the
contrary—affords in general a precarious and unsafe ground of assurance;
for such generalizations are incessantly discovered, on further
experience, to be false. Still, however, it affords some assurance,
sufficient, in many cases, for the ordinary guidance of conduct. It would
be absurd to say, that the generalizations arrived at by mankind in the
outset of their experience, such as these—food nourishes, fire burns,
water drowns—were unworthy of reliance.(186) There is a scale of
trustworthiness in the results of the original unscientific induction; and
on this diversity (as observed in the fourth chapter of the present book)
depend the rules for the improvement of the process. The improvement
consists in correcting one of these inartificial generalizations by means
of another. As has been already pointed out, this is all that art can do.
To test a generalization, by showing that it either follows from, or
conflicts with, some stronger induction, some generalization resting on a
broader foundation of experience, is the beginning and end of the logic of
induction.

§ 3. Now the precariousness of the method of simple enumeration is in an
inverse ratio to the largeness of the generalization. The process is
delusive and insufficient, exactly in proportion as the subject-matter of
the observation is special and limited in extent. As the sphere widens,
this unscientific method becomes less and less liable to mislead; and the
most universal class of truths, the law of causation, for instance, and
the principles of number and of geometry, are duly and satisfactorily
proved by that method alone, nor are they susceptible of any other proof.

With respect to the whole class of generalizations of which we have
recently treated, the uniformities which depend on causation, the truth of
the remark just made follows by obvious inference from the principles laid
down in the preceding chapters. When a fact has been observed a certain
number of times to be true, and is not in any instance known to be false,
if we at once affirm that fact as a universal truth or law of nature,
without either testing it by any of the four methods of induction, or
deducing it from other known laws, we shall in general err grossly; but we
are perfectly justified in affirming it as an empirical law, true within
certain limits of time, place, and circumstance, provided the number of
coincidences be greater than can with any probability be ascribed to
chance. The reason for not extending it beyond those limits is, that the
fact of its holding true within them may be a consequence of collocations,
which can not be concluded to exist in one place because they exist in
another; or may be dependent on the accidental absence of counteracting
agencies, which any variation of time, or the smallest change of
circumstances, may possibly bring into play. If we suppose, then, the
subject-matter of any generalization to be so widely diffused that there
is no time, no place, and no combination of circumstances, but must afford
an example either of its truth or of its falsity, and if it be never found
otherwise than true, its truth can not be contingent on any collocations,
unless such as exist at all times and places; nor can it be frustrated by
any counteracting agencies, unless by such as never actually occur. It is,
therefore, an empirical law co-extensive with all human experience; at
which point the distinction between empirical laws and laws of nature
vanishes, and the proposition takes its place among the most firmly
established as well as largest truths accessible to science.

Now, the most extensive in its subject-matter of all generalizations which
experience warrants, respecting the sequences and co-existences of
phenomena, is the law of causation. It stands at the head of all observed
uniformities, in point of universality, and therefore (if the preceding
observations are correct) in point of certainty. And if we consider, not
what mankind would have been justified in believing in the infancy of
their knowledge, but what may rationally be believed in its present more
advanced state, we shall find ourselves warranted in considering this
fundamental law, though itself obtained by induction from particular laws
of causation, as not less certain, but on the contrary, more so, than any
of those from which it was drawn. It adds to them as much proof as it
receives from them. For there is probably no one even of the best
established laws of causation which is not sometimes counteracted, and to
which, therefore, apparent exceptions do not present themselves, which
would have necessarily and justly shaken the confidence of mankind in the
universality of those laws, if inductive processes founded on the
universal law had not enabled us to refer those exceptions to the agency
of counteracting causes, and thereby reconcile them with the law with
which they apparently conflict. Errors, moreover, may have slipped into
the statement of any one of the special laws, through inattention to some
material circumstance: and instead of the true proposition, another may
have been enunciated, false as a universal law, though leading, in all
cases hitherto observed, to the same result. To the law of causation, on
the contrary, we not only do not know of any exception, but the exceptions
which limit or apparently invalidate the special laws, are so far from
contradicting the universal one, that they confirm it; since in all cases
which are sufficiently open to our observation, we are able to trace the
difference of result, either to the absence of a cause which had been
present in ordinary cases, or to the presence of one which had been
absent.

The law of cause and effect, being thus certain, is capable of imparting
its certainty to all other inductive propositions which can be deduced
from it; and the narrower inductions may be regarded as receiving their
ultimate sanction from that law, since there is no one of them which is
not rendered more certain than it was before, when we are able to connect
it with that larger induction, and to show that it can not be denied,
consistently with the law that every thing which begins to exist has a
cause. And hence we are justified in the seeming inconsistency, of holding
induction by simple enumeration to be good for proving this general truth,
the foundation of scientific induction, and yet refusing to rely on it for
any of the narrower inductions. I fully admit that if the law of causation
were unknown, generalization in the more obvious cases of uniformity in
phenomena would nevertheless be possible, and though in all cases more or
less precarious, and in some extremely so, would suffice to constitute a
certain measure of probability; but what the amount of this probability
might be, we are dispensed from estimating, since it never could amount to
the degree of assurance which the proposition acquires, when, by the
application to it of the Four Methods, the supposition of its falsity is
shown to be inconsistent with the Law of Causation. We are therefore
logically entitled, and, by the necessities of scientific induction,
required, to disregard the probabilities derived from the early rude
method of generalizing, and to consider no minor generalization as proved
except so far as the law of causation confirms it, nor probable except so
far as it may reasonably be expected to be so confirmed.

§ 4. The assertion, that our inductive processes assume the law of
causation, while the law of causation is itself a case of induction, is a
paradox, only on the old theory of reasoning, which supposes the universal
truth, or major premise, in a ratiocination, to be the real proof of the
particular truths which are ostensibly inferred from it. According to the
doctrine maintained in the present treatise,(187) the major premise is not
the proof of the conclusion, but is itself proved, along with the
conclusion from the same evidence. “All men are mortal” is not the proof
that Lord Palmerston is mortal; but our past experience of mortality
authorizes us to infer _both_ the general truth and the particular fact,
and the one with exactly the same degree of assurance as the other. The
mortality of Lord Palmerston is not an inference from the mortality of all
men, but from the experience which proves the mortality of all men; and is
a correct inference from experience, if that general truth is so too. This
relation between our general beliefs and their particular applications
holds equally true in the more comprehensive case which we are now
discussing. Any new fact of causation inferred by induction, is rightly
inferred, if no other objection can be made to the inference than can be
made to the general truth that every event has a cause. The utmost
certainty which can be given to a conclusion arrived at in the way of
inference, stops at this point. When we have ascertained that the
particular conclusion must stand or fall with the general uniformity of
the laws of nature—that it is liable to no doubt except the doubt whether
every event has a cause—we have done all that can be done for it. The
strongest assurance we can obtain of any theory respecting the cause of a
given phenomenon, is that the phenomenon has either that cause or none.

The latter supposition might have been an admissible one in a very early
period of our study of nature. But we have been able to perceive that in
the stage which mankind have now reached, the generalization which gives
the Law of Universal Causation has grown into a stronger and better
induction, one deserving of greater reliance, than any of the subordinate
generalizations. We may even, I think, go a step further than this, and
regard the certainty of that great induction as not merely comparative,
but, for all practical purposes, complete.

The considerations, which, as I apprehend, give, at the present day, to
the proof of the law of uniformity of succession as true of all phenomena
without exception, this character of completeness and conclusiveness, are
the following: First, that we now know it directly to be true of far the
greatest number of phenomena; that there are none of which we know it not
to be true, the utmost that can be said being, that of some we can not
positively from direct evidence affirm its truth; while phenomenon after
phenomenon, as they become better known to us, are constantly passing from
the latter class into the former; and in all cases in which that
transition has not yet taken place, the absence of direct proof is
accounted for by the rarity or the obscurity of the phenomena, our
deficient means of observing them, or the logical difficulties arising
from the complication of the circumstances in which they occur; insomuch
that, notwithstanding as rigid a dependence on given conditions as exists
in the case of any other phenomenon, it was not likely that we should be
better acquainted with those conditions than we are. Besides this first
class of considerations, there is a second, which still further
corroborates the conclusion. Although there are phenomena the production
and changes of which elude all our attempts to reduce them universally to
any ascertained law; yet in every such case, the phenomenon, or the
objects concerned in it, are found in some instances to obey the known
laws of nature. The wind, for example, is the type of uncertainty and
caprice, yet we find it in some cases obeying with as much constancy as
any phenomenon in nature the law of the tendency of fluids to distribute
themselves so as to equalize the pressure on every side of each of their
particles; as in the case of the trade-winds and the monsoons.

Lightning might once have been supposed to obey no laws; but since it has
been ascertained to be identical with electricity, we know that the very
same phenomenon in some of its manifestations is implicitly obedient to
the action of fixed causes. I do not believe that there is now one object
or event in all our experience of nature, within the bounds of the solar
system at least, which has not either been ascertained by direct
observation to follow laws of its own, or been proved to be closely
similar to objects and events which, in more familiar manifestations, or
on a more limited scale, follow strict laws; our inability to trace the
same laws on a larger scale and in the more recondite instances, being
accounted for by the number and complication of the modifying causes, or
by their inaccessibility to observation.

The progress of experience, therefore, has dissipated the doubt which must
have rested on the universality of the law of causation while there were
phenomena which seemed to be _sui generis_, not subject to the same laws
with any other class of phenomena, and not as yet ascertained to have
peculiar laws of their own. This great generalization, however, might
reasonably have been, as it in fact was, acted on as a probability of the
highest order, before there were sufficient grounds for receiving it as a
certainty. In matters of evidence, as in all other human things, we
neither require, nor can attain, the absolute. We must hold even our
strongest convictions with an opening left in our minds for the reception
of facts which contradict them; and only when we have taken this
precaution, have we earned the right to act upon our convictions with
complete confidence when no such contradiction appears. Whatever has been
found true in innumerable instances, and never found to be false after due
examination in any, we are safe in acting on as universal provisionally,
until an undoubted exception appears; provided the nature of the case be
such that a real exception could scarcely have escaped notice. When every
phenomenon that we ever knew sufficiently well to be able to answer the
question, had a cause on which it was invariably consequent, it was more
rational to suppose that our inability to assign the causes of other
phenomena arose from our ignorance, than that there were phenomena which
were uncaused, and which happened to be exactly those which we had
hitherto had no sufficient opportunity of studying.

It must, at the same time, be remarked, that the reasons for this reliance
do not hold in circumstances unknown to us, and beyond the possible range
of our experience. In distant parts of the stellar regions, where the
phenomena may be entirely unlike those with which we are acquainted, it
would be folly to affirm confidently that this general law prevails, any
more than those special ones which we have found to hold universally on
our own planet. The uniformity in the succession of events, otherwise
called the law of causation, must be received not as a law of the
universe, but of that portion of it only which is within the range of our
means of sure observation, with a reasonable degree of extension to
adjacent cases. To extend it further is to make a supposition without
evidence, and to which, in the absence of any ground from experience for
estimating its degree of probability, it would be idle to attempt to
assign any.(188)




                              Chapter XXII.


Of Uniformities Of Co-Existence Not Dependent On Causation.


§ 1. The order of the occurrence of phenomena in time, is either
successive or simultaneous; the uniformities, therefore, which obtain in
their occurrence, are either uniformities of succession or of
co-existence. Uniformities of succession are all comprehended under the
law of causation and its consequences. Every phenomenon has a cause, which
it invariably follows; and from this are derived other invariable
sequences among the successive stages of the same effect, as well as
between the effects resulting from causes which invariably succeed one
another.

In the same manner with these derivative uniformities of succession, a
great variety of uniformities of co-existence also take their rise.
Co-ordinate effects of the same cause naturally co-exist with one another.
High water at any point on the earth’s surface, and high water at the
point diametrically opposite to it, are effects uniformly simultaneous,
resulting from the direction in which the combined attractions of the sun
and moon act upon the waters of the ocean. An eclipse of the sun to us,
and an eclipse of the earth to a spectator situated in the moon, are in
like manner phenomena invariably co-existent; and their co-existence can
equally be deduced from the laws of their production.

It is an obvious question, therefore, whether all the uniformities of
co-existence among phenomena may not be accounted for in this manner. And
it can not be doubted that between phenomena which are themselves effects,
the co-existences must necessarily depend on the causes of those
phenomena. If they are effects immediately or remotely of the same cause,
they can not co-exist except by virtue of some laws or properties of that
cause; if they are effects of different causes, they can not co-exist
unless it be because their causes co-exist; and the uniformity of
co-existence, if such there be, between the effects, proves that those
particular causes, within the limits of our observation, have uniformly
been co-existent.

§ 2. But these same considerations compel us to recognize that there must
be one class of co-existences which can not depend on causation: the
co-existences between the ultimate properties of things—those properties
which are the causes of all phenomena, but are not themselves caused by
any phenomenon, and a cause for which could only be sought by ascending to
the origin of all things. Yet among these ultimate properties there are
not only co-existences, but uniformities of co-existence. General
propositions may be, and are, formed, which assert that whenever certain
properties are found, certain others are found along with them. We
perceive an object; say, for instance, water. We recognize it to be water,
of course by certain of its properties. Having recognized it, we are able
to affirm of it innumerable other properties; which we could not do unless
it were a general truth, a law or uniformity in nature, that the set of
properties by which we identify the substance as water always have those
other properties conjoined with them.

In a former place(189) it has been explained, in some detail, what is
meant by the Kinds of objects; those classes which differ from one another
not by a limited and definite, but by an indefinite and unknown, number of
distinctions. To this we have now to add, that every proposition by which
any thing is asserted of a Kind, affirms a uniformity of co-existence.
Since we know nothing of Kinds but their properties, the Kind, to us, _is_
the set of properties by which it is identified, and which must of course
be sufficient to distinguish it from every other kind.(190) In affirming
any thing, therefore, of a Kind, we are affirming something to be
uniformly co-existent with the properties by which the kind is recognized;
and that is the sole meaning of the assertion.

Among the uniformities of co-existence which exist in nature, may hence be
numbered all the properties of Kinds. The whole of these, however, are not
independent of causation, but only a portion of them. Some are ultimate
properties, others derivative: of some, no cause can be assigned, but
others are manifestly dependent on causes. Thus, pure oxygen gas is a
Kind, and one of its most unequivocal properties is its gaseous form; this
property, however, has for its cause the presence of a certain quantity of
latent heat; and if that heat could be taken away (as has been done from
so many gases in Faraday’s experiments), the gaseous form would doubtless
disappear, together with numerous other properties which depend on, or are
caused by, that property.

In regard to all substances which are chemical compounds, and which
therefore may be regarded as products of the juxtaposition of substances
different in Kind from themselves, there is considerable reason to presume
that the specific properties of the compound are consequent, as effects,
on some of the properties of the elements, though little progress has yet
been made in tracing any invariable relation between the latter and the
former. Still more strongly will a similar presumption exist, when the
object itself, as in the case of organized beings, is no primeval agent,
but an effect, which depends on a cause or causes for its very existence.
The Kinds, therefore, which are called in chemistry simple substances, or
elementary natural agents, are the only ones, any of whose properties can
with certainty be considered ultimate; and of these the ultimate
properties are probably much more numerous than we at present recognize,
since every successful instance of the resolution of the properties of
their compounds into simpler laws, generally leads to the recognition of
properties in the elements distinct from any previously known. The
resolution of the laws of the heavenly motions established the previously
unknown ultimate property of a mutual attraction between all bodies; the
resolution, so far as it has yet proceeded, of the laws of
crystallization, of chemical composition, electricity, magnetism, etc.,
points to various polarities, ultimately inherent in the particles of
which bodies are composed; the comparative atomic weights of different
kinds of bodies were ascertained by resolving into more general laws the
uniformities observed in the proportions in which substances combine with
one another, and so forth. Thus, although every resolution of a complex
uniformity into simpler and more elementary laws has an apparent tendency
to diminish the number of the ultimate properties, and really does remove
many properties from the list; yet (since the result of this simplifying
process is to trace up an ever greater variety of different effects to the
same agents) the further we advance in this direction, the greater number
of distinct properties we are forced to recognize in one and the same
object; the co-existences of which properties must accordingly be ranked
among the ultimate generalities of nature.

§ 3. There are, therefore, only two kinds of propositions which assert
uniformity of co-existence between properties. Either the properties
depend on causes or they do not. If they do, the proposition which affirms
them to be co-existent is a derivative law of co-existence between
effects, and, until resolved into the laws of causation on which it
depends, is an empirical law, and to be tried by the principles of
induction to which such laws are amenable. If, on the other hand, the
properties do not depend on causes, but are ultimate properties, then, if
it be true that they invariably co-exist, they must all be ultimate
properties of one and the same Kind; and it is of these only that the
co-existences can be classed as a peculiar sort of laws of nature.

When we affirm that all crows are black, or that all negroes have woolly
hair, we assert a uniformity of co-existence. We assert that the property
of blackness or of having woolly hair invariably co-exists with the
properties which, in common language, or in the scientific classification
that we adopt, are taken to constitute the class crow, or the class negro.
Now, supposing blackness to be an ultimate property of black objects, or
woolly hair an ultimate property of the animals which possess it;
supposing that these properties are not results of causation, are not
connected with antecedent phenomena by any law; then if all crows are
black, and all negroes have woolly hair, these must be ultimate properties
of the kind _crow_, or _negro_, or of some kind which includes them. If,
on the contrary, blackness or woolly hair be an effect depending on
causes, these general propositions are manifestly empirical laws; and all
that has already been said respecting that class of generalizations may be
applied without modification to these.

Now, we have seen that in the case of all compounds—of all things, in
short, except the elementary substances and primary powers of nature—the
presumption is, that the properties do really depend upon causes; and it
is impossible in any case whatever to be certain that they do not. We
therefore should not be safe in claiming for any generalization respecting
the co-existence of properties, a degree of certainty to which, if the
properties should happen to be the result of causes, it would have no
claim. A generalization respecting co-existence, or, in other words,
respecting the properties of kinds, may be an ultimate truth, but it may
also be merely a derivative one; and since, if so, it is one of those
derivative laws which are neither laws of causation nor have been resolved
into the laws of causation on which they depend, it can possess no higher
degree of evidence than belongs to an empirical law.

§ 4. This conclusion will be confirmed by the consideration of one great
deficiency, which precludes the application to the ultimate uniformities
of co-existence, of a system of rigorous scientific induction, such as the
uniformities in the succession of phenomena have been found to admit of.
The basis of such a system is wanting; there is no general axiom standing
in the same relation to the uniformities of co-existence as the law of
causation does to those of succession. The Methods of Induction applicable
to the ascertainment of causes and effects are grounded on the principle
that every thing which has a beginning must have some cause or other; that
among the circumstances which actually existed at the time of its
commencement, there is certainly some one combination, on which the effect
in question is unconditionally consequent, and on the repetition of which
it would certainly again recur. But in an inquiry whether some kind (as
crow) universally possesses a certain property (as blackness), there is no
room for any assumption analogous to this. We have no previous certainty
that the property must have something which constantly co-exists with it;
must have an invariable co-existent, in the same manner as an event must
have an invariable antecedent. When we feel pain, we must be in some
circumstances under which, if exactly repeated, we should always feel
pain. But when we are conscious of blackness, it does not follow that
there is something else present of which blackness is a constant
accompaniment. There is, therefore, no room for elimination; no method of
Agreement or Difference, or of Concomitant Variations (which is but a
modification either of the Method of Agreement or of the Method of
Difference). We can not conclude that the blackness we see in crows must
be an invariable property of crows merely because there is nothing else
present of which it can be an invariable property. We therefore inquire
into the truth of a proposition like “All crows are black,” under the same
disadvantage as if, in our inquiries into causation, we were compelled to
let in, as one of the possibilities, that the effect may in that
particular instance have arisen without any cause at all.

To overlook this grand distinction was, as it seems to me, the capital
error in Bacon’s view of inductive philosophy. The principle of
elimination, that great logical instrument which he had the immense merit
of first bringing into general use, he deemed applicable in the same
sense, and in as unqualified a manner, to the investigation of the
co-existences, as to that of the successions of phenomena. He seems to
have thought that as every event has a cause, or invariable antecedent, so
every property of an object has an invariable co-existent, which he called
its form; and the examples he chiefly selected for the application and
illustration of his method, were inquiries into such forms; attempts to
determine in what else all those objects resembled, which agreed in some
one general property, as hardness or softness, dryness or moistness, heat
or coldness. Such inquiries could lead to no result. The objects seldom
have any such circumstances in common. They usually agree in the one point
inquired into, and in nothing else. A great proportion of the properties
which, so far as we can conjecture, are the likeliest to be really
ultimate, would seem to be inherently properties of many different kinds
of things not allied in any other respect. And as for the properties
which, being effects of causes, we are able to give some account of, they
have generally nothing to do with the ultimate resemblances or diversities
in the objects themselves, but depend on some outward circumstances, under
the influence of which any objects whatever are capable of manifesting
those properties; as is emphatically the case with those favorite subjects
of Bacon’s scientific inquiries, hotness and coldness, as well as with
hardness and softness, solidity and fluidity, and many other conspicuous
qualities.

In the absence, then, of any universal law of co-existence similar to the
universal law of causation which regulates sequence, we are thrown back
upon the unscientific induction of the ancients, _per enumerationem
simplicem, ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria_. The reason we have
for believing that all crows are black, is simply that we have seen and
heard of many black crows, and never one of any other color. It remains to
be considered how far this evidence can reach, and how we are to measure
its strength in any given case.

§ 5. It sometimes happens that a mere change in the mode of verbally
enunciating a question, though nothing is really added to the meaning
expressed, is of itself a considerable step toward its solution. This, I
think, happens in the present instance. The degree of certainty of any
generalization which rests on no other evidence than the agreement, so far
as it goes, of all past observation, is but another phrase for the degree
of improbability that an exception, if any existed, could have hitherto
remained unobserved. The reason for believing that all crows are black, is
measured by the improbability that crows of any other color should have
existed to the present time without our being aware of it. Let us state
the question in this last mode, and consider what is implied in the
supposition that there may be crows which are not black, and under what
conditions we can be justified in regarding this as incredible.

If there really exist crows which are not black, one of two things must be
the fact. Either the circumstance of blackness, in all crows hitherto
observed, must be, as it were, an accident, not connected with any
distinction of Kind; or if it be a property of Kind, the crows which are
not black must be a new Kind, a Kind hitherto overlooked, though coming
under the same general description by which crows have hitherto been
characterized. The first supposition would be proved true if we were to
discover casually a white crow among black ones, or if it were found that
black crows sometimes turn white. The second would be shown to be the fact
if in Australia or Central Africa a species or a race of white or gray
crows were found to exist.

§ 6. The former of these suppositions necessarily implies that the color
is an effect of causation. If blackness, in the crows in which it has been
observed, be not a property of Kind, but can be present or absent without
any difference generally in the properties of the object, then it is not
an ultimate fact in the individuals themselves, but is certainly dependent
on a cause. There are, no doubt, many properties which vary from
individual to individual of the same Kind, even the same _infima species_,
or lowest Kind. Some flowers may be either white or red, without differing
in any other respect. But these properties are not ultimate; they depend
on causes. So far as the properties of a thing belong to its own nature,
and do not arise from some cause extrinsic to it, they are always the same
in the same Kind. Take, for instance, all simple substances and elementary
powers; the only things of which we are certain that some at least of
their properties are really ultimate. Color is generally esteemed the most
variable of all properties: yet we do not find that sulphur is sometimes
yellow and sometimes white, or that it varies in color at all, except so
far as color is the effect of some extrinsic cause, as of the sort of
light thrown upon it, the mechanical arrangement of the particles (as
after fusion), etc. We do not find that iron is sometimes fluid and
sometimes solid at the same temperature; gold sometimes malleable and
sometimes brittle; that hydrogen will sometimes combine with oxygen and
sometimes not; or the like. If from simple substances we pass to any of
their definite compounds, as water, lime, or sulphuric acid, there is the
same constancy in their properties. When properties vary from individual
to individual, it is either in the case of miscellaneous aggregations,
such as atmospheric air or rock, composed of heterogeneous substances, and
not constituting or belonging to any real Kind,(191) or it is in the case
of organic beings. In them, indeed, there is variability in a high degree.
Animals of the same species and race, human beings of the same age, sex,
and country, will be most different, for example, in face and figure. But
organized beings (from the extreme complication of the laws by which they
are regulated) being more eminently modifiable, that is, liable to be
influenced by a greater number and variety of causes, than any other
phenomena whatever; having also themselves had a beginning, and therefore
a cause; there is reason to believe that none of their properties are
ultimate, but all of them derivative, and produced by causation. And the
presumption is confirmed, by the fact that the properties which vary from
one individual to another, also generally vary more or less at different
times in the same individual; which variation, like any other event,
supposes a cause, and implies, consequently, that the properties are not
independent of causation.

If, therefore, blackness be merely accidental in crows, and capable of
varying while the Kind remains the same, its presence or absence is
doubtless no ultimate fact, but the effect of some unknown cause: and in
that case the universality of the experience that all crows are black is
sufficient proof of a common cause, and establishes the generalization as
an empirical law. Since there are innumerable instances in the
affirmative, and hitherto none at all in the negative, the causes on which
the property depends must exist everywhere in the limits of the
observations which have been made; and the proposition may be received as
universal within those limits, and with the allowable degree of extension
to adjacent cases.

§ 7. If, in the second place, the property, in the instances in which it
has been observed, is not an effect of causation, it is a property of
Kind; and in that case the generalization can only be set aside by the
discovery of a new Kind of crow. That, however, a peculiar Kind not
hitherto discovered should exist in nature, is a supposition so often
realized that it can not be considered at all improbable. We have nothing
to authorize us in attempting to limit the Kinds of things which exist in
nature. The only unlikelihood would be that a new Kind should be
discovered in localities which there was previously reason to believe had
been thoroughly explored; and even this improbability depends on the
degree of conspicuousness of the difference between the newly-discovered
Kind and all others, since new kinds of minerals, plants, and even
animals, previously overlooked or confounded with known species, are still
continually detected in the most frequented situations. On this second
ground, therefore, as well as on the first, the observed uniformity of
co-existence can only hold good as an empirical law, within the limits not
only of actual observation, but of an observation as accurate as the
nature of the case required. And hence it is that (as remarked in an early
chapter of the present book) we so often give up generalizations of this
class at the first summons. If any credible witness stated that he had
seen a white crow, under circumstances which made it not incredible that
it should have escaped notice previously, we should give full credence to
the statement.

It appears, then, that the uniformities which obtain in the co-existence
of phenomena—those which we have reason to consider as ultimate, no less
than those which arise from the laws of causes yet undetected—are entitled
to reception only as empirical laws; are not to be presumed true except
within the limits of time, place, and circumstance, in which the
observations were made, or except in cases strictly adjacent.

§ 8. We have seen in the last chapter that there is a point of generality
at which empirical laws become as certain as laws of nature, or, rather,
at which there is no longer any distinction between empirical laws and
laws of nature. As empirical laws approach this point, in other words, as
they rise in their degree of generality, they become more certain; their
universality may be more strongly relied on. For, in the first place, if
they are results of causation (which, even in the class of uniformities
treated of in the present chapter, we never can be certain that they are
not) the more general they are, the greater is proved to be the space over
which the necessary collocations prevail, and within which no causes exist
capable of counteracting the unknown causes on which the empirical law
depends. To say that any thing is an invariable property of some very
limited class of objects, is to say that it invariably accompanies some
very numerous and complex group of distinguishing properties; which, if
causation be at all concerned in the matter, argues a combination of many
causes, and therefore a great liability to counteraction; while the
comparatively narrow range of the observations renders it impossible to
predict to what extent unknown counteracting causes may be distributed
throughout nature. But when a generalization has been found to hold good
of a very large proportion of all things whatever, it is already proved
that nearly all the causes which exist in nature have no power over it;
that very few changes in the combination of causes can affect it; since
the greater number of possible combinations must have already existed in
some one or other of the instances in which it has been found true. If,
therefore, any empirical law is a result of causation, the more general it
is, the more it may be depended on. And even if it be no result of
causation, but an ultimate co-existence, the more general it is, the
greater amount of experience it is derived from, and the greater therefore
is the probability that if exceptions had existed, some would already have
presented themselves.

For these reasons, it requires much more evidence to establish an
exception to one of the more general empirical laws than to the more
special ones. We should not have any difficulty in believing that there
might be a new Kind of crow; or a new kind of bird resembling a crow in
the properties hitherto considered distinctive of that Kind. But it would
require stronger proof to convince us of the existence of a Kind of crow
having properties at variance with any generally recognized universal
property of birds; and a still higher degree if the properties conflict
with any recognized universal property of animals. And this is conformable
to the mode of judgment recommended by the common sense and general
practice of mankind, who are more incredulous as to any novelties in
nature, according to the degree of generality of the experience which
these novelties seem to contradict.

§ 9. It is conceivable that the alleged properties might conflict with
some recognized universal property of all matter. In that case their
improbability would be at the highest, but would not even then amount to
incredibility. There are only two known properties common to all matter;
in other words, there is but one known uniformity of co-existence of
properties co-extensive with all physical nature, namely, that whatever
opposes resistance to movement gravitates, or, as Professor Bain expresses
it, Inertia and Gravity are co-existent through all matter, and
proportionate in their amount. These properties, as he truly says, are not
mutually implicated; from neither of them could we, on grounds of
causation, presume the other. But, for this very reason, we are never
certain that a Kind may not be discovered possessing one of the properties
without the other. The hypothetical ether, if it exists, may be such a
Kind. Our senses can not recognize in it either resistance or gravity; but
if the reality of a resisting medium should eventually be proved (by
alteration, for example, in the times of revolution of periodic comets,
combined with the evidences afforded by the phenomena of light and heat),
it would be rash to conclude from this alone, without other proofs, that
it must gravitate.

For even the greater generalizations, which embrace comprehensive Kinds
containing under them a great number and variety of _infimæ species_, are
only empirical laws, resting on induction by simple enumeration merely,
and not on any process of elimination—a process wholly inapplicable to
this sort of case. Such generalizations, therefore, ought to be grounded
on an examination of all the _infimæ species_ comprehended in them, and
not of a portion only. We can not conclude (where causation is not
concerned), because a proposition is true of a number of things resembling
one another only in being animals, that it is therefore true of all
animals. If, indeed, any thing be true of species which differ more from
one another than either differs from a third, especially if that third
species occupies in most of its known properties a position between the
two former, there is some probability that the same thing will also be
true of that intermediate species; for it is often, though by no means
universally, found, that there is a sort of parallelism in the properties
of different Kinds, and that their degree of unlikeness in one respect
bears some proportion to their unlikeness in others. We see this
parallelism in the properties of the different metals; in those of
sulphur, phosphorus, and carbon; of chlorine, iodine, and bromine; in the
natural orders of plants and animals, etc. But there are innumerable
anomalies and exceptions to this sort of conformity; if indeed the
conformity itself be any thing but an anomaly and an exception in nature.

Universal propositions, therefore, respecting the properties of superior
Kinds, unless grounded on proved or presumed connection by causation,
ought not to be hazarded except after separately examining every known
sub-kind included in the larger Kind. And even then such generalizations
must be held in readiness to be given up on the occurrence of some new
anomaly, which, when the uniformity is not derived from causation, can
never, even in the case of the most general of these empirical laws, be
considered very improbable. Thus, all the universal propositions which it
has been attempted to lay down respecting simple substances, or concerning
any of the classes which have been formed among simple substances (and the
attempt has been often made), have, with the progress of experience,
either faded into inanity, or been proved to be erroneous; and each Kind
of simple substance remains, with its own collection of properties apart
from the rest, saving a certain parallelism with a few other Kinds, the
most similar to itself. In organized beings, indeed, there are abundance
of propositions ascertained to be universally true of superior genera, to
many of which the discovery hereafter of any exceptions must be regarded
as extremely improbable. But these, as already observed, are, we have
every reason to believe, properties dependent on causation.(192)

Uniformities of co-existence, then, not only when they are consequences of
laws of succession, but also when they are ultimate truths, must be
ranked, for the purpose of logic, among empirical laws; and are amenable
in every respect to the same rules with those unresolved uniformities
which are known to be dependent on causation.(193)




                              Chapter XXIII.


Of Approximate Generalizations, And Probable Evidence.


§ 1. In our inquiries into the nature of the inductive process, we must
not confine our notice to such generalizations from experience as profess
to be universally true. There is a class of inductive truths avowedly not
universal; in which it is not pretended that the predicate is always true
of the subject; but the value of which, as generalizations, is
nevertheless extremely great. An important portion of the field of
inductive knowledge does not consist of universal truths, but of
approximations to such truths; and when a conclusion is said to rest on
probable evidence, the premises it is drawn from are usually
generalizations of this sort.

As every certain inference respecting a particular case implies that there
is ground for a general proposition of the form, every A is B; so does
every probable inference suppose that there is ground for a proposition of
the form, Most A are B; and the degree of probability of the inference in
an average case will depend on the proportion between the number of
instances existing in nature which accord with the generalization, and the
number of those which conflict with it.

§ 2. Propositions in the form, Most A are B, are of a very different
degree of importance in science, and in the practice of life. To the
scientific inquirer they are valuable chiefly as materials for, and steps
toward universal truths. The discovery of these is the proper end of
science; its work is not done if it stops at the proposition that a
majority of A are B, without circumscribing that majority by some common
character, fitted to distinguish them from the minority. Independently of
the inferior precision of such imperfect generalizations, and the inferior
assurance with which they can be applied to individual cases, it is plain
that, compared with exact generalizations, they are almost useless as
means of discovering ulterior truths by way of deduction. We may, it is
true, by combining the proposition Most A are B, with a universal
proposition, Every B is C, arrive at the conclusion that Most A are C. But
when a second proposition of the approximate kind is introduced—or even
when there is but one, if that one be the major premise—nothing can, in
general, be positively concluded. When the major is Most B are D, then,
even if the minor be Every A is B, we can not infer that most A are D, or
with any certainty that even some A are D. Though the majority of the
class B have the attribute signified by D, the whole of the sub-class A
may belong to the minority.(194)

Though so little use can be made, in science, of approximate
generalizations, except as a stage on the road to something better, for
practical guidance they are often all we have to rely on. Even when
science has really determined the universal laws of any phenomenon, not
only are those laws generally too much encumbered with conditions to be
adapted for everyday use, but the cases which present themselves in life
are too complicated, and our decisions require to be taken too rapidly, to
admit of waiting till the existence of a phenomenon can be proved by what
have been scientifically ascertained to be universal marks of it. To be
indecisive and reluctant to act, because we have not evidence of a
perfectly conclusive character to act on, is a defect sometimes incident
to scientific minds, but which, wherever it exists, renders them unfit for
practical emergencies. If we would succeed in action, we must judge by
indications which, though they do not generally mislead us, sometimes do,
and must make up, as far as possible, for the incomplete conclusiveness of
any one indication, by obtaining others to corroborate it. The principles
of induction applicable to approximate generalization are therefore a not
less important subject of inquiry than the rules for the investigation of
universal truths; and might reasonably be expected to detain us almost as
long, were it not that these principles are mere corollaries from those
which have been already treated of.

§ 3. There are two sorts of cases in which we are forced to guide
ourselves by generalizations of the imperfect form, Most A are B. The
first is, when we have no others; when we have not been able to carry our
investigation of the laws of the phenomena any further; as in the
following propositions—Most dark-eyed persons have dark hair; Most springs
contain mineral substances; Most stratified formations contain fossils.
The importance of this class of generalizations is not very great; for,
though it frequently happens that we see no reason why that which is true
of most individuals of a class is not true of the remainder, nor are able
to bring the former under any general description which can distinguish
them from the latter, yet if we are willing to be satisfied with
propositions of a less degree of generality, and to break down the class A
into sub-classes, we may generally obtain a collection of propositions
exactly true. We do not know why most wood is lighter than water, nor can
we point out any general property which discriminates wood that is lighter
than water from that which is heavier. But we know exactly what species
are the one and what the other. And if we meet with a specimen not
conformable to any known species (the only case in which our previous
knowledge affords no other guidance than the approximate generalization),
we can generally make a specific experiment, which is a surer resource.

It often happens, however, that the proposition, Most A are B, is not the
ultimatum of our scientific attainments, though the knowledge we possess
beyond it can not conveniently be brought to bear upon the particular
instance. We may know well enough what circumstances distinguish the
portion of A which has the attribute B from the portion which has it not,
but may have no means, or may not have time, to examine whether those
characteristic circumstances exist or not in the individual case. This is
the situation we are generally in when the inquiry is of the kind called
moral, that is, of the kind which has in view to predict human actions. To
enable us to affirm any thing universally concerning the actions of
classes of human beings, the classification must be grounded on the
circumstances of their mental culture and habits, which in an individual
case are seldom exactly known; and classes grounded on these distinctions
would never precisely accord with those into which mankind are divided for
social purposes. All propositions which can be framed respecting the
actions of human beings as ordinarily classified, or as classified
according to any kind of outward indications, are merely approximate. We
can only say, Most persons of a particular age, profession, country, or
rank in society, have such and such qualities; or, Most persons, when
placed in certain circumstances, act in such and such a way. Not that we
do not often know well enough on what causes the qualities depend, or what
sort of persons they are who act in that particular way; but we have
seldom the means of knowing whether any individual person has been under
the influence of those causes, or is a person of that particular sort. We
could replace the approximate generalizations by propositions universally
true; but these would hardly ever be capable of being applied to practice.
We should be sure of our majors, but we should not be able to get minors
to fit; we are forced, therefore, to draw our conclusions from coarser and
more fallible indications.

§ 4. Proceeding now to consider what is to be regarded as sufficient
evidence of an approximate generalization, we can have no difficulty in at
once recognizing that, when admissible at all, it is admissible only as an
empirical law. Propositions of the form, Every A is B, are not necessarily
laws of causation, or ultimate uniformities of co-existence; propositions
like Most A are B, _can not_ be so. Propositions hitherto found true in
every observed instance may yet be no necessary consequence of laws of
causation, or of ultimate uniformities, and unless they are so, may, for
aught we know, be false beyond the limits of actual observation; still
more evidently must this be the case with propositions which are only true
in a mere majority of the observed instances.

There is some difference, however, in the degree of certainty of the
proposition, Most A are B, according as that approximate generalization
composes the whole of our knowledge of the subject, or not. Suppose,
first, that the former is the case. We know only that most A are B, not
why they are so, nor in what respect those which are differ from those
which are not. How, then, did we learn that most A are B? Precisely in the
manner in which we should have learned, had such happened to be the fact
that all A are B. We collected a number of instances sufficient to
eliminate chance, and, having done so, compared the number of instances in
the affirmative with the number in the negative. The result, like other
unresolved derivative laws, can be relied on solely within the limits not
only of place and time, but also of circumstance, under which its truth
has been actually observed; for, as we are supposed to be ignorant of the
causes which make the proposition true, we can not tell in what manner any
new circumstance might perhaps affect it. The proposition, Most judges are
inaccessible to bribes, would probably be found true of Englishmen,
Frenchmen, Germans, North Americans, and so forth; but if on this evidence
alone we extended the assertion to Orientals, we should step beyond the
limits, not only of place but of circumstance, within which the fact had
been observed, and should let in possibilities of the absence of the
determining causes, or the presence of counteracting ones, which might be
fatal to the approximate generalization.

In the case where the approximate proposition is not the ultimatum of our
scientific knowledge, but only the most available form of it for practical
guidance; where we know, not only that most A have the attribute B, but
also the causes of B, or some properties by which the portion of A which
has that attribute is distinguished from the portion which has it not, we
are rather more favorably situated than in the preceding case. For we have
now a double mode of ascertaining whether it be true that most A are B;
the direct mode, as before, and an indirect one, that of examining whether
the proposition admits of being deduced from the known cause, or from any
known criterion, of B. Let the question, for example, be whether most
Scotchmen can read? We may not have observed, or received the testimony of
others respecting, a sufficient number and variety of Scotchmen to
ascertain this fact; but when we consider that the cause of being able to
read is the having been taught it, another mode of determining the
question presents itself, namely, by inquiring whether most Scotchmen have
been sent to schools where reading is effectually taught. Of these two
modes, sometimes one and sometimes the other is the more available. In
some cases, the frequency of the effect is the more accessible to that
extensive and varied observation which is indispensable to the
establishment of an empirical law; at other times, the frequency of the
causes, or of some collateral indications. It commonly happens that
neither is susceptible of so satisfactory an induction as could be
desired, and that the grounds on which the conclusion is received are
compounded of both. Thus a person may believe that most Scotchmen can
read, because, so far as his information extends, most Scotchmen have been
sent to school, and most Scotch schools teach reading effectually; and
also because most of the Scotchmen whom he has known or heard of could
read; though neither of these two sets of observations may by itself
fulfill the necessary conditions of extent and variety.

Although the approximate generalization may in most cases be indispensable
for our guidance, even when we know the cause, or some certain mark, of
the attribute predicated, it needs hardly be observed that we may always
replace the uncertain indication by a certain one, in any case in which we
can actually recognize the existence of the cause or mark. For example, an
assertion is made by a witness, and the question is whether to believe it.
If we do not look to any of the individual circumstances of the case, we
have nothing to direct us but the approximate generalization, that truth
is more common than falsehood, or, in other words, that most persons, on
most occasions, speak truth. But if we consider in what circumstances the
cases where truth is spoken differ from those in which it is not, we find,
for instance, the following: the witness’s being an honest person or not;
his being an accurate observer or not; his having an interest to serve in
the matter or not. Now, not only may we be able to obtain other
approximate generalizations respecting the degree of frequency of these
various possibilities, but we may know which of them is positively
realized in the individual case. That the witness has or has not an
interest to serve, we perhaps know directly; and the other two points
indirectly, by means of marks; as, for example, from his conduct on some
former occasion; or from his reputation, which, though a very uncertain
mark, affords an approximate generalization (as, for instance, Most
persons who are believed to be honest by those with whom they have had
frequent dealings, are really so), which approaches nearer to a universal
truth than the approximate general proposition with which we set out,
viz., Most persons on most occasions speak truth.

As it seems unnecessary to dwell further on the question of the evidence
of approximate generalizations, we shall proceed to a not less important
topic, that of the cautions to be observed in arguing from these
incompletely universal propositions to particular cases.

§ 5. So far as regards the direct application of an approximate
generalization to an individual instance, this question presents no
difficulty. If the proposition, Most A are B, has been established, by a
sufficient induction, as an empirical law, we may conclude that any
particular A is B with a probability proportioned to the preponderance of
the number of affirmative instances over the number of exceptions. If it
has been found practicable to attain numerical precision in the data, a
corresponding degree of precision may be given to the evaluation of the
chances of error in the conclusion. If it can be established as an
empirical law that nine out of every ten A are B, there will be one chance
in ten of error in assuming that any A, not individually known to us, is a
B: but this of course holds only within the limits of time, place, and
circumstance, embraced in the observations, and therefore can not be
counted on for any sub-class or variety of A (or for A in any set of
external circumstances) which were not included in the average. It must be
added, that we can guide ourselves by the proposition, Nine out of every
ten A are B, only in cases of which we know nothing except that they fall
within the class A. For if we know, of any particular instances _i_, not
only that it falls under A, but to what species or variety of A it
belongs, we shall generally err in applying to _i_ the average struck for
the whole genus, from which the average corresponding to that species
alone would, in all probability, materially differ. And so if _i_, instead
of being a particular sort of instance, is an instance known to be under
the influence of a particular set of circumstances, the presumption drawn
from the numerical proportions in the whole genus would probably, in such
a case, only mislead. A general average should only be applied to cases
which are neither known, nor can be presumed, to be other than average
cases. Such averages, therefore, are commonly of little use for the
practical guidance of any affairs but those which concern large numbers.
Tables of the chances of life are useful to insurance offices, but they go
a very little way toward informing any one of the chances of his own life,
or any other life in which he is interested, since almost every life is
either better or worse than the average. Such averages can only be
considered as supplying the first term in a series of approximations; the
subsequent terms proceeding on an appreciation of the circumstances
belonging to the particular case.

§ 6. From the application of a single approximate generalization to
individual cases, we proceed to the application of two or more of them
together to the same case.

When a judgment applied to an individual instance is grounded on two
approximate generalizations taken in conjunction, the propositions may
cooperate toward the result in two different ways. In the one, each
proposition is separately applicable to the case in hand, and our object
in combining them is to give to the conclusion in that particular case the
double probability arising from the two propositions separately. This may
be called joining two probabilities by way of Addition; and the result is
a probability greater than either. The other mode is, when only one of the
propositions is directly applicable to the case, the second being only
applicable to it by virtue of the application of the first. This is
joining two probabilities by way of Ratiocination or Deduction; the result
of which is a less probability than either. The type of the first argument
is, Most A are B; most C are B; this thing is both an A and a C; therefore
it is probably a B. The type of the second is, Most A are B; most C are A;
this is a C; therefore it is probably an A, therefore it is probably a B.
The first is exemplified when we prove a fact by the testimony of two
unconnected witnesses; the second, when we adduce only the testimony of
one witness that he has heard the thing asserted by another. Or again, in
the first mode it may be argued that the accused committed the crime,
because he concealed himself, and because his clothes were stained with
blood; in the second, that he committed it because he washed or destroyed
his clothes, which is supposed to render it probable that they were
stained with blood. Instead of only two links, as in these instances, we
may suppose chains of any length. A chain of the former kind was termed by
Bentham(195) a self-corroborative chain of evidence; the second, a
self-infirmative chain.

When approximate generalizations are joined by way of addition, we may
deduce from the theory of probabilities laid down in a former chapter, in
what manner each of them adds to the probability of a conclusion which has
the warrant of them all.

If, on an average, two of every three As are Bs, and three of every four
Cs are Bs, the probability that something which is both an A and a C is a
B, will be more than two in three, or than three in four. Of every twelve
things which are As, all except four are Bs by the supposition; and if the
whole twelve, and consequently those four, have the characters of C
likewise, three of these will be Bs on that ground. Therefore, out of
twelve which are both As and Cs, eleven are Bs. To state the argument in
another way; a thing which is both an A and a C, but which is not a B, is
found in only one of three sections of the class A, and in only one of
four sections of the class C; but this fourth of C being spread over the
whole of A indiscriminately, only one-third part of it (or one-twelfth of
the whole number) belongs to the third section of A; therefore a thing
which is not a B occurs only once, among twelve things which are both As
and Cs. The argument would, in the language of the doctrine of chances, be
thus expressed: the chance that an A is not a B is 1/3, the chance that a
C is not a B is 1/4; hence if the thing be both an A and a C, the chance
is 1/3 of 1/4 = 1/12.(196)

In this computation it is of course supposed that the probabilities
arising from A and C are independent of each other. There must not be any
such connection between A and C, that when a thing belongs to the one
class it will therefore belong to the other, or even have a greater chance
of doing so. Otherwise the not-Bs which are Cs may be, most or even all of
them, identical with the not-Bs which are As; in which last case the
probability arising from A and C together will be no greater than that
arising from A alone.

When approximate generalizations are joined together in the other mode,
that of deduction, the degree of probability of the inference, instead of
increasing, diminishes at each step. From two such premises as Most A are
B, Most B are C, we can not with certainty conclude that even a single A
is C; for the whole of the portion of A which in any way falls under B,
may perhaps be comprised in the exceptional part of it. Still, the two
propositions in question afford an appreciable probability that any given
A is C, provided the average on which the second proposition is grounded
was taken fairly with reference to the first; provided the proposition,
Most B are C, was arrived at in a manner leaving no suspicion that the
probability arising from it is otherwise than fairly distributed over the
section of B which belongs to A. For though the instances which are A
_may_ be all in the minority, they may, also, be all in the majority; and
the one possibility is to be set against the other. On the whole, the
probability arising from the two propositions taken together, will be
correctly measured by the probability arising from the one, abated in the
ratio of that arising from the other. If nine out of ten Swedes have light
hair, and eight out of nine inhabitants of Stockholm are Swedes, the
probability arising from these two propositions, that any given inhabitant
of Stockholm is light-haired, will amount to eight in ten; though it is
rigorously possible that the whole Swedish population of Stockholm might
belong to that tenth section of the people of Sweden who are an exception
to the rest.

If the premises are known to be true not of a bare majority, but of nearly
the whole, of their respective subjects, we may go on joining one such
proposition to another for several steps, before we reach a conclusion not
presumably true even of a majority. The error of the conclusion will
amount to the aggregate of the errors of all the premises. Let the
proposition, most A are B, be true of nine in ten; Most B are C, of eight
in nine; then not only will one A in ten not be C, because not B, but even
of the nine-tenths which are B, only eight-ninths will be C; that is, the
cases of A which are C will be only 8/9 of 9/10, or four-fifths. Let us
now add Most C are D, and suppose this to be true of seven cases out of
eight; the proportion of A which is D will be only 7/8 of 8/9 of 9/10, or
7/10. Thus the probability progressively dwindles. The experience,
however, on which our approximate generalizations are grounded, has so
rarely been subjected to, or admits of, accurate numerical estimation,
that we can not in general apply any measurement to the diminution of
probability which takes place at each illation; but must be content with
remembering that it does diminish at every step, and that unless the
premises approach very nearly indeed to being universally true, the
conclusion after a very few steps is worth nothing. A hearsay of a
hearsay, or an argument from presumptive evidence depending not on
immediate marks but on marks of marks, is worthless at a very few removes
from the first stage.

§ 7. There are, however, two cases in which reasonings depending on
approximate generalizations may be carried to any length we please with as
much assurance, and are as strictly scientific, as if they were composed
of universal laws of nature. But these cases are exceptions of the sort
which are currently said to prove the rule. The approximate
generalizations are as suitable, in the cases in question, for purposes of
ratiocination, as if they were complete generalizations, because they are
capable of being transformed into complete generalizations exactly
equivalent.

First: If the approximate generalization is of the class in which our
reason for stopping at the approximation is not the impossibility, but
only the inconvenience, of going further; if we are cognizant of the
character which distinguishes the cases that accord with the
generalization from those which are exceptions to it; we may then
substitute for the approximate proposition, a universal proposition with a
proviso. The proposition, Most persons who have uncontrolled power employ
it ill, is a generalization of this class, and may be transformed into the
following: All persons who have uncontrolled power employ it ill, provided
they are not persons of unusual strength of judgment and rectitude of
purpose. The proposition, carrying the hypothesis or proviso with it, may
then be dealt with no longer as an approximate, but as a universal
proposition; and to whatever number of steps the reasoning may reach, the
hypothesis, being carried forward to the conclusion, will exactly indicate
how far that conclusion is from being applicable universally. If in the
course of the argument other approximate generalizations are introduced,
each of them being in like manner expressed as a universal proposition
with a condition annexed, the sum of all the conditions will appear at the
end as the sum of all the errors which affect the conclusion. Thus, to the
proposition last cited, let us add the following: All absolute monarchs
have uncontrolled power, unless their position is such that they need the
active support of their subjects (as was the case with Queen Elizabeth,
Frederick of Prussia, and others). Combining these two propositions, we
can deduce from them a universal conclusion, which will be subject to both
the hypotheses in the premises; All absolute monarchs employ their power
ill, unless their position makes them need the active support of their
subjects, or unless they are persons of unusual strength of judgment and
rectitude of purpose. It is of no consequence how rapidly the errors in
our premises accumulate, if we are able in this manner to record each
error, and keep an account of the aggregate as it swells up.

Secondly: there is a case in which approximate propositions, even without
our taking note of the conditions under which they are not true of
individual cases, are yet, for the purposes of science, universal ones;
namely, in the inquiries which relate to the properties not of
individuals, but of multitudes. The principal of these is the science of
politics, or of human society. This science is principally concerned with
the actions not of solitary individuals, but of masses; with the fortunes
not of single persons, but of communities. For the statesman, therefore,
it is generally enough to know that _most_ persons act or are acted upon
in a particular way; since his speculations and his practical arrangements
refer almost exclusively to cases in which the whole community, or some
large portion of it, is acted upon at once, and in which, therefore, what
is done or felt by _most_ persons determines the result produced by or
upon the body at large. He can get on well enough with approximate
generalizations on human nature, since what is true approximately of all
individuals is true absolutely of all masses. And even when the operations
of individual men have a part to play in his deductions, as when he is
reasoning of kings, or other single rulers, still, as he is providing for
indefinite duration, involving an indefinite succession of such
individuals, he must in general both reason and act as if what is true of
most persons were true of all.

The two kinds of considerations above adduced are a sufficient refutation
of the popular error, that speculations on society and government, as
resting on merely probable evidence, must be inferior in certainty and
scientific accuracy to the conclusions of what are called the exact
sciences, and less to be relied on in practice. There are reasons enough
why the moral sciences must remain inferior to at least the more perfect
of the physical; why the laws of their more complicated phenomena can not
be so completely deciphered, nor the phenomena predicted with the same
degree of assurance. But though we can not attain to so many truths, there
is no reason that those we can attain should deserve less reliance, or
have less of a scientific character. Of this topic, however, I shall treat
more systematically in the concluding Book, to which place any further
consideration of it must be deferred.




                              Chapter XXIV.


Of The Remaining Laws Of Nature.


§ 1. In the First Book we found that all the assertions which can be
conveyed by language, express some one or more of five different things:
Existence; Order in Place; Order in Time; Causation; and Resemblance.(197)
Of these, Causation, in our view of the subject, not being fundamentally
different from Order in Time, the five species of possible assertions are
reduced to four. The propositions which affirm Order in Time in either of
its two modes, Co-existence and Succession, have formed, thus far, the
subject of the present Book. And we have now concluded the exposition, so
far as it falls within the limits assigned to this work, of the nature of
the evidence on which these propositions rest, and the processes of
investigation by which they are ascertained and proved. There remain three
classes of facts: Existence, Order in Place, and Resemblance; in regard to
which the same questions are now to be resolved.

Regarding the first of these, very little needs be said. Existence in
general, is a subject not for our science, but for metaphysics. To
determine what things can be recognized as really existing, independently
of our own sensible or other impressions, and in what meaning the term is,
in that case, predicated of them, belongs to the consideration of “Things
in themselves,” from which, throughout this work, we have as much as
possible kept aloof. Existence, so far as Logic is concerned about it, has
reference only to phenomena; to actual, or possible, states of external or
internal consciousness, in ourselves or others. Feelings of sensitive
beings, or possibilities of having such feelings, are the only things the
existence of which can be a subject of logical induction, because the only
things of which the existence in individual cases can be a subject of
experience.

It is true that a thing is said by us to exist, even when it is absent,
and therefore is not and can not be perceived. But even then, its
existence is to us only another word for our conviction that we should
perceive it on a certain supposition; namely, if we were in the needful
circumstances of time and place, and endowed with the needful perfection
of organs. My belief that the Emperor of China exists, is simply my belief
that if I were transported to the imperial palace or some other locality
in Pekin, I should see him. My belief that Julius Cæsar existed, is my
belief that I should have seen him if I had been present in the field of
Pharsalia, or in the senate-house at Rome. When I believe that stars exist
beyond the utmost range of my vision, though assisted by the most powerful
telescopes yet invented, my belief, philosophically expressed, is, that
with still better telescopes, if such existed, I could see them, or that
they may be perceived by beings less remote from them in space, or whose
capacities of perception are superior to mine.

The existence, therefore, of a phenomenon, is but another word for its
being perceived, or for the inferred possibility of perceiving it. When
the phenomenon is within the range of present observation, by present
observation we assure ourselves of its existence; when it is beyond that
range, and is therefore said to be absent, we infer its existence from
marks or evidences. But what can these evidences be? Other phenomena;
ascertained by induction to be connected with the given phenomenon, either
in the way of succession or of co-existence. The simple existence,
therefore, of an individual phenomenon, when not directly perceived, is
inferred from some inductive law of succession or co-existence; and is
consequently not amenable to any peculiar inductive principles. We prove
the existence of a thing, by proving that it is connected by succession or
co-existence with some known thing.

With respect to _general_ propositions of this class, that is, which
affirm the bare fact of existence, they have a peculiarity which renders
the logical treatment of them a very easy matter; they are generalizations
which are sufficiently proved by a single instance. That ghosts, or
unicorns, or sea-serpents exist, would be fully established if it could be
ascertained positively that such things had been even once seen. Whatever
has once happened, is capable of happening again; the only question
relates to the conditions under which it happens.

So far, therefore, as relates to simple existence, the Inductive Logic has
no knots to untie. And we may proceed to the remaining two of the great
classes into which facts have been divided; Resemblance, and Order in
Place.

§ 2. Resemblance and its opposite, except in the case in which they assume
the names of Equality and Inequality, are seldom regarded as subjects of
science; they are supposed to be perceived by simple apprehension; by
merely applying our senses or directing our attention to the two objects
at once, or in immediate succession. And this simultaneous, or virtually
simultaneous, application of our faculties to the two things which are to
be compared, does necessarily constitute the ultimate appeal, wherever
such application is practicable. But, in most cases, it is not
practicable: the objects can not be brought so close together that the
feeling of their resemblance (at least a complete feeling of it) directly
arises in the mind. We can only compare each of them with some third
object, capable of being transported from one to the other. And besides,
even when the objects can be brought into immediate juxtaposition, their
resemblance or difference is but imperfectly known to us, unless we have
compared them minutely, part by part. Until this has been done, things in
reality very dissimilar often appear undistinguishably alike. Two lines of
very unequal length will appear about equal when lying in different
directions; but place them parallel with their farther extremities even,
and if we look at the nearer extremities, their inequality becomes a
matter of direct perception.

To ascertain whether, and in what, two phenomena resemble or differ, is
not always, therefore, so easy a thing as it might at first appear. When
the two can not be brought into juxtaposition, or not so that the observer
is able to compare their several parts in detail, he must employ the
indirect means of reasoning and general propositions. When we can not
bring two straight lines together, to determine whether they are equal, we
do it by the physical aid of a foot-rule applied first to one and then to
the other, and the logical aid of the general proposition or formula,
“Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another.” The
comparison of two things through the intervention of a third thing, when
their direct comparison is impossible, is the appropriate scientific
process for ascertaining resemblances and dissimilarities, and is the sum
total of what Logic has to teach on the subject.

An undue extension of this remark induced Locke to consider reasoning
itself as nothing but the comparison of two ideas through the medium of a
third, and knowledge as the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
two ideas; doctrines which the Condillac school blindly adopted, without
the qualifications and distinctions with which they were studiously
guarded by their illustrious author. Where, indeed, the agreement or
disagreement (otherwise called resemblance or dissimilarity) of any two
things is the very matter to be determined, as is the case particularly in
the sciences of quantity and extension; there, the process by which a
solution, if not attainable by direct perception, must be indirectly
sought, consists in comparing these two things through the medium of a
third. But this is far from being true of all inquiries. The knowledge
that bodies fall to the ground is not a perception of agreement or
disagreement, but of a series of physical occurrences, a succession of
sensations. Locke’s definitions of knowledge and of reasoning required to
be limited to our knowledge of, and reasoning about, resemblances. Nor,
even when thus restricted, are the propositions strictly correct; since
the comparison is not made, as he represents, between the ideas of the two
phenomena, but between the phenomena themselves. This mistake has been
pointed out in an earlier part of our inquiry,(198) and we traced it to an
imperfect conception of what takes place in mathematics, where very often
the comparison is really made between the ideas, without any appeal to the
outward senses; only, however, because in mathematics a comparison of the
ideas is strictly equivalent to a comparison of the phenomena themselves.
Where, as in the case of numbers, lines, and figures, our idea of an
object is a complete picture of the object, so far as respects the matter
in hand; we can, of course, learn from the picture, whatever could be
learned from the object itself by mere contemplation of it as it exists at
the particular instant when the picture is taken. No mere contemplation of
gunpowder would ever teach us that a spark would make it explode, nor,
consequently, would the contemplation of the idea of gunpowder do so; but
the mere contemplation of a straight line shows that it can not inclose a
space; accordingly the contemplation of the idea of it will show the same.
What takes place in mathematics is thus no argument that the comparison is
between the ideas only. It is always, either indirectly or directly, a
comparison of the phenomena.

In cases in which we can not bring the phenomena to the test of direct
inspection at all, or not in a manner sufficiently precise, but must judge
of their resemblance by inference from other resemblances or
dissimilarities more accessible to observation, we of course require, as
in all cases of ratiocination, generalizations or formulæ applicable to
the subject. We must reason from laws of nature; from the uniformities
which are observable in the fact of likeness or unlikeness.

§ 3. Of these laws or uniformities, the most comprehensive are those
supplied by mathematics; the axioms relating to equality, inequality, and
proportionality, and the various theorems thereon founded. And these are
the only Laws of Resemblance which require to be, or which can be, treated
apart. It is true there are innumerable other theorems which affirm
resemblances among phenomena; as that the angle of the reflection of light
is _equal_ to its angle of incidence (equality being merely exact
resemblance in magnitude). Again, that the heavenly bodies describe
_equal_ areas in equal times; and that their periods of revolution are
_proportional_ (another species of resemblance) to the sesquiplicate
powers of their distances from the centre of force. These and similar
propositions affirm resemblances, of the same nature with those asserted
in the theorems of mathematics; but the distinction is, that the
propositions of mathematics are true of all phenomena whatever, or at
least without distinction of origin; while the truths in question are
affirmed only of special phenomena, which originate in a certain way; and
the equalities, proportionalities, or other resemblances, which exist
between such phenomena, must necessarily be either derived from, or
identical with, the law of their origin—the law of causation on which they
depend. The equality of the areas described in equal times by the planets,
is _derived_ from the laws of the causes; and, until its derivation was
shown, it was an empirical law. The equality of the angles of reflection
and incidence is _identical_ with the law of the cause; for the cause is
the incidence of a ray of light upon a reflecting surface, and the
equality in question is the very law according to which that cause
produces its effects. This class, therefore, of the uniformities of
resemblance between phenomena, are inseparable, in fact and in thought,
from the laws of the production of those phenomena; and the principles of
induction applicable to them are no other than those of which we have
treated in the preceding chapters of this Book.

It is otherwise with the truths of mathematics. The laws of equality and
inequality between spaces, or between numbers, have no connection with
laws of causation. That the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of
incidence, is a statement of the mode of action of a particular cause; but
that when two straight lines intersect each other the opposite angles are
equal, is true of all such lines and angles, by whatever cause produced.
That the squares of the periodic times of the planets are proportional to
the cubes of their distances from the sun, is a uniformity derived from
the laws of the causes (or forces) which produce the planetary motions;
but that the square of any number is four times the square of half the
number, is true independently of any cause. The only laws of resemblance,
therefore, which we are called upon to consider independently of
causation, belong to the province of mathematics.

§ 4. The same thing is evident with respect to the only one remaining of
our five categories, Order in Place. The order in place, of the effects of
a cause, is (like every thing else belonging to the effects) a consequence
of the laws of that cause. The order in place, or, as we have termed it,
the collocation, of the primeval causes, is (as well as their resemblance)
in each instance an ultimate fact, in which no laws or uniformities are
traceable. The only remaining general propositions respecting order in
place, and the only ones which have nothing to do with causation, are some
of the truths of geometry; laws through which we are able, from the order
in place of certain points, lines, or spaces, to infer the order in place
of others which are connected with the former in some known mode; quite
independently of the particular nature of those points, lines, or spaces,
in any other respect than position or magnitude, as well as independently
of the physical cause from which in any particular case they happen to
derive their origin.

It thus appears that mathematics is the only department of science into
the methods of which it still remains to inquire. And there is the less
necessity that this inquiry should occupy us long, as we have already, in
the Second Book, made considerable progress in it. We there remarked, that
the directly inductive truths of mathematics are few in number; consisting
of the axioms, together with certain propositions concerning existence,
tacitly involved in most of the so-called definitions. And we gave what
appeared conclusive reasons for affirming that these original premises,
from which the remaining truths of the science are deduced, are,
notwithstanding all appearances to the contrary, results of observation
and experience; founded, in short, on the evidence of the senses. That
things equal to the same thing are equal to one another, and that two
straight lines which have once intersected one another continue to
diverge, are inductive truths; resting, indeed, like the law of universal
causation, only on induction _per enumerationem simplicem_; on the fact
that they have been perpetually perceived to be true, and never once found
to be false. But, as we have seen in a recent chapter that this evidence,
in the case of a law so completely universal as the law of causation,
amounts to the fullest proof, so is this even more evidently true of the
general propositions to which we are now adverting; because, as a
perception of their truth in any individual case whatever, requires only
the simple act of looking at the objects in a proper position, there never
could have been in their case (what, for a long period, there were in the
case of the law of causation) instances which were apparently, though not
really, exceptions to them. Their infallible truth was recognized from the
very dawn of speculation; and as their extreme familiarity made it
impossible for the mind to conceive the objects under any other law, they
were, and still are, generally considered as truths recognized by their
own evidence, or by instinct.

§ 5. There is something which seems to require explanation, in the fact
that the immense multitude of truths (a multitude still as far from being
exhausted as ever) comprised in the mathematical sciences, can be elicited
from so small a number of elementary laws. One sees not, at first, how it
is that there can be room for such an infinite variety of true
propositions, on subjects apparently so limited.

To begin with the science of number. The elementary or ultimate truths of
this science are the common axioms concerning equality, namely, “Things
which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another,” and “Equals
added to equals make equal sums” (no other axioms are required),(199)
together with the definitions of the various numbers. Like other so-called
definitions, these are composed of two things, the explanation of a name,
and the assertion of a fact; of which the latter alone can form a first
principle or premise of a science. The fact asserted in the definition of
a number is a physical fact. Each of the numbers two, three, four, etc.,
denotes physical phenomena, and connotes a physical property of those
phenomena. Two, for instance, denotes all pairs of things, and twelve all
dozens of things, connoting what makes them pairs, or dozens; and that
which makes them so is something physical; since it can not be denied that
two apples are physically distinguishable from three apples, two horses
from one horse, and so forth; that they are a different visible and
tangible phenomenon. I am not undertaking to say what the difference is;
it is enough that there is a difference of which the senses can take
cognizance. And although a hundred and two horses are not so easily
distinguished from a hundred and three, as two horses are from
three—though in most positions the senses do not perceive any
difference—yet they may be so placed that a difference will be
perceptible, or else we should never have distinguished them, and given
them different names. Weight is confessedly a physical property of things;
yet small differences between great weights are as imperceptible to the
senses in most situations, as small differences between great numbers; and
are only put in evidence by placing the two objects in a peculiar
position—namely, in the opposite scales of a delicate balance.

What, then, is that which is connoted by a name of number? Of course, some
property belonging to the agglomeration of things which we call by the
name; and that property is, the characteristic manner in which the
agglomeration is made up of, and may be separated into, parts. I will
endeavor to make this more intelligible by a few explanations.

When we call a collection of objects _two_, _three_, or _four_, they are
not two, three, or four in the abstract; they are two, three, or four
things of some particular kind; pebbles, horses, inches, pounds’ weight.
What the name of number connotes is, the manner in which single objects of
the given kind must be put together, in order to produce that particular
aggregate. If the aggregate be of pebbles, and we call it _two_, the name
implies that, to compose the aggregate, one pebble must be joined to one
pebble. If we call it _three_, one and one and one pebble must be brought
together to produce it, or else one pebble must be joined to an aggregate
of the kind called _two_, already existing. The aggregate which we call
_four_, has a still greater number of characteristic modes of formation.
One and one and one and one pebble may be brought together; or two
aggregates of the kind called _two_ may be united; or one pebble may be
added to an aggregate of the kind called _three_. Every succeeding number
in the ascending series, may be formed by the junction of smaller numbers
in a progressively greater variety of ways. Even limiting the parts to
two, the number may be formed, and consequently may be divided, in as many
different ways as there are numbers smaller than itself; and, if we admit
of threes, fours, etc., in a still greater variety. Other modes of
arriving at the same aggregate present themselves, not by the union of
smaller, but by the dismemberment of larger aggregates. Thus, _three
pebbles_ may be formed by taking away one pebble from an aggregate of
four; _two pebbles_, by an equal division of a similar aggregate; and so
on.

Every arithmetical proposition; every statement of the result of an
arithmetical operation; is a statement of one of the modes of formation of
a given number. It affirms that a certain aggregate might have been formed
by putting together certain other aggregates, or by withdrawing certain
portions of some aggregate; and that, by consequence, we might reproduce
those aggregates from it, by reversing the process.

Thus, when we say that the cube of 12 is 1728, what we affirm is this:
that if, having a sufficient number of pebbles or of any other objects, we
put them together into the particular sort of parcels or aggregates called
twelves; and put together these twelves again into similar collections;
and, finally, make up twelve of these largest parcels; the aggregate thus
formed will be such a one as we call 1728; namely, that which (to take the
most familiar of its modes of formation) may be made by joining the parcel
called a thousand pebbles, the parcel called seven hundred pebbles, the
parcel called twenty pebbles, and the parcel called eight pebbles.

The converse proposition that the cube root of 1728 is 12, asserts that
this large aggregate may again be decomposed into the twelve twelves of
twelves of pebbles which it consists of.

The modes of formation of any number are innumerable; but when we know one
mode of formation of each, all the rest may be determined deductively. If
we know that _a_ is formed from _b_ and _c_, _b_ from _a_ and _e_, _c_
from _d_ and _f_, and so forth, until we have included all the numbers of
any scale we choose to select (taking care that for each number the mode
of formation be really a distinct one, not bringing us round again to the
former numbers, but introducing a new number), we have a set of
propositions from which we may reason to all the other modes of formation
of those numbers from one another. Having established a chain of inductive
truths connecting together all the numbers of the scale, we can ascertain
the formation of any one of those numbers from any other by merely
traveling from one to the other along the chain. Suppose that we know only
the following modes of formation: 6=4+2, 4=7-3, 7=5+2, 5=9-4. We could
determine how 6 may be formed from 9. For 6=4+2=7-3+2=5+2-3+2=9-4+2-3+2.
It may therefore be formed by taking away 4 and 3, and adding 2 and 2. If
we know besides that 2+2=4, we obtain 6 from 9 in a simpler mode, by
merely taking away 3.

It is sufficient, therefore, to select one of the various modes of
formation of each number, as a means of ascertaining all the rest. And
since things which are uniform, and therefore simple, are most easily
received and retained by the understanding, there is an obvious advantage
in selecting a mode of formation which shall be alike for all; in fixing
the connotation of names of number on one uniform principle. The mode in
which our existing numerical nomenclature is contrived possesses this
advantage, with the additional one, that it happily conveys to the mind
two of the modes of formation of every number. Each number is considered
as formed by the addition of a unit to the number next below it in
magnitude, and this mode of formation is conveyed by the place which it
occupies in the series. And each is also considered as formed by the
addition of a number of units less than ten, and a number of aggregates
each equal to one of the successive powers of ten; and this mode of its
formation is expressed by its spoken name, and by its numerical character.

What renders arithmetic the type of a deductive science, is the fortunate
applicability to it of a law so comprehensive as “The sums of equals are
equals:” or (to express the same principle in less familiar but more
characteristic language), Whatever is made up of parts, is made up of the
parts of those parts. This truth, obvious to the senses in all cases which
can be fairly referred to their decision, and so general as to be
co-extensive with nature itself, being true of all sorts of phenomena (for
all admit of being numbered), must be considered an inductive truth, or
law of nature, of the highest order. And every arithmetical operation is
an application of this law, or of other laws capable of being deduced from
it. This is our warrant for all calculations. We believe that five and two
are equal to seven, on the evidence of this inductive law, combined with
the definitions of those numbers. We arrive at that conclusion (as all
know who remember how they first learned it) by adding a single unit at a
time: 5 + 1=6, therefore 5+1+1=6+1=7; and again 2=1+1, therefore
5+2=5+1+1=7.

§ 6. Innumerable as are the true propositions which can be formed
concerning particular numbers, no adequate conception could be gained,
from these alone, of the extent of the truths composing the science of
number. Such propositions as we have spoken of are the least general of
all numerical truths. It is true that even these are co-extensive with all
nature; the properties of the number four are true of all objects that are
divisible into four equal parts, and all objects are either actually or
ideally so divisible. But the propositions which compose the science of
algebra are true, not of a particular number, but of all numbers; not of
all things under the condition of being divided in a particular way, but
of all things under the condition of being divided in any way—of being
designated by a number at all.

Since it is impossible for different numbers to have any of their modes of
formation completely in common, it is a kind of paradox to say, that all
propositions which can be made concerning numbers relate to their modes of
formation from other numbers, and yet that there are propositions which
are true of all numbers. But this very paradox leads to the real principle
of generalization concerning the properties of numbers. Two different
numbers can not be formed in the same manner from the same numbers; but
they may be formed in the same manner from different numbers; as nine is
formed from three by multiplying it into itself, and sixteen is formed
from four by the same process. Thus there arises a classification of modes
of formation, or in the language commonly used by mathematicians, a
classification of Functions. Any number, considered as formed from any
other number, is called a function of it; and there are as many kinds of
functions as there are modes of formation. The simple functions are by no
means numerous, most functions being formed by the combination of several
of the operations which form simple functions, or by successive
repetitions of some one of those operations. The simple functions of any
number _x_ are all reducible to the following forms: _x_+_a_, _x_-_a_,
_ax_, _x_/_a_, log. _x_ (to the base _a_), and the same expressions varied
by putting _x_ for _a_ and _a_ for _x_, wherever that substitution would
alter the value: to which, perhaps, ought to be added sin _x_, and arc
(sin=_x_). All other functions of _x_ are formed by putting some one or
more of the simple functions in the place of _x_ or _a_, and subjecting
them to the same elementary operations.

In order to carry on general reasonings on the subject of Functions, we
require a nomenclature enabling us to express any two numbers by names
which, without specifying what particular numbers they are, shall show
what function each is of the other; or, in other words, shall put in
evidence their mode of formation from one another. The system of general
language called algebraical notation does this. The expressions _a_ and
a2+3a denote, the one any number, the other the number formed from it in a
particular manner. The expressions _a_, _b_, _n_, and (_a+b_)n, denote any
three numbers, and a fourth which is formed from them in a certain mode.

The following may be stated as the general problem of the algebraical
calculus: F being a certain function of a given number, to find what
function F will be of any function of that number. For example, a binomial
_a + b_ is a function of its two parts _a_ and _b_, and the parts are, in
their turn, functions of _a + b_: now (_a + b_)n is a certain function of
the binomial; what function will this be of _a_ and _b_, the two parts?
The answer to this question is the binomial theorem. The formula _(a +
b)__n__ = a__n__ + n/1 a__n-1__ b + n.n-1/1.2 a__n-2__ b__2_, etc., shows
in what manner the number which is formed by multiplying _a + b_ into
itself _n_ times, might be formed without that process, directly from _a,
b_, and _n_. And of this nature are all the theorems of the science of
number. They assert the identity of the result of different modes of
formation. They affirm that some mode of formation from _x_, and some mode
of formation from a certain function of _x_, produce the same number.

Such, as above described, is the aim and end of the calculus. As for its
processes, every one knows that they are simply deductive. In
demonstrating an algebraical theorem, or in resolving an equation, we
travel from the _datum_ to the _quæsitum_ by pure ratiocination; in which
the only premises introduced, besides the original hypotheses, are the
fundamental axioms already mentioned—that things equal to the same thing
are equal to one another, and that the sums of equal things are equal. At
each step in the demonstration or in the calculation, we apply one or
other of these truths, or truths deducible from them, as, that the
differences, products, etc., of equal numbers are equal.

It would be inconsistent with the scale of this work, and not necessary to
its design, to carry the analysis of the truths and processes of algebra
any further; which is also the less needful, as the task has been, to a
very great extent, performed by other writers. Peacock’s Algebra, and Dr.
Whewell’s _Doctrine of Limits_, are full of instruction on the subject.
The profound treatises of a truly philosophical mathematician, Professor
De Morgan, should be studied by every one who desires to comprehend the
evidence of mathematical truths, and the meaning of the obscurer processes
of the calculus, and the speculations of M. Comte, in his _Cours de
Philosophie Positive_, on the philosophy of the higher branches of
mathematics, are among the many valuable gifts for which philosophy is
indebted to that eminent thinker.

§ 7. If the extreme generality, and remoteness not so much from sense as
from the visual and tactual imagination, of the laws of number, renders it
a somewhat difficult effort of abstraction to conceive those laws as being
in reality physical truths obtained by observation; the same difficulty
does not exist with regard to the laws of extension. The facts of which
those laws are expressions, are of a kind peculiarly accessible to the
senses, and suggesting eminently distinct images to the fancy. That
geometry is a strictly physical science would doubtless have been
recognized in all ages, had it not been for the illusions produced by two
circumstances. One of these is the characteristic property, already
noticed, of the facts of geometry, that they may be collected from our
ideas or mental pictures of objects as effectually as from the objects
themselves. The other is, the demonstrative character of geometrical
truths; which was at one time supposed to constitute a radical distinction
between them and physical truths; the latter, as resting on merely
probable evidence, being deemed essentially uncertain and unprecise. The
advance of knowledge has, however, made it manifest that physical science,
in its better understood branches, is quite as demonstrative as geometry.
The task of deducing its details from a few comparatively simple
principles is found to be any thing but the impossibility it was once
supposed to be; and the notion of the superior certainty of geometry is an
illusion, arising from the ancient prejudice which, in that science,
mistakes the ideal data from which we reason, for a peculiar class of
realities, while the corresponding ideal data of any deductive physical
science are recognized as what they really are, hypotheses.

Every theorem in geometry is a law of external nature, and might have been
ascertained by generalizing from observation and experiment, which in this
case resolve themselves into comparison and measurement. But it was found
practicable, and, being practicable, was desirable, to deduce these truths
by ratiocination from a small number of general laws of nature, the
certainty and universality of which are obvious to the most careless
observer, and which compose the first principles and ultimate premises of
the science. Among these general laws must be included the same two which
we have noticed as ultimate principles of the Science of Number also, and
which are applicable to every description of quantity; viz., The sums of
equals are equal, and Things which are equal to the same thing are equal
to one another; the latter of which may be expressed in a manner more
suggestive of the inexhaustible multitude of its consequences, by the
following terms: Whatever is equal to any one of a number of equal
magnitudes, is equal to any other of them. To these two must be added, in
geometry, a third law of equality, namely, that lines, surfaces, or solid
spaces, which can be so applied to one another as to coincide, are equal.
Some writers have asserted that this law of nature is a mere verbal
definition; that the expression “equal magnitudes” _means_ nothing but
magnitudes which can be so applied to one another as to coincide. But in
this opinion I can not agree. The equality of two geometrical magnitudes
can not differ fundamentally in its nature from the equality of two
weights, two degrees of heat, or two portions of duration, to none of
which would this definition of equality be suitable. None of these things
can be so applied to one another as to coincide, yet we perfectly
understand what we mean when we call them equal. Things are equal in
magnitude, as things are equal in weight, when they are felt to be exactly
similar in respect of the attribute in which we compare them: and the
application of the objects to each other in the one case, like the
balancing them with a pair of scales in the other, is but a mode of
bringing them into a position in which our senses can recognize
deficiencies of exact resemblance that would otherwise escape our notice.

Along with these three general principles or axioms, the remainder of the
premises of geometry consists of the so-called definitions: that is to
say, propositions asserting the real existence of the various objects
therein designated, together with some one property of each. In some cases
more than one property is commonly assumed, but in no case is more than
one necessary. It is assumed that there are such things in nature as
straight lines, and that any two of them setting out from the same point,
diverge more and more without limit. This assumption (which includes and
goes beyond Euclid’s axiom that two straight lines can not inclose a
space) is as indispensable in geometry, and as evident, resting on as
simple, familiar, and universal observation, as any of the other axioms.
It is also assumed that straight lines diverge from one another in
different degrees; in other words, that there are such things as angles,
and that they are capable of being equal or unequal. It is assumed that
there is such a thing as a circle, and that all its radii are equal; such
things as ellipses, and that the sums of the focal distances are equal for
every point in an ellipse; such things as parallel lines, and that those
lines are everywhere equally distant.(200)

§ 8. It is a matter of more than curiosity to consider, to what
peculiarity of the physical truths which are the subject of geometry, it
is owing that they can all be deduced from so small a number of original
premises; why it is that we can set out from only one characteristic
property of each kind of phenomenon, and with that and two or three
general truths relating to equality, can travel from mark to mark until we
obtain a vast body of derivative truths, to all appearance extremely
unlike those elementary ones.

The explanation of this remarkable fact seems to lie in the following
circumstances. In the first place, all questions of position and figure
may be resolved into questions of magnitude. The position and figure of
any object are determined by determining the position of a sufficient
number of points in it; and the position of any point may be determined by
the magnitude of three rectangular co-ordinates, that is, of the
perpendiculars drawn from the point to three planes at right angles to one
another, arbitrarily selected. By this transformation of all questions of
quality into questions only of quantity, geometry is reduced to the single
problem of the measurement of magnitudes, that is, the ascertainment of
the equalities which exist between them. Now when we consider that by one
of the general axioms, any equality, when ascertained, is proof of as many
other equalities as there are other things equal to either of the two
equals; and that by another of those axioms, any ascertained equality is
proof of the equality of as many pairs of magnitudes as can be formed by
the numerous operations which resolve themselves into the addition of the
equals to themselves or to other equals; we cease to wonder that in
proportion as a science is conversant about equality, it should afford a
more copious supply of marks of marks; and that the sciences of number and
extension, which are conversant with little else than equality, should be
the most deductive of all the sciences.

There are also two or three of the principal laws of space or extension
which are unusually fitted for rendering one position or magnitude a mark
of another, and thereby contributing to render the science largely
deductive. First, the magnitudes of inclosed spaces, whether superficial
or solid, are completely determined by the magnitudes of the lines and
angles which bound them. Secondly, the length of any line, whether
straight or curve, is measured (certain other things being given) by the
angle which it subtends, and _vicè versa_. Lastly, the angle which any two
straight lines make with each other at an inaccessible point, is measured
by the angles they severally make with any third line we choose to select.
By means of these general laws, the measurement of all lines, angles, and
spaces whatsoever might be accomplished by measuring a single straight
line and a sufficient number of angles; which is the plan actually pursued
in the trigonometrical survey of a country; and fortunate it is that this
is practicable, the exact measurement of long straight lines being always
difficult, and often impossible, but that of angles very easy. Three such
generalizations as the foregoing afford such facilities for the indirect
measurement of magnitudes (by supplying us with known lines or angles
which are marks of the magnitude of unknown ones, and thereby of the
spaces which they inclose), that it is easily intelligible how from a few
data we can go on to ascertain the magnitude of an indefinite multitude of
lines, angles, and spaces, which we could not easily, or could not at all,
measure by any more direct process.

§ 9. Such are the remarks which it seems necessary to make in this place,
respecting the laws of nature which are the peculiar subject of the
sciences of number and extension. The immense part which those laws take
in giving a deductive character to the other departments of physical
science, is well known; and is not surprising, when we consider that all
causes operate according to mathematical laws. The effect is always
dependent on, or is a function of, the quantity of the agent; and
generally of its position also. We can not, therefore, reason respecting
causation, without introducing considerations of quantity and extension at
every step; and if the nature of the phenomena admits of our obtaining
numerical data of sufficient accuracy, the laws of quantity become the
grand instrument for calculating forward to an effect, or backward to a
cause. That in all other sciences, as well as in geometry, questions of
quality are scarcely ever independent of questions of quantity, may be
seen from the most familiar phenomena. Even when several colors are mixed
on a painter’s palette, the comparative quantity of each entirely
determines the color of the mixture.

With this mere suggestion of the general causes which render mathematical
principles and processes so predominant in those deductive sciences which
afford precise numerical data, I must, on the present occasion, content
myself; referring the reader who desires a more thorough acquaintance with
the subject, to the first two volumes of M. Comte’s systematic work.

In the same work, and more particularly in the third volume, are also
fully discussed the limits of the applicability of mathematical principles
to the improvement of other sciences. Such principles are manifestly
inapplicable, where the causes on which any class of phenomena depend are
so imperfectly accessible to our observation, that we can not ascertain,
by a proper induction, their numerical laws; or where the causes are so
numerous, and intermixed in so complex a manner with one another, that
even supposing their laws known, the computation of the aggregate effect
transcends the powers of the calculus as it is, or is likely to be; or,
lastly, where the causes themselves are in a state of perpetual
fluctuation; as in physiology, and still more, if possible, in the social
science. The mathematical solutions of physical questions become
progressively more difficult and imperfect, in proportion as the questions
divest themselves of their abstract and hypothetical character, and
approach nearer to the degree of complication actually existing in nature;
insomuch that beyond the limits of astronomical phenomena, and of those
most nearly analogous to them, mathematical accuracy is generally obtained
“at the expense of the reality of the inquiry:” while even in astronomical
questions, “notwithstanding the admirable simplicity of their mathematical
elements, our feeble intelligence becomes incapable of following out
effectually the logical combinations of the laws on which the phenomena
are dependent, as soon as we attempt to take into simultaneous
consideration more than two or three essential influences.”(201) Of this,
the problem of the Three Bodies has already been cited, more than once, as
a remarkable instance; the complete solution of so comparatively simple a
question having vainly tried the skill of the most profound
mathematicians. We may conceive, then, how chimerical would be the hope
that mathematical principles could be advantageously applied to phenomena
dependent on the mutual action of the innumerable minute particles of
bodies, as those of chemistry, and still more, of physiology; and for
similar reasons those principles remain inapplicable to the still more
complex inquiries, the subjects of which are phenomena of society and
government.

The value of mathematical instruction as a preparation for those more
difficult investigations, consists in the applicability not of its
doctrines, but of its method. Mathematics will ever remain the most
perfect type of the Deductive Method in general; and the applications of
mathematics to the deductive branches of physics, furnish the only school
in which philosophers can effectually learn the most difficult and
important portion of their art, the employment of the laws of simpler
phenomena for explaining and predicting those of the more complex. These
grounds are quite sufficient for deeming mathematical training an
indispensable basis of real scientific education, and regarding (according
to the _dictum_ which an old but unauthentic tradition ascribes to Plato)
one who is ἀγεωμέτρητος, as wanting in one of the most essential
qualifications for the successful cultivation of the higher branches of
philosophy.




                               Chapter XXV.


Of The Grounds Of Disbelief.


§ 1. The method of arriving at general truths, or general propositions fit
to be believed, and the nature of the evidence on which they are grounded,
have been discussed, as far as space and the writer’s faculties permitted,
in the twenty-four preceding chapters. But the result of the examination
of evidence is not always belief, nor even suspension of judgment; it is
sometimes disbelief. The philosophy, therefore, of induction and
experimental inquiry is incomplete, unless the grounds not only of belief,
but of disbelief, are treated of; and to this topic we shall devote one,
and the final, chapter.

By disbelief is not here to be understood the mere absence of belief. The
ground for abstaining from belief is simply the absence or insufficiency
of proof; and in considering what is sufficient evidence to support any
given conclusion, we have already, by implication, considered what
evidence is not sufficient for the same purpose. By disbelief is here
meant, not the state of mind in which we form no opinion concerning a
subject, but that in which we are fully persuaded that some opinion is not
true; insomuch that if evidence, even of great apparent strength (whether
grounded on the testimony of others or on our own supposed perceptions),
were produced in favor of the opinion, we should believe that the
witnesses spoke falsely, or that they, or we ourselves if we were the
direct percipients, were mistaken.

That there are such cases, no one is likely to dispute. Assertions for
which there is abundant positive evidence are often disbelieved, on
account of what is called their improbability, or impossibility. And the
question for consideration is what, in the present case, these words mean,
and how far and in what circumstances the properties which they express
are sufficient grounds for disbelief.

§ 2. It is to be remarked, in the first place, that the positive evidence
produced in support of an assertion which is nevertheless rejected on the
score of impossibility or improbability, is never such as amounts to full
proof. It is always grounded on some approximate generalization. The fact
may have been asserted by a hundred witnesses; but there are many
exceptions to the universality of the generalization that what a hundred
witnesses affirm is true. We may seem to ourselves to have actually seen
the fact; but that we really see what we think we see, is by no means a
universal truth; our organs may have been in a morbid state; or we may
have inferred something, and imagined that we perceived it. The evidence,
then, in the affirmative being never more than an approximate
generalization, all will depend on what the evidence in the negative is.
If that also rests on an approximate generalization, it is a case for
comparison of probabilities. If the approximate generalizations leading to
the affirmative are, when added together, less strong, or, in other words,
farther from being universal, than the approximate generalizations which
support the negative side of the question, the proposition is said to be
improbable, and is to be disbelieved provisionally. If, however, an
alleged fact be in contradiction, not to any number of approximate
generalizations, but to a completed generalization grounded on a rigorous
induction, it is said to be impossible, and is to be disbelieved totally.

This last principle, simple and evident as it appears, is the doctrine
which, on the occasion of an attempt to apply it to the question of the
credibility of miracles, excited so violent a controversy. Hume’s
celebrated doctrine, that nothing is credible which is contradictory to
experience, or at variance with laws of nature, is merely this very plain
and harmless proposition, that whatever is contradictory to a complete
induction is incredible. That such a maxim as this should either be
accounted a dangerous heresy, or mistaken for a great and recondite truth,
speaks ill for the state of philosophical speculation on such subjects.

But does not (it may be asked) the very statement of the proposition imply
a contradiction? An alleged fact, according to this theory, is not to be
believed if it contradict a complete induction. But it is essential to the
completeness of an induction that it shall not contradict any known fact.
Is it not, then, a _petitio principii_ to say, that the fact ought to be
disbelieved because the induction opposed to it is complete? How can we
have a right to declare the induction complete, while facts, supported by
credible evidence, present themselves in opposition to it?

I answer, we have that right whenever the scientific canons of induction
give it to us; that is, whenever the induction _can_ be complete. We have
it, for example, in a case of causation in which there has been an
_experimentum crucis_. If an antecedent A, superadded to a set of
antecedents in all other respects unaltered, is followed by an effect B
which did not exist before, A is, in that instance at least, the cause of
B, or an indispensable part of its cause; and if A be tried again with
many totally different sets of antecedents and B still follows, then it is
the whole cause. If these observations or experiments have been repeated
so often, and by so many persons, as to exclude all supposition of error
in the observer, a law of nature is established; and so long as this law
is received as such, the assertion that on any particular occasion A took
place, and yet B did not follow, _without any counteracting cause_, must
be disbelieved. Such an assertion is not to be credited on any less
evidence than what would suffice to overturn the law. The general truths,
that whatever has a beginning has a cause, and that when none but the same
causes exist, the same effects follow, rest on the strongest inductive
evidence possible; the proposition that things affirmed by even a crowd of
respectable witnesses are true, is but an approximate generalization;
and—even if we fancy we actually saw or felt the fact which is in
contradiction to the law—what a human being can see is no more than a set
of appearances; from which the real nature of the phenomenon is merely an
inference, and in this inference approximate generalizations usually have
a large share. If, therefore, we make our election to hold by the law, no
quantity of evidence whatever ought to persuade us that there has occurred
any thing in contradiction to it. If, indeed, the evidence produced is
such that it is more likely that the set of observations and experiments
on which the law rests should have been inaccurately performed or
incorrectly interpreted, than that the evidence in question should be
false, we may believe the evidence; but then we must abandon the law. And
since the law was received on what seemed a complete induction, it can
only be rejected on evidence equivalent; namely, as being inconsistent not
with any number of approximate generalizations, but with some other and
better established law of nature. This extreme case, of a conflict between
two supposed laws of nature, has probably never actually occurred where,
in the process of investigating both the laws, the true canons of
scientific induction had been kept in view; but if it did occur, it must
terminate in the total rejection of one of the supposed laws. It would
prove that there must be a flaw in the logical process by which either one
or the other was established; and if there be so, that supposed general
truth is no truth at all. We can not admit a proposition as a law of
nature, and yet believe a fact in real contradiction to it. We must
disbelieve the alleged fact, or believe that we were mistaken in admitting
the supposed law.

But in order that any alleged fact should be contradictory to a law of
causation, the allegation must be, not simply that the cause existed
without being followed by the effect, for that would be no uncommon
occurrence; but that this happened in the absence of any adequate
counteracting cause. Now in the case of an alleged miracle, the assertion
is the exact opposite of this. It is, that the effect was defeated, not in
the absence, but in consequence of a counteracting cause, namely, a direct
interposition of an act of the will of some being who has power over
nature; and in particular of a Being, whose will being assumed to have
endowed all the causes with the powers by which they produce their
effects, may well be supposed able to counteract them. A miracle (as was
justly remarked by Brown)(202) is no contradiction to the law of cause and
effect; it is a new effect, supposed to be produced by the introduction of
a new cause. Of the adequacy of that cause, if present, there can be no
doubt; and the only antecedent improbability which can be ascribed to the
miracle, is the improbability that any such cause existed.

All, therefore, which Hume has made out, and this he must be considered to
have made out, is, that (at least in the imperfect state of our knowledge
of natural agencies, which leaves it always possible that some of the
physical antecedents may have been hidden from us) no evidence can prove a
miracle to any one who did not previously believe the existence of a being
or beings with supernatural power; or who believes himself to have full
proof that the character of the Being whom he recognizes is inconsistent
with his having seen fit to interfere on the occasion in question.

If we do not already believe in supernatural agencies, no miracle can
prove to us their existence. The miracle itself, considered merely as an
extraordinary fact, may be satisfactorily certified by our senses or by
testimony; but nothing can ever prove that it is a miracle; there is still
another possible hypothesis, that of its being the result of some unknown
natural cause; and this possibility can not be so completely shut out, as
to leave no alternative but that of admitting the existence and
intervention of a being superior to nature. Those, however, who already
believe in such a being have two hypotheses to choose from, a supernatural
and an unknown natural agency; and they have to judge which of the two is
the most probable in the particular case. In forming this judgment, an
important element of the question will be the conformity of the result to
the laws of the supposed agent, that is, to the character of the Deity as
they conceive it. But with the knowledge which we now possess of the
general uniformity of the course of nature, religion, following in the
wake of science, has been compelled to acknowledge the government of the
universe as being on the whole carried on by general laws, and not by
special interpositions. To whoever holds this belief, there is a general
presumption against any supposition of divine agency not operating through
general laws, or, in other words, there is an antecedent improbability in
every miracle, which, in order to outweigh it, requires an extraordinary
strength of antecedent probability derived from the special circumstances
of the case.

§ 3. It appears from what has been said, that the assertion that a cause
has been defeated of an effect which is connected with it by a completely
ascertained law of causation, is to be disbelieved or not, according to
the probability or improbability that there existed in the particular
instance an adequate counteracting cause. To form an estimate of this, is
not more difficult than of other probabilities. With regard to all _known_
causes capable of counteracting the given causes, we have generally some
previous knowledge of the frequency or rarity of their occurrence, from
which we may draw an inference as to the antecedent improbability of their
having been present in any particular case. And neither in respect to
known nor unknown causes are we required to pronounce on the probability
of their existing in nature, but only of their having existed at the time
and place at which the transaction is alleged to have happened. We are
seldom, therefore, without the means (when the circumstances of the case
are at all known to us) of judging how far it is likely that such a cause
should have existed at that time and place without manifesting its
presence by some other marks, and (in the case of an unknown cause)
without having hitherto manifested its existence in any other instance.
According as this circumstance, or the falsity of the testimony, appears
more improbable—that is, conflicts with an approximate generalization of a
higher order—we believe the testimony, or disbelieve it; with a stronger
or a weaker degree of conviction, according to the preponderance; at least
until we have sifted the matter further.

So much, then, for the case in which the alleged fact conflicts, or
appears to conflict, with a real law of causation. But a more common case,
perhaps, is that of its conflicting with uniformities of mere
co-existence, not proved to be dependent on causation; in other words,
with the properties of Kinds. It is with these uniformities principally
that the marvelous stories related by travelers are apt to be at variance;
as of men with tails, or with wings, and (until confirmed by experience)
of flying fish; or of ice, in the celebrated anecdote of the Dutch
travelers and the King of Siam. Facts of this description, facts
previously unheard of, but which could not from any known law of causation
be pronounced impossible, are what Hume characterizes as not contrary to
experience, but merely unconformable to it; and Bentham, in his treatise
on Evidence, denominates them facts disconformable _in specie_, as
distinguished from such as are disconformable _in toto_ or in _degree_

In a case of this description, the fact asserted is the existence of a new
Kind; which in itself is not in the slightest degree incredible, and only
to be rejected if the improbability that any variety of object existing at
the particular place and time should not have been discovered sooner, be
greater than that of error or mendacity in the witnesses. Accordingly,
such assertions, when made by credible persons, and of unexplored places,
are not disbelieved, but at most regarded as requiring confirmation from
subsequent observers; unless the alleged properties of the supposed new
Kind are at variance with known properties of some larger kind which
includes it; or, in other words, unless, in the new Kind which is asserted
to exist, some properties are said to have been found disjoined from
others which have always been known to accompany them; as in the case of
Pliny’s men, or any other kind of animal of a structure different from
that which has always been found to co-exist with animal life. On the mode
of dealing with any such case, little needs be added to what has been said
on the same topic in the twenty-second chapter.(203) When the uniformities
of co-existence which the alleged fact would violate, are such as to raise
a strong presumption of their being the result of causation, the fact
which conflicts with them is to be disbelieved; at least provisionally,
and subject to further investigation. When the presumption amounts to a
virtual certainty, as in the case of the general structure of organized
beings, the only question requiring consideration is whether, in phenomena
so little understood, there may not be liabilities to counteraction from
causes hitherto unknown; or whether the phenomena may not be capable of
originating in some other way, which would produce a different set of
derivative uniformities. Where (as in the case of the flying fish, or the
ornithorhynchus) the generalization to which the alleged fact would be an
exception is very special and of limited range, neither of the above
suppositions can be deemed very improbable; and it is generally, in the
case of such alleged anomalies, wise to suspend our judgment, pending the
subsequent inquiries which will not fail to confirm the assertion if it be
true. But when the generalization is very comprehensive, embracing a vast
number and variety of observations, and covering a considerable province
of the domain of nature; then, for reasons which have been fully
explained, such an empirical law comes near to the certainty of an
ascertained law of causation; and any alleged exception to it can not be
admitted, unless on the evidence of some law of causation proved by a
still more complete induction.

Such uniformities in the course of nature as do not bear marks of being
the results of causation are, as we have already seen, admissible as
universal truths with a degree of credence proportioned to their
generality. Those which are true of all things whatever, or at least which
are totally independent of the varieties of Kinds, namely, the laws of
number and extension, to which we may add the law of causation itself, are
probably the only ones, an exception to which is absolutely and
permanently incredible. Accordingly, it is to assertions supposed to be
contradictory to these laws, or to some others coming near to them in
generality, that the word impossibility (at least _total_ impossibility)
seems to be generally confined. Violations of other laws, of special laws
of causation, for instance, are said, by persons studious of accuracy in
expression, to be impossible _in the circumstances of the case_; or
impossible unless some cause had existed which did not exist in the
particular case.(204) Of no assertion, not in contradiction to some of
these very general laws, will more than improbability be asserted by any
cautious person; and improbability not of the highest degree, unless the
time and place in which the fact is said to have occurred, render it
almost certain that the anomaly, if real, could not have been overlooked
by other observers. Suspension of judgment is in all other cases the
resource of the judicious inquirer; provided the testimony in favor of the
anomaly presents, when well sifted, no suspicious circumstances.

But the testimony is scarcely ever found to stand that test, in cases in
which the anomaly is not real. In the instances on record in which a great
number of witnesses, of good reputation and scientific acquirements, have
testified to the truth of something which has turned out untrue, there
have almost always been circumstances which, to a keen observer who had
taken due pains to sift the matter, would have rendered the testimony
untrustworthy. There have generally been means of accounting for the
impression on the senses or minds of the alleged percipients, by
fallacious appearances; or some epidemic delusion, propagated by the
contagious influence of popular feeling, has been concerned in the case;
or some strong interest has been implicated—religious zeal, party feeling,
vanity, or at least the passion for the marvelous, in persons strongly
susceptible of it. When none of these or similar circumstances exist to
account for the apparent strength of the testimony; and where the
assertion is not in contradiction either to those universal laws which
know no counteraction or anomaly, or to the generalizations next in
comprehensiveness to them, but would only amount, if admitted, to the
existence of an unknown cause or an anomalous Kind, in circumstances not
so thoroughly explored but that it is credible that things hitherto
unknown may still come to light; a cautious person will neither admit nor
reject the testimony, but will wait for confirmation at other times and
from other unconnected sources. Such ought to have been the conduct of the
King of Siam when the Dutch travelers affirmed to him the existence of
ice. But an ignorant person is as obstinate in his contemptuous
incredulity as he is unreasonably credulous. Any thing unlike his own
narrow experience he disbelieves, if it flatters no propensity; any
nursery tale is swallowed implicitly by him if it does.

§ 4. I shall now advert to a very serious misapprehension of the
principles of the subject, which has been committed by some of the writers
against Hume’s Essay on Miracles, and by Bishop Butler before them, in
their anxiety to destroy what appeared to them a formidable weapon of
assault against the Christian religion; and the effect of which is
entirely to confound the doctrine of the Grounds of Disbelief. The mistake
consists in overlooking the distinction between (what may be called)
improbability before the fact and improbability after it; or (since, as
Mr. Venn remarks, the distinction of past and future is not the material
circumstance) between the improbability of a mere guess being right, and
the improbability of an alleged fact being true.

Many events are altogether improbable to us, before they have happened, or
before we are informed of their happening, which are not in the least
incredible when we are informed of them, because not contrary to any, even
approximate, induction. In the cast of a perfectly fair die, the chances
are five to one against throwing ace, that is, ace will be thrown on an
average only once in six throws. But this is no reason against believing
that ace was thrown on a given occasion, if any credible witness asserts
it; since though ace is only thrown once in six times, _some_ number which
is only thrown once in six times must have been thrown if the die was
thrown at all. The improbability, then, or, in other words, the
unusualness, of any fact, is no reason for disbelieving it, if the nature
of the case renders it certain that either that or something equally
improbable, that is, equally unusual, did happen. Nor is this all; for
even if the other five sides of the die were all twos, or all threes, yet
as ace would still, on the average, come up once in every six throws, its
coming up in a given throw would be not in any way contradictory to
experience. If we disbelieved all facts which had the chances against them
beforehand, we should believe hardly any thing. We are told that A. B.
died yesterday; the moment before we were so told, the chances against his
having died on that day may have been ten thousand to one; but since he
was certain to die at some time or other, and when he died must
necessarily die on some particular day, while the preponderance of chances
is very great against every day in particular, experience affords no
ground for discrediting any testimony which may be produced to the event’s
having taken place on a given day.

Yet it has been considered by Dr. Campbell and others, as a complete
answer to Hume’s doctrine (that things are incredible which are _contrary_
to the uniform course of experience), that we do not disbelieve, merely
because the chances were against them, things in strict _conformity_ to
the uniform course of experience; that we do not disbelieve an alleged
fact merely because the combination of causes on which it depends occurs
only once in a certain number of times. It is evident that whatever is
shown by observation, or can be proved from laws of nature, to occur in a
certain proportion (however small) of the whole number of possible cases,
is not contrary to experience; though we are right in disbelieving it, if
some other supposition respecting the matter in question involves, on the
whole, a less departure from the ordinary course of events. Yet on such
grounds as this have able writers been led to the extraordinary
conclusion, that nothing supported by credible testimony ought ever to be
disbelieved.

§ 5. We have considered two species of events, commonly said to be
improbable; one kind which are in no way extraordinary, but which, having
an immense preponderance of chances against them, are improbable until
they are affirmed, but no longer; another kind which, being contrary to
some recognized law of nature, are incredible on any amount of testimony
except such as would be sufficient to shake our belief in the law itself.
But between these two classes of events, there is an intermediate class,
consisting of what are commonly termed Coincidences: in other words, those
combinations of chances which present some peculiar and unexpected
regularity, assimilating them, in so far, to the results of law. As if,
for example, in a lottery of a thousand tickets, the numbers should be
drawn in the exact order of what are called the natural numbers, 1, 2, 3,
etc. We have still to consider the principles of evidence applicable to
this case: whether there is any difference between coincidences and
ordinary events, in the amount of testimony or other evidence necessary to
render them credible.

It is certain that on every rational principle of expectation, a
combination of this peculiar sort may be expected quite as often as any
other given series of a thousand numbers; that with perfectly fair dice,
sixes will be thrown twice, thrice, or any number of times in succession,
quite as often in a thousand or a million throws, as any other succession
of numbers fixed upon beforehand; and that no judicious player would give
greater odds against the one series than against the other.
Notwithstanding this, there is a general disposition to regard the one as
much more improbable than the other, and as requiring much stronger
evidence to make it credible. Such is the force of this impression, that
it has led some thinkers to the conclusion, that nature has greater
difficulty in producing regular combinations than irregular ones; or in
other words, that there is some general tendency of things, some law,
which prevents regular combinations from occurring, or at least from
occurring so often as others. Among these thinkers may be numbered
D’Alembert; who, in an Essay on Probabilities to be found in the fifth
volume of his _Mélanges_, contends that regular combinations, though
equally probable according to the mathematical theory with any others, are
physically less probable. He appeals to common sense, or, in other words,
to common impressions; saying, if dice thrown repeatedly in our presence
gave sixes every time, should we not, before the number of throws had
reached ten (not to speak of thousands of millions), be ready to affirm,
with the most positive conviction, that the dice were false?

The common and natural impression is in favor of D’Alembert: the regular
series would be thought much more unlikely than an irregular. But this
common impression is, I apprehend, merely grounded on the fact, that
scarcely any body remembers to have ever seen one of these peculiar
coincidences: the reason of which is simply that no one’s experience
extends to any thing like the number of trials, within which that or any
other given combination of events can be expected to happen. The chance of
sixes on a single throw of two dice being 1/36, the chance of sixes ten
times in succession is 1 divided by the tenth power of 36; in other words,
such a concurrence is only likely to happen once in 3,656,158,440,062,976
trials, a number which no dice-player’s experience comes up to a millionth
part of. But if, instead of sixes ten times, any other given succession of
ten throws had been fixed upon, it would have been exactly as unlikely
that in any individual’s experience that particular succession had ever
occurred; although this does not _seem_ equally improbable, because no one
would be likely to have remembered whether it had occurred or not, and
because the comparison is tacitly made, not between sixes ten times and
any one particular series of throws, but between all regular and all
irregular successions taken together.

That (as D’Alembert says) if the succession of sixes was actually thrown
before our eyes, we should ascribe it not to chance, but to unfairness in
the dice, is unquestionably true. But this arises from a totally different
principle. We should then be considering, not the probability of the fact
in itself, but the comparative probability with which, when it is known to
have happened, it may be referred to one or to another cause. The regular
series is not at all less likely than the irregular one to be brought
about by chance, but it is much more likely than the irregular one to be
produced by design; or by some general cause operating through the
structure of the dice. It is the nature of casual combinations to produce
a repetition of the same event, as often and no oftener than any other
series of events. But it is the nature of general causes to reproduce, in
the same circumstances, always the same event. Common sense and science
alike dictate that, all other things being the same, we should rather
attribute the effect to a cause which if real would be very likely to
produce it, than to a cause which would be very unlikely to produce it.
According to Laplace’s sixth theorem, which we demonstrated in a former
chapter, the difference of probability arising from the superior
_efficacy_ of the constant cause, unfairness in the dice, would after a
very few throws far outweigh any antecedent probability which there could
be against its existence.

D’Alembert should have put the question in another manner. He should have
supposed that we had ourselves previously tried the dice, and knew by
ample experience that they were fair. Another person then tries them in
our absence, and assures us that he threw sixes ten times in succession.
Is the assertion credible or not? Here the effect to be accounted for is
not the occurrence itself, but the fact of the witness’s asserting it.
This may arise either from its having really happened, or from some other
cause. What we have to estimate is the comparative probability of these
two suppositions.

If the witness affirmed that he had thrown any other series of numbers,
supposing him to be a person of veracity, and tolerable accuracy, and to
profess that he took particular notice, we should believe him. But the ten
sixes are exactly as likely to have been really thrown as the other
series. If, therefore, this assertion is less credible than the other, the
reason must be, not that it is less likely than the other to be made
truly, but that it is more likely than the other to be made falsely.

One reason obviously presents itself why what is called a coincidence,
should be oftener asserted falsely than an ordinary combination. It
excites wonder. It gratifies the love of the marvelous. The motives,
therefore, to falsehood, one of the most frequent of which is the desire
to astonish, operate more strongly in favor of this kind of assertion than
of the other kind. Thus far there is evidently more reason for
discrediting an alleged coincidence, than a statement in itself not more
probable, but which if made would not be thought remarkable. There are
cases, however, in which the presumption on this ground would be the other
way. There are some witnesses who, the more extraordinary an occurrence
might appear, would be the more anxious to verify it by the utmost
carefulness of observation before they would venture to believe it, and
still more before they would assert it to others.

§ 6. Independently, however, of any peculiar chances of mendacity arising
from the nature of the assertion, Laplace contends, that merely on the
general ground of the fallibility of testimony, a coincidence is not
credible on the same amount of testimony on which we should be warranted
in believing an ordinary combination of events. In order to do justice to
his argument, it is necessary to illustrate it by the example chosen by
himself.

If, says Laplace, there were one thousand tickets in a box, and one only
has been drawn out, then if an eye-witness affirms that the number drawn
was 79, this, though the chances were 999 in 1000 against it, is not on
that account the less credible; its credibility is equal to the antecedent
probability of the witness’s veracity. But if there were in the box 999
black balls and only one white, and the witness affirms that the white
ball was drawn, the case according to Laplace is very different: the
credibility of his assertion is but a small fraction of what it was in the
former case; the reason of the difference being as follows:

The witnesses of whom we are speaking must, from the nature of the case,
be of a kind whose credibility falls materially short of certainty; let us
suppose, then, the credibility of the witness in the case in question to
be 9/10; that is, let us suppose that in every ten statements which the
witness makes, nine on an average are correct, and one incorrect. Let us
now suppose that there have taken place a sufficient number of drawings to
exhaust all the possible combinations, the witness deposing in every one.
In one case out of every ten in all these drawings he will actually have
made a false announcement. But in the case of the thousand tickets these
false announcements will have been distributed impartially over all the
numbers, and of the 999 cases in which No. 79 was not drawn, there will
have been only one case in which it was announced. On the contrary, in the
case of the thousand balls (the announcement being always either “black”
or “white”), if white was not drawn, and there was a false announcement,
that false announcement _must_ have been white; and since by the
supposition there was a false announcement once in every ten times, white
will have been announced falsely in one-tenth part of all the cases in
which it was not drawn, that is, in one-tenth part of 999 cases out of
every thousand. White, then, is drawn, on an average, exactly as often as
No. 79, but it is announced, without having been really drawn, 999 times
as often as No. 79; the announcement, therefore, requires a much greater
amount of testimony to render it credible.(205)

To make this argument valid it must of course be supposed, that the
announcements made by the witness are average specimens of his general
veracity and accuracy; or, at least, that they are neither more nor less
so in the case of the black and white balls, than in the case of the
thousand tickets. This assumption, however, is not warranted. A person is
far less likely to mistake, who has only one form of error to guard
against, than if he had 999 different errors to avoid. For instance, in
the example chosen, a messenger who might make a mistake once in ten times
in reporting the number drawn in a lottery, might not err once in a
thousand times if sent simply to observe whether a ball was black or
white. Laplace’s argument, therefore, is faulty even as applied to his own
case. Still less can that case be received as completely representing all
cases of coincidence. Laplace has so contrived his example, that though
black answers to 999 distinct possibilities, and white only to one, the
witness has nevertheless no bias which can make him prefer black to white.
The witness did not know that there were 999 black balls in the box and
only one white; or if he did, Laplace has taken care to make all the 999
cases so undistinguishably alike, that there is hardly a possibility of
any cause of falsehood or error operating in favor of any of them, which
would not operate in the same manner if there were only one. Alter this
supposition, and the whole argument falls to the ground. Let the balls,
for instance, be numbered, and let the white ball be No. 79. Considered in
respect of their color, there are but two things which the witness can be
interested in asserting, or can have dreamed or hallucinated, or has to
choose from if he answers at random, viz., black and white; but considered
in respect of the numbers attached to them, there are a thousand; and if
his interest or error happens to be connected with the numbers, though the
only assertion he makes is about the color, the case becomes precisely
assimilated to that of the thousand tickets. Or instead of the balls
suppose a lottery, with 1000 tickets and but one prize, and that I hold
No. 79, and being interested only in that, ask the witness not what was
the number drawn, but whether it was 79 or some other. There are now only
two cases, as in Laplace’s example; yet he surely would not say that if
the witness answered 79, the assertion would be in an enormous proportion
less credible, than if he made the same answer to the same question asked
in the other way. If, for instance (to put a case supposed by Laplace
himself), he has staked a large sum on one of the chances, and thinks that
by announcing its occurrence he shall increase his credit; he is equally
likely to have betted on any one of the 999 numbers which are attached to
black balls, and so far as the chances of mendacity from this cause are
concerned, there will be 999 times as many chances of his announcing black
falsely as white.

Or suppose a regiment of 1000 men, 999 Englishmen and one Frenchman, and
that of these one man has been killed, and it is not known which. I ask
the question, and the witness answers, the Frenchman. This was not only as
improbable _a priori_, but is in itself as singular a circumstance, as
remarkable a coincidence, as the drawing of the white ball; yet we should
believe the statement as readily, as if the answer had been John Thompson.
Because, though the 999 Englishmen were all alike in the point in which
they differed from the Frenchman, they were not, like the 999 black balls,
undistinguishable in every other respect; but being all different, they
admitted as many chances of interest or error, as if each man had been of
a different nation; and if a lie was told or a mistake made, the
misstatement was as likely to fall on any Jones or Thompson of the set, as
on the Frenchman.

The example of a coincidence selected by D’Alembert, that of sixes thrown
on a pair of dice ten times in succession, belongs to this sort of cases
rather than to such as Laplace’s. The coincidence is here far more
remarkable, because of far rarer occurrence, than the drawing of the white
ball. But though the improbability of its really occurring is greater, the
superior probability of its being announced falsely can not be established
with the same evidence. The announcement “black” represented 999 cases,
but the witness may not have known this, and if he did, the 999 cases are
so exactly alike, that there is really only one set of possible causes of
mendacity corresponding to the whole. The announcement “sixes _not_ drawn
ten times,” represents, and is known by the witness to represent, a great
multitude of contingencies, every one of which being unlike every other,
there may be a different and a fresh set of causes of mendacity
corresponding to each.

It appears to me, therefore, that Laplace’s doctrine is not strictly true
of any coincidences, and is wholly inapplicable to most; and that to know
whether a coincidence does or does not require more evidence to render it
credible than an ordinary event, we must refer, in every instance, to
first principles, and estimate afresh what is the probability that the
given testimony would have been delivered in that instance, supposing the
fact which it asserts not to be true.

With these remarks we close the discussion of the Grounds of Disbelief;
and along with it, such exposition as space admits, and as the writer has
it in his power to furnish, of the Logic of Induction.





                                 Book IV.


OF OPERATIONS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.


    “Clear and distinct ideas are terms which, though familiar and
    frequent in men’s mouths, I have reason to think every one who
    uses does not perfectly understand. And possibly it is but here
    and there one who gives himself the trouble to consider them so
    far as to know what he himself or others precisely mean by them; I
    have, therefore, in most places, chose to put determinate or
    determined, instead of clear and distinct, as more likely to
    direct men’s thoughts to my meaning in this matter.”—LOCKE’S
    _Essay on the Human Understanding_; Epistle to the Reader.

    “Il ne peut y avoir qu’une méthode parfaite, qui est la _méthode
    naturelle_; on nomme ainsi un arrangement dans lequel les êtres du
    même genre seraient plus voisins entre eux que ceux de tous les
    autres genres; les genres du même ordre, plus que ceux de tous les
    autres ordres; et ainsi de suite. Cette méthode est l’idéal auquel
    l’histoire naturelle doit tendre; car il est évident que si l’on y
    parvenait, l’on aurait l’expression exacte et complète de la
    nature entière.”—CUVIER, _Règne Animal_, Introduction.

    “Deux grandes notions philosophiques dominent la théorie
    fondamentale de la méthode naturelle proprement dite, savoir la
    formation des groupes naturels, et ensuite leur succession
    hiérarchique.”—COMTE, _Cours de Philosophie Positive_, 42me leçon.




                                Chapter I.


Of Observation And Description.


§ 1. The inquiry which occupied us in the two preceding Books, has
conducted us to what appears a satisfactory solution of the principal
problem of Logic, according to the conception I have formed of the
science. We have found, that the mental process with which Logic is
conversant, the operation of ascertaining truths by means of evidence, is
always, even when appearances point to a different theory of it, a process
of induction. And we have particularized the various modes of induction,
and obtained a clear view of the principles to which it must conform, in
order to lead to results which can be relied on.

The consideration of Induction, however, does not end with the direct
rules for its performance. Something must be said of those other
operations of the mind, which are either necessarily presupposed in all
induction, or are instrumental to the more difficult and complicated
inductive processes. The present Book will be devoted to the consideration
of these subsidiary operations; among which our attention must first be
given to those, which are indispensable preliminaries to all induction
whatsoever.

Induction being merely the extension to a class of cases, of something
which has been observed to be true in certain individual instances of the
class; the first place among the operations subsidiary to induction, is
claimed by Observation. This is not, however, the place to lay down rules
for making good observers; nor is it within the competence of Logic to do
so, but of the art of intellectual Education. Our business with
observation is only in its connection with the appropriate problem of
logic, the estimation of evidence. We have to consider, not how or what to
observe, but under what conditions observation is to be relied on; what is
needful, in order that the fact, supposed to be observed, may safely be
received as true.

§ 2. The answer to this question is very simple, at least in its first
aspect. The sole condition is, that what is supposed to have been observed
shall really have been observed; that it be an observation, not an
inference. For in almost every act of our perceiving faculties,
observation and inference are intimately blended. What we are said to
observe is usually a compound result, of which one-tenth may be
observation, and the remaining nine-tenths inference.

I affirm, for example, that I hear a man’s voice. This would pass, in
common language, for a direct perception. All, however, which is really
perception, is that I hear a sound. That the sound is a voice, and that
voice the voice of a man, are not perceptions but inferences. I affirm,
again, that I saw my brother at a certain hour this morning. If any
proposition concerning a matter of fact would commonly be said to be known
by the direct testimony of the senses, this surely would be so. The truth,
however, is far otherwise. I only saw a certain colored surface; or rather
I had the kind of visual sensations which are usually produced by a
colored surface; and from these as marks, known to be such by previous
experience, I concluded that I saw my brother. I might have had sensations
precisely similar, when my brother was not there. I might have seen some
other person so nearly resembling him in appearance, as, at the distance,
and, with the degree of attention which I bestowed, to be mistaken for
him. I might have been asleep, and have dreamed that I saw him; or in a
state of nervous disorder, which brought his image before me in a waking
hallucination. In all these modes, many have been led to believe that they
saw persons well known to them, who were dead or far distant. If any of
these suppositions had been true, the affirmation that I saw my brother
would have been erroneous; but whatever was matter of direct perception,
namely the visual sensations, would have been real. The inference only
would have been ill grounded; I should have ascribed those sensations to a
wrong cause.

Innumerable instances might be given, and analyzed in the same manner, of
what are vulgarly called errors of sense. There are none of them properly
errors of sense; they are erroneous inferences from sense. When I look at
a candle through a multiplying glass, I see what seems a dozen candles
instead of one; and if the real circumstances of the case were skillfully
disguised, I might suppose that there were really that number; there would
be what is called an optical deception. In the kaleidoscope there really
is that deception; when I look through the instrument, instead of what is
actually there, namely a casual arrangement of colored fragments, the
appearance presented is that of the same combination several times
repeated in symmetrical arrangement round a point. The delusion is of
course effected by giving me the same sensations which I should have had
if such a symmetrical combination had really been presented to me. If I
cross two of my fingers, and bring any small object, a marble for
instance, into contact with both, at points not usually touched
simultaneously by one object, I can hardly, if my eyes are shut, help
believing that there are two marbles instead of one. But it is not my
touch in this case, nor my sight in the other, which is deceived; the
deception, whether durable or only momentary, is in my judgment. From my
senses I have only the sensations, and those are genuine. Being accustomed
to have those or similar sensations when, and only when, a certain
arrangement of outward objects is present to my organs, I have the habit
of instantly, when I experience the sensations, inferring the existence of
that state of outward things. This habit has become so powerful, that the
inference, performed with the speed and certainty of an instinct, is
confounded with intuitive perceptions. When it is correct, I am
unconscious that it ever needed proof; even when I know it to be
incorrect, I can not without considerable effort abstain from making it.
In order to be aware that it is not made by instinct but by an acquired
habit, I am obliged to reflect on the slow process through which I learned
to judge by the eye of many things which I now appear to perceive directly
by sight; and on the reverse operation performed by persons learning to
draw, who with difficulty and labor divest themselves of their acquired
perceptions, and learn afresh to see things as they appear to the eye.

It would be easy to prolong these illustrations, were there any need to
expatiate on a topic so copiously exemplified in various popular works.
From the examples already given, it is seen sufficiently, that the
individual facts from which we collect our inductive generalizations are
scarcely ever obtained by observation alone. Observation extends only to
the sensations by which we recognize objects; but the propositions which
we make use of, either in science or in common life, relate mostly to the
objects themselves. In every act of what is called observation, there is
at least one inference—from the sensations to the presence of the object;
from the marks or diagnostics, to the entire phenomenon. And hence, among
other consequences, follows the seeming paradox, that a general
proposition collected from particulars is often more certainly true than
any one of the particular propositions from which, by an act of induction,
it was inferred. For, each of those particular (or rather singular)
propositions involved an inference, from the impression on the senses to
the fact which caused that impression; and this inference may have been
erroneous in any one of the instances, but can not well have been
erroneous in all of them, provided their number was sufficient to
eliminate chance. The conclusion, therefore, that is, the general
proposition, may deserve more complete reliance than it would be safe to
repose in any one of the inductive premises.

The logic of observation, then, consists solely in a correct
discrimination between that, in a result of observation, which has really
been perceived, and that which is an inference from the perception.
Whatever portion is inference, is amenable to the rules of induction
already treated of, and requires no further notice here; the question for
us in this place is, when all which is inference is taken away what
remains? There remains, in the first place, the mind’s own feelings or
states of consciousness, namely, its outward feelings or sensations, and
its inward feelings—its thoughts, emotions, and volitions. Whether any
thing else remains, or all else is inference from this; whether the mind
is capable of directly perceiving or apprehending any thing except states
of its own consciousness—is a problem of metaphysics not to be discussed
in this place. But after excluding all questions on which metaphysicians
differ, it remains true, that for most purposes the discrimination we are
called upon practically to exercise is that between sensations or other
feelings, of our own or of other people, and inferences drawn from them.
And on the theory of Observation this is all which seems necessary to be
said for the purposes of the present work.

§ 3. If, in the simplest observation, or in what passes for such, there is
a large part which is not observation but something else; so in the
simplest description of an observation, there is, and must always be, much
more asserted than is contained in the perception itself. We can not
describe a fact, without implying more than the fact. The perception is
only of one individual thing; but to describe it is to affirm a connection
between it and every other thing which is either denoted or connoted by
any of the terms used. To begin with an example, than which none can be
conceived more elementary: I have a sensation of sight, and I endeavor to
describe it by saying that I see something white. In saying this, I do not
solely affirm my sensation; I also class it. I assert a resemblance
between the thing I see, and all things which I and others are accustomed
to call white. I assert that it resembles them in the circumstance in
which they all resemble one another, in that which is the ground of their
being called by the name. This is not merely one way of describing an
observation, but the only way. If I would either register my observation
for my own future use, or make it known for the benefit of others, I must
assert a resemblance between the fact which I have observed and something
else. It is inherent in a description, to be the statement of a
resemblance, or resemblances.

We thus see that it is impossible to express in words any result of
observation, without performing an act possessing what Dr. Whewell
considers to be characteristic of Induction. There is always something
introduced which was not included in the observation itself; some
conception common to the phenomenon with other phenomena to which it is
compared. An observation can not be spoken of in language at all without
declaring more than that one observation; without assimilating it to other
phenomena already observed and classified. But this identification of an
object—this recognition of it as possessing certain known
characteristics—has never been confounded with Induction. It is an
operation which precedes all induction, and supplies it with its
materials. It is a perception of resemblances, obtained by comparison.

These resemblances are not always apprehended directly, by merely
comparing the object observed with some other present object, or with our
recollection of an object which is absent. They are often ascertained
through intermediate marks, that is, deductively. In describing some new
kind of animal, suppose me to say that it measures ten feet in length,
from the forehead to the extremity of the tail. I did not ascertain this
by the unassisted eye. I had a two-foot rule which I applied to the
object, and, as we commonly say, measured it; an operation which was not
wholly manual, but partly also mathematical, involving the two
propositions, Five times two is ten, and Things which are equal to the
same thing are equal to one another. Hence, the fact that the animal is
ten feet long is not an immediate perception, but a conclusion from
reasoning; the minor premises alone being furnished by observation of the
object. Nevertheless, this is called an observation, or a description of
the animal, not an induction respecting it.

To pass at once from a very simple to a very complex example: I affirm
that the earth is globular. The assertion is not grounded on direct
perception; for the figure of the earth can not, by us, be directly
perceived, though the assertion would not be true unless circumstances
could be supposed under which its truth could be so perceived. That the
form of the earth is globular is inferred from certain marks, as for
instance from this, that its shadow thrown upon the moon is circular; or
this, that on the sea, or any extensive plain, our horizon is always a
circle; either of which marks is incompatible with any other than a
globular form. I assert further, that the earth is that particular kind of
a globe which is termed an oblate spheroid; because it is found by
measurement in the direction of the meridian, that the length on the
surface of the earth which subtends a given angle at its centre,
diminishes as we recede from the equator and approach the poles. But these
propositions, that the earth is globular, and that it is an oblate
spheroid, assert, each of them, an individual fact; in its own nature
capable of being perceived by the senses when the requisite organs and the
necessary position are supposed, and only not actually perceived because
those organs and that position are wanting. This identification of the
earth, first as a globe, and next as an oblate spheroid, which, if the
fact could have been seen, would have been called a description of the
figure of the earth, may without impropriety be so called when, instead of
being seen, it is inferred. But we could not without impropriety call
either of these assertions an induction from facts respecting the earth.
They are not general propositions collected from particular facts, but
particular facts deduced from general propositions. They are conclusions
obtained deductively, from premises originating in induction: but of these
premises some were not obtained by observation of the earth, nor had any
peculiar reference to it.

If, then, the truth respecting the figure of the earth is not an
induction, why should the truth respecting the figure of the earth’s orbit
be so? The two cases only differ in this, that the form of the orbit was
not, like the form of the earth itself, deduced by ratiocination from
facts which were marks of ellipticity, but was got at by boldly guessing
that the path was an ellipse, and finding afterward, on examination, that
the observations were in harmony with the hypothesis. According to Dr.
Whewell, however, this process of guessing and verifying our guesses is
not only induction, but the whole of induction: no other exposition can be
given of that logical operation. That he is wrong in the latter assertion,
the whole of the preceding book has, I hope, sufficiently proved; and that
the process by which the ellipticity of the planetary orbits was
ascertained, is not induction at all, was attempted to be shown in the
second chapter of the same Book.(206) We are now, however, prepared to go
more into the heart of the matter than at that earlier period of our
inquiry, and to show, not merely what the operation in question is not,
but what it is.

§ 4. We observed, in the second chapter, that the proposition “the earth
moves in an ellipse,” so far as it only serves for the colligation or
connecting together of actual observations (that is, as it only affirms
that the observed positions of the earth may be correctly represented by
as many points in the circumference of an imaginary ellipse), is not an
induction, but a description: it is an induction, only when it affirms
that the intermediate positions, of which there has been no direct
observation, would be found to correspond to the remaining points of the
same elliptic circumference. Now, though this real induction is one thing,
and the description another, we are in a very different condition for
making the induction before we have obtained the description, and after
it. For inasmuch as the description, like all other descriptions, contains
the assertion of a resemblance between the phenomenon described and
something else; in pointing out something which the series of observed
places of a planet resembles, it points out something in which the several
places themselves agree. If the series of places correspond to as many
points of an ellipse, the places themselves agree in being situated in
that ellipse. We have, therefore, by the same process which gave us the
description, obtained the requisites for an induction by the Method of
Agreement. The successive observed places of the earth being considered as
effects, and its motion as the cause which produces them, we find that
those effects, that is, those places, agree in the circumstance of being
in an ellipse. We conclude that the remaining effects, the places which
have not been observed, agree in the same circumstance, and that the _law_
of the motion of the earth is motion in an ellipse.

The Colligation of Facts, therefore, by means of hypotheses, or, as Dr.
Whewell prefers to say, by means of Conceptions, instead of being, as he
supposes, Induction itself, takes its proper place among operations
subsidiary to Induction. All Induction supposes that we have previously
compared the requisite number of individual instances, and ascertained in
what circumstances they agree. The Colligation of Facts is no other than
this preliminary operation. When Kepler, after vainly endeavoring to
connect the observed places of a planet by various hypotheses of circular
motion, at last tried the hypotheses of an ellipse and found it answer to
the phenomena; what he really attempted, first unsuccessfully and at last
successfully, was to discover the circumstance in which all the observed
positions of the planet agreed. And when he in like manner connected
another set of observed facts, the periodic times of the different
planets, by the proposition that the squares of the times are proportional
to the cubes of the distances, what he did was simply to ascertain the
property in which the periodic times of all the different planets agreed.

Since, therefore, all that is true and to the purpose in Dr. Whewell’s
doctrine of Conceptions might be fully expressed by the more familiar term
Hypothesis; and since his Colligation of Facts by means of appropriate
Conceptions, is but the ordinary process of finding by a comparison of
phenomena, in what consists their agreement or resemblance; I would
willingly have confined myself to those better understood expressions, and
persevered to the end in the same abstinence which I have hitherto
observed from ideological discussions; considering the mechanism of our
thoughts to be a topic distinct from and irrelevant to the principles and
rules by which the trustworthiness of the results of thinking is to be
estimated. Since, however, a work of such high pretensions, and, it must
also be said, of so much real merit, has rested the whole theory of
Induction upon such ideological considerations, it seems necessary for
others who follow to claim for themselves and their doctrines whatever
position may properly belong to them on the same metaphysical ground. And
this is the object of the succeeding chapter.




                               Chapter II.


Of Abstraction, Or The Formation Of Conceptions.


§ 1. The metaphysical inquiry into the nature and composition of what have
been called Abstract Ideas, or, in other words, of the notions which
answer in the mind to classes and to general names, belongs not to Logic,
but to a different science, and our purpose does not require that we
should enter upon it here. We are only concerned with the universally
acknowledged fact, that such notions or conceptions do exist. The mind can
conceive a multitude of individual things as one assemblage or class; and
general names do really suggest to us certain ideas or mental
representations, otherwise we could not use the names with consciousness
of a meaning. Whether the idea called up by a general name is composed of
the various circumstances in which all the individuals denoted by the name
agree, and of no others (which is the doctrine of Locke, Brown, and the
Conceptualists); or whether it be the idea of some one of those
individuals, clothed in its individualizing peculiarities, but with the
accompanying knowledge that those peculiarities are not properties of the
class (which is the doctrine of Berkeley, Mr. Bailey,(207) and the modern
Nominalists); or whether (as held by Mr. James Mill) the idea of the class
is that of a miscellaneous assemblage of individuals belonging to the
class; or whether, finally, it be any one or any other of all these,
according to the accidental circumstances of the case; certain it is, that
_some_ idea or mental conception is suggested by a general name, whenever
we either hear it or employ it with consciousness of a meaning. And this,
which we may call, if we please, a general idea, _represents_ in our minds
the whole class of things to which the name is applied. Whenever we think
or reason concerning the class, we do so by means of this idea. And the
voluntary power which the mind has, of attending to one part of what is
present to it at any moment, and neglecting another part, enables us to
keep our reasonings and conclusions respecting the class unaffected by any
thing in the idea or mental image which is not really, or at least which
we do not really believe to be common, to the whole class.(208)

There are, then, such things as general conceptions, or conceptions by
means of which we can think generally; and when we form a set of phenomena
into a class, that is, when we compare them with one another to ascertain
in what they agree, some general conception is implied in this mental
operation. And inasmuch as such a comparison is a necessary preliminary to
Induction, it is most true that Induction could not go on without general
conceptions.

§ 2. But it does not therefore follow that these general conceptions must
have existed in the mind previously to the comparison. It is not a law of
our intellect, that in comparing things with each other and taking note of
their agreement we merely recognize as realized in the outward world
something that we already had in our minds. The conception originally
found its way to us as the _result_ of such a comparison. It was obtained
(in metaphysical phrase) by _abstraction_ from individual things. These
things may be things which we perceived or thought of on former occasions,
but they may also be the things which we are perceiving or thinking of on
the very occasion. When Kepler compared the observed places of the planet
Mars, and found that they agreed in being points of an elliptic
circumference, he applied a general conception which was already in his
mind, having been derived from his former experience. But this is by no
means universally the case. When we compare several objects and find them
to agree in being white, or when we compare the various species of
ruminating animals and find them to agree in being cloven-footed, we have
just as much a general conception in our minds as Kepler had in his: we
have the conception of “a white thing,” or the conception of “a
cloven-footed animal.” But no one supposes that we necessarily bring these
conceptions with us, and _superinduce_ them (to adopt Dr. Whewell’s
expression) upon the facts: because in these simple cases every body sees
that the very act of comparison which ends in our connecting the facts by
means of the conception, may be the source from which we derive the
conception itself. If we had never seen any white object or had never seen
any cloven-footed animal before, we should at the same time and by the
same mental act acquire the idea, and employ it for the colligation of the
observed phenomena. Kepler, on the contrary, really had to bring the idea
with him, and superinduce it upon the facts; he could not evolve it out of
them: if he had not already had the idea, he would not have been able to
acquire it by a comparison of the planet’s positions. But this inability
was a mere accident; the idea of an ellipse could have been acquired from
the paths of the planets as effectually as from any thing else, if the
paths had not happened to be invisible. If the planet had left a visible
track, and we had been so placed that we could see it at the proper angle,
we might have abstracted our original idea of an ellipse from the
planetary orbit. Indeed, every conception which can be made the instrument
for connecting a set of facts, might have been originally evolved from
those very facts. The conception is a conception _of_ something; and that
which it is a conception of, is really _in_ the facts, and might, under
some supposable circumstances, or by some supposable extension of the
faculties which we actually possess, have been detected in them. And not
only is this always in itself possible, but it actually happens in almost
all cases in which the obtaining of the right conception is a matter of
any considerable difficulty. For if there be no new conception required;
if one of those already familiar to mankind will serve the purpose, the
accident of being the first to whom the right one occurs, may happen to
almost any body; at least in the case of a set of phenomena which the
whole scientific world are engaged in attempting to connect. The honor, in
Kepler’s case, was that of the accurate, patient, and toilsome
calculations by which he compared the results that followed from his
different guesses, with the observations of Tycho Brahe; but the merit was
very small of guessing an ellipse; the only wonder is that men had not
guessed it before, nor could they have failed to do so if there had not
existed an obstinate _a priori_ prejudice that the heavenly bodies must
move, if not in a circle, in some combination of circles.

The really difficult cases are those in which the conception destined to
create light and order out of darkness and confusion has to be sought for
among the very phenomena which it afterward serves to arrange. Why,
according to Dr. Whewell himself, did the ancients fail in discovering the
laws of mechanics, that is, of equilibrium and of the communication of
motion? Because they had not, or at least had not clearly, the ideas or
conceptions of pressure and resistance, momentum, and uniform and
accelerating force. And whence could they have obtained these ideas except
from the very facts of equilibrium and motion? The tardy development of
several of the physical sciences, for example, of optics, electricity,
magnetism, and the higher generalizations of chemistry, he ascribes to the
fact that mankind had not yet possessed themselves of the Idea of
Polarity, that is, the idea of opposite properties in opposite directions.
But what was there to suggest such an idea, until, by a separate
examination of several of these different branches of knowledge, it was
shown that the facts of each of them did present, in some instances at
least, the curious phenomenon of opposite properties in opposite
directions? The thing was superficially manifest only in two cases, those
of the magnet and of electrified bodies; and there the conception was
encumbered with the circumstance of material poles, or fixed points in the
body itself, in which points this opposition of properties seemed to be
inherent. The first comparison and abstraction had led only to this
conception of poles; and if any thing corresponding to that conception had
existed in the phenomena of chemistry or optics, the difficulty now justly
considered so great, would have been extremely small. The obscurity arose
from the fact, that the polarities in chemistry and optics were distinct
species, though of the same genus, with the polarities in electricity and
magnetism; and that in order to assimilate the phenomena to one another,
it was necessary to compare a polarity without poles, such for instance as
is exemplified in the polarization of light, and the polarity with
(apparent) poles, which we see in the magnet; and to recognize that these
polarities, while different in many other respects, agree in the one
character which is expressed by the phrase, opposite properties in
opposite directions. From the result of such a comparison it was that the
minds of scientific men formed this new general conception; between which,
and the first confused feeling of an analogy between some of the phenomena
of light and those of electricity and magnetism, there is a long interval,
filled up by the labors and more or less sagacious suggestions of many
superior minds.

The conceptions, then, which we employ for the colligation and
methodization of facts, do not develop themselves from within, but are
impressed upon the mind from without; they are never obtained otherwise
than by way of comparison and abstraction, and, in the most important and
the most numerous cases, are evolved by abstraction from the very
phenomena which it is their office to colligate. I am far, however, from
wishing to imply that it is not often a very difficult thing to perform
this process of abstraction well, or that the success of an inductive
operation does not, in many cases, principally depend on the skill with
which we perform it. Bacon was quite justified in designating as one of
the principal obstacles to good induction, general conceptions wrongly
formed, “notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ;” to which Dr. Whewell adds,
that not only does bad abstraction make bad induction, but that, in order
to perform induction well, we must have abstracted well; our general
conceptions must be “clear” and “appropriate” to the matter in hand.

§ 3. In attempting to show what the difficulty in this matter really is,
and how it is surmounted, I must beg the reader, once for all, to bear
this in mind; that although, in discussing the opinions of a different
school of philosophy, I am willing to adopt their language, and to speak,
therefore, of connecting facts through the instrumentality of a
conception, this technical phraseology means neither more nor less than
what is commonly called comparing the facts with one another and
determining in what they agree. Nor has the technical expression even the
advantage of being metaphysically correct. The facts are not _connected_,
except in a merely metaphorical acceptation of the term. The _ideas_ of
the facts may become connected, that is, we may be led to think of them
together; but this consequence is no more than what may be produced by any
casual association. What really takes place, is, I conceive, more
philosophically expressed by the common word Comparison, than by the
phrases “to connect” or “to superinduce.” For, as the general conception
is itself obtained by a comparison of particular phenomena, so, when
obtained, the mode in which we apply it to other phenomena is again by
comparison. We compare phenomena with each other to get the conception,
and we then compare those and other phenomena _with_ the conception. We
get the conception of an animal (for instance) by comparing different
animals, and when we afterward see a creature resembling an animal, we
compare it with our general conception of an animal; and if it agrees with
that general conception, we include it in the class. The conception
becomes the type of comparison.

And we need only consider what comparison is, to see that where the
objects are more than two, and still more when they are an indefinite
number, a type of some sort is an indispensable condition of the
comparison. When we have to arrange and classify a great number of objects
according to their agreements and differences, we do not make a confused
attempt to compare all with all. We know that two things are as much as
the mind can easily attend to at a time, and we therefore fix upon one of
the objects, either at hazard or because it offers in a peculiarly
striking manner some important character, and, taking this as our
standard, compare it with one object after another. If we find a second
object which presents a remarkable agreement with the first, inducing us
to class them together, the question instantly arises, in what particular
circumstances do they agree? and to take notice of these circumstances is
already a first stage of abstraction, giving rise to a general conception.
Having advanced thus far, when we now take in hand a third object we
naturally ask ourselves the question, not merely whether this third object
agrees with the first, but whether it agrees with it in the same
circumstances in which the second did? in other words, whether it agrees
with the general conception which has been obtained by abstraction from
the first and second? Thus we see the tendency of general conceptions, as
soon as formed, to substitute themselves as types, for whatever individual
objects previously answered that purpose in our comparisons. We may,
perhaps, find that no considerable number of other objects agree with this
first general conception; and that we must drop the conception, and
beginning again with a different individual case, proceed by fresh
comparisons to a different general conception. Sometimes, again, we find
that the same conception will serve, by merely leaving out some of its
circumstances; and by this higher effort of abstraction, we obtain a still
more general conception; as in the case formerly referred to, the
scientific world rose from the conception of poles to the general
conception of opposite properties in opposite directions; or as those
South-Sea islanders, whose conception of a quadruped had been abstracted
from hogs (the only animals of that description which they had seen), when
they afterward compared that conception with other quadrupeds, dropped
some of the circumstances, and arrived at the more general conception
which Europeans associate with the term.

These brief remarks contain, I believe, all that is well grounded in the
doctrine, that the conception by which the mind arranges and gives unity
to phenomena must be furnished by the mind itself, and that we find the
right conception by a tentative process, trying first one and then another
until we hit the mark. The conception is not furnished _by_ the mind until
it has been furnished _to_ the mind; and the facts which supply it are
sometimes extraneous facts, but more often the very facts which we are
attempting to arrange by it. It is quite true, however, that in
endeavoring to arrange the facts, at whatever point we begin, we never
advance three steps without forming a general conception, more or less
distinct and precise; and that this general conception becomes the clue
which we instantly endeavor to trace through the rest of the facts, or
rather, becomes the standard with which we thenceforth compare them. If we
are not satisfied with the agreements which we discover among the
phenomena by comparing them with this type, or with some still more
general conception which by an additional stage of abstraction we can form
from the type; we change our path, and look out for other agreements; we
recommence the comparison from a different starting-point, and so generate
a different set of general conceptions. This is the tentative process
which Dr. Whewell speaks of; and which has not unnaturally suggested the
theory, that the conception is supplied by the mind itself; since the
different conceptions which the mind successively tries, it either already
possessed from its previous experience, or they were supplied to it in the
first stage of the corresponding act of comparison; so that, in the
subsequent part of the process, the conception manifested itself as
something compared with the phenomena, not evolved from them.

§ 4. If this be a correct account of the instrumentality of general
conceptions in the comparison which necessarily precedes Induction, we are
now able to translate into our own language what Dr. Whewell means by
saying that conceptions, to be subservient to Induction, must be “clear”
and “appropriate.”

If the conception corresponds to a real agreement among the phenomena; if
the comparison which we have made of a set of objects has led us to class
them according to real resemblances and differences; the conception which
does this can not fail to be appropriate, for some purpose or other. The
question of appropriateness is relative to the particular object we have
in view. As soon as, by our comparison, we have ascertained some
agreement, something which can be predicated in common of a number of
objects; we have obtained a basis on which an inductive process is capable
of being founded. But the agreements, or the ulterior consequences to
which those agreements lead, may be of very different degrees of
importance. If, for instance, we only compare animals according to their
color, and class those together which are colored alike, we form the
general conceptions of a white animal, a black animal, etc., which are
conceptions legitimately formed; and if an induction were to be attempted
concerning the causes of the colors of animals, this comparison would be
the proper and necessary preparation for such an induction, but would not
help us toward a knowledge of the laws of any other of the properties of
animals; while if, with Cuvier, we compare and class them according to the
structure of the skeleton, or, with Blainville, according to the nature of
their outward integuments, the agreements and differences which are
observable in these respects are not only of much greater importance in
themselves, but are marks of agreements and differences in many other
important particulars of the structure and mode of life of the animals.
If, therefore, the study of their structure and habits be our object, the
conceptions generated by these last comparisons are far more “appropriate”
than those generated by the former. Nothing, other than this, can be meant
by the appropriateness of a conception.

When Dr. Whewell says that the ancients, or the school-men, or any modern
inquirers, missed discovering the real law of a phenomenon because they
applied to it an inappropriate instead of an appropriate conception; he
can only mean that in comparing various instances of the phenomenon, to
ascertain in what those instances agreed, they missed the important points
of agreement; and fastened upon such as were either imaginary, and not
agreements at all, or, if real agreements, were comparatively trifling,
and had no connection with the phenomenon, the law of which was sought.

Aristotle, philosophizing on the subject of motion, remarked that certain
motions apparently take place spontaneously; bodies fall to the ground,
flame ascends, bubbles of air rise in water, etc.; and these he called
natural motions; while others not only never take place without external
incitement, but even when such incitement is applied, tend spontaneously
to cease; which, to distinguish them from the former, he called violent
motions. Now, in comparing the so-called natural motions with one another,
it appeared to Aristotle that they agreed in one circumstance, namely,
that the body which moved (or seemed to move) spontaneously, was moving
_toward its own place_; meaning thereby the place from whence it
originally came, or the place where a great quantity of matter similar to
itself was assembled. In the other class of motions, as when bodies are
thrown up in the air, they are, on the contrary, moving _from_ their own
place. Now, this conception of a body moving toward its own place may
justly be considered inappropriate; because, though it expresses a
circumstance really found in some of the most familiar instances of motion
apparently spontaneous, yet, first, there are many other cases of such
motion, in which that circumstance is absent; the motion, for instance, of
the earth and planets. Secondly, even when it is present, the motion, on
closer examination, would often be seen not to be spontaneous; as, when
air rises in water, it does not rise by its own nature, but is pushed up
by the superior weight of the water which presses upon it. Finally, there
are many cases in which the spontaneous motion takes place in the contrary
direction to what the theory considers as the body’s own place; for
instance, when a fog rises from a lake, or when water dries up. The
agreement, therefore, which Aristotle selected as his principle of
classification, did not extend to all cases of the phenomenon he wanted to
study, spontaneous motion; while it did include cases of the absence of
the phenomenon, cases of motion not spontaneous. The conception was hence
“inappropriate.” We may add that, in the case in question, no conception
would be appropriate; there is no agreement which runs through all the
cases of spontaneous or apparently spontaneous motion and no others; they
can not be brought under one law; it is a case of Plurality of
Causes.(209)

§ 5. So much for the first of Dr. Whewell’s conditions, that conceptions
must be appropriate. The second is, that they shall be “clear:” and let us
consider what this implies. Unless the conception corresponds to a real
agreement, it has a worse defect than that of not being clear: it is not
applicable to the case at all. Among the phenomena, therefore, which we
are attempting to connect by means of the conception, we must suppose that
there really is an agreement, and that the conception is a conception of
that agreement. In order, then, that it may be clear, the only requisite
is, that we shall know exactly in what the agreement consists; that it
shall have been carefully observed, and accurately remembered. We are said
not to have a clear conception of the resemblance among a set of objects,
when we have only a general feeling that they resemble, without having
analyzed their resemblance, or perceived in what points it consists, and
fixed in our memory an exact recollection of those points. This want of
clearness, or, as it may be otherwise called, this vagueness in the
general conception, may be owing either to our having no accurate
knowledge of the objects themselves, or merely to our not having carefully
compared them. Thus a person may have no clear idea of a ship because he
has never seen one, or because he remembers but little, and that faintly,
of what he has seen. Or he may have a perfect knowledge and remembrance of
many ships of various kinds, frigates among the rest, but he may have no
clear but only a confused idea of a frigate, because he has never been
told, and has not compared them sufficiently to have remarked and
remembered, in what particular points a frigate differs from some other
kind of ship.

It is not, however, necessary, in order to have clear ideas, that we
should know all the common properties of the things which we class
together. That would be to have our conception of the class complete as
well as clear. It is sufficient if we never class things together without
knowing exactly why we do so—without having ascertained exactly what
agreements we are about to include in our conception; and if, after having
thus fixed our conception, we never vary from it, never include in the
class any thing which has not those common properties, nor exclude from it
any thing which has. A clear conception means a determinate conception;
one which does not fluctuate, which is not one thing to-day and another
to-morrow, but remains fixed and invariable, except when, from the
progress of our knowledge, or the correction of some error, we consciously
add to it or alter it. A person of clear ideas is a person who always
knows in virtue of what properties his classes are constituted; what
attributes are connoted by his general names.

The principal requisites, therefore, of clear conceptions, are habits of
attentive observation, an extensive experience, and a memory which
receives and retains an exact image of what is observed. And in proportion
as any one has the habit of observing minutely and comparing carefully a
particular class of phenomena, and an accurate memory for the results of
the observation and comparison, so will his conceptions of that class of
phenomena be clear; provided he has the indispensable habit (naturally,
however, resulting from those other endowments), of never using general
names without a precise connotation.

As the clearness of our conceptions chiefly depends on the _carefulness_
and _accuracy_ of our observing and comparing faculties, so their
appropriateness, or rather the chance we have of hitting upon the
appropriate conception in any case, mainly depends on the _activity_ of
the same faculties. He who by habit, grounded on sufficient natural
aptitude, has acquired a readiness in accurately observing and comparing
phenomena, will perceive so many more agreements, and will perceive them
so much more rapidly than other people, that the chances are much greater
of his perceiving, in any instance, the agreement on which the important
consequences depend.

§ 6. It is of so much importance that the part of the process of
investigating truth, discussed in this chapter, should be rightly
understood, that I think it is desirable to restate the results we have
arrived at, in a somewhat different mode of expression.

We can not ascertain general truths, that is, truths applicable to
classes, unless we have formed the classes in such a manner that general
truths can be affirmed of them. In the formation of any class, there is
involved a conception of it as a class, that is, a conception of certain
circumstances as being those which characterize the class, and distinguish
the objects composing it from all other things. When we know exactly what
these circumstances are, we have a clear idea (or conception) of the
class, and of the meaning of the general name which designates it. The
primary condition implied in having this clear idea, is that the class be
really a class; that it correspond to a real distinction; that the things
it includes really do agree with one another in certain particulars, and
differ, in those same particulars, from all other things. A person without
clear ideas is one who habitually classes together, under the same general
names, things which have no common properties, or none which are not
possessed also by other things; or who, if the usage of other people
prevents him from actually misclassing things, is unable to state to
himself the common properties in virtue of which he classes them rightly.

But is it not the sole requisite of classification that the classes should
be real classes, framed by a legitimate mental process? Some modes of
classing things are more valuable than others for human uses, whether of
speculation or of practice; and our classifications are not well made,
unless the things which they bring together not only agree with each other
in something which distinguishes them from all other things, but agree
with each other and differ from other things in the very circumstances
which are of primary importance for the purpose (theoretical or practical)
which we have in view, and which constitutes the problem before us. In
other words, our conceptions, though they may be clear, are not
_appropriate_ for our purpose, unless the properties we comprise in them
are those which will help us toward what we wish to understand—_i.e._,
either those which go deepest into the nature of the things, if our object
be to understand that, or those which are most closely connected with the
particular property which we are endeavoring to investigate.

We can not, therefore, frame good general conceptions beforehand. That the
conception we have obtained is the one we want, can only be known when we
have done the work for the sake of which we wanted it; when we completely
understand the general character of the phenomena, or the conditions of
the particular property with which we concern ourselves. General
conceptions formed without this thorough knowledge, are Bacon’s “notiones
temerè à rebus abstractæ.” Yet such premature conceptions we must be
continually making up, in our progress to something better. They are an
impediment to the progress of knowledge, only when they are permanently
acquiesced in. When it has become our habit to group things in wrong
classes—in groups which either are not really classes, having no
distinctive points of agreement (absence of _clear_ ideas), or which are
not classes of which any thing important to our purpose can be predicated
(absence of _appropriate_ ideas); and when, in the belief that these badly
made classes are those sanctioned by nature, we refuse to exchange them
for others, and can not or will not make up our general conceptions from
any other elements; in that case all the evils which Bacon ascribes to his
“notiones temerè abstractæ” really occur. This was what the ancients did
in physics, and what the world in general does in morals and politics to
the present day.

It would thus, in my view of the matter, be an inaccurate mode of
expression to say, that obtaining appropriate conceptions is a condition
precedent to generalization. Throughout the whole process of comparing
phenomena with one another for the purpose of generalization, the mind is
trying to make up a conception; but the conception which it is trying to
make up is that of the really important point of agreement in the
phenomena. As we obtain more knowledge of the phenomena themselves, and of
the conditions on which their important properties depend, our views on
this subject naturally alter; and thus we advance from a less to a more
"appropriate" general conception, in the progress of our investigations.

We ought not, at the same time, to forget that the really important
agreement can not always be discovered by mere comparison of the very
phenomena in question, without the aid of a conception acquired elsewhere;
as in the case, so often referred to, of the planetary orbits.

The search for the agreement of a set of phenomena is in truth very
similar to the search for a lost or hidden object. At first we place
ourselves in a sufficiently commanding position, and cast our eyes round
us, and if we can see the object it is well; if not, we ask ourselves
mentally what are the places in which it may be hid, in order that we may
there search for it: and so on, until we imagine the place where it really
is. And here too we require to have had a previous conception, or
knowledge, of those different places. As in this familiar process, so in
the philosophical operation which it illustrates, we first endeavor to
find the lost object or recognize the common attribute, without
conjecturally invoking the aid of any previously acquired conception, or,
in other words, of any hypothesis. Having failed in this, we call upon our
imagination for some hypothesis of a possible place, or a possible point
of resemblance, and then look to see whether the facts agree with the
conjecture.

For such cases something more is required than a mind accustomed to
accurate observation and comparison. It must be a mind stored with general
conceptions, previously acquired, of the sorts which bear affinity to the
subject of the particular inquiry. And much will also depend on the
natural strength and acquired culture of what has been termed the
scientific imagination; on the faculty possessed of mentally arranging
known elements into new combinations, such as have not yet been observed
in nature, though not contradictory to any known laws.

But the variety of intellectual habits, the purposes which they serve, and
the modes in which they may be fostered and cultivated, are considerations
belonging to the Art of Education: a subject far wider than Logic, and
which this treatise does not profess to discuss. Here, therefore, the
present chapter may properly close.




                               Chapter III.


Of Naming, As Subsidiary To Induction.


§ 1. It does not belong to the present undertaking to dwell on the
importance of language as a medium of human intercourse, whether for
purposes of sympathy or of information. Nor does our design admit of more
than a passing allusion to that great property of names, on which their
functions as an intellectual instrument are, in reality, ultimately
dependent; their potency as a means of forming, and of riveting,
associations among our other ideas; a subject on which an able
thinker(210) has thus written:

“Names are impressions of sense, and as such take the strongest hold on
the mind, and of all other impressions can be most easily recalled and
retained in view. They therefore serve to give a point of attachment to
all the more volatile objects of thought and feeling. Impressions that
when passed might be dissipated forever, are, by their connection with
language, always within reach. Thoughts, of themselves, are perpetually
slipping out of the field of immediate mental vision; but the name abides
with us, and the utterance of it restores them in a moment. Words are the
custodiers of every product of mind less impressive than themselves. All
extensions of human knowledge, all new generalizations, are fixed and
spread, even unintentionally, by the use of words. The child growing up
learns, along with the vocables of his mother-tongue, that things which he
would have believed to be different are, in important points, the same.
Without any formal instruction, the language in which we grow up teaches
us all the common philosophy of the age. It directs us to observe and know
things which we should have overlooked; it supplies us with
classifications ready made, by which things are arranged (as far as the
light of by-gone generations admits) with the objects to which they bear
the greatest total resemblance. The number of general names in a language,
and the degree of generality of those names, afford a test of the
knowledge of the era, and of the intellectual insight which is the
birthright of any one born into it.”

It is not, however, of the functions of Names, considered generally, that
we have here to treat, but only of the manner and degree in which they are
directly instrumental to the investigation of truth; in other words, to
the process of induction.

§ 2. Observation and Abstraction, the operations which formed the subject
of the two foregoing chapters, are conditions indispensable to induction;
there can be no induction where they are not. It has been imagined that
Naming is also a condition equally indispensable. There are thinkers who
have held that language is not solely, according to a phrase generally
current, _an_ instrument of thought, but _the_ instrument; that names, or
something equivalent to them, some species of artificial signs, are
necessary to reasoning; that there could be no inference, and consequently
no induction, without them. But if the nature of reasoning was correctly
explained in the earlier part of the present work, this opinion must be
held to be an exaggeration, though of an important truth. If reasoning be
from particulars to particulars, and if it consist in recognizing one fact
as a mark of another, or a mark of a mark of another, nothing is required
to render reasoning possible, except senses and association; senses to
perceive that two facts are conjoined; association, as the law by which
one of those two facts raises up the idea of the other.(211) For these
mental phenomena, as well as for the belief or expectation which follows,
and by which we recognize as having taken place, or as about to take
place, that of which we have perceived a mark, there is evidently no need
of language. And this inference of one particular fact from another is a
case of induction. It is of this sort of induction that brutes are
capable; it is in this shape that uncultivated minds make almost all their
inductions, and that we all do so in the cases in which familiar
experience forces our conclusions upon us without any active process of
inquiry on our part, and in which the belief or expectation follows the
suggestion of the evidence with the promptitude and certainty of an
instinct.(212)

§ 3. But though inference of an inductive character is possible without
the use of signs, it could never, without them, be carried much beyond the
very simple cases which we have just described, and which form, in all
probability, the limit of the reasonings of those animals to whom
conventional language is unknown. Without language, or something
equivalent to it, there could only be as much reasoning from experience as
can take place without the aid of general propositions. Now, though in
strictness we may reason from past experience to a fresh individual case
without the intermediate stage of a general proposition, yet without
general propositions we should seldom remember what past experience we
have had, and scarcely ever what conclusions that experience will warrant.
The division of the inductive process into two parts, the first
ascertaining what is a mark of the given fact, the second whether in the
new case that mark exists, is natural, and scientifically indispensable.
It is, indeed, in a majority of cases, rendered necessary by mere distance
of time. The experience by which we are to guide our judgments may be
other people’s experience, little of which can be communicated to us
otherwise than by language; when it is our own, it is generally experience
long past; unless, therefore, it were recorded by means of artificial
signs, little of it (except in cases involving our intenser sensations or
emotions, or the subjects of our daily and hourly contemplation) would be
retained in the memory. It is hardly necessary to add, that when the
inductive inference is of any but the most direct and obvious nature—when
it requires several observations or experiments, in varying circumstances,
and the comparison of one of these with another—it is impossible to
proceed a step, without the artificial memory which words bestow. Without
words, we should, if we had often seen A and B in immediate and obvious
conjunction, expect B whenever we saw A; but to discover their conjunction
when not obvious, or to determine whether it is really constant or only
casual, and whether there is reason to expect it under any given change of
circumstances, is a process far too complex to be performed without some
contrivance to make our remembrance of our own mental operations accurate.
Now, language is such a contrivance. When that instrument is called to our
aid, the difficulty is reduced to that of making our remembrance of the
meaning of words accurate. This being secured, whatever passes through our
minds may be remembered accurately, by putting it carefully into words,
and committing the words either to writing or to memory.

The function of Naming, and particularly of General Names, in Induction,
may be recapitulated as follows. Every inductive inference which is good
at all, is good for a whole class of cases; and, that the inference may
have any better warrant of its correctness than the mere clinging together
of two ideas, a process of experimentation and comparison is necessary; in
which the whole class of cases must be brought to view, and some
uniformity in the course of nature evolved and ascertained, since the
existence of such a uniformity is required as a justification for drawing
the inference in even a single case. This uniformity, therefore, may be
ascertained once for all; and if, being ascertained, it can be remembered,
it will serve as a formula for making, in particular cases, all such
inferences as the previous experience will warrant. But we can only secure
its being remembered, or give ourselves even a chance of carrying in our
memory any considerable number of such uniformities, by registering them
through the medium of permanent signs; which (being, from the nature of
the case, signs not of an individual fact, but of a uniformity, that is,
of an indefinite number of facts similar to one another) are general
signs; universals; general names, and general propositions.

§ 4. And here I can not omit to notice an oversight committed by some
eminent thinkers; who have said that the cause of our using general names
is the infinite multitude of individual objects, which, making it
impossible to have a name for each, compels us to make one name serve for
many.

This is a very limited view of the function of general names. Even if
there were a name for every individual object, we should require general
names as much as we now do. Without them we could not express the result
of a single comparison, nor record any one of the uniformities existing in
nature; and should be hardly better off in respect to Induction than if we
had no names at all. With none but names of individuals (or, in other
words, proper names), we might, by pronouncing the name, suggest the idea
of the object, but we could not assert any proposition; except the
unmeaning ones formed by predicating two proper names one of another. It
is only by means of general names that we can convey any information,
predicate any attribute, even of an individual, much more of a class.
Rigorously speaking, we could get on without any other general names than
the abstract names of attributes; all our propositions might be of the
form “such an individual object possesses such an attribute,” or “such an
attribute is always (or never) conjoined with such another attribute.” In
fact, however, mankind have always given general names to objects as well
as attributes, and indeed before attributes: but the general names given
to objects imply attributes, derive their whole meaning from attributes;
and are chiefly useful as the language by means of which we predicate the
attributes which they connote.

It remains to be considered what principles are to be adhered to in giving
general names, so that these names, and the general propositions in which
they fill a place, may conduce most to the purposes of Induction.




                               Chapter IV.


Of The Requisites Of A Philosophical Language, And The Principles Of
Definition.


§ 1. In order that we may possess a language perfectly suitable for the
investigation and expression of general truths, there are two principal,
and several minor requisites. The first is, that every general name should
have a meaning, steadily fixed, and precisely determined. When, by the
fulfillment of this condition, such names as we possess are fitted for the
due performance of their functions, the next requisite, and the second in
order of importance, is that we should possess a name wherever one is
needed; wherever there is any thing to be designated by it, which it is of
importance to express.

The former of these requisites is that to which our attention will be
exclusively directed in the present chapter.

§ 2. Every general name, then, must have a certain and knowable meaning.
Now the meaning (as has so often been explained) of a general connotative
name, resides in the connotation; in the attribute on account of which,
and to express which, the name is given. Thus, the name animal being given
to all things which possess the attributes of sensation and voluntary
motion, the word connotes those attributes exclusively, and they
constitute the whole of its meaning. If the name be abstract, its
denotation is the same with the connotation of the corresponding concrete;
it designates directly the attribute, which the concrete term implies. To
give a precise meaning to general names is, then, to fix with steadiness
the attribute or attributes connoted by each concrete general name, and
denoted by the corresponding abstract. Since abstract names, in the order
of their creation, do not precede but follow concrete ones, as is proved
by the etymological fact that they are almost always derived from them; we
may consider their meaning as determined by, and dependent on, the meaning
of their concrete; and thus the problem of giving a distinct meaning to
general language, is all included in that of giving a precise connotation
to all concrete general names.

This is not difficult in the case of new names; of the technical terms
created by scientific inquirers for the purposes of science or art. But
when a name is in common use, the difficulty is greater; the problem in
this case not being that of choosing a convenient connotation for the
name, but of ascertaining and fixing the connotation with which it is
already used. That this can ever be a matter of doubt, is a sort of
paradox. But the vulgar (including in that term all who have not accurate
habits of thought) seldom know exactly what assertion they intend to make,
what common property they mean to express, when they apply the same name
to a number of different things. All which the name expresses with them,
when they predicate it of an object, is a confused feeling of resemblance
between that object and some of the other things which they have been
accustomed to denote by the name. They have applied the name Stone to
various objects previously seen; they see a new object, which appears to
them somewhat like the former, and they call it a stone, without asking
themselves in what respect it is like, or what mode or degree of
resemblance the best authorities, or even they themselves, require as a
warrant for using the name. This rough general impression of resemblance
is, however, made up of particular circumstances of resemblance; and into
these it is the business of the logician to analyze it; to ascertain what
points of resemblance among the different things commonly called by the
name, have produced in the common mind this vague feeling of likeness;
have given to the things the similarity of aspect, which has made them a
class, and has caused the same name to be bestowed upon them.

But though general names are imposed by the vulgar without any more
definite connotation than that of a vague resemblance; general
propositions come in time to be made, in which predicates are applied to
those names, that is, general assertions are made concerning the _whole_
of the things which are denoted by the name. And since by each of these
propositions some attribute, more or less precisely conceived, is of
course predicated, the ideas of these various attributes thus become
associated with the name, and in a sort of uncertain way it comes to
connote them; there is a hesitation to apply the name in any new case in
which any of the attributes familiarly predicated of the class do not
exist. And thus, to common minds, the propositions which they are in the
habit of hearing or uttering concerning a class make up in a loose way a
sort of connotation for the class name. Let us take, for instance, the
word Civilized. How few could be found, even among the most educated
persons, who would undertake to say exactly what the term Civilized
connotes. Yet there is a feeling in the minds of all who use it, that they
are using it with a meaning; and this meaning is made up, in a confused
manner, of every thing which they have heard or read that civilized men or
civilized communities are, or may be expected to be.

It is at this stage, probably, in the progress of a concrete name, that
the corresponding abstract name generally comes into use. Under the notion
that the concrete name must of course convey a meaning, or, in other
words, that there is some property common to all things which it denotes,
people give a name to this common property; from the concrete Civilized,
they form the abstract Civilization. But since most people have never
compared the different things which are called by the concrete name, in
such a manner as to ascertain what properties these things have in common,
or whether they have any; each is thrown back upon the marks by which he
himself has been accustomed to be guided in his application of the term;
and these, being merely vague hearsays and current phrases, are not the
same in any two persons, nor in the same person at different times. Hence
the word (as Civilization, for example) which professes to be the
designation of the unknown common property, conveys scarcely to any two
minds the same idea. No two persons agree in the things they predicate of
it; and when it is itself predicated of any thing, no other person knows,
nor does the speaker himself know with precision, what he means to assert.
Many other words which could be named, as the word _honor_, or the word
_gentleman_, exemplify this uncertainty still more strikingly.

It needs scarcely be observed, that general propositions of which no one
can tell exactly what they assert, can not possibly have been brought to
the test of a correct induction. Whether a name is to be used as an
instrument of thinking, or as a means of communicating the result of
thought, it is imperative to determine exactly the attribute or attributes
which it is to express; to give it, in short, a fixed and ascertained
connotation.

§ 3. It would, however, be a complete misunderstanding of the proper
office of a logician in dealing with terms already in use, if we were to
think that because a name has not at present an ascertained connotation,
it is competent to any one to give it such a connotation at his own
choice. The meaning of a term actually in use is not an arbitrary quantity
to be fixed, but an unknown quantity to be sought.

In the first place, it is obviously desirable to avail ourselves, as far
as possible, of the associations already connected with the name; not
enjoining the employment of it in a manner which conflicts with all
previous habits, and especially not so as to require the rupture of those
strongest of all associations between names, which are created by
familiarity with propositions in which they are predicated of one another.
A philosopher would have little chance of having his example followed, if
he were to give such a meaning to his terms as should require us to call
the North American Indians a civilized people, or the higher classes in
Europe savages; or to say that civilized people live by hunting, and
savages by agriculture. Were there no other reason, the extreme difficulty
of effecting so complete a revolution in speech would be more than a
sufficient one. The endeavor should be, that all generally received
propositions into which the term enters, should be at least as true after
its meaning is fixed, as they were before; and that the concrete name,
therefore, should not receive such a connotation as shall prevent it from
denoting things which, in common language, it is currently affirmed of.
The fixed and precise connotation which it receives should not be in
deviation from, but in agreement (as far as it goes) with, the vague and
fluctuating connotation which the term already had.

To fix the connotation of a concrete name, or the denotation of the
corresponding abstract, is to define the name. When this can be done
without rendering any received assertions inadmissible, the name can be
defined in accordance with its received use, which is vulgarly called
defining not the name but the thing. What is meant by the improper
expression of defining a thing (or rather a class of things—for nobody
talks of defining an individual), is to define the name, subject to the
condition that it shall denote those things. This, of course, supposes a
comparison of the things, feature by feature and property by property, to
ascertain what attributes they agree in; and not unfrequently an operation
strictly inductive, for the purpose of ascertaining some unobvious
agreement, which is the cause of the obvious agreements.

For, in order to give a connotation to a name, consistently with its
denoting certain objects, we have to make our selection from among the
various attributes in which those objects agree. To ascertain in what they
do agree is, therefore, the first logical operation requisite. When this
has been done as far as is necessary or practicable, the question arises,
which of these common attributes shall be selected to be associated with
the name. For if the class which the name denotes be a Kind, the common
properties are innumerable; and even if not, they are often extremely
numerous. Our choice is first limited by the preference to be given to
properties which are well known, and familiarly predicated of the class;
but even these are often too numerous to be all included in the
definition, and, besides, the properties most generally known may not be
those which serve best to mark out the class from all others. We should
therefore select from among the common properties (if among them any such
are to be found) those on which it has been ascertained by experience, or
proved by deduction, that many others depend; or at least which are sure
marks of them, and from whence, therefore, many others will follow by
inference. We thus see that to frame a good definition of a name already
in use, is not a matter of choice but of discussion, and discussion not
merely respecting the usage of language, but respecting the properties of
things, and even the origin of those properties. And hence every
enlargement of our knowledge of the objects to which the name is applied,
is liable to suggest an improvement in the definition. It is impossible to
frame a perfect set of definitions on any subject, until the theory of the
subject is perfect; and as science makes progress, its definitions are
also progressive.

§ 4. The discussion of Definitions, in so far as it does not turn on the
use of words but on the properties of things, Dr. Whewell calls the
Explication of Conceptions. The act of ascertaining, better than before,
in what particulars any phenomena which are classed together agree, he
calls in his technical phraseology, unfolding the general conception in
virtue of which they are so classed. Making allowance for what appears to
me the darkening and misleading tendency of this mode of expression,
several of his remarks are so much to the purpose, that I shall take the
liberty of transcribing them.

He observes,(213) that many of the controversies which have had an
important share in the formation of the existing body of science, have
“assumed the form of a battle of Definitions. For example, the inquiry
concerning the laws of falling bodies led to the question whether the
proper definition of a _uniform force_ is that it generates a velocity
proportional to the _space_ from rest, or to the _time_. The controversy
of the _vis viva_ was what was the proper definition of the _measure of
force_. A principal question in the classification of minerals is, what is
the definition of a _mineral species_. Physiologists have endeavored to
throw light on their subject by defining _organization_, or some similar
term.” Questions of the same nature were long open and are not yet
completely closed, respecting the definitions of Specific Heat, Latent
Heat, Chemical Combination, and Solution.

“It is very important for us to observe, that these controversies have
never been questions of insulated and _arbitrary_ definitions, as men seem
often tempted to imagine them to have been. In all cases there is a tacit
assumption of some proposition which is to be expressed by means of the
definition, and which gives it its importance. The dispute concerning the
definition thus acquires a real value, and becomes a question concerning
true and false. Thus, in the discussion of the question, What is a uniform
force? it was taken for granted that gravity is a uniform force. In the
debate of the _vis viva_, it was assumed that in the mutual action of
bodies the whole effect of the force is unchanged. In the zoological
definition of species (that it consists of individuals which have, or may
have, sprung from the same parents), it is presumed that individuals so
related resemble each other more than those which are excluded by such a
definition; or, perhaps, that species so defined have permanent and
definite differences. A definition of organization, or of some other term
which was not employed to express some principle, would be of no value.

“The establishment, therefore, of a right definition of a term, may be a
useful step in the explication of our conceptions; but this will be the
case then only when we have under our consideration some proposition in
which the term is employed. For then the question really is, how the
conception shall be understood and defined in order that the proposition
may be true.

“To unfold our conceptions by means of definitions has never been
serviceable to science, except when it has been associated with an
immediate use of the definitions. The endeavor to define a Uniform Force
was combined with the assertion that gravity is a uniform force; the
attempt to define Accelerating Force was immediately followed by the
doctrine that accelerating forces may be compounded; the process of
defining Momentum was connected with the principle that momenta gained and
lost are equal; naturalists would have given in vain the definition of
Species which we have quoted, if they had not also given the characters of
species so separated.... Definition may be the best mode of explaining our
conception, but that which alone makes it worth while to explain it in any
mode, is the opportunity of using it in the expression of truth. When a
definition is propounded to us as a useful step in knowledge, we are
always entitled to ask what principle it serves to enunciate.”

In giving, then, an exact connotation to the phrase, “a uniform force,”
the condition was understood, that the phrase should continue to denote
gravity. The discussion, therefore, respecting the definition, resolved
itself into this question, What is there of a uniform nature in the
motions produced by gravity? By observations and comparisons, it was found
that what was uniform in those motions was the ratio of the velocity
acquired to the time elapsed; equal velocities being added in equal times.
A uniform force, therefore, was defined a force which adds equal
velocities in equal times. So, again, in defining momentum. It was already
a received doctrine that, when two objects impinge upon one another, the
momentum lost by the one is equal to that gained by the other. This
proposition it was deemed necessary to preserve, not from the motive
(which operates in many other cases) that it was firmly fixed in popular
belief; for the proposition in question had never been heard of by any but
the scientifically instructed. But it was felt to contain a truth; even a
superficial observation of the phenomena left no doubt that in the
propagation of motion from one body to another, there was something of
which the one body gained precisely what the other lost; and the word
momentum had been invented to express this unknown something. The
settlement, therefore, of the definition of momentum, involved the
determination of the question, What is that of which a body, when it sets
another body in motion, loses exactly as much as it communicates? And when
experiment had shown that this _something_ was the product of the velocity
of the body by its mass, or quantity of matter, this became the definition
of momentum.

The following remarks,(214) therefore, are perfectly just: “The business
of definition is part of the business of discovery.... To define, so that
our definition shall have any scientific value, requires no small portion
of that sagacity by which truth is detected.... When it has been clearly
seen what ought to be our definition, it must be pretty well known what
truth we have to state. The definition, as well as the discovery, supposes
a decided step in our knowledge to have been made. The writers on Logic,
in the Middle Ages, made Definition the last stage in the progress of
knowledge; and in this arrangement at least, the history of science, and
the philosophy derived from the history, confirm their speculative views.”
For in order to judge finally how the name which denotes a class may best
be defined, we must know all the properties common to the class, and all
the relations of causation or dependence among those properties.

If the properties which are fittest to be selected as marks of other
common properties are also obvious and familiar, and especially if they
bear a great part in producing that general air of resemblance which was
the original inducement to the formation of the class, the definition will
then be most felicitous. But it is often necessary to define the class by
some property not familiarly known, provided that property be the best
mark of those which are known. M. De Blainville, for instance, founded his
definition of life on the process of decomposition and recomposition which
incessantly takes place in every living body, so that the particles
composing it are never for two instants the same. This is by no means one
of the most obvious properties of living bodies; it might escape
altogether the notice of an unscientific observer. Yet great authorities
(independently of M. De Blainville, who is himself a first-rate authority)
have thought that no other property so well answers the conditions
required for the definition.

§ 5. Having laid down the principles which ought for the most part to be
observed in attempting to give a precise connotation to a term in use, I
must now add, that it is not always practicable to adhere to those
principles, and that even when practicable, it is occasionally not
desirable.

Cases in which it is impossible to comply with all the conditions of a
precise definition of a name in agreement with usage, occur very
frequently. There is often no one connotation capable of being given to a
word, so that it shall still denote every thing it is accustomed to
denote; or that all the propositions into which it is accustomed to enter,
and which have any foundation in truth, shall remain true. Independently
of accidental ambiguities, in which the different meanings have no
connection with one another; it continually happens that a word is used in
two or more senses derived from each other, but yet radically distinct. So
long as a term is vague, that is, so long as its connotation is not
ascertained and permanently fixed, it is constantly liable to be applied
by _extension_ from one thing to another, until it reaches things which
have little, or even no, resemblance to those which were first designated
by it.

“Suppose,” says Dugald Stewart, in his _Philosophical Essays_,(215) “that
the letters A, B, C, D, E, denote a series of objects; that A possesses
some one quality in common with B; B a quality in common with C; C a
quality in common with D; D a quality in common with E; while at the same
time, no quality can be found which belongs in common to any _three_
objects in the series. Is it not conceivable, that the affinity between A
and B may produce a transference of the name of the first to the second;
and that, in consequence of the other affinities which connect the
remaining objects together, the same name may pass in succession from B to
C; from C to D; and from D to E? In this manner, a common appellation will
arise between A and E, although the two objects may, in their nature and
properties, be so widely distant from each other, that no stretch of
imagination can conceive how the thoughts were led from the former to the
latter. The transitions, nevertheless, may have been all so easy and
gradual, that, were they successfully detected by the fortunate ingenuity
of a theorist, we should instantly recognize, not only the verisimilitude,
but the truth of the conjecture: in the same way as we admit, with the
confidence of intuitive conviction, the certainty of the well-known
etymological process which connects the Latin preposition _e_ or _ex_ with
the English substantive _stranger_, the moment that the intermediate links
of the chain are submitted to our examination.”(216)

The applications which a word acquires by this gradual extension of it
from one set of objects to another, Stewart, adopting an expression from
Mr. Payne Knight, calls its _transitive_ applications; and after briefly
illustrating such of them as are the result of local or casual
associations, he proceeds as follows:(217)

“But although by far the greater part of the transitive or derivative
applications of words depend on casual and unaccountable caprices of the
feelings or the fancy, there are certain cases in which they open a very
interesting field of philosophical speculation. Such are those, in which
an analogous transference of the corresponding term may be remarked
universally, or very generally, in other languages; and in which, of
course, the uniformity of the result must be ascribed to the essential
principles of the human frame. Even in such cases, however, it will by no
means be always found, on examination, that the various applications of
the same term have arisen from any common quality or qualities in the
objects to which they relate. In the greater number of instances, they may
be traced to some natural and universal associations of ideas, founded in
the common faculties, common organs, and common condition of the human
race.... According to the different degrees of intimacy and strength in
the associations on which the _transitions_ of language are founded, very
different effects may be expected to arise. Where the association is
slight and casual, the several meanings will remain distinct from each
other, and will often, in process of time, assume the appearance of
capricious varieties in the use of the same arbitrary sign. _Where the
association is so natural and habitual as to become virtually
indissoluble, the transitive meanings will coalesce in one complex
conception; and every new transition will become a more comprehensive
generalization of the term in question._”

I solicit particular attention to the law of mind expressed in the last
sentence, and which is the source of the perplexity so often experienced
in detecting these transitions of meaning. Ignorance of that law is the
shoal on which some of the most powerful intellects which have adorned the
human race have been stranded. The inquiries of Plato into the definitions
of some of the most general terms of moral speculation are characterized
by Bacon as a far nearer approach to a true inductive method than is
elsewhere to be found among the ancients, and are, indeed, almost perfect
examples of the preparatory process of comparison and abstraction; but,
from being unaware of the law just mentioned, he often wasted the powers
of this great logical instrument on inquiries in which it could realize no
result, since the phenomena, whose common properties he so elaborately
endeavored to detect, had not really any common properties. Bacon himself
fell into the same error in his speculations on the nature of heat, in
which he evidently confounded under the name hot, classes of phenomena
which have no property in common. Stewart certainly overstates the matter
when he speaks of “a prejudice which has descended to modern times from
the scholastic ages, that when a word admits of a variety of
significations, these different significations must all be species of the
same genus, and must consequently include some essential idea common to
every individual to which the generic term can be applied;”(218) for both
Aristotle and his followers were well aware that there are such things as
ambiguities of language, and delighted in distinguishing them. But they
never suspected ambiguity in the cases where (as Stewart remarks) the
association on which the transition of meaning was founded is so natural
and habitual, that the two meanings blend together in the mind, and a real
transition becomes an apparent generalization. Accordingly they wasted
infinite pains in endeavoring to find a definition which would serve for
several distinct meanings at once; as in an instance noticed by Stewart
himself, that of “causation; the ambiguity of the word which, in the Greek
language corresponds to the English word _cause_, having suggested to them
the vain attempt of tracing the common idea which, in the case of any
_effect_, belongs to the _efficient_, to the _matter_, to the _form_, and
to the _end_. The idle generalities” (he adds) “we meet with in other
philosophers, about the ideas of the _good_, the _fit_, and the
_becoming_, have taken their rise from the same undue influence of popular
epithets on the speculations of the learned.”(219)

Among the words which have undergone so many successive transitions of
meaning that every trace of a property common to all the things they are
applied to, or at least common and also peculiar to those things, has been
lost, Stewart considers the word Beautiful to be one. And (without
attempting to decide a question which in no respect belongs to logic) I
can not but feel, with him, considerable doubt whether the word beautiful
connotes the same property when we speak of a beautiful color, a beautiful
face, a beautiful scene, a beautiful character, and a beautiful poem. The
word was doubtless extended from one of these objects to another on
account of a resemblance between them, or, more probably, between the
emotions they excited; and, by this progressive extension, it has at last
reached things very remote from those objects of sight to which there is
no doubt that it was first appropriated; and it is at least questionable
whether there is now any property common to all the things which,
consistently with usage, may be called beautiful, except the property of
agreeableness, which the term certainly does connote, but which can not be
all that people usually intend to express by it, since there are many
agreeable things which are never called beautiful. If such be the case, it
is impossible to give to the word Beautiful any fixed connotation, such
that it shall denote all the objects which in common use it now denotes,
but no others. A fixed connotation, however, it ought to have; for, so
long as it has not, it is unfit to be used as a scientific term, and is a
perpetual source of false analogies and erroneous generalizations.

This, then, constitutes a case in exemplification of our remark, that even
when there is a property common to all the things denoted by a name, to
erect that property into the definition and exclusive connotation of the
name is not always desirable. The various things called beautiful
unquestionably resemble one another in being agreeable; but to make this
the definition of beauty, and so extend the word Beautiful to all
agreeable things, would be to drop altogether a portion of meaning which
the word really, though indistinctly, conveys, and to do what depends on
us toward causing those qualities of the objects which the word
previously, though vaguely, pointed at, to be overlooked and forgotten. It
is better, in such a case, to give a fixed connotation to the term by
restricting, than by extending its use; rather excluding from the epithet
Beautiful some things to which it is commonly considered applicable, than
leaving out of its connotation any of the qualities by which, though
occasionally lost sight of, the general mind may have been habitually
guided in the commonest and most interesting applications of the term. For
there is no question that when people call any thing beautiful, they think
they are asserting more than that it is merely agreeable. They think they
are ascribing a peculiar _sort_ of agreeableness, analogous to that which
they find in some other of the things to which they are accustomed to
apply the same name. If, therefore, there be any peculiar sort of
agreeableness which is common though not to all, yet to the principal
things which are called beautiful, it is better to limit the denotation of
the term to those things, than to leave that kind of quality without a
term to connote it, and thereby divert attention from its peculiarities.

§ 6. The last remark exemplifies a rule of terminology, which is of great
importance, and which has hardly yet been recognized as a rule, but by a
few thinkers of the present century. In attempting to rectify the use of a
vague term by giving it a fixed connotation, we must take care not to
discard (unless advisedly, and on the ground of a deeper knowledge of the
subject) any portion of the connotation which the word, in however
indistinct a manner, previously carried with it. For otherwise language
loses one of its inherent and most valuable properties, that of being the
conservator of ancient experience; the keeper-alive of those thoughts and
observations of former ages, which may be alien to the tendencies of the
passing time. This function of language is so often overlooked or
undervalued, that a few observations on it appear to be extremely
required.

Even when the connotation of a term has been accurately fixed, and still
more if it has been left in the state of a vague unanalyzed feeling of
resemblance; there is a constant tendency in the word, through familiar
use, to part with a portion of its connotation. It is a well-known law of
the mind, that a word originally associated with a very complex cluster of
ideas, is far from calling up all those ideas in the mind, every time the
word is used; it calls up only one or two, from which the mind runs on by
fresh associations to another set of ideas, without waiting for the
suggestion of the remainder of the complex cluster. If this were not the
case, processes of thought could not take place with any thing like the
rapidity which we know they possess. Very often, indeed, when we are
employing a word in our mental operations, we are so far from waiting
until the complex idea which corresponds to the meaning of the word is
consciously brought before us in all its parts, that we run on to new
trains of ideas by the other associations which the mere word excites,
without having realized in our imagination any part whatever of the
meaning; thus using the word, and even using it well and accurately, and
carrying on important processes of reasoning by means of it, in an almost
mechanical manner; so much so, that some metaphysicians, generalizing from
an extreme case, have fancied that all reasoning is but the mechanical use
of a set of terms according to a certain form. We may discuss and settle
the most important interests of towns or nations, by the application of
general theorems or practical maxims previously laid down, without having
had consciously suggested to us, once in the whole process, the houses and
green fields, the thronged market-places and domestic hearths, of which
not only those towns and nations consist, but which the words town and
nation confessedly mean.

Since, then, general names come in this manner to be used (and even to do
a portion of their work well) without suggesting to the mind the whole of
their meaning, and often with the suggestion of a very small, or no part
at all of that meaning; we can not wonder that words so used come in time
to be no longer capable of suggesting any other of the ideas appropriated
to them, than those with which the association is most immediate and
strongest, or most kept up by the incidents of life; the remainder being
lost altogether; unless the mind, by often consciously dwelling on them,
keeps up the association. Words naturally retain much more of their
meaning to persons of active imagination, who habitually represent to
themselves things in the concrete, with the detail which belongs to them
in the actual world. To minds of a different description, the only
antidote to this corruption of language is predication. The habit of
predicating of the name, all the various properties which it originally
connoted, keeps up the association between the name and those properties.

But in order that it may do so, it is necessary that the predicates should
themselves retain their association with the properties which they
severally connote. For the propositions can not keep the meaning of the
words alive, if the meaning of the propositions themselves should die. And
nothing is more common than for propositions to be mechanically repeated,
mechanically retained in the memory, and their truth undoubtingly assented
to and relied on, while yet they carry no meaning distinctly home to the
mind; and while the matter of fact or law of nature which they originally
expressed is as much lost sight of, and practically disregarded, as if it
never had been heard of at all. In those subjects which are at the same
time familiar and complicated, and especially in those which are so in as
great a degree as moral and social subjects are, it is a matter of common
remark how many important propositions are believed and repeated from
habit, while no account could be given, and no sense is practically
manifested, of the truths which they convey. Hence it is, that the
traditional maxims of old experience, though seldom questioned, have often
so little effect on the conduct of life; because their meaning is never,
by most persons, really felt, until personal experience has brought it
home. And thus also it is that so many doctrines of religion, ethics, and
even politics, so full of meaning and reality to first converts, have
manifested (after the association of that meaning with the verbal formulas
has ceased to be kept up by the controversies which accompanied their
first introduction) a tendency to degenerate rapidly into lifeless dogmas;
which tendency, all the efforts of an education expressly and skillfully
directed to keeping the meaning alive, are barely sufficient to
counteract.

Considering, then, that the human mind, in different generations, occupies
itself with different things, and in one age is led by the circumstances
which surround it to fix more of its attention upon one of the properties
of a thing, in another age upon another; it is natural and inevitable that
in every age a certain portion of our recorded and traditional knowledge,
not being continually suggested by the pursuits and inquiries with which
mankind are at that time engrossed, should fall asleep, as it were, and
fade from the memory. It would be in danger of being totally lost, if the
propositions or formulas, the results of the previous experience, did not
remain, as forms of words it may be, but of words that once really
conveyed, and are still supposed to convey, a meaning: which meaning,
though suspended, may be historically traced, and when suggested, may be
recognized by minds of the necessary endowments as being still matter of
fact, or truth. While the formulas remain, the meaning may at any time
revive; and as, on the one hand, the formulas progressively lose the
meaning they were intended to convey, so, on the other, when this
forgetfulness has reached its height and begun to produce obvious
consequences, minds arise which from the contemplation of the formulas
rediscover the truth, when truth it was, which was contained in them, and
announce it again to mankind, not as a discovery, but as the meaning of
that which they have been taught, and still profess to believe.

Thus there is a perpetual oscillation in spiritual truths, and in
spiritual doctrines of any significance, even when not truths. Their
meaning is almost always in a process either of being lost or of being
recovered. Whoever has attended to the history of the more serious
convictions of mankind—of the opinions by which the general conduct of
their lives is, or as they conceive ought to be, more especially
regulated—is aware that even when recognizing verbally the same doctrines,
they attach to them at different periods a greater or a less quantity, and
even a different kind of meaning. The words in their original acceptation
connoted, and the propositions expressed, a complication of outward facts
and inward feelings, to different portions of which the general mind is
more particularly alive in different generations of mankind. To common
minds, only that portion of the meaning is in each generation suggested,
of which that generation possesses the counterpart in its own habitual
experience. But the words and propositions lie ready to suggest to any
mind duly prepared the remainder of the meaning. Such individual minds are
almost always to be found; and the lost meaning, revived by them, again by
degrees works its way into the general mind.

The arrival of this salutary reaction may, however, be materially retarded
by the shallow conceptions and incautious proceedings of mere logicians.
It sometimes happens that toward the close of the downward period, when
the words have lost part of their significance, and have not yet begun to
recover it, persons arise whose leading and favorite idea is the
importance of clear conceptions and precise thought, and the necessity,
therefore, of definite language. These persons, in examining the old
formulas, easily perceive that words are used in them without a meaning;
and if they are not the sort of persons who are capable of rediscovering
the lost signification, they naturally enough dismiss the formula, and
define the name without reference to it. In so doing they fasten down the
name to what it connotes in common use at the time when it conveys the
smallest quantity of meaning; and introduce the practice of employing it,
consistently and uniformly, according to that connotation. The word in
this way acquires an extent of denotation far beyond what it had before;
it becomes extended to many things to which it was previously, in
appearance capriciously, refused. Of the propositions in which it was
formerly used, those which were true in virtue of the forgotten part of
its meaning are now, by the clearer light which the definition diffuses,
seen not to be true according to the definition; which, however, is the
recognized and sufficiently correct expression of all that is perceived to
be in the mind of any one by whom the term is used at the present day. The
ancient formulas are consequently treated as prejudices; and people are no
longer taught as before, though not to understand them, yet to believe
that there is truth in them. They no longer remain in the general mind
surrounded by respect, and ready at any time to suggest their original
meaning. Whatever truths they contain are not only, in these
circumstances, rediscovered far more slowly, but, when rediscovered, the
prejudice with which novelties are regarded is now, in some degree at
least, against them, instead of being on their side.

An example may make these remarks more intelligible. In all ages, except
where moral speculation has been silenced by outward compulsion, or where
the feelings which prompt to it still continue to be satisfied by the
traditional doctrines of an established faith, one of the subjects which
have most occupied the minds of thinking persons is the inquiry, What is
virtue? or, What is a virtuous character? Among the different theories on
the subject which have, at different times, grown up and obtained partial
currency, every one of which reflected as in the clearest mirror the
express image of the age which gave it birth; there was one, according to
which virtue consists in a correct calculation of our own personal
interests, either in this world only, or also in another. To make this
theory plausible, it was of course necessary that the only beneficial
actions which people in general were accustomed to see, or were therefore
accustomed to praise, should be such as were, or at least might without
contradicting obvious facts be supposed to be, the result of a prudential
regard to self-interest; so that the words really connoted no more, in
common acceptation, than was set down in the definition.

Suppose, now, that the partisans of this theory had contrived to introduce
a consistent and undeviating use of the term according to this definition.
Suppose that they had seriously endeavored, and had succeeded in the
endeavor, to banish the word disinterestedness from the language; had
obtained the disuse of all expressions attaching odium to selfishness or
commendation to self-sacrifice, or which implied generosity or kindness to
be any thing but doing a benefit in order to receive a greater personal
advantage in return. Need we say that this abrogation of the old formulas
for the sake of preserving clear ideas and consistency of thought, would
have been a great evil? while the very inconsistency incurred by the
co-existence of the formulas with philosophical opinions which seemed to
condemn them as absurdities, operated as a stimulus to the re-examination
of the subject and thus the very doctrines originating in the oblivion
into which a part of the truth had fallen, were rendered indirectly, but
powerfully, instrumental to its revival.

The doctrine of the Coleridge school, that the language of any people
among whom culture is of old date, is a sacred deposit, the property of
all ages, and which no one age should consider itself empowered to
alter—borders indeed, as thus expressed, on an extravagance; but it is
grounded on a truth, frequently overlooked by that class of logicians who
think more of having a clear than of having a comprehensive meaning; and
who perceive that every age is adding to the truths which it has received
from its predecessors, but fail to see that a counter process of losing
truths already possessed, is also constantly going on, and requiring the
most sedulous attention to counteract it. Language is the depository of
the accumulated body of experience to which all former ages have
contributed their part, and which is the inheritance of all yet to come.
We have no right to prevent ourselves from transmitting to posterity a
larger portion of this inheritance than we may ourselves have profited by.
However much we may be able to improve on the conclusions of our
forefathers, we ought to be careful not inadvertently to let any of their
premises slip through our fingers. It may be good to alter the meaning of
a word, but it is bad to let any part of the meaning drop. Whoever seeks
to introduce a more correct use of a term with which important
associations are connected, should be required to possess an accurate
acquaintance with the history of the particular word, and of the opinions
which in different stages of its progress it served to express. To be
qualified to define the name, we must know all that has ever been known of
the properties of the class of objects which are, or originally were,
denoted by it. For if we give it a meaning according to which any
proposition will be false which has ever been generally held to be true,
it is incumbent on us to be sure that we know and have considered all
which those who believed the proposition understood by it.




                                Chapter V.


On The Natural History Of The Variations In The Meaning Of Terms.


§ 1. It is not only in the mode which has now been pointed out, namely by
gradual inattention to a portion of the ideas conveyed, that words in
common use are liable to shift their connotation. The truth is, that the
connotation of such words is perpetually varying; as might be expected
from the manner in which words in common use acquire their connotation. A
technical term, invented for purposes of art or science, has, from the
first, the connotation given to it by its inventor; but a name which is in
every one’s mouth before any one thinks of defining it, derives its
connotation only from the circumstances which are habitually brought to
mind when it is pronounced. Among these circumstances, the properties
common to the things denoted by the name, have naturally a principal
place; and would have the sole place, if language were regulated by
convention rather than by custom and accident. But besides these common
properties, which if they exist are _certainly_ present whenever the name
is employed, any other circumstance may _casually_ be found along with it,
so frequently as to become associated with it in the same manner, and as
strongly, as the common properties themselves. In proportion as this
association forms itself, people give up using the name in cases in which
those casual circumstances do not exist. They prefer using some other
name, or the same name with some adjunct, rather than employ an expression
which will call up an idea they do not want to excite. The circumstance
originally casual, thus becomes regularly a part of the connotation of the
word.

It is this continual incorporation of circumstances originally accidental,
into the permanent signification of words, which is the cause that there
are so few exact synonyms. It is this also which renders the dictionary
meaning of a word, by universal remark so imperfect an exponent of its
real meaning. The dictionary meaning is marked out in a broad, blunt way,
and probably includes all that was originally necessary for the correct
employment of the term; but in process of time so many collateral
associations adhere to words, that whoever should attempt to use them with
no other guide than the dictionary, would confound a thousand nice
distinctions and subtle shades of meaning which dictionaries take no
account of; as we notice in the use of a language in conversation or
writing by a foreigner not thoroughly master of it. The history of a word,
by showing the causes which determine its use, is in these cases a better
guide to its employment than any definition; for definitions can only show
its meaning at the particular time, or at most the series of its
successive meanings, but its history may show the law by which the
succession was produced. The word _gentleman_, for instance, to the
correct employment of which a dictionary would be no guide, originally
meant simply a man born in a certain rank. From this it came by degrees to
connote all such qualities or adventitious circumstances as were usually
found to belong to persons of that rank. This consideration at once
explains why in one of its vulgar acceptations it means any one who lives
without labor, in another without manual labor, and in its more elevated
signification it has in every age signified the conduct, character,
habits, and outward appearance, in whomsoever found, which, according to
the ideas of that age, belonged or were expected to belong to persons born
and educated in a high social position.

It continually happens that of two words, whose dictionary meanings are
either the same or very slightly different, one will be the proper word to
use in one set of circumstances, another in another, without its being
possible to show how the custom of so employing them originally grew up.
The accident that one of the words was used and not the other on a
particular occasion or in a particular social circle, will be sufficient
to produce so strong an association between the word and some specialty of
circumstances, that mankind abandon the use of it in any other case, and
the specialty becomes part of its signification. The tide of custom first
drifts the word on the shore of a particular meaning, then retires and
leaves it there.

An instance in point is the remarkable change which, in the English
language at least, has taken place in the signification of the word
_loyalty_. That word originally meant in English, as it still means in the
language from whence it came, fair, open dealing, and fidelity to
engagements; in that sense the quality it expressed was part of the ideal
chivalrous or knightly character. By what process, in England, the term
became restricted to the single case of fidelity to the throne, I am not
sufficiently versed in the history of courtly language to be able to
pronounce. The interval between a _loyal chevalier_ and a loyal subject is
certainly great. I can only suppose that the word was, at some period, the
favorite term at court to express fidelity to the oath of allegiance;
until at length those who wished to speak of any other, and as it was
probably deemed, inferior sort of fidelity, either did not venture to use
so dignified a term, or found it convenient to employ some other in order
to avoid being misunderstood.

§ 2. Cases are not unfrequent in which a circumstance, at first casually
incorporated into the connotation of a word which originally had no
reference to it, in time wholly supersedes the original meaning, and
becomes not merely a part of the connotation, but the whole of it. This is
exemplified in the word pagan, _paganus_; which originally, as its
etymology imports, was equivalent to _villager_; the inhabitant of a
_pagus_, or village. At a particular era in the extension of Christianity
over the Roman empire, the adherents of the old religion, and the
villagers or country people, were nearly the same body of individuals, the
inhabitants of the towns having been earliest converted; as in our own
day, and at all times, the greater activity of social intercourse renders
them the earliest recipients of new opinions and modes, while old habits
and prejudices linger longest among the country people; not to mention
that the towns were more immediately under the direct influence of the
Government, which at that time had embraced Christianity. From this casual
coincidence, the word _paganus_ carried with it, and began more and more
steadily to suggest, the idea of a worshiper of the ancient divinities;
until at length it suggested that idea so forcibly that people who did not
desire to suggest the idea avoided using the word. But when _paganus_ had
come to connote heathenism, the very unimportant circumstance, with
reference to that fact, of the place of residence, was soon disregarded in
the employment of the word. As there was seldom any occasion for making
separate assertions respecting heathens who lived in the country, there
was no need for a separate word to denote them; and pagan came not only to
mean heathen, but to mean that exclusively.

A case still more familiar to most readers is that of the word _villain_
or _villein_. This term, as every body knows, had in the Middle Ages a
connotation as strictly defined as a word could have, being the proper
legal designation for those persons who were the subjects of the less
onerous forms of feudal bondage. The scorn of the semi-barbarous military
aristocracy for these their abject dependants, rendered the act of
likening any person to this class of people a mark of the greatest
contumely; the same scorn led them to ascribe to the same people all
manner of hateful qualities, which doubtless also, in the degrading
situation in which they were held, were often not unjustly imputed to
them. These circumstances combined to attach to the term villain ideas of
crime and guilt, in so forcible a manner that the application of the
epithet even to those to whom it legally belonged became an affront, and
was abstained from whenever no affront was intended. From that time guilt
was part of the connotation; and soon became the whole of it, since
mankind were not prompted by any urgent motive to continue making a
distinction in their language between bad men of servile station and bad
men of any other rank in life.

These and similar instances in which the original signification of a term
is totally lost—another and an entirely distinct meaning being first
ingrafted upon the former, and finally substituted for it—afford examples
of the double movement which is always taking place in language: two
counter-movements, one of Generalization, by which words are perpetually
losing portions of their connotation, and becoming of less meaning and
more general acceptation; the other of Specialization, by which other, or
even these same words, are continually taking on fresh connotation;
acquiring additional meaning by being restricted in their employment to a
part only of the occasions on which they might properly be used before.
This double movement is of sufficient importance in the natural history of
language (to which natural history the artificial modifications ought
always to have some degree of reference), to justify our dwelling a little
longer on the nature of the twofold phenomenon, and the causes to which it
owes its existence.

§ 3. To begin with the movement of generalization. It might seem
unnecessary to dwell on the changes in the meaning of names which take
place merely from their being used ignorantly, by persons who, not having
properly mastered the received connotation of a word, apply it in a looser
and wider sense than belongs to it. This, however, is a real source of
alterations in the language; for when a word, from being often employed in
cases where one of the qualities which it connotes does not exist, ceases
to suggest that quality with certainty, then even those who are under no
mistake as to the proper meaning of the word, prefer expressing that
meaning in some other way, and leave the original word to its fate. The
word ’Squire, as standing for an owner of a landed estate; Parson, as
denoting not the rector of the parish, but clergymen in general; Artist,
to denote only a painter or sculptor; are cases in point. Such cases give
a clear insight into the process of the degeneration of languages in
periods of history when literary culture was suspended; and we are now in
danger of experiencing a similar evil through the superficial extension of
the same culture. So many persons without any thing deserving the name of
education have become writers by profession, that written language may
almost be said to be principally wielded by persons ignorant of the proper
use of the instrument, and who are spoiling it more and more for those who
understand it. Vulgarisms, which creep in nobody knows how, are daily
depriving the English language of valuable modes of expressing thought. To
take a present instance: the verb _transpire_ formerly conveyed very
expressively its correct meaning, viz., to _become known_ through
unnoticed channels—to exhale, as it were, into publicity through invisible
pores, like a vapor or gas disengaging itself. But of late a practice has
commenced of employing this word, for the sake of finery, as a mere
synonym of _to happen_: “the events which have _transpired_ in the
Crimea,” meaning the incidents of the war. This vile specimen of bad
English is already seen in the dispatches of noblemen and viceroys; and
the time is apparently not far distant when nobody will understand the
word if used in its proper sense. In other cases it is not the love of
finery, but simple want of education, which makes writers employ words in
senses unknown to genuine English. The use of “aggravating” for
“provoking,” in my boyhood a vulgarism of the nursery, has crept into
almost all newspapers, and into many books; and when the word is used in
its proper sense, as when writers on criminal law speak of aggravating and
extenuating circumstances, their meaning, it is probable, is already
misunderstood. It is a great error to think that these corruptions of
language do no harm. Those who are struggling with the difficulty (and who
know by experience how great it already is) of expressing one’s self
clearly with precision, find their resources continually narrowed by
illiterate writers, who seize and twist from its purpose some form of
speech which once served to convey briefly and compactly an unambiguous
meaning. It would hardly be believed how often a writer is compelled to a
circumlocution by the single vulgarism, introduced during the last few
years, of using the word _alone_ as an adverb, _only_ not being fine
enough for the rhetoric of ambitious ignorance. A man will say “to which I
am not alone bound by honor but also by law,” unaware that what he has
unintentionally said is, that he is _not alone_ bound, some other person
being bound with him. Formerly, if any one said, “I am not alone
responsible for this,” he was understood to mean (what alone his words
mean in correct English), that he is not the sole person responsible; but
if he now used such an expression, the reader would be confused between
that and two other meanings: that he is not _only responsible_ but
something more; or that he is responsible _not only for this_ but for
something besides. The time is coming when Tennyson’s Œnone could not say,
“I will not die alone,” lest she should be supposed to mean that she would
not only die but do something else.

The blunder of writing _predicate_ for _predict_ has become so widely
diffused that it bids fair to render one of the most useful terms in the
scientific vocabulary of Logic unintelligible. The mathematical and
logical term “to eliminate” is undergoing a similar destruction. All who
are acquainted either with the proper use of the word or with its
etymology know that to eliminate a thing is to thrust it out: but those
who know nothing about it, except that it is a fine-looking phrase, use it
in a sense precisely the reverse, to denote, not turning any thing out,
but bringing it in. They talk of _eliminating_ some truth, or other useful
result, from a mass of details.(220) A similar permanent deterioration in
the language is in danger of being produced by the blunders of
translators. The writers of telegrams, and the foreign correspondents of
newspapers, have gone on so long translating _demander_ by “to demand,”
without a suspicion that it means only to ask, that (the context generally
showing that nothing else is meant) English readers are gradually
associating the English word demand with simple asking, thus leaving the
language without a term to express a demand in its proper sense. In like
manner, “transaction,” the French word for a compromise, is translated
into the English word transaction; while, curiously enough, the inverse
change is taking place in France, where the word “compromis” has lately
begun to be used for expressing the same idea. If this continues, the two
countries will have exchanged phrases.

Independently, however, of the generalization of names through their
ignorant misuse, there is a tendency in the same direction consistently
with a perfect knowledge of their meaning; arising from the fact, that the
number of things known to us, and of which we feel a desire to speak,
multiply faster than the names for them. Except on subjects for which
there has been constructed a scientific terminology, with which
unscientific persons do not meddle, great difficulty is generally found in
bringing a new name into use; and independently of that difficulty, it is
natural to prefer giving to a new object a name which at least expresses
its resemblance to something already known, since by predicating of it a
name entirely new we at first convey no information. In this manner the
name of a species often becomes the name of a genus; as _salt_, for
example, or _oil_; the former of which words originally denoted only the
muriate of soda, the latter, as its etymology indicates, only olive-oil;
but which now denote large and diversified classes of substances
resembling these in some of their qualities, and connote only those common
qualities, instead of the whole of the distinctive properties of olive-oil
and sea-salt. The words _glass_ and _soap_ are used by modern chemists in
a similar manner, to denote genera of which the substances vulgarly so
called are single species. And it often happens, as in those instances,
that the term keeps its special signification in addition to its more
general one, and becomes ambiguous, that is, two names instead of one.

These changes, by which words in ordinary use become more and more
generalized, and less and less expressive, take place in a still greater
degree with the words which express the complicated phenomena of mind and
society. Historians, travelers, and in general those who speak or write
concerning moral and social phenomena with which they are not familiarly
acquainted, are the great agents in this modification of language. The
vocabulary of all except unusually instructed as well as thinking persons,
is, on such subjects, eminently scanty. They have a certain small set of
words to which they are accustomed, and which they employ to express
phenomena the most heterogeneous, because they have never sufficiently
analyzed the facts to which those words correspond in their own country,
to have attached perfectly definite ideas to the words. The first English
conquerors of Bengal, for example, carried with them the phrase _landed
proprietor_ into a country where the rights of individuals over the soil
were extremely different in degree, and even in nature, from those
recognized in England. Applying the term with all its English associations
in such a state of things; to one who had only a limited right they gave
an absolute right, from another because he had not an absolute right they
took away all right, drove whole classes of people to ruin and despair,
filled the country with banditti, created a feeling that nothing was
secure, and produced, with the best intentions, a disorganization of
society which had not been produced in that country by the most ruthless
of its barbarian invaders. Yet the usage of persons capable of so gross a
misapprehension determines the meaning of language; and the words they
thus misuse grow in generality, until the instructed are obliged to
acquiesce; and to employ those words (first freeing them from vagueness by
giving them a definite connotation) as generic terms, subdividing the
genera into species.

§ 4. While the more rapid growth of ideas than of names thus creates a
perpetual necessity for making the same names serve, even if imperfectly,
on a greater number of occasions; a counter-operation is going on, by
which names become on the contrary restricted to fewer occasions, by
taking on, as it were, additional connotation, from circumstances not
originally included in the meaning, but which have become connected with
it in the mind by some accidental cause. We have seen above, in the words
_pagan_ and _villain_, remarkable examples of the specialization of the
meaning of words from casual associations, as well as of the
generalization of it in a new direction, which often follows.

Similar specializations are of frequent occurrence in the history even of
scientific nomenclature. “It is by no means uncommon,” says Dr. Paris, in
his _Pharmacologia_,(221) “to find a word which is used to express general
characters subsequently become the name of a specific substance in which
such characters are predominant; and we shall find that some important
anomalies in nomenclature may be thus explained. The term Αρσενίκον, from
which the word Arsenic is derived, was an ancient epithet applied to those
natural substances which possessed strong and acrimonious properties; and
as the poisonous quality of arsenic was found to be remarkably powerful,
the term was especially applied to Orpiment, the form in which this metal
most usually occurred. So the term _Verbena_ (quasi _Herbena_) originally
denoted all those herbs that were held sacred on account of their being
employed in the rites of sacrifice, as we learn from the poets; but as
_one_ herb was usually adopted upon these occasions, the word Verbena came
to denote that particular herb _only_, and it is transmitted to us to this
day under the same title, viz., Verbena or Vervain, and indeed until
lately it enjoyed the medical reputation which its sacred origin conferred
upon it, for it was worn suspended around the neck as an amulet.
_Vitriol_, in the original application of the word, denoted _any_
crystalline body with a certain degree of transparency (_vitrum_); it is
hardly necessary to observe that the term is now appropriated to a
particular species: in the same manner, Bark, which is a general term, is
applied to express _one_ genus, and by way of eminence it has the article
_The_ prefixed, as _The_ bark; the same observation will apply to the word
Opium, which, in its primitive sense, signifies _any_ juice (ὀπὸς,
_Succus_), while it now only denotes _one_ species, viz., that of the
poppy. So, again, _Elaterium_ was used by Hippocrates to signify various
internal applications, especially purgatives, of a violent and drastic
nature (from the word ἐλαύνω, _agito_, _moveo_, _stimulo_), but by
succeeding authors it was exclusively applied to denote the active matter
which subsides from the juice of the wild cucumber. The word _Fecula_,
again, originally meant to imply _any_ substance which was derived by
spontaneous subsidence from a liquid (from _fæx_, the grounds or
settlement of _any_ liquor); afterward it was applied to Starch, which is
deposited in this manner by agitating the flour of wheat in water; and,
lastly, it has been applied to a peculiar vegetable principle, which, like
starch, is insoluble in cold, but completely soluble in boiling water,
with which it forms a gelatinous solution. This indefinite meaning of the
word _fecula_ has created numerous mistakes in pharmaceutic chemistry;
Elaterium, for instance, is said to be _fecula_, and, in the original
sense of the word, it is properly so called, inasmuch as it is procured
from a vegetable juice by spontaneous subsidence, but in the limited and
modern acceptation of the term it conveys an erroneous idea; for instead
of the active principle of the juice residing in _fecula_, it is a
peculiar proximate principle, _sui generis_, to which I have ventured to
bestow the name of _Elatin_. For the same reason, much doubt and obscurity
involve the meaning of the word _Extract_, because it is applied
_generally_ to any substance obtained by the evaporation of a vegetable
solution, and _specifically_ to a peculiar proximate principle, possessed
of certain characters, by which it is distinguished from every other
elementary body.”

A generic term is always liable to become thus limited to a single
species, or even individual, if people have occasion to think and speak of
that individual or species much oftener than of any thing else which is
contained in the genus. Thus by cattle, a stage-coachman will understand
horses; beasts, in the language of agriculturists, stands for oxen; and
birds, with some sportsmen, for partridges only. The law of language which
operates in these trivial instances is the very same in conformity to
which the terms Θεός, Deus, and God, were adopted from Polytheism by
Christianity, to express the single object of its own adoration. Almost
all the terminology of the Christian Church is made up of words originally
used in a much more general acceptation: _Ecclesia_, Assembly; _Bishop_,
Episcopus, Overseer; _Priest_, Presbyter, Elder; _Deacon_, Diaconus,
Administrator; _Sacrament_, a vow of allegiance; _Evangelium_, good
tidings; and some words, as _Minister_, are still used both in the general
and in the limited sense. It would be interesting to trace the progress by
which _author_ came, in its most familiar sense, to signify a writer, and
ποίητης, or maker, a poet.

Of the incorporation into the meaning of a term, of circumstances
accidentally connected with it at some particular period, as in the case
of Pagan, instances might easily be multiplied. Physician (φυσίκος, or
naturalist) became, in England, synonymous with a healer of diseases,
because until a comparatively late period medical practitioners were the
only naturalists. _Clerc_, or clericus, a scholar, came to signify an
ecclesiastic, because the clergy were for many centuries the only
scholars.

Of all ideas, however, the most liable to cling by association to any
thing with which they have ever been connected by proximity, are those of
our pleasures and pains, or of the things which we habitually contemplate
as sources of our pleasures or pains. The additional connotation,
therefore, which a word soonest and most readily takes on, is that of
agreeableness or painfulness, in their various kinds and degrees; of being
a good or bad thing; desirable or to be avoided; an object of hatred, of
dread, contempt, admiration, hope, or love. Accordingly there is hardly a
single name, expressive of any moral or social fact calculated to call
forth strong affections either of a favorable or of a hostile nature,
which does not carry with it decidedly and irresistibly a connotation of
those strong affections, or, at the least, of approbation or censure;
insomuch that to employ those names in conjunction with others by which
the contrary sentiments were expressed, would produce the effect of a
paradox, or even a contradiction in terms. The baneful influence of a
connotation thus acquired, on the prevailing habits of thought, especially
in morals and politics, has been well pointed out on many occasions by
Bentham. It gives rise to the fallacy of “question-begging names.” The
very property which we are inquiring whether a thing possesses or not, has
become so associated with the name of the thing as to be part of its
meaning, insomuch that by merely uttering the name we assume the point
which was to be made out; one of the most frequent sources of apparently
self-evident propositions.

Without any further multiplication of examples to illustrate the changes
which usage is continually making in the signification of terms, I shall
add, as a practical rule, that the logician, not being able to prevent
such transformations, should submit to them with a good grace when they
are irrevocably effected, and if a definition is necessary, define the
word according to its new meaning; retaining the former as a second
signification, if it is needed, and if there is any chance of being able
to preserve it either in the language of philosophy or in common use.
Logicians can not _make_ the meaning of any but scientific terms; that of
all other words is made by the collective human race. But logicians can
ascertain clearly what it is which, working obscurely, has guided the
general mind to a particular employment of a name; and when they have
found this, they can clothe it in such distinct and permanent terms, that
mankind shall see the meaning which before they only felt, and shall not
suffer it to be afterward forgotten or misapprehended.




                               Chapter VI.


The Principles Of A Philosophical Language Further Considered.


§ 1. We have, thus far, considered only one of the requisites of a
language adapted for the investigation of truth; that its terms shall each
of them convey a determinate and unmistakable meaning. There are, however,
as we have already remarked, other requisites; some of them important only
in the second degree, but one which is fundamental, and barely yields in
point of importance, if it yields at all, to the quality which we have
already discussed at so much length. That the language may be fitted for
its purposes, not only should every word perfectly express its meaning,
but there should be no important meaning without its word. Whatever we
have occasion to think of often, and for scientific purposes, ought to
have a name appropriated to it.

This requisite of philosophical language may be considered under three
different heads; that number of separate conditions being involved in it.

§ 2. First, there ought to be all such names, as are needful for making
such a record of individual observations that the words of the record
shall exactly show what fact it is which has been observed. In other
words, there should be an accurate Descriptive Terminology.

The only things which we can observe directly being our own sensations, or
other feelings, a complete descriptive language would be one in which
there should be a name for every variety of elementary sensation or
feeling. Combinations of sensations or feelings may always be described,
if we have a name for each of the elementary feelings which compose them;
but brevity of description, and clearness (which often depends very much
on brevity), are greatly promoted by giving distinctive names not to the
elements alone, but also to all combinations which are of frequent
recurrence. On this occasion I can not do better than quote from Dr.
Whewell(222) some of the excellent remarks which he has made on this
important branch of our subject.

“The meaning of [descriptive] technical terms can be fixed in the first
instance only by convention, and can be made intelligible only by
presenting to the senses that which the terms are to signify. The
knowledge of a color by its name can only be taught through the eye. No
description can convey to a hearer what we mean by _apple-green_ or
_French gray_. It might, perhaps, be supposed that, in the first example,
the term _apple_, referring to so familiar an object, sufficiently
suggests the color intended. But it may easily be seen that this is not
true; for apples are of many different hues of green, and it is only by a
conventional selection that we can appropriate the term to one special
shade. When this appropriation is once made, the term refers to the
sensation, and not to the parts of the term; for these enter into the
compound merely as a help to the memory, whether the suggestion be a
natural connection as in ‘apple-green,’ or a casual one as in ‘French
gray.’ In order to derive due advantage from technical terms of the kind,
they must be associated _immediately_ with the perception to which they
belong; and not connected with it through the vague usages of common
language. The memory must retain the sensation; and the technical word
must be understood as directly as the most familiar word, and more
distinctly. When we find such terms as _tin-white_ or _pinchbeck-brown_,
the metallic color so denoted ought to start up in our memory without
delay or search.

“This, which it is most important to recollect with respect to the simpler
properties of bodies, as color and form, is no less true with respect to
more compound notions. In all cases the term is fixed to a peculiar
meaning by convention; and the student, in order to use the word, must be
completely familiar with the convention, so that he has no need to frame
conjectures from the word itself. Such conjectures would always be
insecure, and often erroneous. Thus the term _papilionaceous_ applied to a
flower is employed to indicate, not only a resemblance to a butterfly, but
a resemblance arising from five petals of a certain-peculiar shape and
arrangement; and even if the resemblance were much stronger than it is in
such cases, yet, if it were produced in a different way, as, for example,
by one petal, or two only, instead of a ‘standard,’ two ‘wings,’ and a
‘keel’ consisting of two parts more or less united into one, we should be
no longer justified in speaking of it as a ‘papilionaceous’ flower.”

When, however, the thing named is, as in this last case, a combination of
simple sensations, it is not necessary, in order to learn the meaning of
the word, that the student should refer back to the sensations themselves;
it may be communicated to him through the medium of other words; the
terms, in short, may be defined. But the names of elementary sensations,
or elementary feelings of any sort, can not be defined; nor is there any
mode of making their signification known but by making the learner
experience the sensation, or referring him, through some known mark, to
his remembrance of having experienced it before. Hence it is only the
impressions on the outward senses, or those inward feelings which are
connected in a very obvious and uniform manner with outward objects, that
are really susceptible of an exact descriptive language. The countless
variety of sensations which arise, for instance, from disease, or from
peculiar physiological states, it would be in vain to attempt to name; for
as no one can judge whether the sensation I have is the same with his, the
name can not have, to us two, real community of meaning. The same may be
said, to a considerable extent, of purely mental feelings. But in some of
the sciences which are conversant with external objects, it is scarcely
possible to surpass the perfection to which this quality of a
philosophical language has been carried.

“The formation(223) of an exact and extensive descriptive language for
botany has been executed with a degree of skill and felicity, which,
before it was attained, could hardly have been dreamed of as attainable.
Every part of a plant has been named; and the form of every part, even the
most minute, has had a large assemblage of descriptive terms appropriated
to it, by means of which the botanist can convey and receive knowledge of
form and structure, as exactly as if each minute part were presented to
him vastly magnified. This acquisition was part of the Linnæan reform....
‘Tournefort,’ says Decandolle, ‘appears to have been the first who really
perceived the utility of fixing the sense of terms in such a way as always
to employ the same word in the same sense, and always to express the same
idea by the same words; but it was Linnæus who really created and fixed
this botanical language, and this is his fairest claim to glory, for by
this fixation of language he has shed clearness and precision over all
parts of the science.’

“It is not necessary here to give any detailed account of the terms of
botany. The fundamental ones have been gradually introduced, as the parts
of plants were more carefully and minutely examined. Thus the flower was
necessarily distinguished into the _calyx_, the _corolla_, the _stamens_,
and the _pistils_; the sections of the corolla were termed _petals_ by
Columna; those of the calyx were called _sepals_ by Necker. Sometimes
terms of greater generality were devised; as _perianth_, to include the
calyx and corolla, whether one or both of these were present; _pericarp_,
for the part inclosing the grain, of whatever kind it be, fruit, nut, pod,
etc. And it may easily be imagined, that descriptive terms may, by
definition and combination, become very numerous and distinct. Thus leaves
may be called _pinnatifid_, _pinnatipartite_, _pinnatisect_,
_pinnatilobate_, _palmatifid_, _palmatipartite_, etc., and each of these
words designates different combinations of the modes and extent of the
divisions of the leaf with the divisions of its outline. In some cases,
arbitrary numerical relations are introduced into the definition: thus, a
leaf is called _bilobate_, when it is divided into two parts by a notch;
but if the notch go to the middle of its length, it is _bifid_; if it go
near the base of the leaf, it is _bipartite_; if to the base, it is
_bisect_. Thus, too, a pod of a cruciferous plant is a _siliqua_, if it is
four times as long as it is broad, but if it be shorter than this it is a
_silicula_. Such terms being established, the form of the very complex
leaf or frond of a fern (Hymenophyllum Wilsoni) is exactly conveyed by the
following phrase: ‘fronds rigid pinnate, pinnæ recurved subunilateral,
pinnatifid, the segments linear undivided or bifid, spinuloso-serrate.’

“Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with the like precision:
Color by means of a classified scale of colors.... This was done with most
precision by Werner, and his scale of colors is still the most usual
standard of naturalists. Werner also introduced a more exact terminology
with regard to other characters which are important in mineralogy, as
lustre, hardness. But Mohs improved upon this step by giving a numerical
scale of hardness, in which talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc spar 3, and so
on.... Some properties, as specific gravity, by their definition give at
once a numerical measure; and others, as crystalline form, require a very
considerable array of mathematical calculation and reasoning, to point out
their relations and gradations.”

§ 3. Thus far of Descriptive Terminology, or of the language requisite for
placing on record our observation of individual instances. But when we
proceed from this to Induction, or rather to that comparison of observed
instances which is the preparatory step toward it, we stand in need of an
additional and a different sort of general names.

Whenever, for purposes of Induction, we find it necessary to introduce (in
Dr. Whewell’s phraseology) some new general conception; that is, whenever
the comparison of a set of phenomena leads to the recognition in them of
some common circumstance, which, our attention not having been directed to
it on any former occasion, is to us a new phenomenon; it is of importance
that this new conception, or this new result of abstraction, should have a
name appropriated to it; especially if the circumstance it involves be one
which leads to many consequences, or which is likely to be found also in
other classes of phenomena. No doubt, in most cases of the kind, the
meaning might be conveyed by joining together several words already in
use. But when a thing has to be often spoken of, there are more reasons
than the saving of time and space, for speaking of it in the most concise
manner possible. What darkness would be spread over geometrical
demonstrations, if wherever the word _circle_ is used, the definition of a
circle were inserted instead of it. In mathematics and its applications,
where the nature of the processes demands that the attention should be
strongly concentrated, but does not require that it should be widely
diffused, the importance of concentration also in the expressions has
always been duly felt; and a mathematician no sooner finds that he shall
often have occasion to speak of the same two things together, than he at
once creates a term to express them whenever combined: just as, in his
algebraical operations, he substitutes for (_a_m + _b_n) p/q, or for
_a_/_b_ + _b_/_c_ + _c_/_d_ + etc., the single letter P, Q, or S; not
solely to shorten his symbolical expressions, but to simplify the purely
intellectual part of his operations, by enabling the mind to give its
exclusive attention to the relation between the quantity S and the other
quantities which enter into the equation, without being distracted by
thinking unnecessarily of the parts of which S is itself composed.

But there is another reason, in addition to that of promoting perspicuity,
for giving a brief and compact name to each of the more considerable
results of abstraction which are obtained in the course of our
intellectual phenomena. By naming them, we fix our attention upon them; we
keep them more constantly before the mind. The names are remembered, and
being remembered, suggest their definition; while if instead of specific
and characteristic names, the meaning had been expressed by putting
together a number of other names, that particular combination of words
already in common use for other purposes would have had nothing to make
itself remembered by. If we want to render a particular combination of
ideas permanent in the mind, there is nothing which clinches it like a
name specially devoted to express it. If mathematicians had been obliged
to speak of “that to which a quantity, in increasing or diminishing, is
always approaching nearer, so that the difference becomes less than any
assignable quantity, but to which it never becomes exactly equal,” instead
of expressing all this by the simple phrase, “the limit of a quantity,” we
should probably have long remained without most of the important truths
which have been discovered by means of the relation between quantities of
various kinds and their limits. If instead of speaking of _momentum_, it
had been necessary to say, “the product of the number of units of velocity
in the velocity by the number of units of mass in the mass,” many of the
dynamical truths now apprehended by means of this complex idea would
probably have escaped notice, for want of recalling the idea itself with
sufficient readiness and familiarity. And on subjects less remote from the
topics of popular discussion, whoever wishes to draw attention to some new
or unfamiliar distinction among things, will find no way so sure as to
invent or select suitable names for the express purpose of marking it.

A volume devoted to explaining what the writer means by civilization, does
not raise so vivid a conception of it as the single expression, that
Civilization is a different thing from Cultivation; the compactness of
that brief designation for the contrasted quality being an equivalent for
a long discussion. So, if we would impress forcibly upon the understanding
and memory the distinction between the two different conceptions of a
representative government, we can not more effectually do so than by
saying that Delegation is not Representation. Hardly any original thoughts
on mental or social subjects ever make their way among mankind, or assume
their proper importance in the minds even of their inventors, until
aptly-selected words or phrases have, as it were, nailed them down and
held them fast.

§ 4. Of the three essential parts of a philosophical language, we have now
mentioned two: a terminology suited for describing with precision the
individual facts observed; and a name for every common property of any
importance or interest, which we detect by comparing those facts;
including (as the concretes corresponding to those abstract terms) names
for the classes which we artificially construct in virtue of those
properties, or as many of them, at least, as we have frequent occasion to
predicate any thing of.

But there is a sort of classes, for the recognition of which no such
elaborate process is necessary; because each of them is marked out from
all others not by some one property, the detection of which may depend on
a difficult act of abstraction, but by its properties generally. I mean,
the Kinds of things, in the sense which, in this treatise, has been
specially attached to that term. By a Kind, it will be remembered, we mean
one of those classes which are distinguished from all others not by one or
a few definite properties, but by an unknown multitude of them; the
combination of properties on which the class is grounded, being a mere
index to an indefinite number of other distinctive attributes. The class
horse is a Kind, because the things which agree in possessing the
characters by which we recognize a horse, agree in a great number of other
properties, as we know, and, it can not be doubted, in many more than we
know. Animal, again, is a Kind, because no definition that could be given
of the name animal could either exhaust the properties common to all
animals, or supply premises from which the remainder of those properties
could be inferred. But a combination of properties which does not give
evidence of the existence of any other independent peculiarities, does not
constitute a Kind. White horse, therefore, is not a Kind; because horses
which agree in whiteness, do not agree in any thing else, except the
qualities common to all horses, and whatever may be the causes or effects
of that particular color.

On the principle that there should be a name for every thing which we have
frequent occasion to make assertions about, there ought evidently to be a
name for every Kind; for as it is the very meaning of a Kind that the
individuals composing it have an indefinite multitude of properties in
common, it follows that, if not with our present knowledge, yet with that
which we may hereafter acquire, the Kind is a subject to which there will
have to be applied many predicates. The third component element of a
philosophical language, therefore, is that there shall be a name for every
Kind. In other words, there must not only be a terminology, but also a
nomenclature.

The words Nomenclature and Terminology are employed by most authors almost
indiscriminately; Dr. Whewell being, as far as I am aware, the first
writer who has regularly assigned to the two words different meanings. The
distinction, however, which he has drawn between them being real and
important, his example is likely to be followed; and (as is apt to be the
case when such innovations in language are felicitously made) a vague
sense of the distinction is found to have influenced the employment of the
terms in common practice, before the expediency had been pointed out of
discriminating them philosophically. Every one would say that the reform
effected by Lavoisier and Guyton-Morveau in the language of chemistry
consisted in the introduction of a new nomenclature, not of a new
terminology. Linear, lanceolate, oval, or oblong, serrated, dentate, or
crenate leaves, are expressions forming part of the terminology of botany,
while the names “Viola odorata,” and “Ulex Europæus,” belong to its
nomenclature.

A nomenclature may be defined, the collection of the names of all the
Kinds with which any branch of knowledge is conversant; or more properly,
of all the lowest Kinds, or _infirmæ species_—those which may be
subdivided indeed, but not into Kinds, and which generally accord with
what in natural history are termed simply species. Science possesses two
splendid examples of a systematic nomenclature; that of plants and
animals, constructed by Linnæus and his successors, and that of chemistry,
which we owe to the illustrious group of chemists who flourished in France
toward the close of the eighteenth century. In these two departments, not
only has every known species, or lowest Kind, a name assigned to it, but
when new lowest Kinds are discovered, names are at once given to them on a
uniform principle. In other sciences the nomenclature is not at present
constructed on any system, either because the species to be named are not
numerous enough to require one (as in geometry, for example), or because
no one has yet suggested a suitable principle for such a system, as in
mineralogy; in which the want of a scientifically constructed nomenclature
is now the principal cause which retards the progress of the science.

§ 5. A word which carries on its face that it belongs to a nomenclature,
seems at first sight to differ from other concrete general names in
this—that its meaning does not reside in its connotation, in the
attributes implied in it, but in its denotation, that is, in the
particular group of things which it is appointed to designate; and can
not, therefore, be unfolded by means of a definition, but must be made
known in another way. This opinion, however, appears to me erroneous.
Words belonging to a nomenclature differ, I conceive, from other words
mainly in this, that besides the ordinary connotation, they have a
peculiar one of their own: besides connoting certain attributes, they also
connote that those attributes are distinctive of a Kind. The term
“peroxide of iron,” for example, belonging by its form to the systematic
nomenclature of chemistry, bears on its face that it is the name of a
peculiar Kind of substance. It moreover connotes, like the name of any
other class, some portion of the properties common to the class; in this
instance the property of being a compound of iron and the largest dose of
oxygen with which iron will combine. These two things, the fact of being
such a compound, and the fact of being a Kind, constitute the connotation
of the name peroxide of iron. When we say of the substance before us, that
it is the peroxide of iron, we thereby assert, first, that it is a
compound of iron and a maximum of oxygen, and next, that the substance so
composed is a peculiar Kind of substance.

Now, this second part of the connotation of any word belonging to a
nomenclature is as essential a portion of its meaning as the first part,
while the definition only declares the first; and hence the appearance
that the signification of such terms can not be conveyed by a definition:
which appearance, however, is fallacious. The name Viola odorata denotes a
Kind, of which a certain number of characters, sufficient to distinguish
it, are enunciated in botanical works. This enumeration of characters is
surely, as in other cases, a definition of the name. No, say some, it is
not a definition, for the name Viola odorata does not mean those
characters; it means that particular group of plants, and the characters
are selected from among a much greater number, merely as marks by which to
recognize the group. But to this I reply, that the name does not mean that
group, for it would be applied to that group no longer than while the
group is believed to be an _infima species_; if it were to be discovered
that several distinct Kinds have been confounded under this one name, no
one would any longer apply the name Viola odorata to the whole of the
group, but would apply it, if retained at all, to one only of the Kinds
retained therein. What is imperative, therefore, is not that the name
shall denote one particular collection of objects, but that it shall
denote a Kind, and a lowest Kind. The form of the name declares that,
happen what will, it is to denote an _infima species_; and that,
therefore, the properties which it connotes, and which are expressed in
the definition, are to be connoted by it no longer than while we continue
to believe that those properties, when found together, indicate a Kind,
and that the whole of them are found in no more than one Kind.

With the addition of this peculiar connotation, implied in the form of
every word which belongs to a systematic nomenclature; the set of
characters which is employed to discriminate each Kind from all other
Kinds (and which is a real definition) constitutes as completely as in any
other case the whole meaning of the term. It is no objection to say that
(as is often the case in natural history) the set of characters may be
changed, and another substituted as being better suited for the purpose of
distinction, while the word, still continuing to denote the same group or
things, is not considered to have changed its meaning. For this is no more
than may happen in the case of any other general name: we may, in
reforming its connotation, leave its denotation untouched; and it is
generally desirable to do so. The connotation, however, is not the less
for this the real meaning, for we at once apply the name wherever the
characters set down in the definition are found; and that which
exclusively guides us in applying the term, must constitute its
signification. If we find, contrary to our previous belief, that the
characters are not peculiar to one species, we cease to use the term
co-extensively with the characters; but then it is because the other
portion of the connotation fails; the condition that the class must be a
Kind. The connotation, therefore, is still the meaning; the set of
descriptive characters is a true definition; and the meaning is unfolded,
not indeed (as in other cases) by the definition alone, but by the
definition and the form of the word taken together.

§ 6. We have now analyzed what is implied in the two principal requisites
of a philosophical language; first, precision, or definiteness; and,
secondly, completeness. Any further remarks on the mode of constructing a
nomenclature must be deferred until we treat of Classification; the mode
of naming the Kinds of things being necessarily subordinate to the mode of
arranging those Kinds into larger classes. With respect to the minor
requisites of terminology, some of them are well stated and illustrated in
the “Aphorisms concerning the Language of Science,” included in Dr.
Whewell’s _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_. These, as being of
secondary importance in the peculiar point of view of Logic, I shall not
further refer to, but shall confine my observations to one more quality,
which, next to the two already treated of, appears to be the most valuable
which the language of science can possess. Of this quality a general
notion may be conveyed by the following aphorism:

Whenever the nature of the subject permits our reasoning processes to be,
without danger, carried on mechanically, the language should be
constructed on as mechanical principles as possible; while, in the
contrary case, it should be so constructed that there shall be the
greatest possible obstacles to a merely mechanical use of it.

I am aware that this maxim requires much explanation, which I shall at
once proceed to give. At first, as to what is meant by using a language
mechanically. The complete or extreme case of the mechanical use of
language, is when it is used without any consciousness of a meaning, and
with only the consciousness of using certain visible or audible marks in
conformity to technical rules previously laid down. This extreme case is
nowhere realized except in the figures of arithmetic, and still more the
symbols of algebra, a language unique in its kind, and approaching as
nearly to perfection, for the purposes to which it is destined, as can,
perhaps, be said of any creation of the human mind. Its perfection
consists in the completeness of its adaptation to a purely mechanical use.
The symbols are mere counters, without even the semblance of a meaning
apart from the convention which is renewed each time they are employed,
and which is altered at each renewal, the same symbol _a_ or _x_ being
used on different occasions to represent things which (except that, like
all things, they are susceptible of being numbered) have no property in
common. There is nothing, therefore, to distract the mind from the set of
mechanical operations which are to be performed upon the symbols, such as
squaring both sides of the equation, multiplying or dividing them by the
same or by equivalent symbols, and so forth. Each of these operations, it
is true, corresponds to a syllogism; represents one step of a
ratiocination relating not to the symbols, but to the things signified by
them. But as it has been found practicable to frame a technical form, by
conforming to which we can make sure of finding the conclusion of the
ratiocination, our end can be completely attained without our ever
thinking of any thing but the symbols. Being thus intended to work merely
as mechanism, they have the qualities which mechanism ought to have. They
are of the least possible bulk, so that they take up scarcely any room,
and waste no time in their manipulation; they are compact, and fit so
closely together that the eye can take in the whole at once of almost
every operation which they are employed to perform.

These admirable properties of the symbolical language of mathematics have
made so strong an impression on the minds of many thinkers, as to have led
them to consider the symbolical language in question as the ideal type of
philosophical language generally; to think that names in general, or (as
they are fond of calling them) signs, are fitted for the purposes of
thought in proportion as they can be made to approximate to the
compactness, the entire unmeaningness, and the capability of being used as
counters without a thought of what they represent, which are
characteristic of the _a_ and _b_, the _x_ and _y_, of algebra. This
notion has led to sanguine views of the acceleration of the progress of
science by means which, I conceive, can not possibly conduce to that end,
and forms part of that exaggerated estimate of the influence of signs,
which has contributed in no small degree to prevent the real laws of our
intellectual operations from being rightly understood.

In the first place, a set of signs by which we reason without
consciousness of their meaning, can be serviceable, at most, only in our
deductive operations. In our direct inductions we can not for a moment
dispense with a distinct mental image of the phenomena, since the whole
operation turns on a perception of the particulars in which those
phenomena agree and differ. But, further, this reasoning by counters is
only suitable to a very limited portion even of our deductive processes.
In our reasonings respecting numbers, the only general principles which we
ever have occasion to introduce are these, Things which are equal to the
same thing are equal to one another, and The sums or differences of equal
things are equal; with their various corollaries. Not only can no
hesitation ever arise respecting the applicability of these principles,
since they are true of all magnitudes whatever; but every possible
application of which they are susceptible, may be reduced to a technical
rule; and such, in fact, the rules of the calculus are. But if the symbols
represent any other things than mere numbers, let us say even straight or
curve lines, we have then to apply theorems of geometry not true of all
lines without exception, and to select those which are true of the lines
we are reasoning about. And how can we do this unless we keep completely
in mind what particular lines these are? Since additional geometrical
truths may be introduced into the ratiocination in any stage of its
progress, we can not suffer ourselves, during even the smallest part of
it, to use the names mechanically (as we use algebraical symbols) without
an image annexed to them. It is only after ascertaining that the solution
of a question concerning lines can be made to depend on a previous
question concerning numbers, or, in other words, after the question has
been (to speak technically) reduced to an equation, that the unmeaning
signs become available, and that the nature of the facts themselves to
which the investigation relates can be dismissed from the mind. Up to the
establishment of the equation, the language in which mathematicians carry
on their reasoning does not differ in character from that employed by
close reasoners on any other kind of subject.

I do not deny that every correct ratiocination, when thrown into the
syllogistic shape, is conclusive from the mere form of the expression,
provided none of the terms used be ambiguous; and this is one of the
circumstances which have led some writers to think that if all names were
so judiciously constructed and so carefully defined as not to admit of any
ambiguity, the improvement thus made in language would not only give to
the conclusions of every deductive science the same certainty with those
of mathematics, but would reduce all reasonings to the application of a
technical form, and enable their conclusiveness to be rationally assented
to after a merely mechanical process, as is undoubtedly the case in
algebra. But, if we except geometry, the conclusions of which are already
as certain and exact as they can be made, there is no science but that of
number, in which the practical validity of a reasoning can be apparent to
any person who has looked only at the reasoning itself. Whoever has
assented to what was said in the last Book concerning the case of the
Composition of Causes, and the still stronger case of the entire
supersession of one set of laws by another, is aware that geometry and
algebra are the only sciences of which the propositions are categorically
true; the general propositions of all other sciences are true only
hypothetically, supposing that no counteracting cause happens to
interfere. A conclusion, therefore, however correctly deduced, in point of
form, from admitted laws of nature, will have no other than an
hypothetical certainty. At every step we must assure ourselves that no
other law of nature has superseded, or intermingled its operation with,
those which are the premises of the reasoning; and how can this be done by
merely looking at the words? We must not only be constantly thinking of
the phenomena themselves, but we must be constantly studying them; making
ourselves acquainted with the peculiarities of every case to which we
attempt to apply our general principles.

The algebraic notation, considered as a philosophical language, is perfect
in its adaptation to the subjects for which it is commonly employed,
namely those of which the investigations have already been reduced to the
ascertainment of a relation between numbers. But, admirable as it is for
its own purpose, the properties by which it is rendered such are so far
from constituting it the ideal model of philosophical language in general,
that the more nearly the language of any other branch of science
approaches to it, the less fit that language is for its own proper
functions. On all other subjects, instead of contrivances to prevent our
attention from being distracted by thinking of the meaning of our signs,
we ought to wish for contrivances to make it impossible that we should
ever lose sight of that meaning even for an instant.

With this view, as much meaning as possible should be thrown into the
formation of the word itself; the aids of derivation and analogy being
made available to keep alive a consciousness of all that is signified by
it. In this respect those languages have an immense advantage which form
their compounds and derivatives from native roots, like the German, and
not from those of a foreign or dead language, as is so much the case with
English, French, and Italian; and the best are those which form them
according to fixed analogies, corresponding to the relations between the
ideas to be expressed. All languages do this more or less, but especially,
among modern European languages, the German; while even that is inferior
to the Greek, in which the relation between the meaning of a derivative
word and that of its primitive is in general clearly marked by its mode of
formation, except in the case of words compounded with prepositions, which
are often, in both those languages, extremely anomalous.

But all that can be done, by the mode of constructing words, to prevent
them from degenerating into sounds passing through the mind without any
distinct apprehension of what they signify, is far too little for the
necessity of the case. Words, however well constructed originally, are
always tending, like coins, to have their inscription worn off by passing
from hand to hand; and the only possible mode of reviving it is to be ever
stamping it afresh, by living in the habitual contemplation of the
phenomena themselves, and not resting in our familiarity with the words
that express them. If any one, having possessed himself of the laws of
phenomena as recorded in words, whether delivered to him originally by
others, or even found out by himself, is content from thenceforth to live
among these formulæ, to think exclusively of them, and of applying them to
cases as they arise, without keeping up his acquaintance with the
realities from which these laws were collected—not only will he
continually fail in his practical efforts, because he will apply his
formulæ without duly considering whether, in this case and in that, other
laws of nature do not modify or supersede them; but the formulæ themselves
will progressively lose their meaning to him, and he will cease at last
even to be capable of recognizing with certainty whether a case falls
within the contemplation of his formula or not. It is, in short, as
necessary, on all subjects not mathematical, that the things on which we
reason should be conceived by us in the concrete, and “clothed in
circumstances,” as it is in algebra that we should keep all
individualizing peculiarities sedulously out of view.

With this remark we close our observations on the Philosophy of Language.




                               Chapter VII.


Of Classification, As Subsidiary To Induction.


§ 1. There is, as has been frequently remarked in this work, a
classification of things, which is inseparable from the fact of giving
them general names. Every name which connotes an attribute, divides, by
that very fact, all things whatever into two classes, those which have the
attribute and those which have it not; those of which the name can be
predicated, and those of which it can not. And the division thus made is
not merely a division of such things as actually exist, or are known to
exist, but of all such as may hereafter be discovered, and even of all
which can be imagined.

On this kind of Classification we have nothing to add to what has
previously been said. The Classification which requires to be discussed as
a separate act of the mind, is altogether different. In the one, the
arrangement of objects in groups, and distribution of them into
compartments, is a mere incidental effect consequent on the use of names
given for another purpose, namely that of simply expressing some of their
qualities. In the other, the arrangement and distribution are the main
object, and the naming is secondary to, and purposely conforms itself to,
instead of governing, that more important operation.

Classification, thus regarded, is a contrivance for the best possible
ordering of the ideas of objects in our minds; for causing the ideas to
accompany or succeed one another in such a way as shall give us the
greatest command over our knowledge already acquired, and lead most
directly to the acquisition of more. The general problem of
Classification, in reference to these purposes, may be stated as follows:
To provide that things shall be thought of in such groups, and those
groups in such an order, as will best conduce to the remembrance and to
the ascertainment of their laws.

Classification thus considered, differs from classification in the wider
sense, in having reference to real objects exclusively, and not to all
that are imaginable: its object being the due co-ordination in our minds
of those things only, with the properties of which we have actually
occasion to make ourselves acquainted. But, on the other hand, it embraces
_all_ really existing objects. We can not constitute any one class
properly, except in reference to a general division of the whole of
nature; we can not determine the group in which any one object can most
conveniently be placed, without taking into consideration all the
varieties of existing objects, all at least which have any degree of
affinity with it. No one family of plants or animals could have been
rationally constituted, except as part of a systematic arrangement of all
plants or animals; nor could such a general arrangement have been properly
made, without first determining the exact place of plants and animals in a
general division of nature.

§ 2. There is no property of objects which may not be taken, if we please,
as the foundation for a classification or mental grouping of those
objects; and in our first attempts we are likely to select for that
purpose properties which are simple, easily conceived, and perceptible on
a first view, without any previous process of thought. Thus Tournefort’s
arrangement of plants was founded on the shape and divisions of the
corolla; and that which is commonly called the Linnæan (though Linnæus
also suggested another and more scientific arrangement) was grounded
chiefly on the number of the stamens and pistils.

But these classifications, which are at first recommended by the facility
they afford of ascertaining to what class any individual belongs, are
seldom much adapted to the ends of that Classification which is the
subject of our present remarks. The Linnæan arrangement answers the
purpose of making us think together of all those kinds of plants which
possess the same number of stamens and pistils; but to think of them in
that manner is of little use, since we seldom have any thing to affirm in
common of the plants which have a given number of stamens and pistils. If
plants of the class Pentandria, order Monogynia, agreed in any other
properties, the habit of thinking and speaking of the plants under a
common designation would conduce to our remembering those common
properties so far as they were ascertained, and would dispose us to be on
the lookout for such of them as were not yet known. But since this is not
the case, the only purpose of thought which the Linnæan classification
serves is that of causing us to remember, better than we should otherwise
have done, the exact number of stamens and pistils of every species of
plants. Now, as this property is of little importance or interest, the
remembering it with any particular accuracy is of no moment. And, inasmuch
as, by habitually thinking of plants in those groups, we are prevented
from habitually thinking of them in groups which have a greater number of
properties in common, the effect of such a classification, when
systematically adhered to, upon our habits of thought, must be regarded as
mischievous.

The ends of scientific classification are best answered, when the objects
are formed into groups respecting which a greater number of general
propositions can be made, and those propositions more important, than
could be made respecting any other groups into which the same things could
be distributed. The properties, therefore, according to which objects are
classified, should, if possible, be those which are causes of many other
properties; or, at any rate, which are sure marks of them. Causes are
preferable, both as being the surest and most direct of marks, and as
being themselves the properties on which it is of most use that our
attention should be strongly fixed. But the property which is the cause of
the chief peculiarities of a class, is unfortunately seldom fitted to
serve also as the diagnostic of the class. Instead of the cause, we must
generally select some of its more prominent effects, which may serve as
marks of the other effects and of the cause.

A classification thus formed is properly scientific or philosophical, and
is commonly called a Natural, in contradistinction to a Technical or
Artificial, classification or arrangement. The phrase Natural
Classification seems most peculiarly appropriate to such arrangements as
correspond, in the groups which they form, to the spontaneous tendencies
of the mind, by placing together the objects most similar in their general
aspect; in opposition to those technical systems which, arranging things
according to their agreement in some circumstance arbitrarily selected,
often throw into the same group objects which in the general aggregate of
their properties present no resemblance, and into different and remote
groups, others which have the closest similarity. It is one of the most
valid recommendations of any classification to the character of a
scientific one, that it shall be a natural classification in this sense
also; for the test of its scientific character is the number and
importance of the properties which can be asserted in common of all
objects included in a group; and properties on which the general aspect of
the things depends are, if only on that ground, important, as well as, in
most cases, numerous. But, though a strong recommendation, this
circumstance is not a _sine qua non_; since the most obvious properties of
things may be of trifling importance compared with others that are not
obvious. I have seen it mentioned as a great absurdity in the Linnæan
classification, that it places (which by-the-way it does not) the violet
by the side of the oak; it certainly dissevers natural affinities, and
brings together things quite as unlike as the oak and the violet are. But
the difference, apparently so wide, which renders the juxtaposition of
those two vegetables so suitable an illustration of a bad arrangement,
depends, to the common eye, mainly on mere size and texture; now if we
made it our study to adopt the classification which would involve the
least peril of similar _rapprochements_, we should return to the obsolete
division into trees, shrubs, and herbs, which though of primary importance
with regard to mere general aspect, yet (compared even with so petty and
unobvious a distinction as that into dicotyledons and monocotyledons)
answers to so few differences in the other properties of plants, that a
classification founded on it (independently of the indistinctness of the
lines of demarcation) would be as completely artificial and technical as
the Linnæan.

Our natural groups, therefore, must often be founded not on the obvious
but on the unobvious properties of things, when these are of greater
importance. But in such cases it is essential that there should be some
other property or set of properties, more readily recognizable by the
observer, which co-exist with, and may be received as marks of, the
properties which are the real groundwork of the classification. A natural
arrangement, for example, of animals, must be founded in the main on their
internal structure, but (as M. Comte remarks) it would be absurd that we
should not be able to determine the genus and species of an animal without
first killing it. On this ground, the preference, among zoological
classifications, is probably due to that of M. De Blainville, founded on
the differences in the external integuments; differences which correspond,
much more accurately than might be supposed, to the really important
varieties, both in the other parts of the structure, and in the habits and
history of the animals.

This shows, more strongly than ever, how extensive a knowledge of the
properties of objects is necessary for making a good classification of
them. And as it is one of the uses of such a classification that by
drawing attention to the properties on which it is founded, and which, if
the classification be good, are marks of many others, it facilitates the
discovery of those others; we see in what manner our knowledge of things,
and our classification of them, tend mutually and indefinitely to the
improvement of each other.

We said just now that the classification of objects should follow those of
their properties which indicate not only the most numerous, but also the
most important peculiarities. What is here meant by importance? It has
reference to the particular end in view; and the same objects, therefore,
may admit with propriety of several different classifications. Each
science or art forms its classification of things according to the
properties which fall within its special cognizance, or of which it must
take account in order to accomplish its peculiar practical end. A farmer
does not divide plants, like a botanist, into dicotyledonous and
monocotyledonous, but into useful plants and weeds. A geologist divides
fossils, not like a zoologist, into families corresponding to those of
living species, but into fossils of the paleozoic, mesozoic, and tertiary
periods, above the coal and below the coal, etc. Whales are or are not
fish according to the purpose for which we are considering them. “If we
are speaking of the internal structure and physiology of the animal, we
must not call them fish; for in these respects they deviate widely from
fishes; they have warm blood, and produce and suckle their young as land
quadrupeds do. But this would not prevent our speaking of the
_whale-fishery_, and calling such animals _fish_ on all occasions
connected with this employment; for the relations thus arising depend upon
the animal’s living in the water, and being caught in a manner similar to
other fishes. A plea that human laws which mention fish do not apply to
whales, would be rejected at once by an intelligent judge.”(224)

These different classifications are all good, for the purposes of their
own particular departments of knowledge or practice. But when we are
studying objects not for any special practical end, but for the sake of
extending our knowledge of the whole of their properties and relations, we
must consider as the most important attributes those which contribute
most, either by themselves or by their effects, to render the things like
one another, and unlike other things; which give to the class composed of
them the most marked individuality; which fill, as it were, the largest
space in their existence, and would most impress the attention of a
spectator who knew all their properties but was not specially interested
in any. Classes formed on this principle may be called, in a more emphatic
manner than any others, natural groups.

§ 3. On the subject of these groups Dr. Whewell lays down a theory,
grounded on an important truth, which he has, in some respects, expressed
and illustrated very felicitously, but also, as it appears to me, with
some admixture of error. It will be advantageous, for both these reasons,
to extract the statement of his doctrine in the very words he has used.

“Natural groups,” according to this theory,(225) are “given by Type, not
by Definition.” And this consideration accounts for that “indefiniteness
and indecision which we frequently find in the descriptions of such
groups, and which must appear so strange and inconsistent to any one who
does not suppose these descriptions to assume any deeper ground of
connection than an arbitrary choice of the botanist. Thus in the family of
the rose-tree, we are told that the _ovules_ are _very rarely_ erect, the
_stigmata usually_ simple. Of what use, it might be asked, can such loose
accounts be? To which the answer is, that they are not inserted in order
to distinguish the species, but in order to describe the family, and the
total relations of the ovules and the stigmata of the family are better
known by this general statement. A similar observation may be made with
regard to the Anomalies of each group, which occur so commonly, that Dr.
Lindley, in his _Introduction to the Natural System of Botany_, makes the
‘Anomalies’ an article in each family. Thus, part of the character of the
Rosaceæ is, that they have alternate _stipulate_ leaves, and that the
_albumen_ is _obliterated_; but yet in _Lowea_, one of the genera of this
family, the stipulæ are _absent_; and the albumen is _present_ in another,
_Neillia_. This implies, as we have already seen, that the artificial
character (or _diagnosis_, as Mr. Lindley calls it) is imperfect. It is,
though very nearly, yet not exactly, commensurate with the natural group;
and hence in certain cases this character is made to yield to the general
weight of natural affinities.

“These views—of classes determined by characters which can not be
expressed in words—of propositions which state, not what happens in all
cases, but only usually—of particulars which are included in a class,
though they transgress the definition of it, may probably surprise the
reader. They are so contrary to many of the received opinions respecting
the use of definitions, and the nature of scientific propositions, that
they will probably appear to many persons highly illogical and
unphilosophical. But a disposition to such a judgment arises in a great
measure from this, that the mathematical and mathematico-physical sciences
have, in a great degree, determined men’s views of the general nature and
form of scientific truth; while Natural History has not yet had time or
opportunity to exert its due influence upon the current habits of
philosophizing. The apparent indefiniteness and inconsistency of the
classifications and definitions of Natural History belongs, in a far
higher degree, to all other except mathematical speculations; and the
modes in which approximations to exact distinctions and general truths
have been made in Natural History, may be worthy our attention, even for
the light they throw upon the best modes of pursuing truth of all kinds.

“Though in a Natural group of objects a definition can no longer be of any
use as a regulative principle, classes are not therefore left quite loose,
without any certain standard or guide. The class is steadily fixed, though
not precisely limited; it is given, though not circumscribed; it is
determined, not by a boundary-line without, but by a central point within;
not by what it strictly excludes, but by what it eminently includes; by an
example, not by a precept; in short, instead of a Definition we have a
Type for our director.

“A Type is an example of any class, for instance a species of a genus,
which is considered as eminently possessing the character of the class.
All the species which have a greater affinity with this type-species than
with any others, form the genus, and are arranged about it, deviating from
it in various directions and different degrees. Thus a genus may consist
of several species which approach very near the type, and of which the
claim to a place with it is obvious; while there may be other species
which straggle farther from this central knot, and which yet are clearly
more connected with it than with any other. And even if there should be
some species of which the place is dubious, and which appear to be equally
bound to two generic types, it is easily seen that this would not destroy
the reality of the generic groups, any more than the scattered trees of
the intervening plain prevent our speaking intelligibly of the distinct
forests of two separate hills.

“The type-species of every genus, the type-genus of every family, is then,
one which possesses all the characters and properties of the genus in a
marked and prominent manner. The type of the Rose family has alternate
stipulate leaves, wants the albumen, has the ovules not erect, has the
stigmata simple, and besides these features, which distinguish it from the
exceptions or varieties of its class, it has the features which make it
prominent in its class. It is one of those which possess clearly several
leading attributes; and thus, though we can not say of any one genus that
it _must_ be the type of the family, or of any one species that it _must_
be the type of the genus, we are still not wholly to seek; the type must
be connected by many affinities with most of the others of its group; it
must be near the centre of the crowd, and not one of the stragglers.”

In this passage (the latter part of which especially I can not help
noticing as an admirable example of philosophic style) Dr. Whewell has
stated very clearly and forcibly, but (I think) without making all
necessary distinctions, one of the principles of a Natural Classification.
What this principle is, what are its limits, and in what manner he seems
to me to have overstepped them, will appear when we have laid down another
rule of Natural Arrangement, which appears to me still more fundamental.

§ 4. The reader is by this time familiar with the general truth (which I
restate so often on account of the great confusion in which it is commonly
involved), that there are in nature distinctions of Kind; distinctions not
consisting in a given number of definite properties _plus_ the effects
which follow from those properties, but running through the whole nature,
through the attributes generally, of the things so distinguished. Our
knowledge of the properties of a Kind is never complete. We are always
discovering, and expecting to discover, new ones. Where the distinction
between two classes of things is not one of Kind, we expect to find their
properties alike, except where there is some reason for their being
different. On the contrary, when the distinction is in Kind, we expect to
find the properties different unless there be some cause for their being
the same. All knowledge of a Kind must be obtained by observation and
experiment upon the Kind itself; no inference respecting its properties
from the properties of things not connected with it by Kind, goes for more
than the sort of presumption usually characterized as an analogy, and
generally in one of its fainter degrees.

Since the common properties of a true Kind, and consequently the general
assertions which can be made respecting it, or which are certain to be
made hereafter as our knowledge extends, are indefinite and inexhaustible;
and since the very first principle of natural classification is that of
forming the classes so that the objects composing each may have the
greatest number of properties in common; this principle prescribes that
every such classification shall recognize and adopt into itself all
distinctions of Kind, which exist among the objects it professes to
classify. To pass over any distinctions of Kind, and substitute definite
distinctions, which, however considerable they may be, do not point to
ulterior unknown differences, would be to replace classes with more by
classes with fewer attributes in common; and would be subversive of the
Natural Method of Classification.

Accordingly all natural arrangements, whether the reality of the
distinction of Kinds was felt or not by their framers, have been led, by
the mere pursuit of their own proper end, to conform themselves to the
distinctions of Kind, so far as these have been ascertained at the time.
The species of Plants are not only real Kinds, but are probably, all of
them, real lowest Kinds, Infimæ Species; which, if we were to subdivide,
as of course it is open to us to do, into sub-classes, the subdivision
would necessarily be founded on _definite_ distinctions, not pointing
(apart from what may be known of their causes or effects) to any
difference beyond themselves.

In so far as a natural classification is grounded on real Kinds, its
groups are certainly not conventional: it is perfectly true that they do
not depend upon an arbitrary choice of the naturalist. But it does not
follow, nor, I conceive, is it true, that these classes are determined by
a type, and not by characters. To determine them by a type would be as
sure a way of missing the Kind, as if we were to select a set of
characters arbitrarily. They are determined by characters, but these are
not arbitrary. The problem is, to find a few definite characters which
point to the multitude of indefinite ones. Kinds are Classes between which
there is an impassable barrier; and what we have to seek is, marks whereby
we may determine on which side of the barrier an object takes its place.
The characters which will best do this should be chosen: if they are also
important in themselves, so much the better. When we have selected the
characters, we parcel out the objects according to those characters, and
not, I conceive, according to resemblance to a type. We do not compose the
species Ranunculus acris, of all plants which bear a satisfactory degree
of resemblance to a model buttercup, but of those which possess certain
characters selected as marks by which we might recognize the possibility
of a common parentage; and the enumeration of those characters is the
definition of the species.

The question next arises, whether, as all Kinds must have a place among
the classes, so all the classes in a natural arrangement must be Kinds?
And to this I answer, certainly not. The distinctions of Kinds are not
numerous enough to make up the whole of a classification. Very few of the
genera of plants, or even of the families, can be pronounced with
certainty to be Kinds. The great distinctions of Vascular and Cellular,
Dicotyledonous or Exogenous and Monocotyledonous or Endogenous plants, are
perhaps differences of kind; the lines of demarcation which divide those
classes seem (though even on this I would not pronounce positively) to go
through the whole nature of the plants. But the different species of a
genus, or genera of a family, usually have in common only a limited number
of characters. A Rose does not seem to differ from a Rubus, or the
Umbelliferæ from the Ranunculaceæ, in much else than the characters
botanically assigned to those genera or those families. Unenumerated
differences certainly do exist in some cases; there are families of plants
which have peculiarities of chemical composition, or yield products having
peculiar effects on the animal economy. The Cruciferæ and Fungi contain an
unusual proportion of nitrogen; the Labiatæ are the chief sources of
essential oils, the Solaneæ are very commonly narcotic, etc. In these and
similar cases there are possibly distinctions of Kind; but it is by no
means indispensable that there should be. Genera and Families may be
eminently natural, though marked out from one another by properties
limited in number; provided those properties are important, and the
objects contained in each genus or family resemble each other more than
they resemble any thing which is excluded from the genus or family.

After the recognition and definition, then, of the _infimæ species_, the
next step is to arrange those _infimæ species_ into larger groups: making
these groups correspond to Kinds wherever it is possible, but in most
cases without any such guidance. And in doing this it is true that we are
naturally and properly guided, in most cases at least, by resemblance to a
type. We form our groups round certain selected Kinds, each of which
serves as a sort of exemplar of its group. But though the groups are
suggested by types, I can not think that a group when formed is
_determined_ by the type; that in deciding whether a species belongs to
the group, a reference is made to the type, and not to the characters;
that the characters “can not be expressed in words.” This assertion is
inconsistent with Dr. Whewell’s own statement of the fundamental principle
of classification, namely, that “general assertions shall be possible.” If
the class did not possess any characters in common, what general
assertions would be possible respecting it? Except that they all resemble
each other more than they resemble any thing else, nothing whatever could
be predicated of the class.

The truth is, on the contrary, that every genus or family is framed with
distinct reference to certain characters, and is composed, first and
principally, of species which agree in possessing all those characters. To
these are added, as a sort of appendix, such other species, generally in
small number, as possess _nearly_ all the properties selected; wanting
some of them one property, some another, and which, while they agree with
the rest _almost_ as much as these agree with one another, do not resemble
in an equal degree any other group. Our conception of the class continues
to be grounded on the characters; and the class might be defined, those
things which _either_ possess that set of characters, _or_ resemble the
things that do so, more than they resemble any thing else.

And this resemblance itself is not, like resemblance between simple
sensations, an ultimate fact, unsusceptible of analysis. Even the inferior
degree of resemblance is created by the possession of common characters.
Whatever resembles the genus Rose more than it resembles any other genus,
does so because it possesses a greater number of the characters of that
genus than of the characters of any other genus. Nor can there be any real
difficulty in representing, by an enumeration of characters, the nature
and degree of the resemblance which is strictly sufficient to include any
object in the class. There are always some properties common to all things
which are included. Others there often are, to which some things, which
are nevertheless included, are exceptions. But the objects which are
exceptions to one character are not exceptions to another; the resemblance
which fails in some particulars must be made up for in others. The class,
therefore, is constituted by the possession of _all_ the characters which
are universal, and _most_ of those which admit of exceptions. If a plant
had the ovules erect, the stigmata divided, possessed the albumen, and was
without stipules, it possibly would not be classed among the Rosaceæ. But
it may want any one, or more than one of these characters, and not be
excluded. The ends of a scientific classification are better answered by
including it. Since it agrees so nearly, in its known properties, with the
sum of the characters of the class, it is likely to resemble that class
more than any other in those of its properties which are still
undiscovered.

Not only, therefore, are natural groups, no less than any artificial
classes, determined by characters; they are constituted in contemplation
of, and by reason of, characters. But it is in contemplation not of those
characters only which are rigorously common to all the objects included in
the group, but of the entire body of characters, all of which are found in
most of those objects, and most of them in all. And hence our conception
of the class, the image in our minds which is representative of it, is
that of a specimen complete in all the characters; most naturally a
specimen which, by possessing them all in the greatest degree in which
they are ever found, is the best fitted to exhibit clearly, and in a
marked manner, what they are. It is by a mental reference to this
standard, not instead of, but in illustration of, the definition of the
class, that we usually and advantageously determine whether any individual
or species belongs to the class or not. And this, as it seems to me, is
the amount of truth contained in the doctrine of Types.

We shall see presently that where the classification is made for the
express purpose of a special inductive inquiry, it is not optional, but
necessary for fulfilling the conditions of a correct Inductive Method,
that we should establish a type-species or genus, namely, the one which
exhibits in the most eminent degree the particular phenomenon under
investigation. But of this hereafter. It remains, for completing the
theory of natural groups, that a few words should be said on the
principles of the nomenclature adapted to them.

§ 5. A Nomenclature in science is, as we have said, a system of the names
of Kinds. These names, like other class-names, are defined by the
enumeration of the characters distinctive of the class. The only merit
which a set of names can have beyond this, is to convey, by the mode of
their construction, as much information as possible: so that a person who
knows the thing, may receive all the assistance which the name can give in
remembering what he knows; while he who knows it not, may receive as much
knowledge respecting it as the case admits of, by merely being told its
name.

There are two modes of giving to the name of a Kind this sort of
significance. The best, but which unfortunately is seldom practicable, is
when the word can be made to indicate, by its formation, the very
properties which it is designed to connote. The name of a Kind does not,
of course, connote all the properties of the Kind, since these are
inexhaustible, but such of them as are sufficient to distinguish it; such
as are sure marks of all the rest. Now, it is very rarely that one
property, or even any two or three properties, can answer this purpose. To
distinguish the common daisy from all other species of plants would
require the specification of many characters. And a name can not, without
being too cumbrous for use, give indication, by its etymology or mode of
construction, of more than a very small number of these. The possibility,
therefore, of an ideally perfect Nomenclature, is probably confined to the
one case in which we are happily in possession of something approaching to
it—the Nomenclature of elementary Chemistry. The substances, whether
simple or compound, with which chemistry is conversant, are Kinds, and, as
such, the properties which distinguish each of them from the rest are
innumerable; but in the case of compound substances (the simple ones are
not numerous enough to require a systematic nomenclature), there is one
property, the chemical composition, which is of itself sufficient to
distinguish the Kind; and is (with certain reservations not yet thoroughly
understood) a sure mark of all the other properties of the compound. All
that was needful, therefore, was to make the name of every compound
express, on the first hearing, its chemical composition; that is, to form
the name of the compound, in some uniform manner, from the names of the
simple substances which enter into it as elements. This was done, most
skillfully and successfully, by the French chemists, though their
nomenclature has become inadequate to the convenient expression of the
very complicated compounds now known to chemists. The only thing left
unexpressed by them was the exact proportion in which the elements were
combined; and even this, since the establishment of the atomic theory, it
has been found possible to express by a simple adaptation of their
phraseology.

But where the characters which must be taken into consideration, in order
sufficiently to designate the Kind, are too numerous to be all signified
in the derivation of the name, and where no one of them is of such
preponderant importance as to justify its being singled out to be so
indicated, we may avail ourselves of a subsidiary resource. Though we can
not indicate the distinctive properties of the Kind, we may indicate its
nearest natural affinities, by incorporating into its name the name of the
proximate natural group of which it is one of the species. On this
principle is founded the admirable binary nomenclature of botany and
zoology. In this nomenclature the name of every species consists of the
name of the genus, or natural group next above it, with a word added to
distinguish the particular species. The last portion of the compound name
is sometimes taken from some _one_ of the peculiarities in which that
species differs from others of the genus; as Clematis _integrifolia_,
Potentilla _alba_, Viola _palustris_, Artemisia _vulgaris_; sometimes from
a circumstance of an historical nature, as Narcissus _poeticus_,
Potentilla _tormentilla_ (indicating that the plant is that which was
formerly known by the latter name), Exacum _Candollii_ (from the fact that
De Candolle was its first discoverer); and sometimes the word is purely
conventional, as Thlaspi _bursapastoris_, Ranunculus _thora_; it is of
little consequence which; since the second, or, as it is usually called,
the specific name, could at most express, independently of convention, no
more than a very small portion of the connotation of the term. But by
adding to this the name of the superior genus, we may make the best amends
we can for the impossibility of so contriving the name as to express all
the distinctive characters of the Kind. We make it, at all events, express
as many of those characters as are common to the proximate natural group
in which the Kind is included. If even those common characters are so
numerous or so little familiar as to require a further extension of the
same resource, we might, instead of a binary, adopt a ternary
nomenclature, employing not only the name of the genus, but that of the
next natural group in order of generality above the genus, commonly called
the Family. This was done in the mineralogical nomenclature proposed by
Professor Mohs. “The names framed by him were not composed of two, but of
three elements, designating respectively the Species, the Genus, and the
Order; thus he has such species as _Rhombohedral Lime Haloide_,
_Octohedral Fluor Haloide_, _Prismatic Hal Baryte_.”(226) The binary
construction, however, has been found sufficient in botany and zoology,
the only sciences in which this general principle has hitherto been
successfully adopted in the construction of a nomenclature.

Besides the advantage which this principle of nomenclature possesses, in
giving to the names of species the greatest quantity of independent
significance which the circumstances of the case admit of, it answers the
further end of immensely economizing the use of names, and preventing an
otherwise intolerable burden on the memory. When the names of species
become extremely numerous, some artifice (as Dr. Whewell(227) observes)
becomes absolutely necessary to make it possible to recollect or apply
them. “The known species of plants, for example, were ten thousand in the
time of Linnæus, and are now probably sixty thousand. It would be useless
to endeavor to frame and employ separate names for each of these species.
The division of the objects into a subordinated system of classification
enables us to introduce a Nomenclature which does not require this
enormous number of names. Each of the genera has its name, and the species
are marked by the addition of some epithet to the name of the genus. In
this manner about seventeen hundred generic names, with a moderate number
of specific names, were found by Linnæus sufficient to designate with
precision all the species of vegetables known at his time.” And though the
number of generic names has since greatly increased, it has not increased
in any thing like the proportion of the multiplication of known species.




                              Chapter VIII.


Of Classification By Series.


§ 1. Thus far, we have considered the principles of scientific
classification so far only as relates to the formation of natural groups;
and at this point most of those who have attempted a theory of natural
arrangement, including, among the rest, Dr. Whewell, have stopped. There
remains, however, another, and a not less important portion of the theory,
which has not yet, as far as I am aware, been systematically treated of by
any writer except M. Comte. This is, the arrangement of the natural groups
into a natural series.(228)

The end of Classification, as an instrument for the investigation of
nature, is (as before stated) to make us think of those objects together
which have the greatest number of important common properties; and which,
therefore, we have oftenest occasion, in the course of our inductions, for
taking into joint consideration. Our ideas of objects are thus brought
into the order most conducive to the successful prosecution of inductive
inquiries generally. But when the purpose is to facilitate some particular
inductive inquiry, more is required. To be instrumental to that purpose,
the classification must bring those objects together, the simultaneous
contemplation of which is likely to throw most light upon the particular
subject. That subject being the laws of some phenomenon or some set of
connected phenomena; the very phenomenon or set of phenomena in question
must be chosen as the groundwork of the classification.

The requisites of a classification intended to facilitate the study of a
particular phenomenon, are, first to bring into one class all Kinds of
things which exhibit that phenomenon, in whatever variety of forms or
degrees; and, secondly, to arrange those Kinds in a series according to
the degree in which they exhibit it, beginning with those which exhibit
most of it, and terminating with those which exhibit least. The principal
example, as yet, of such a classification, is afforded by comparative
anatomy and physiology, from which, therefore, our illustrations shall be
taken.

§ 2. The object being supposed to be, the investigation of the laws of
animal life; the first step, after forming the most distinct conception of
the phenomenon itself, possible in the existing state of our knowledge, is
to erect into one great class (that of animals) all the known Kinds of
beings where that phenomenon presents itself; in however various
combinations with other properties, and in however different degrees. As
some of these Kinds manifest the general phenomenon of animal life in a
very high degree, and others in an insignificant degree, barely sufficient
for recognition; we must, in the next place, arrange the various Kinds in
a series, following one another according to the degrees in which they
severally exhibit the phenomenon; beginning therefore with man, and ending
with the most imperfect kinds of zoophytes.

This is merely saying that we should put the instances, from which the law
is to be inductively collected, into the order which is implied in one of
the four Methods of Experimental Inquiry discussed in the preceding Book;
the fourth Method, that of Concomitant Variations. As formerly remarked,
this is often the only method to which recourse can be had, with assurance
of a true conclusion, in cases in which we have but limited means of
effecting, by artificial experiments, a separation of circumstances
usually conjoined. The principle of the method is, that facts which
increase or diminish together, and disappear together, are either cause
and effect, or effects of a common cause. When it has been ascertained
that this relation really subsists between the variations, a connection
between the facts themselves may be confidently laid down, either as a law
of nature or only as an empirical law, according to circumstances.

That the application of this Method must be preceded by the formation of
such a series as we have described, is too obvious to need being pointed
out; and the mere arrangement of a set of objects in a series, according
to the degrees in which they exhibit some fact of which we are seeking the
law, is too naturally suggested by the necessities of our inductive
operations, to require any lengthened illustration here. But there are
cases in which the arrangement required for the special purpose becomes
the determining principle of the classification of the same objects for
general purposes. This will naturally and properly happen, when those laws
of the objects which are sought in the special inquiry enact so principal
a part in the general character and history of those objects—exercise so
much influence in determining all the phenomena of which they are either
the agents or the theatre—that all other differences existing among the
objects are fittingly regarded as mere modifications of the one phenomenon
sought; effects determined by the co-operation of some incidental
circumstance with the laws of that phenomenon. Thus in the case of
animated beings, the differences between one class of animals and another
may reasonably be considered as mere modifications of the general
phenomenon, animal life; modifications arising either from the different
degrees in which that phenomenon is manifested in different animals, or
from the intermixture of the effects of incidental causes peculiar to the
nature of each, with the effects produced by the general laws of life;
those laws still exercising a predominant influence over the result. Such
being the case, no other inductive inquiry respecting animals can be
successfully carried on, except in subordination to the great inquiry into
the universal laws of animal life; and the classification of animals best
suited to that one purpose, is the most suitable to all the other purposes
of zoological science.

§ 3. To establish a classification of this sort, or even to apprehend it
when established, requires the power of recognizing the essential
similarity of a phenomenon, in its minuter degrees and obscurer forms,
with what is called the _same_ phenomenon in the greatest perfection of
its development; that is, of identifying with each other all phenomena
which differ only in degree, and in properties which we suppose to be
caused by difference of degree. In order to recognize this identity, or,
in other words, this exact similarity of quality, the assumption of a
type-species is indispensable. We must consider as the type of the class,
that among the Kinds included in it, which exhibits the properties
constitutive of the class, in the highest degree; conceiving the other
varieties as instances of degeneracy, as it were, from that type;
deviations from it by inferior intensity of the characteristic property or
properties. For every phenomenon is best studied (_cæteris paribus_) where
it exists in the greatest intensity. It is there that the effects which
either depend on it, or depend on the same causes with it, will also exist
in the greatest degree. It is there, consequently, and only there, that
those effects of it, or joint effects with it, can become fully known to
us, so that we may learn to recognize their smaller degrees, or even their
mere rudiments, in cases in which the direct study would have been
difficult or even impossible. Not to mention that the phenomenon in its
higher degrees may be attended by effects or collateral circumstances
which in its smaller degrees do not occur at all, requiring for their
production in any sensible amount a greater degree of intensity of the
cause than is there met with. In man, for example (the species in which
both the phenomenon of animal and that of organic life exist in the
highest degree), many subordinate phenomena develop themselves in the
course of his animated existence, which the inferior varieties of animals
do not show. The knowledge of these properties may nevertheless be of
great avail toward the discovery of the conditions and laws of the general
phenomenon of life, which is common to man with those inferior animals.
And they are, even, rightly considered as properties of animated nature
itself; because they may evidently be affiliated to the general laws of
animated nature; because we may fairly presume that some rudiments or
feeble degrees of those properties would be recognized in all animals by
more perfect organs, or even by more perfect instruments, than ours; and
because those may be correctly termed properties of a class, which a thing
exhibits exactly in proportion as it belongs to the class, that is, in
proportion as it possesses the main attributes constitutive of the class.

§ 4. It remains to consider how the internal distribution of the series
may most properly take place; in what manner it should be divided into
Orders, Families, and Genera.

The main principle of division must of course be natural affinity; the
classes formed must be natural groups; and the formation of these has
already been sufficiently treated of. But the principles of natural
grouping must be applied in subordination to the principle of a natural
series. The groups must not be so constituted as to place in the same
group things which ought to occupy different points of the general scale.
The precaution necessary to be observed for this purpose is, that the
_primary_ divisions must be grounded not on all distinctions
indiscriminately, but on those which correspond to variations in the
degree of the main phenomenon. The series of Animated Nature should be
broken into parts at the points where the variation in the degree of
intensity of the main phenomenon (as marked by its principal characters,
Sensation, Thought, Voluntary Motion, etc.) begins to be attended by
conspicuous changes in the miscellaneous properties of the animal. Such
well-marked changes take place, for example, where the class Mammalia
ends; at the points where Fishes are separated from Insects, Insects from
Mollusca, etc. When so formed, the primary natural groups will compose the
series by mere juxtaposition, without redistribution; each of them
corresponding to a definite portion of the scale. In like manner each
family should, if possible, be so subdivided, that one portion of it shall
stand higher and the other lower, though of course contiguous, in the
general scale; and only when this is impossible is it allowable to ground
the remaining subdivisions on characters having no determinable connection
with the main phenomenon.

Where the principal phenomenon so far transcends in importance all other
properties on which a classification could be grounded, as it does in the
case of animated existence, any considerable deviation from the rule last
laid down is in general sufficiently guarded against by the first
principle of a natural arrangement, that of forming the groups according
to the most important characters. All attempts at a scientific
classification of animals, since first their anatomy and physiology were
successfully studied, have been framed with a certain degree of
instinctive reference to a natural series, and have accorded in many more
points than they have differed, with the classification which would most
naturally have been grounded on such a series. But the accordance has not
always been complete; and it still is often a matter of discussion, which
of several classifications best accords with the true scale of intensity
of the main phenomenon. Cuvier, for example, has been justly criticised
for having formed his natural groups, with an undue degree of reference to
the mode of alimentation, a circumstance directly connected only with
organic life, and not leading to the arrangement most appropriate for the
purposes of an investigation of the laws of animal life, since both
carnivorous and herbivorous or frugivorous animals are found at almost
every degree in the scale of animal perfection. Blainville’s
classification has been considered by high authorities to be free from
this defect; as representing correctly, by the mere order of the principal
groups, the successive degeneracy of animal nature from its highest to its
most imperfect exemplification.

§ 5. A classification of any large portion of the field of nature in
conformity to the foregoing principles, has hitherto been found
practicable only in one great instance, that of animals. In the case even
of vegetables, the natural arrangement has not been carried beyond the
formation of natural groups. Naturalists have found, and probably will
continue to find it impossible to form those groups into any series, the
terms of which correspond to real gradations in the phenomenon of
vegetative or organic life. Such a difference of degree may be traced
between the class of Vascular Plants and that of Cellular, which includes
lichens, algæ, and other substances whose organization is simpler and more
rudimentary than that of the higher order of vegetables, and which
therefore approach nearer to mere inorganic nature. But when we rise much
above this point, we do not find any sufficient difference in the degree
in which different plants possess the properties of organization and life.
The dicotyledons are of more complex structure, and somewhat more perfect
organization, than the monocotyledons; and some dicotyledonous families,
such as the Compositæ, are rather more complex in their organization than
the rest. But the differences are not of a marked character, and do not
promise to throw any particular light upon the conditions and laws of
vegetable life and development. If they did, the classification of
vegetables would have to be made, like that of animals, with reference to
the scale or series indicated.

Although the scientific arrangements of organic nature afford as yet the
only complete example of the true principles of rational classification,
whether as to the formation of groups or of series, those principles are
applicable to all cases in which mankind are called upon to bring the
various parts of any extensive subject into mental co-ordination. They are
as much to the point when objects are to be classed for purposes of art or
business, as for those of science. The proper arrangement, for example, of
a code of laws, depends on the same scientific conditions as the
classifications in natural history; nor could there be a better
preparatory discipline for that important function, than the study of the
principles of a natural arrangement, not only in the abstract, but in
their actual application to the class of phenomena for which they were
first elaborated, and which are still the best school for learning their
use. Of this the great authority on codification, Bentham, was perfectly
aware; and his early _Fragment on Government_, the admirable introduction
to a series of writings unequaled in their department, contains clear and
just views (as far as they go) on the meaning of a natural arrangement,
such as could scarcely have occurred to any one who lived anterior to the
age of Linnæus and Bernard de Jussieu.





                                 Book V.


ON FALLACIES.


    “Errare non modo affirmando et negando, sed etiam sentiendo, et in
    tacitâ hominum cogitatione contingit.”—HOBBES, _Computatio sive
    Logica_, chap. v.

    “Il leur semble qu’il n’y a qu’à douter par fantaisie, et qu’il
    n’y a qu’à dire en général que notre nature est infirme; que notre
    esprit est plein d’aveuglement: qu’il faut avoir un grand soin de
    se défaire de ses préjugés, et autres choses semblables. Ils
    pensent que cela suffit pour ne plus se laisser séduire à ses
    sens, et pour ne plus se tromper du tout. Il ne suffit pas de dire
    que l’esprit est foible, il faut lui faire sentir ses foiblesses.
    Ce n’est pas assez de dire qu’il est sujet à l’erreur, il faut lui
    découvrir en quoi consistent ses erreurs.”—MALEBRANCHE, _Recherche
    de la Vérité_.




                                Chapter I.


Of Fallacies In General.


§ 1. It is a maxim of the school-men, that “contrariorum eadem est
scientia:” we never really know what a thing is, unless we are also able
to give a sufficient account of its opposite. Conformably to this maxim,
one considerable section, in most treatises on Logic, is devoted to the
subject of Fallacies; and the practice is too well worthy of observance,
to allow of our departing from it. The philosophy of reasoning, to be
complete, ought to comprise the theory of bad as well as of good
reasoning.

We have endeavored to ascertain the principles by which the sufficiency of
any proof can be tested, and by which the nature and amount of evidence
needful to prove any given conclusion can be determined beforehand. If
these principles were adhered to, then although the number and value of
the truths ascertained would be limited by the opportunities, or by the
industry, ingenuity, and patience, of the individual inquirer, at least
error would not be embraced instead of truth. But the general consent of
mankind, founded on their experience, vouches for their being far indeed
from even this negative kind of perfection in the employment of their
reasoning powers.

In the conduct of life—in the practical business of mankind—wrong
inferences, incorrect interpretations of experience, unless after much
culture of the thinking faculty, are absolutely inevitable; and with most
people, after the highest degree of culture they ever attain, such
erroneous inferences, producing corresponding errors in conduct, are
lamentably frequent. Even in the speculations to which eminent intellects
have systematically devoted themselves, and in reference to which the
collective mind of the scientific world is always at hand to aid the
efforts and correct the aberrations of individuals, it is only from the
more perfect sciences, from those of which the subject-matter is the least
complicated, that opinions not resting on a correct induction have at
length, generally speaking, been expelled. In the departments of inquiry
relating to the more complex phenomena of nature, and especially those of
which the subject is man, whether as a moral and intellectual, a social,
or even as a physical being; the diversity of opinions still prevalent
among instructed persons, and the equal confidence with which those of the
most contrary ways of thinking cling to their respective tenets, are proof
not only that right modes of philosophizing are not yet generally adopted
on those subjects, but that wrong ones are; that inquirers have not only
in general missed the truth, but have often embraced error; that even the
most cultivated portion of our species have not yet learned to abstain
from drawing conclusions which the evidence does not warrant.

The only complete safeguard against reasoning ill, is the habit of
reasoning well; familiarity with the principles of correct reasoning, and
practice in applying those principles. It is, however, not unimportant to
consider what are the most common modes of bad reasoning; by what
appearances the mind is most likely to be seduced from the observance of
true principles of induction; what, in short, are the most common and most
dangerous varieties of Apparent Evidence, whereby persons are misled into
opinions for which there does not exist evidence really conclusive.

A catalogue of the varieties of apparent evidence which are not real
evidence, is an enumeration of Fallacies. Without such an enumeration,
therefore, the present work would be wanting in an essential point. And
while writers who included in their theory of reasoning nothing more than
ratiocination, have in consistency with this limitation, confined their
remarks to the fallacies which have their seat in that portion of the
process of investigation; we, who profess to treat of the whole process,
must add to our directions for performing it rightly, warnings against
performing it wrongly in any of its parts: whether the ratiocinative or
the experimental portion of it be in fault, or the fault lie in dispensing
with ratiocination and induction altogether.

§ 2. In considering the sources of unfounded inference, it is unnecessary
to reckon the errors which arise, not from a wrong method, nor even from
ignorance of the right one, but from a casual lapse, through hurry or
inattention, in the application of the true principles of induction. Such
errors, like the accidental mistakes in casting up a sum, do not call for
philosophical analysis or classification; theoretical considerations can
throw no light upon the means of avoiding them. In the present treatise
our attention is required, not to mere inexpertness in performing the
operation in the right way (the only remedies for which are increased
attention and more sedulous practice), but to the modes of performing it
in a way fundamentally wrong; the conditions under which the human mind
persuades itself that it has sufficient grounds for a conclusion which it
has not arrived at by any of the legitimate methods of induction—which it
has not, even carelessly or overhastily, endeavored to test by those
legitimate methods.

§ 3. There is another branch of what may be called the Philosophy of
Error, which must be mentioned here, though only to be excluded from our
subject. The sources of erroneous opinions are twofold, moral and
intellectual. Of these, the moral do not fall within the compass of this
work. They may be classed under two general heads: Indifference to the
attainment of truth, and Bias; of which last the most common case is that
in which we are biased by our wishes; but the liability is almost as great
to the undue adoption of a conclusion which is disagreeable to us, as of
one which is agreeable, if it be of a nature to bring into action any of
the stronger passions. Persons of timid character are the more predisposed
to believe any statement, the more it is calculated to alarm them. Indeed
it is a psychological law, deducible from the most general laws of the
mental constitution of man, that any strong passion renders us credulous
as to the existence of objects suitable to excite it.

But the moral causes of opinions, though with most persons the most
powerful of all, are but remote causes; they do not act directly, but by
means of the intellectual causes; to which they bear the same relation
that the circumstances called, in the theory of medicine, _predisposing_
causes, bear to _exciting_ causes. Indifference to truth can not, in and
by itself, produce erroneous belief; it operates by preventing the mind
from collecting the proper evidences, or from applying to them the test of
a legitimate and rigid induction; by which omission it is exposed
unprotected to the influence of any species of apparent evidence which
offers itself spontaneously, or which is elicited by that smaller quantity
of trouble which the mind may be willing to take. As little is Bias a
direct source of wrong conclusions. We can not believe a proposition only
by wishing, or only by dreading, to believe it. The most violent
inclination to find a set of propositions true, will not enable the
weakest of mankind to believe them without a vestige of intellectual
grounds—without any, even apparent, evidence. It acts indirectly, by
placing the intellectual grounds of belief in an incomplete or distorted
shape before his eyes. It makes him shrink from the irksome labor of a
rigorous induction, when he has a misgiving that its result may be
disagreeable; and in such examination as he does institute, it makes him
exert that which _is_ in a certain measure voluntary, his attention,
