ogee cornices have an independent development of their own, from the
first type of the concave cornice _a_ in Plate XV.

[Illustration: Fig. LXIII.]

§ XXVI. That cornice occurs, in the simplest work, perfectly pure, but
in finished work it was quickly felt that there was a meagreness in its
junction with the wall beneath it, where it was set as here at _a_, Fig.
LXIII., which could only be conquered by concealing such junction in a
bar of shadow. There were two ways of getting this bar: one by a
projecting roll at the foot of the cornice (_b_, Fig. LXIII.), the other
by slipping the whole cornice a little forward (_c_. Fig. LXIII.). From
these two methods arise two groups of cornices and capitals, which we
shall pursue in succession.

§ XXVII. First group. With the roll at the base (_b_, Fig. LXIII.). The
chain of its succession is represented from 1 to 6, in Plate XV.: 1 and
2 are the steps already gained, as in Fig. LXIII.; and in them the
profile of cornice used is _a_ of Plate XV., or a refined condition of
_b_ of Fig. V., p. 69, above. Now, keeping the same refined profile,
substitute the condition of it, _f_ of Fig. V. (and there accounted
for), above the roll here, and you have 3, Plate XV. This superadded
abacus was instantly felt to be harsh in its projecting angle; but you
know what to do with an angle when it is harsh. Use your simplest
chamfer on it (_a_ or _b_, Fig. LIII., page 287, above), but on the
visible side only, and you have fig. 4, Plate XV. (the top stone being
made deeper that you may have room to chamfer it). Now this fig. 4 is
the profile of Lombardic and Venetian early capitals and cornices, by
tens of thousands; and it continues into the late Venetian Gothic, with
this only difference, that as times advances, the vertical line at the
top of the original cornice begins to slope outwards, and through a
series of years rises like the hazel wand in the hand of a diviner:--but
how slowly! a stone dial which marches but 45 degrees in three
centuries, and through the intermediate condition 5 arrives at 6, and so
stays.

In tracing this chain I have kept all the profiles of the same height in
order to make the comparison more easy; the depth chosen is about
intermediate between that which is customary in cornices on the one
hand, which are often a little shorter, and capitals on the other, which
are often a little deeper.[87] And it is to be noted that the profiles 5
and 6 establish themselves in capitals chiefly, while 4 is retained in
cornices to the latest times.

[Illustration: Fig. LXIV.]

§ XXVIII. Second group (c, Fig. LXIII.). If the lower angle, which was
quickly felt to be hard, be rounded off, we have the form _a_, Fig.
LXIV. The front of the curved line is then decorated, as we have seen;
and the termination of the decorated surface marked by an incision, as
in an ordinary chamfer, as at _b_ here. This I believe to have been the
simple origin of most of the Venetian ogee cornices; but they are
farther complicated by the curves given to the leafage which flows over
them. In the ordinary Greek cornices, and in _a_ and _d_ of Plate XVI.,
the decoration is _incised_ from the outside profile, without any
suggestion of an interior surface of a different contour. But in the
leaf cornices which follow, the decoration is represented as _overlaid_
on one of the early profiles, and has another outside contour of its
own; which is, indeed, the true profile of the cornice, but beneath
which, more or less, the simpler profile is seen or suggested, which
terminates all the incisions of the chisel. This under profile will
often be found to be some condition of the type _a_ or _b_, Fig. LXIV.;
and the leaf profile to be another ogee with its fullest curve up
instead of down, lapping over the cornice edge above, so that the entire
profile might be considered as made up of two ogee curves laid, like
packed herrings, head to tail. Figures 8 and 9 of Plate XV. exemplify
this arrangement. Fig. 7 is a heavier contour, doubtless composed in the
same manner, but of which I had not marked the innermost profile, and
which I have given here only to complete the series which, from 7 to 12
inclusive, exemplifies the gradual restriction of the leaf outline, from
its boldest projection in the cornice to its most modest service in the
capital. This change, however, is not one which indicates difference of
age, but merely of office and position: the cornice 7 is from the tomb
of the Doge Andrea Dandolo (1350) in St. Mark's, 8 from a canopy over a
door of about the same period, 9 from the tomb of the Dogaressa Agnese
Venier (1411), 10 from that of Pietro Cornaro (1361),[88] and 11 from
that of Andrea Morosini (1347), all in the church of San Giov. and
Paola, all these being cornice profiles; and, finally, 12 from a capital
of the Ducal Palace, of fourteen century work.

§ XXIX. Now the reader will doubtless notice that in the three examples,
10 to 12, the leaf has a different contour from that of 7, 8, or 9. This
difference is peculiarly significant. I have always desired that the
reader should theoretically consider the capital as a concentration of
the cornice; but in practice it often happens that the cornice is, on
the contrary, an unrolled capital; and one of the richest early forms of
the Byzantine cornice (not given in Plate XV., because its separate
character and importance require examination apart) is nothing more than
an unrolled continuation of the lower range of acanthus leaves on the
Corinthian capital. From this cornice others appear to have been
derived, like _e_ in Plate XVI., in which the acanthus outline has
become confused with that of the honeysuckle, and the rosette of the
centre of the Corinthian capital introduced between them; and thus their
forms approach more and more to those derived from the cornice itself.
Now if the leaf has the contour of 10, 11, or 12, Plate XV., the profile
is either actually of a capital, or of a cornice derived from a capital;
while, if the leaf have the contour of 7 or 8, the profile is either
actually of a cornice or of a capital derived from a cornice. Where the
Byzantines use the acanthus, the Lombards use the Persepolitan
water-leaf; but the connection of the cornices and capitals is exactly
the same.

§ XXX. Thus far, however, we have considered the characters of profile
which are common to the cornice and capital both. We have now to note
what farther decorative features or peculiarities belong to the capital
itself, or result from the theoretical gathering of the one into the
other.

Look back to Fig. XXII., p. 110. The five types there given, represented
the five different methods of concentration of the root of cornices, _a_
of Fig. V. Now, as many profiles of cornices as were developed in Plate
XV. from this cornice root, there represented by the dotted slope, so
many may be applied to each of the five types in Fig. XXII.,--applied
simply in _a_ and _b_, but with farther modifications, necessitated by
their truncations or spurs, in _c_, _d_, and _e_.

Then, these cornice profiles having been so applied in such length and
slope as is proper for capitals, the farther condition comes into effect
described in Chapter IX. § XXIV., and any one of the cornices in Plate
XV. may become the _abacus_ of a capital formed out of any other, or
out of itself. The infinity of forms thus resultant cannot, as may well
be supposed, be exhibited or catalogued in the space at present
permitted to us: but the reader, once master of the principle, will
easily be able to investigate for himself the syntax of all examples
that may occur to him, and I shall only here, as a kind of exercise, put
before him a few of those which he will meet with most frequently in his
Venetian inquiries, or which illustrate points, not hitherto touched
upon, in the disposition of the abacus.

§ XXXI. In Plate XVII. the capital at the top, on the left hand, is the
rudest possible gathering of the plain Christian Doric cornice, _d_ of
Plate XV. The shaft is octagonal, and the capital is not cut to fit it,
but is square at the base; and the curve of its profile projects on two
of its sides more than on the other two, so as to make the abacus
oblong, in order to carry an oblong mass of brickwork, dividing one of
the upper lights of a Lombard campanile at Milan. The awkward stretching
of the brickwork, to do what the capital ought to have done, is very
remarkable. There is here no second superimposed abacus.

§ XXXII. The figure on the right hand, at the top, shows the simple but
perfect fulfilment of all the requirements in which the first example
fails. The mass of brickwork to be carried is exactly the same in size
and shape; but instead of being trusted to a single shaft, it has two of
smaller area (compare Chap. VIII., § XIII.), and all the expansion
necessary is now gracefully attained by their united capitals, hewn out
of one stone. Take the section of these capitals through their angle,
and nothing can be simpler or purer; it is composed of 2, in Plate XV.,
used for the capital itself, with _c_ of Fig. LXIII. used for the
abacus; the reader could hardly have a neater little bit of syntax for a
first lesson. If the section be taken through the side of the bell, the
capital profile is the root of cornices, _a_ of Fig. V., with the added
roll. This capital is somewhat remarkable in having its sides perfectly
straight, some slight curvature being usual on so bold a scale; but it
is all the better as a first example, the method of reduction being
of order _d_, in Fig. XXII., p. 110, and with a concave cut, as in
Fig. XXI., p. 109. These two capitals are from the cloister of the duomo
of Verona.

[Illustration: Plate XVII.
               CAPITALS CONCAVE GROUP.]

[Illustration: Fig. LXV.]

§ XXXIII. The lowermost figure in Plate XVII. represents an exquisitely
finished example of the same type, from St. Zeno of Verona. Above, at 2,
in Plate II., the plan of the shafts was given, but I inadvertently
reversed their position: in comparing that plan with Plate XVII., Plate
II. must be held upside down. The capitals, with the band connecting
them, are all cut out of one block; their profile is an adaptation of 4
of Plate XV., with a plain headstone superimposed. This method of
reduction is that of order _d_ in Fig. XXII., but the peculiarity of
treatment of their truncation is highly interesting. Fig. LXV.
represents the plans of the capitals at the base, the shaded parts being
the bells: the open line, the roll with its connecting band. The bell of
the one, it will be seen, is the exact reverse of that of the other: the
angle truncations are, in both, curved horizontally as well as
uprightly; but their curve is convex in the one, and in the other
concave. Plate XVII. will show the effect of both, with the farther
incisions, to the same depth, on the flank of the one with the concave
truncation, which join with the rest of its singularly bold and keen
execution in giving the impression of its rather having been cloven
into its form by the sweeps of a sword, than by the dull travail of a
chisel. Its workman was proud of it, as well he might be: he has written
his name upon its front (I would that more of his fellows had been as
kindly vain), and the goodly stone proclaims for ever, ADAMINUS DE
SANCTO GIORGIO ME FECIT.

§ XXXIV. The reader will easily understand that the gracefulness of this
kind of truncation, as he sees it in Plate XVII., soon suggested the
idea of reducing it to a vegetable outline, and laying four healing
leaves, as it were, upon the wounds which the sword had made. These four
leaves, on the truncations of the capital, correspond to the four leaves
which we saw, in like manner, extend themselves over the spurs of the
base, and, as they increase in delicacy of execution, form one of the
most lovely groups of capitals which the Gothic workmen ever invented;
represented by two perfect types in the capitals of the Piazzetta
columns of Venice. But this pure group is an isolated one; it remains in
the first simplicity of its conception far into the thirteenth century,
while around it rise up a crowd of other forms, imitative of the old
Corinthian, and in which other and younger leaves spring up in luxuriant
growth among the primal four. The varieties of their grouping we shall
enumerate hereafter: one general characteristic of them all must be
noted here.

§ XXXV. The reader has been told repeatedly[89] that there are two, and
only two, real orders of capitals, originally represented by the
Corinthian and the Doric; and distinguished by the concave or convex
contours of their bells, as shown by the dotted lines at _e_, Fig. V.,
p. 65. And hitherto, respecting the capital, we have been exclusively
concerned with the methods in which these two families of simple
contours have gathered themselves together, and obtained reconciliation
to the abacus above, and the shaft below. But the last paragraph
introduces us to the surface ornament disposed upon these, in the
chiselling of which the characters described above, § XXVIII., which
are but feebly marked in the cornice, boldly distinguish and divide the
families of the capital.

§ XXXVI. Whatever the nature of the ornament be, it must clearly have
relief of some kind, and must present projecting surfaces separated by
incisions. But it is a very material question whether the contour,
hitherto broadly considered as that of the entire bell, shall be that of
the _outside_ of the projecting and relieved ornaments, or of the
_bottoms of the incisions_ which divide them; whether, that is to say,
we shall first cut out the bell of our capital quite smooth, and then
cut farther into it, with incisions, which shall leave ornamental forms
in relief, or whether, in originally cutting the contour of the bell, we
shall leave projecting bits of stone, which we may afterwards work into
the relieved ornament.

§ XXXVII. Now, look back to Fig. V., p. 65. Clearly, if to ornament the
already hollowed profile, _b_, we cut deep incisions into it, we shall
so far weaken it at the top, that it will nearly lose all its supporting
power. Clearly, also, if to ornament the already bulging profile _c_ we
were to leave projecting pieces of stone outside of it, we should nearly
destroy all its relation to the original sloping line X, and produce an
unseemly and ponderous mass, hardly recognizable as a cornice profile.
It is evident, on the other hand, that we can afford to cut into this
profile without fear of destroying its strength, and that we can afford
to leave projections outside of the other, without fear of destroying
its lightness. Such is, accordingly, the natural disposition of the
sculpture, and the two great families of capitals are therefore
distinguished, not merely by their concave and convex contours, but by
the ornamentation being left outside the bell of the one, and cut into
the bell of the other; so that, in either case, the ornamental portions
will fall _between the dotted lines_ at _e_, Fig. V., and the pointed
oval, or vesica piscis, which is traced by them, may be called the Limit
of ornamentation.

§ XXXVIII. Several distinctions in the quantity and style of the
ornament must instantly follow from this great distinction in its
position. First, in its quantity. For, observe: since in the Doric
profile, _c_ of Fig. V., the contour itself is to be composed of the
surface of the ornamentation, this ornamentation must be close and
united enough to form, or at least suggest, a continuous surface; it
must, therefore, be rich in quantity and close in aggregation; otherwise
it will destroy the massy character of the profile it adorns, and
approximate it to its opposite, the concave. On the other hand, the
ornament left projecting from the concave, must be sparing enough, and
dispersed enough, to allow the concave bell to be clearly seen beneath
it; otherwise it will choke up the concave profile, and approximate it
to its opposite, the convex.

§ XXXIX. And, secondly, in its style. For, clearly, as the sculptor of
the concave profile must leave masses of rough stone prepared for his
outer ornament, and cannot finish them at once, but must complete the
cutting of the smooth bell beneath first, and then return to the
projecting masses (for if he were to finish these latter first, they
would assuredly, if delicate or sharp, be broken as he worked on; since,
I say, he must work in this foreseeing and predetermined method, he is
sure to reduce the system of his ornaments to some definite symmetrical
order before he begins); and the habit of conceiving beforehand all that
he has to do, will probably render him not only more orderly in its
arrangement, but more skilful and accurate in its execution, than if he
could finish all as he worked on. On the other hand, the sculptor of the
convex profile has its smooth surface laid before him, as a piece of
paper on which he can sketch at his pleasure; the incisions he makes in
it are like touches of a dark pencil; and he is at liberty to roam over
the surface in perfect freedom, with light incisions or with deep;
finishing here, suggesting there, or perhaps in places leaving the
surface altogether smooth. It is ten to one, therefore, but that, if he
yield to the temptation, he becomes irregular in design, and rude in
handling; and we shall assuredly find the two families of capitals
distinguished, the one by its symmetrical, thoroughly organised, and
exquisitely executed ornament, the other by its rambling, confused, and
rudely chiselled ornament: But, on the other hand, while we shall
often have to admire the disciplined precision of the one, and as often
to regret the irregular rudeness of the other, we shall not fail to find
balancing qualities in both. The severity of the disciplinarian capital
represses the power of the imagination; it gradually degenerates into
Formalism; and the indolence which cannot escape from its stern demand
of accurate workmanship, seeks refuge in copyism of established forms,
and loses itself at last in lifeless mechanism. The license of the
other, though often abused, permits full exercise to the imagination:
the mind of the sculptor, unshackled by the niceties of chiselling,
wanders over its orbed field in endless fantasy; and, when generous as
well as powerful, repays the liberty which has been granted to it with
interest, by developing through the utmost wildness and fulness of its
thoughts, an order as much more noble than the mechanical symmetry of
the opponent school, as the domain which it regulates is vaster.

[Illustration: Plate XVIII.
               CAPITALS CONVEX GROUP.]

§ XL. And now the reader shall judge whether I had not reason to cast
aside the so-called Five orders of the Renaissance architects, with
their volutes and fillets, and to tell him that there were only two real
orders, and that there could never be more.[90] For we now find that
these two great and real orders are representative of the two great
influences which must for ever divide the heart of man: the one of
Lawful Discipline, with its perfection and order, but its danger of
degeneracy into Formalism; the other of Lawful Freedom, with its vigor
and variety, but its danger of degeneracy into Licentiousness.

§ XLI. I shall not attempt to give any illustrations here of the most
elaborate developments of either order; they will be better given on a
larger scale: but the examples in Plate XVII. and XVIII. represent the
two methods of ornament in their earliest appliance. The two lower
capitals in Plate XVII. are a pure type of the concave school; the two
in the centre of Plate XVIII., of the convex. At the top of Plate XVIII.
are two Lombardic capitals; that on the left from Sta. Sofia at Padua,
that on the right from the cortile of St. Ambrogio at Milan. They both
have the concave angle truncation; but being of date prior to the time
when the idea of the concave bell was developed, they are otherwise left
square, and decorated with the surface ornament characteristic of the
convex school. The relation of the designs to each other is interesting;
the cross being prominent in the centre of each, but more richly
relieved in that from St. Ambrogio. The two beneath are from the
southern portico of St. Mark's; the shafts having been of different
lengths, and neither, in all probability, originally intended for their
present place, they have double abaci, of which the uppermost is the
cornice running round the whole façade. The zigzagged capital is highly
curious, and in its place very effective and beautiful, although one of
the exceptions which it was above noticed that we should sometimes find
to the law stated in § XV. above.

[Illustration: Fig. LXVI.]

§ XLII. The lower capital, which is also of the true convex school,
exhibits one of the conditions of the spurred type, _e_ of Fig. XXII.,
respecting which one or two points must be noticed.

If we were to take up the plan of the simple spur, represented at _e_ in
Fig. XXII., p. 110, and treat it, with the salvia leaf, as we did the
spur of the base, we should have for the head of our capital a plan like
Fig. LXVI., which is actually that of one of the capitals of the Fondaco
de' Turchi at Venice; with this only difference, that the intermediate
curves between the spurs would have been circular: the reason they are
not so, here, is that the decoration, instead of being confined to the
spur, is now spread over the whole mass, and contours are therefore
given to the intermediate curves which fit them for this ornament; the
inside shaded space being the head of the shaft, and the outer, the
abacus. The reader has in Fig. LXVI. a characteristic type of the plans
of the spurred capitals, generally preferred by the sculptors of the
convex school, but treated with infinite variety, the spurs often being
cut into animal forms, or the incisions between them multiplied, for
richer effect; and in our own Norman capital the type _c_ of Fig. XXII.
is variously subdivided by incisions on its slope, approximating in
general effect to many conditions of the real spurred type, _e_, but
totally differing from them in principle.

[Illustration: Fig. LXVII.]

[Illustration: Fig. LXVIII.]

§ XLIII. The treatment of the spur in the concave school is far more
complicated, being borrowed in nearly every case from the original
Corinthian. Its plan may be generally represented by Fig. LXVII. The
spur itself is carved into a curling tendril or concave leaf, which
supports the projecting angle of a four-sided abacus, whose hollow sides
fall back behind the bell, and have generally a rosette or other
ornament in their centres. The mediæval architects often put another
square abacus above all, as represented by the shaded portion of Fig.
LXVII., and some massy conditions of this form, elaborately ornamented,
are very beautiful; but it is apt to become rigid and effeminate, as
assuredly it is in the original Corinthian, which is thoroughly mean and
meagre in its upper tendrils and abacus.

§ XLIV. The lowest capital in Plate XVIII. is from St. Mark's, and
singular in having double spurs; it is therefore to be compared with
the doubly spurred base, also from St Mark's, in Plate XI. In other
respects it is a good example of the union of breadth of mass with
subtlety of curvature, which characterises nearly all the spurred
capitals of the convex school. Its plan is given in Fig. LXVIII.: the
inner shaded circle is the head of the shaft; the white cross, the
bottom of the capital, which expands itself into the external shaded
portions at the top. Each spur, thus formed, is cut like a ship's bow,
with the Doric profile; the surfaces so obtained are then charged with
arborescent ornament.

§ XLV. I shall not here farther exemplify the conditions of the
treatment of the spur, because I am afraid of confusing the reader's
mind, and diminishing the distinctness of his conception of the
differences between the two great orders, which it has been my principal
object to develope throughout this chapter. If all my readers lived in
London, I could at once fix this difference in their minds by a simple,
yet somewhat curious illustration. In many parts of the west end of
London, as, for instance, at the corners of Belgrave Square, and the
north side of Grosvenor Square, the Corinthian capitals of newly-built
houses are put into cages of wire. The wire cage is the exact form of
the typical capital of the convex school; the Corinthian capital,
within, is a finished and highly decorated example of the concave. The
space between the cage and capital is the limit of ornamentation.

§ XLVI. Those of my readers, however, to whom this illustration is
inaccessible, must be content with the two profiles, 13 and 14, on Plate
XV. If they will glance along the line of sections from 1 to 6, they
will see that the profile 13 is their final development, with a
superadded cornice for its abacus. It is taken from a capital in a very
important ruin of a palace, near the Rialto of Venice, and hereafter to
be described; the projection, outside of its principal curve, is the
profile of its _superadded_ leaf ornamentation; it may be taken as one
of the simplest, yet a perfect type of the concave group.

§ XLVII. The profile 14 is that of the capital of the main shaft of the
northern portico of St. Mark's, the most finished example I ever met
with of the convex family, to which, in spite of the central inward bend
of its profile, it is marked as distinctly belonging, by the bold convex
curve at its root, springing from the shaft in the line of the Christian
Doric cornice, and exactly reversing the structure of the other profile,
which rises from the shaft, like a palm leaf from its stem. Farther, in
the profile 13, the innermost line is that of the bell; but in the
profile 14, the outermost line is that of the bell, and the inner line
is the limit of the incisions of the chisel, in undercutting a
reticulated veil of ornament, surrounding a flower like a lily; most
ingeniously, and, I hope, justly, conjectured by the Marchese Selvatico
to have been intended for an imitation of the capitals of the temple of
Solomon, which Hiram made, with "nets of checker work, and wreaths of
chain work for the chapiters that were on the top of the pillars ... and
the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of lily work in
the porch." (1 Kings, vii. 17, 19.)

§ XLVIII. On this exquisite capital there is imposed an abacus of the
profile with which we began our investigation long ago, the profile _a_
of Fig. V. This abacus is formed by the cornice already given, _a_, of
Plate XVI.: and therefore we have, in this lovely Venetian capital, the
summary of the results of our investigation, from its beginning to its
close: the type of the first cornice; the decoration of it, in its
emergence from the classical models; the gathering into the capital; the
superimposition of the secondary cornice, and the refinement of the bell
of the capital by triple curvature in the two limits of chiselling. I
cannot express the exquisite refinements of the curves on the small
scale of Plate XV.; I will give them more accurately in a larger
engraving; but the scale on which they are here given will not prevent
the reader from perceiving, and let him note it thoughtfully, that the
outer curve of the noble capital is the one which was our first example
of associated curves; that I have had no need, throughout the whole of
our inquiry, to refer to any other ornamental line than the three which
I at first chose, the simplest of those which Nature set by chance
before me; and that this lily, of the delicate Venetian marble, has but
been wrought, by the highest human art, into the same line which the
clouds disclose, when they break from the rough rocks of the flank of
the Matterhorn.


FOOTNOTES:

  [84] In very early Doric it was an absolute right line; and that
    capital is therefore derived from the pure cornice root, represented
    by the dotted line.

  [85] The word banded is used by Professor Willis in a different
    sense; which I would respect, by applying it in his sense always to
    the Impost, and in mine to the capital itself. (This note is not for
    the general reader, who need not trouble himself about the matter.)

  [86] The Renaissance period being one of return to formalism on the
    one side, of utter licentiousness on the other, so that sometimes,
    as here, I have to declare its lifelessness, at other times (Chap.
    XXV., § XVII.) its lasciviousness. There is, of course, no
    contradiction in this: but the reader might well ask how I knew the
    change from the base 11 to the base 12, in Plate XII., to be one
    from temperance to luxury; and from the cornice _f_ to the cornice
    _g_, in Plate XVI., to be one from formalism to vitality. I know it,
    both by certain internal evidences, on which I shall have to dwell
    at length hereafter, and by the context of the works of the time.
    But the outward signs might in both ornaments be the same,
    distinguishable only as signs of opposite tendencies by the event of
    both. The blush of shame cannot always be told from the blush of
    indignation.

  [87] The reader must always remember that a cornice, in becoming a
    capital, must, if not originally bold and deep, have depth added to
    its profile, in order to reach the just proportion of the lower
    member of the shaft head; and that therefore the small Greek egg
    cornices are utterly incapable of becoming capitals till they have
    totally changed their form and depth. The Renaissance architects,
    who never obtained hold of a right principle but they made it worse
    than a wrong one by misapplication, caught the idea of turning the
    cornice into a capital, but did not comprehend the necessity of the
    accompanying change of depth. Hence we have pilaster heads formed of
    small egg cornices, and that meanest of all mean heads of shafts,
    the coarse Roman Doric profile chopped into a small egg and arrow
    moulding, both which may be seen disfiguring half the buildings in
    London.

  [88] I have taken these dates roughly from Selvatico; their absolute
    accuracy to within a year or two, is here of no importance.

  [89] Chap. I. § XIX., Appendix 7: and Chap. VI. § V.

  [90] Chap. I., § XIX.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

  THE ARCHIVOLT AND APERTURE.


[Illustration: Plate XIX.
               ARCHIVOLT DECORATION.
               AT VERONA.]

§ I. If the windows and doors of some of our best northern Gothic
buildings were built up, and the ornament of their archivolts concealed,
there would often remain little but masses of dead wall and unsightly
buttress; the whole vitality of the building consisting in the graceful
proportions or rich mouldings of its apertures. It is not so in the
south, where, frequently, the aperture is a mere dark spot on the
variegated wall; but there the column, with its horizontal or curved
architrave, assumes an importance of another kind, equally dependent
upon the methods of lintel and archivolt decoration. These, though in
their richness of minor variety they defy all exemplification, may be
very broadly generalized.

Of the mere lintel, indeed, there is no specific decoration, nor can be;
it has no organism to direct its ornament, and therefore may receive any
kind and degree of ornament, according to its position. In a Greek
temple, it has meagre horizontal lines; in a Romanesque church, it
becomes a row of upright niches, with an apostle in each; and may become
anything else at the architect's will. But the arch head has a natural
organism, which separates its ornament into distinct families, broadly
definable.

§ II. In speaking of the arch-line and arch masonry, we considered the
arch to be cut straight through the wall; so that, if half built, it
would have the appearance at _a_, Fig. LXIX. But in the chapter on Form
of Apertures, we found that the side of the arch, or jamb of the
aperture, might often require to be bevelled, so as to give the section
_b_, Fig. LXIX. It is easily conceivable that when two ranges of
voussoirs were used, one over another, it would be easier to leave
those beneath, of a smaller diameter, than to bevel them to accurate
junction with those outside. Whether influenced by this facility, or by
decorative instinct, the early northern builders often substitute for
the bevel the third condition, _c_, of Fig. LXIX.; so that, of the three
forms in that figure, _a_ belongs principally to the south, _c_ to the
north, and _b_ indifferently to both.

[Illustration: Fig. LXIX.]

§ III. If the arch in the northern building be very deep, its depth will
probably be attained by a succession of steps, like that in _c_; and the
richest results of northern archivolt decoration are entirely based on
the aggregation of the ornament of these several steps; while those of
the south are only the complete finish and perfection of the ornament of
one. In this ornament of the single arch, the points for general note
are very few.

§ IV. It was, in the first instance, derived from the classical
architrave,[91] and the early Romanesque arches are nothing but such an
architrave, bent round. The horizontal lines of the latter become
semicircular, but their importance and value remain exactly the same;
their continuity is preserved across all the voussoirs, and the joints
and functions of the latter are studiously concealed. As the builders
get accustomed to the arch, and love it better, they cease to be ashamed
of its structure: the voussoirs begin to show themselves confidently,
and fight for precedence with the architrave lines; and there is an
entanglement of the two structures, in consequence, like the circular
and radiating lines of a cobweb, until at last the architrave lines get
worsted, and driven away outside of the voussoirs; being permitted to
stay at all only on condition of their dressing themselves in mediæval
costume, as in the plate opposite.

§ V. In other cases, however, before the entire discomfiture of the
architrave, a treaty of peace is signed between the adverse parties on
these terms: That the architrave shall entirely dismiss its inner three
meagre lines, and leave the space of them to the voussoirs, to display
themselves after their manner; but that, in return for this concession,
the architrave shall have leave to expand the small cornice which
usually terminates it (the reader had better look at the original form
in that of the Erechtheum, in the middle of the Elgin room of the
British Museum) into bolder prominence, and even to put brackets under
it, as if it were a roof cornice, and thus mark with a bold shadow the
terminal line of the voussoirs. This condition is seen in the arch from
St. Pietro of Pistoja, Plate XIII., above.

§ VI. If the Gothic spirit of the building be thoroughly determined, and
victorious, the architrave cornice is compelled to relinquish its
classical form, and take the profile of a Gothic cornice or dripstone;
while, in other cases, as in much of the Gothic of Verona, it is forced
to disappear altogether. But the voussoirs then concede, on the other
hand, so much of their dignity as to receive a running ornament of
foliage or animals, like a classical frieze, and continuous round the
arch. In fact, the contest between the adversaries may be seen running
through all the early architecture of Italy: success inclining sometimes
to the one, sometimes to the other, and various kinds of truce or
reconciliation being effected between them: sometimes merely formal,
sometimes honest and affectionate, but with no regular succession in
time. The greatest victory of the voussoir is to annihilate the cornice,
and receive an ornament of its own outline, and entirely limited by its
own joints: and yet this may be seen in the very early apse of Murano.

§ VII. The most usual condition, however, is that unity of the two
members above described, § V., and which may be generally represented by
the archivolt section _a_, Fig. LXX.; and from this descend a family of
Gothic archivolts of the highest importance. For the cornice, thus
attached to the arch, suffers exactly the same changes as the level
cornice, or capital; receives, in due time, its elaborate ogee profile
and leaf ornaments, like Fig. 8 or 9 of Plate XV.; and, when the shaft
loses its shape, and is lost in the later Gothic jamb, the archivolt has
influence enough to introduce this ogee profile in the jamb also,
through the banded impost: and we immediately find ourselves involved in
deep successions of ogee mouldings in sides of doors and windows, which
never would have been thought of, but for the obstinate resistance of
the classical architrave to the attempts of the voussoir at its
degradation or banishment.

[Illustration: Fig. LXX.]

§ VIII. This, then, will be the first great head under which we shall in
future find it convenient to arrange a large number of archivolt
decorations. It is the distinctively Southern and Byzantine form, and
typically represented by the section _a_, of Fig. LXX.; and it is
susceptible of almost every species of surface ornament, respecting
which only this general law may be asserted: that, while the outside or
vertical surface may properly be decorated, and yet the soffit or under
surface left plain, the soffit is never to be decorated, and the outer
surface left plain. Much beautiful sculpture is, in the best Byzantine
buildings, half lost by being put under soffits; but the eye is led to
discover it, and even to demand it, by the rich chasing of the outside
of the voussoirs. It would have been an hypocrisy to carve them
externally only. But there is not the smallest excuse for carving the
soffit, and not the outside; for, in that case, we approach the building
under the idea of its being perfectly plain; we do not look for the
soffit decoration, and, of course, do not see it: or, if we do, it is
merely to regret that it should not be in a better place. In the
Renaissance architects, it may, perhaps, for once, be considered a
merit, that they put their bad decoration systematically in the places
where we should least expect it, and can seldomest see it:--Approaching
the Scuola di San Rocco, you probably will regret the extreme plainness
and barrenness of the window traceries; but, if you will go very close
to the wall beneath the windows, you may, on sunny days, discover a
quantity of panel decorations which the ingenious architect has
concealed under the soffits.

The custom of decorating the arch soffit with panelling is a Roman
application of the Greek roof ornament, which, whatever its intrinsic
merit (compare Chap. XXIX. § IV.), may rationally be applied to waggon
vaults, as of St. Peter's, and to arch soffits under which one walks.
But the Renaissance architects had not wit enough to reflect that people
usually do not walk through windows.

§ IX. So far, then, of the Southern archivolt: In Fig. LXIX., above, it
will be remembered that _c_ represents the simplest form of the
Northern. In the farther development of this, which we have next to
consider, the voussoirs, in consequence of their own negligence or
over-confidence, sustain a total and irrecoverable defeat. That
archivolt is in its earliest conditions perfectly pure and
undecorated,--the simplest and rudest of Gothic forms. Necessarily, when
it falls on the pier, and meets that of the opposite arch, the entire
section of masonry is in the shape of a cross, and is carried by the
crosslet shaft, which we above stated to be distinctive of Northern
design. I am more at a loss to account for the sudden and fixed
development of this type of archivolt than for any other architectural
transition with which I am acquainted. But there it is, pure and firmly
established, as early as the building of St. Michele of Pavia; and we
have thenceforward only to observe what comes of it.

§ X. We find it first, as I said, perfectly barren; cornice and
architrave altogether ignored, the existence of such things practically
denied, and a plain, deep-cut recess with a single mighty shadow
occupying their place. The voussoirs, thinking their great adversary
utterly defeated, are at no trouble to show themselves; visible enough
in both the upper and under archivolts, they are content to wait the
time when, as might have been hoped, they should receive a new
decoration peculiar to themselves.

§ XI. In this state of paralysis, or expectation, their flank is turned
by an insidious chamfer. The edges of the two great blank archivolts are
felt to be painfully conspicuous; all the four are at once beaded or
chamfered, as at _b_, Fig. LXX.; a rich group of deep lines, running
concentrically with the arch, is the result on the instant, and the fate
of the voussoirs is sealed. They surrender at once without a struggle,
and unconditionally; the chamfers deepen and multiply themselves, cover
the soffit, ally themselves with other forms resulting from grouped
shafts or traceries, and settle into the inextricable richness of the
fully developed Gothic jamb and arch; farther complicated in the end by
the addition of niches to their recesses, as above described.

§ XII. The voussoirs, in despair, go over to the classical camp, in hope
of receiving some help or tolerance from their former enemies. They
receive it indeed: but as traitors should, to their own eternal
dishonor. They are sharply chiselled at the joints, or rusticated, or
cut into masks and satyrs' heads, and so set forth and pilloried in the
various detestable forms of which the simplest is given above in Plate
XIII. (on the left); and others may be seen in nearly every large
building in London, more especially in the bridges; and, as if in pure
spite at the treatment they had received from the archivolt, they are
now not content with vigorously showing their lateral joints, but shape
themselves into right-angled steps at their heads, cutting to pieces
their limiting line, which otherwise would have had sympathy with that
of the arch, and fitting themselves to their new friend, the Renaissance
Ruled Copy-book wall. It had been better they had died ten times over,
in their own ancient cause, than thus prolonged their existence.

§ XIII. We bid them farewell in their dishonor, to return to our
victorious chamfer. It had not, we said, obtained so easy a conquest,
unless by the help of certain forms of the grouped shaft. The chamfer
was quite enough to decorate the archivolts, if there were no more than
two; but if, as above noticed in § III., the archivolt was very deep,
and composed of a succession of such steps, the multitude of chamferings
were felt to be weak and insipid, and instead of dealing with the
outside edges of the archivolts, the group was softened by introducing
solid shafts in their dark inner angles. This, the manliest and best
condition of the early northern jamb and archivolt, is represented in
section at fig. 12 of Plate II.; and its simplest aspect in Plate V.,
from the Broletto of Como,--an interesting example, because there the
voussoirs being in the midst of their above-described southern contest
with the architrave, were better prepared for the flank attack upon them
by the shaft and chamfer, and make a noble resistance, with the help of
color, in which even the shaft itself gets slightly worsted, and cut
across in several places, like General Zach's column at Marengo.

§ XIV. The shaft, however, rapidly rallies, and brings up its own
peculiar decorations to its aid; and the intermediate archivolts receive
running or panelled ornaments, also, until we reach the exquisitely rich
conditions of our own Norman archivolts, and of the parallel Lombardic
designs, such as the entrance of the Duomo, and of San Fermo, at Verona.
This change, however, occupies little time, and takes place principally
in doorways, owing to the greater thickness of wall, and depth of
archivolt; so that we find the rich shafted succession of ornament, in
the doorway and window aperture, associated with the earliest and rudest
double archivolt, in the nave arches, at St. Michele of Pavia. The nave
arches, therefore, are most usually treated by the chamfer, and the
voussoirs are there defeated much sooner than by the shafted
arrangements, which they resist, as we saw, in the south by color; and
even in the north, though forced out of their own shape, they take that
of birds' or monsters' heads, which for some time peck and pinch the
rolls of the archivolt to their hearts' content; while the Norman zigzag
ornament allies itself with them, each zigzag often restraining itself
amicably between the joints of each voussoir in the ruder work, and even
in the highly finished arches, distinctly presenting a concentric or
sunlike arrangement of lines; so much so, as to prompt the conjecture,
above stated, Chap. XX. § XXVI., that all such ornaments were intended
to be typical of light issuing from the orb of the arch. I doubt the
intention, but acknowledge the resemblance; which perhaps goes far to
account for the never-failing delightfulness of this zigzag decoration.
The diminution of the zigzag, as it gradually shares the defeat of the
voussoir, and is at last overwhelmed by the complicated, railroad-like
fluency of the later Gothic mouldings, is to me one of the saddest
sights in the drama of architecture.

§ XV. One farther circumstance is deserving of especial note in Plate
V., the greater depth of the voussoirs at the top of the arch. This has
been above alluded to as a feature of good construction, Chap. XI., §
III.; it is to be noted now as one still more valuable in decoration:
for when we arrive at the deep succession of concentric archivolts, with
which northern portals, and many of the associated windows, are headed,
we immediately find a difficulty in reconciling the outer curve with the
inner. If, as is sometimes the case, the width of the group of
archivolts be twice or three times that of the inner aperture, the inner
arch may be distinctly pointed, and the outer one, if drawn with
concentric arcs, approximate very nearly to a round arch. This is
actually the case in the later Gothic of Verona; the outer line of the
archivolt having a hardly perceptible point, and every inner arch of
course forming the point more distinctly, till the innermost becomes a
lancet. By far the nobler method, however, is that of the pure early
Italian Gothic; to make every outer arch a _magnified fac-simile_ of the
innermost one, every arc including the same number of degrees, but
degrees of a larger circle. The result is the condition represented in
Plate V., often found in far bolder development; exquisitely springy and
elastic in its expression, and entirely free from the heaviness and
monotony of the deep northern archivolts.

§ XVI. We have not spoken of the intermediate form, _b_, of Fig. LXIX.
(which its convenience for admission of light has rendered common in
nearly all architectures), because it has no transitions peculiar to
itself: in the north it sometimes shares the fate of the outer
architrave, and is channelled into longitudinal mouldings; sometimes
remains smooth and massy, as in military architecture, or in the simpler
forms of domestic and ecclesiastical. In Italy it receives surface
decoration like the architrave, but has, perhaps, something of peculiar
expression in being placed between the tracery of the window within, and
its shafts and tabernacle work without, as in the Duomo of Florence: in
this position it is always kept smooth in surface, and inlaid (or
painted) with delicate arabesques; while the tracery and the tabernacle
work are richly sculptured. The example of its treatment by colored
voussoirs, given in Plate XIX., may be useful to the reader as a kind of
central expression of the aperture decoration of the pure Italian
Gothic;--aperture decoration proper; applying no shaft work to the
jambs, but leaving the bevelled opening unenriched; using on the outer
archivolt the voussoirs and concentric architrave in reconcilement (the
latter having, however, some connection with the Norman zigzag); and
beneath them, the pure Italian two-pieced and mid-cusped arch, with rich
cusp decoration. It is a Veronese arch, probably of the thirteenth
century, and finished with extreme care; the red portions are all in
brick, delicately cast: and the most remarkable feature of the whole is
the small piece of brick inlaid on the angle of each stone voussoir,
with a most just feeling, which every artist will at once understand,
that the color ought not to be let go all at once.

§ XVII. We have traced the various conditions of treatment in the
archivolt alone; but, except in what has been said of the peculiar
expression of the voussoirs, we might throughout have spoken in the same
terms of the jamb. Even a parallel to the expression of the voussoir may
be found in the Lombardic and Norman divisions of the shafts, by zigzags
and other transverse ornamentation, which in the end are all swept away
by the canaliculated mouldings. Then, in the recesses of these and of
the archivolts alike, the niche and statue decoration develops itself;
and the vaulted and cavernous apertures are covered with incrustations
of fretwork, and with every various application of foliage to their
fantastic mouldings.

§ XVIII. I have kept the inquiry into the proper ornament of the
archivolt wholly free from all confusion with the questions of beauty in
tracery; for, in fact, all tracery is a mere multiplication and
entanglement of small archivolts, and its cusp ornament is a minor
condition of that proper to the spandril. It does not reach its
completely defined form until the jamb and archivolt have been divided
into longitudinal mouldings; and then the tracery is formed by the
innermost group of the shafts or fillets, bent into whatever forms or
foliations the designer may choose; but this with a delicacy of
adaptation which I rather choose to illustrate by particular examples,
of which we shall meet with many in the course of our inquiry, than to
delay the reader by specifying here. As for the conditions of beauty in
the disposition of the tracery bars, I see no hope of dealing with the
subject fairly but by devoting, if I can find time, a separate essay to
it--which, in itself, need not be long, but would involve, before it
could be completed, the examination of the whole mass of materials
lately collected by the indefatigable industry of the English architects
who have devoted their special attention to this subject, and which are
of the highest value as illustrating the chronological succession or
mechanical structure of tracery, but which, in most cases, touch on
their æsthetic merits incidentally only. Of works of this kind, by far
the best I have met with is Mr. Edmund Sharpe's, on Decorated Windows,
which seems to me, as far as a cursory glance can enable me to judge, to
exhaust the subject as respects English Gothic; and which may be
recommended to the readers who are interested in the subject, as
containing a clear and masterly enunciation of the general principles by
which the design of tracery has been regulated, from its first
development to its final degradation.


FOOTNOTES:

  [91] The architrave is properly the horizontal piece of stone laid
    across the tops of the pillars in Greek buildings, and commonly
    marked with horizontal lines, obtained by slight projections of its
    surface, while it is protected above in the richer orders, by a
    small cornice.




CHAPTER XXIX.

  THE ROOF.


§ I. The modes of decoration hitherto considered, have been common to
the exteriors and interiors of all noble buildings; and we have taken no
notice of the various kinds of ornament which require protection from
weather, and are necessarily confined to interior work. But in the case
of the roof, the exterior and interior treatments become, as we saw in
construction, so also in decoration, separated by broad and bold
distinctions. One side of a wall is, in most cases, the same as another,
and if its structure be concealed, it is mostly on the inside; but, in
the roof, the anatomical structure, out of which decoration should
naturally spring, is visible, if at all, in the interior only: so that
the subject of internal ornament becomes both wide and important, and
that of external, comparatively subordinate.

§ II. Now, so long as we were concerned principally with the outside of
buildings, we might with safety leave expressional character out of the
question for the time, because it is not to be expected that all persons
who pass the building, or see it from a distance, shall be in the temper
which the building is properly intended to induce; so that ornaments
somewhat at variance with this temper may often be employed externally
without painful effect. But these ornaments would be inadmissible in the
interior, for those who enter will for the most part either be in the
proper temper which the building requires, or desirous of acquiring it.
(The distinction is not rigidly observed by the mediæval builders, and
grotesques, or profane subjects, occur in the interior of churches, in
bosses, crockets, capitals, brackets, and such other portions of minor
ornament: but we do not find the interior wall covered with hunting and
battle pieces, as often the Lombardic exteriors.) And thus the interior
expression of the roof or ceiling becomes necessarily so various, and
the kind and degree of fitting decoration so dependent upon particular
circumstances, that it is nearly impossible to classify its methods, or
limit its application.

§ III. I have little, therefore, to say here, and that touching rather
the omission than the selection of decoration, as far as regards
interior roofing. Whether of timber or stone, roofs are necessarily
divided into surfaces, and ribs or beams;--surfaces, flat or carved;
ribs, traversing these in the directions where main strength is
required; or beams, filling the hollow of the dark gable with the
intricate roof-tree, or supporting the flat ceiling. Wherever the ribs
and beams are simply and unaffectedly arranged, there is no difficulty
about decoration; the beams may be carved, the ribs moulded, and the eye
is satisfied at once; but when the vaulting is unribbed, as in plain
waggon vaults and much excellent early Gothic, or when the ceiling is
flat, it becomes a difficult question how far their services may receive
ornamentation independent of their structure. I have never myself seen a
flat ceiling satisfactorily decorated, except by painting: there is much
good and fanciful panelling in old English domestic architecture, but it
always is in some degree meaningless and mean. The flat ceilings of
Venice, as in the Scuola di San Rocco and Ducal Palace, have in their
vast panellings some of the noblest paintings (on stretched canvas)
which the world possesses: and this is all very well for the ceiling;
but one would rather have the painting in a better place, especially
when the rain soaks through its canvas, as I have seen it doing through
many a noble Tintoret. On the whole, flat ceilings are as much to be
avoided as possible; and, when necessary, perhaps a panelled
ornamentation with rich colored patterns is the most satisfying, and
loses least of valuable labor. But I leave the question to the reader's
thought, being myself exceedingly undecided respecting it: except only
touching one point--that a blank ceiling is not to be redeemed by a
decorated ventilator.

§ IV. I have a more confirmed opinion, however, respecting the
decoration of curved surfaces. The majesty of a roof is never, I think,
so great, as when the eye can pass undisturbed over the course of all
its curvatures, and trace the dying of the shadows along its smooth and
sweeping vaults. And I would rather, myself, have a plain ridged Gothic
vault, with all its rough stones visible, to keep the sleet and wind out
of a cathedral aisle, than all the fanning and pendanting and foliation
that ever bewildered Tudor weight. But mosaic or fresco may of course be
used as far as we can afford or obtain them; for these do not break the
curvature. Perhaps the most solemn roofs in the world are the apse
conchas of the Romanesque basilicas, with their golden ground and severe
figures. Exactly opposed to these are the decorations which disturb the
serenity of the curve without giving it interest, like the vulgar
panelling of St. Peter's and the Pantheon; both, I think, in the last
degree detestable.

§ V. As roofs internally may be divided into surfaces and ribs,
externally they may be divided into surfaces, and points, or ridges;
these latter often receiving very bold and distinctive ornament. The
outside surface is of small importance in central Europe, being almost
universally low in slope, and tiled throughout Spain, South France, and
North Italy: of still less importance where it is flat, as a terrace; as
often in South Italy and the East, mingled with low domes: but the
larger Eastern and Arabian domes become elaborate in ornamentation: I
cannot speak of them with confidence; to the mind of an inhabitant of
the north, a roof is a guard against wild weather; not a surface which
is forever to bask in serene heat, and gleam across deserts like a
rising moon. I can only say, that I have never seen any drawing of a
richly decorated Eastern dome that made me desire to see the original.

§ VI. Our own northern roof decoration is necessarily simple. Colored
tiles are used in some cases with quaint effect; but I believe the
dignity of the building is always greater when the roof is kept in an
undisturbed mass, opposing itself to the variegation and richness of the
walls. The Italian round tile is itself decoration enough, a deep and
rich fluting, which all artists delight in; this, however, is fitted
exclusively for low pitch of roofs. On steep domestic roofs, there is no
ornament better than may be obtained by merely rounding, or cutting to
an angle, the lower extremities of the flat tiles or shingles, as in
Switzerland: thus the whole surface is covered with an appearance of
scales, a fish-like defence against water, at once perfectly simple,
natural, and effective at any distance; and the best decoration of
sloping stone roofs, as of spires, is a mere copy of this scale armor;
it enriches every one of the spires and pinnacles of the cathedral of
Coutances, and of many Norman and early Gothic buildings. Roofs covered
or edged with lead have often patterns designed upon the lead, gilded
and relieved with some dark color, as on the house of Jaques Coeur at
Bourges; and I imagine the effect of this must have been singularly
delicate and beautiful, but only traces of it now remain. The northern
roofs, however, generally stand in little need of surface decoration,
the eye being drawn to the fantastic ranges of their dormer windows, and
to the finials and fringes on their points and ridges.

§ VII. Whether dormer windows are legitimately to be classed as
decorative features, seems to me to admit of doubt. The northern spire
system is evidently a mere elevation and exaggeration of the domestic
turret with its look-out windows, and one can hardly part with the
grotesque lines of the projections, though nobody is to be expected to
live in the spire: but, at all events, such windows are never to be
allowed in places visibly inaccessible, or on less than a natural and
serviceable scale.

§ VIII. Under the general head of roof-ridge and point decoration, we
may include, as above noted, the entire race of fringes, finials, and
crockets. As there is no use in any of these things, and as they are
visible additions and parasitical portions of the structure, more
caution is required in their use than in any other features of ornament,
and the architect and spectator must both be in felicitous humor before
they can be well designed or thoroughly enjoyed. They are generally
most admirable where the grotesque Northern spirit has most power; and I
think there is almost always a certain spirit of playfulness in them,
adverse to the grandest architectural effects, or at least to be kept in
severe subordination to the serener character of the prevalent lines.
But as they are opposed to the seriousness of majesty on the one hand,
so they are to the weight of dulness on the other; and I know not any
features which make the contrast between continental domestic
architecture, and our own, more humiliatingly felt, or which give so
sudden a feeling of new life and delight, when we pass from the streets
of London to those of Abbeville or Rouen, as the quaint points and
pinnacles of the roof gables and turrets. The commonest and heaviest
roof may be redeemed by a spike at the end of it, if it is set on with
any spirit; but the foreign builders have (or had, at least) a peculiar
feeling in this, and gave animation to the whole roof by the fringe of
its back, and the spike on its forehead, so that all goes together, like
the dorsal fins and spines of a fish: but our spikes have a dull,
screwed on, look; a far-off relationship to the nuts of machinery; and
our roof fringes are sure to look like fenders, as if they were meant to
catch ashes out of the London smoke-clouds.

§ IX. Stone finials and crockets are, I think, to be considered in
architecture, what points and flashes of light are in the color of
painting, or of nature. There are some landscapes whose best character
is sparkling, and there is a possibility of repose in the midst of
brilliancy, or embracing it,--as on the fields of summer sea, or summer
land:

  "Calm, and deep peace, on this high wold,
   And on the dews that drench the furze,
   And on the silvery gossamers,
   _That twinkle into green and gold_."

And there are colorists who can keep their quiet in the midst of a
jewellery of light; but, for the most part, it is better to avoid
breaking up either lines or masses by too many points, and to make the
few points used exceedingly precious. So the best crockets and finials
are set, like stars, along the lines, and at the points, which they
adorn, with considerable intervals between them, and exquisite delicacy
and fancy of sculpture in their own designs; if very small, they may
become more frequent, and describe lines by a chain of points; but their
whole value is lost if they are gathered into bunches or clustered into
tassels and knots; and an over-indulgence in them always marks lowness
of school. In Venice, the addition of the finial to the arch-head is the
first sign of degradation; all her best architecture is entirely without
either crockets or finials; and her ecclesiastical architecture may be
classed, with fearless accuracy, as better or worse, in proportion to
the diminution or expansion of the crocket. The absolutely perfect use
of the crocket is found, I think, in the tower of Giotto, and in some
other buildings of the Pisan school. In the North they generally err on
one side or other, and are either florid and huge, or mean in outline,
looking as if they had been pinched out of the stonework, as throughout
the entire cathedral of Amiens; and are besides connected with the
generally spotty system which has been spoken of under the head of
archivolt decoration.

§ X. Employed, however, in moderation, they are among the most
delightful means of delicate expression; and the architect has more
liberty in their individual treatment than in any other feature of the
building. Separated entirely from the structural system, they are
subjected to no shadow of any other laws than those of grace and
chastity; and the fancy may range without rebuke, for materials of their
design, through the whole field of the visible or imaginable creation.




CHAPTER XXX.

  THE VESTIBULE.


§ I. I have hardly kept my promise. The reader has decorated but little
for himself as yet; but I have not, at least, attempted to bias his
judgment. Of the simple forms of decoration which have been set before
him, he has always been left free to choose; and the stated restrictions
in the methods of applying them have been only those which followed on
the necessities of construction previously determined. These having been
now defined, I do indeed leave my reader free to build; and with what a
freedom! All the lovely forms of the universe set before him, whence to
choose, and all the lovely lines that bound their substance or guide
their motion; and of all these lines,--and there are myriads of myriads
in every bank of grass and every tuft of forest; and groups of them
divinely harmonized, in the bell of every flower, and in every several
member of bird and beast,--of all these lines, for the principal forms
of the most important members of architecture, I have used but Three!
What, therefore, must be the infinity of the treasure in them all! There
is material enough in a single flower for the ornament of a score of
cathedrals, but suppose we were satisfied with less exhaustive
appliance, and built a score of cathedrals, each to illustrate a single
flower? that would be better than trying to invent new styles, I think.
There is quite difference of style enough, between a violet and a
harebell, for all reasonable purposes.

§ II. Perhaps, however, even more strange than the struggle of our
architects to invent new styles, is the way they commonly speak of this
treasure of natural infinity. Let us take our patience to us for an
instant, and hear one of them, not among the least intelligent:--

  "It is not true that all natural forms are beautiful. We may hardly
  be able to detect this in Nature herself; but when the forms are
  separated from the things, and exhibited alone (by sculpture or
  carving), we then see that they are not all fitted for ornamental
  purposes; and indeed that very few, perhaps none, are so fitted
  without correction. Yes, I say _correction_, for though it is the
  highest aim of every art to imitate nature, this is not to be done by
  imitating any natural form, but by _criticising_ and _correcting_
  it,--criticising it by Nature's rules gathered from all her works,
  but never completely carried out by her in any one work; correcting
  it, by rendering it more natural, _i.e._ more conformable to the
  general tendency of Nature, according to that noble maxim recorded of
  Raffaelle, 'that the artist's object was to make things not as Nature
  makes them, but as she WOULD make them;' as she ever tries to make
  them, but never succeeds, though her aim may be deduced from a
  comparison of her efforts; just as if a number of archers had aimed
  unsuccessfully at a mark upon a wall, and this mark were then
  removed, we could by the examination of their arrow marks point out
  the most probable position of the spot aimed at, with a certainty of
  being nearer to it than any of their shots."[92]

§ III. I had thought that, by this time, we had done with that stale,
second-hand, one-sided, and misunderstood saying of Raffaelle's; or that
at least, in these days of purer Christian light, men might have begun
to get some insight into the meaning of it: Raffaelle was a painter of
humanity, and assuredly there is something the matter with humanity, a
few _dovrebbe's_, more or less, wanting in it. We have most of us heard
of original sin, and may perhaps, in our modest moments, conjecture that
we are not quite what God, or nature, would have us to be. Raffaelle
_had_ something to mend in Humanity: I should have liked to have seen
him mending a daisy!--or a pease-blossom, or a moth, or a mustard seed,
or any other of God's slightest works. If he had accomplished that, one
might have found for him more respectable employment,--to set the stars
in better order, perhaps (they seem grievously scattered as they are,
and to be of all manner of shapes and sizes,--except the ideal shape,
and the proper size); or to give us a corrected view of the ocean; that,
at least, seems a very irregular and improveable thing; the very
fishermen do not know, this day, how far it will reach, driven up before
the west wind:--perhaps Some One else does, but that is not our
business. Let us go down and stand by the beach of it,--of the great
irregular sea, and count whether the thunder of it is not out of time.
One,--two:--here comes a well-formed wave at last, trembling a little at
the top, but, on the whole, orderly. So, crash among the shingle, and up
as far as this grey pebble; now stand by and watch! Another:--Ah,
careless wave! why couldn't you have kept your crest on? it is all gone
away into spray, striking up against the cliffs there--I thought as
much--missed the mark by a couple of feet! Another:--How now, impatient
one! couldn't you have waited till your friend's reflux was done with,
instead of rolling yourself up with it in that unseemly manner? You go
for nothing. A fourth, and a goodly one at last. What think we of yonder
slow rise, and crystalline hollow, without a flaw? Steady, good wave;
not so fast; not so fast; where are you coming to?--By our architectural
word, this is too bad; two yards over the mark, and ever so much of you
in our face besides; and a wave which we had some hope of, behind there,
broken all to pieces out at sea, and laying a great white table-cloth of
foam all the way to the shore, as if the marine gods were to dine off
it! Alas, for these unhappy arrow shots of Nature; she will never hit
her mark with those unruly waves of hers, nor get one of them, into the
ideal shape, if we wait for a thousand years. Let us send for a Greek
architect to do it for her. He comes--the great Greek architect, with
measure and rule. Will he not also make the weight for the winds? and
weigh out the waters by measure? and make a decree for the rain, and a
way for the lightning of the thunder? He sets himself orderly to his
work, and behold! this is the mark of nature, and this is the thing into
which the great Greek architect improves the sea--

[Illustration]

[Greek: Thalatta, thalatta]: Was it this, then, that they wept to see
from the sacred mountain--those wearied ones?

§ IV. But the sea was meant to be irregular! Yes, and were not also the
leaves, and the blades of grass; and, in a sort, as far as may be
without mark of sin, even the countenance of man? Or would it be
pleasanter and better to have us all alike, and numbered on our
foreheads, that we might be known one from the other?

§ V. Is there, then, nothing to be done by man's art? Have we only to
copy, and again copy, for ever, the imagery of the universe? Not so. We
have work to do upon it; there is not any one of us so simple, nor so
feeble, but he has work to do upon it. But the work is not to improve,
but to explain. This infinite universe is unfathomable, inconceivable,
in its whole; every human creature must slowly spell out, and long
contemplate, such part of it as may be possible for him to reach; then
set forth what he has learned of it for those beneath him; extricating
it from infinity, as one gathers a violet out of grass; one does not
improve either violet or grass in gathering it, but one makes the flower
visible; and then the human being has to make its power upon his own
heart visible also, and to give it the honor of the good thoughts it has
raised up in him, and to write upon it the history of his own soul. And
sometimes he may be able to do more than this, and to set it in strange
lights, and display it in a thousand ways before unknown: ways specially
directed to necessary and noble purposes, for which he had to choose
instruments out of the wide armory of God. All this he may do: and in
this he is only doing what every Christian has to do with the written,
as well as the created word, "rightly _dividing_ the word of truth." Out
of the infinity of the written word, he has also to gather and set forth
things new and old, to choose them for the season and the work that are
before him, to explain and manifest them to others, with such
illustration and enforcement as may be in his power, and to crown them
with the history of what, by them, God has done for his soul. And, in
doing this, is he improving the Word of God? Just such difference as
there is between the sense in which a minister may be said to improve a
text, to the people's comfort, and the sense in which an atheist might
declare that he could improve the Book, which, if any man shall add
unto, there shall be added unto him the plagues that are written
therein; just such difference is there between that which, with respect
to Nature, man is, in his humbleness, called upon to do, and that which,
in his insolence, he imagines himself capable of doing.

§ VI. Have no fear, therefore, reader, in judging between nature and
art, so only that you love both. If you can love one only, then let it
be Nature; you are safe with her: but do not then attempt to judge the
art, to which you do not care to give thought, or time. But if you love
both, you may judge between them fearlessly; you may estimate the last,
by its making you remember the first, and giving you the same kind of
joy. If, in the square of the city, you can find a delight, finite,
indeed, but pure and intense, like that which you have in a valley among
the hills, then its art and architecture are right; but if, after fair
trial, you can find no delight in them, nor any instruction like that of
nature, I call on you fearlessly to condemn them.

We are forced, for the sake of accumulating our power and knowledge, to
live in cities; but such advantage as we have in association with each
other is in great part counterbalanced by our loss of fellowship with
nature. We cannot all have our gardens now, nor our pleasant fields to
meditate in at eventide. Then the function of our architecture is, as
far as may be, to replace these; to tell us about nature; to possess us
with memories of her quietness; to be solemn and full of tenderness,
like her, and rich in portraitures of her; full of delicate imagery of
the flowers we can no more gather, and of the living creatures now far
away from us in their own solitude. If ever you felt or found this in a
London Street,--if ever it furnished you with one serious thought, or
one ray of true and gentle pleasure,--if there is in your heart a true
delight in its grim railings and dark casements, and wasteful finery of
shops, and feeble coxcombry of club-houses,--it is well: promote the
building of more like them. But if they never taught you anything, and
never made you happier as you passed beneath them, do not think they
have any mysterious goodness nor occult sublimity. Have done with the
wretched affectation, the futile barbarism, of pretending to enjoy: for,
as surely as you know that the meadow grass, meshed with fairy rings, is
better than the wood pavement, cut into hexagons; and as surely as you
know the fresh winds and sunshine of the upland are better than the
choke-damp of the vault, or the gas-light of the ball-room, you may
know, as I told you that you should, that the good architecture, which
has life, and truth, and joy in it, is better than the bad architecture,
which has death, dishonesty, and vexation of heart in it, from the
beginning to the end of time.

§ VII. And now come with me, for I have kept you too long from your
gondola: come with me, on an autumnal morning, through the dark gates of
Padua, and let us take the broad road leading towards the East.

It lies level, for a league or two, between its elms, and vine festoons
full laden, their thin leaves veined into scarlet hectic, and their
clusters deepened into gloomy blue; then mounts an embankment above the
Brenta, and runs between the river and the broad plain, which stretches
to the north in endless lines of mulberry and maize. The Brenta flows
slowly, but strongly; a muddy volume of yellowish-grey water, that
neither hastens nor slackens, but glides heavily between its monotonous
banks, with here and there a short, babbling eddy twisted for an instant
into its opaque surface, and vanishing, as if something had been dragged
into it and gone down. Dusty and shadeless, the road fares along the
dyke on its northern side; and the tall white tower of Dolo is seen
trembling in the heat mist far away, and never seems nearer than it did
at first. Presently you pass one of the much vaunted "villas on the
Brenta:" a glaring, spectral shell of brick and stucco, its windows with
painted architraves like picture-frames, and a court-yard paved with
pebbles in front of it, all burning in the thick glow of the feverish
sunshine, but fenced from the high road, for magnificence sake, with
goodly posts and chains; then another, of Kew Gothic, with Chinese
variations, painted red and green; a third composed for the greater
part of dead-wall, with fictitious windows painted upon it, each with a
pea-green blind, and a classical architrave in bad perspective; and a
fourth, with stucco figures set on the top of its garden-wall: some
antique, like the kind to be seen at the corner of the New Road, and
some of clumsy grotesque dwarfs, with fat bodies and large boots. This
is the architecture to which her studies of the Renaissance have
conducted modern Italy.

§ VIII. The sun climbs steadily, and warms into intense white the walls
of the little piazza of Dolo, where we change horses. Another dreary
stage among the now divided branches of the Brenta, forming irregular
and half-stagnant canals; with one or two more villas on the other side
of them, but these of the old Venetian type, which we may have
recognised before at Padua, and sinking fast into utter ruin, black, and
rent, and lonely, set close to the edge of the dull water, with what
were once small gardens beside them, kneaded into mud, and with blighted
fragments of gnarled hedges and broken stakes for their fencing; and
here and there a few fragments of marble steps, which have once given
them graceful access from the water's edge, now settling into the mud in
broken joints, all aslope, and slippery with green weed. At last the
road turns sharply to the north, and there is an open space, covered
with bent grass, on the right of it: but do not look that way.

§ IX. Five minutes more, and we are in the upper room of the little inn
at Mestre, glad of a moment's rest in shade. The table is (always, I
think) covered with a cloth of nominal white and perennial grey, with
plates and glasses at due intervals, and small loaves of a peculiar
white bread, made with oil, and more like knots of flour than bread. The
view from its balcony is not cheerful: a narrow street, with a solitary
brick church and barren campanile on the other side of it; and some
coventual buildings, with a few crimson remnants of fresco about their
windows; and, between them and the street, a ditch with some slow
current in it, and one or two small houses beside it, one with an arbor
of roses at its door, as in an English tea-garden; the air, however,
about us having in it nothing of roses, but a close smell of garlic and
crabs, warmed by the smoke of various stands of hot chestnuts. There is
much vociferation also going on beneath the window respecting certain
wheelbarrows which are in rivalry for our baggage: we appease their
rivalry with our best patience, and follow them down the narrow street.

§ X. We have but walked some two hundred yards when we come to a low
wharf or quay, at the extremity of a canal, with long steps on each side
down to the water, which latter we fancy for an instant has become black
with stagnation; another glance undeceives us,--it is covered with the
black boats of Venice. We enter one of them, rather to try if they be
real boats or not, than with any definite purpose, and glide away; at
first feeling as if the water were yielding continually beneath the boat
and letting her sink into soft vacancy. It is something clearer than any
water we have seen lately, and of a pale green; the banks only two or
three feet above it, of mud and rank grass, with here and there a
stunted tree; gliding swiftly past the small casement of the gondola, as
if they were dragged by upon a painted scene.

Stroke by stroke we count the plunges of the oar, each heaving up the
side of the boat slightly as her silver beak shoots forward. We lose
patience, and extricate ourselves from the cushions: the sea air blows
keenly by, as we stand leaning on the roof of the floating cell. In
front, nothing to be seen but long canal and level bank; to the west,
the tower of Mestre is lowering fast, and behind it there have risen
purple shapes, of the color of dead rose-leaves, all round the horizon,
feebly defined against the afternoon sky,--the Alps of Bassano. Forward
still: the endless canal bends at last, and then breaks into intricate
angles about some low bastions, now torn to pieces and staggering in
ugly rents towards the water,--the bastions of the fort of Malghera.
Another turn, and another perspective of canal; but not interminable.
The silver beak cleaves it fast,--it widens: the rank grass of the
banks sinks lower, and lower, and at last dies in tawny knots along an
expanse of weedy shore. Over it, on the right, but a few years back, we
might have seen the lagoon stretching to the horizon, and the warm
southern sky bending over Malamocco to the sea. Now we can see nothing
but what seems a low and monotonous dock-yard wall, with flat arches to
let the tide through it;--this is the railroad bridge, conspicuous above
all things. But at the end of those dismal arches, there rises, out of
the wide water, a straggling line of low and confused brick buildings,
which, but for the many towers which are mingled among them, might be
the suburbs of an English manufacturing town. Four or five domes, pale,
and apparently at a greater distance, rise over the centre of the line;
but the object which first catches the eye is a sullen cloud of black
smoke brooding over the northern half of it, and which issues from the
belfry of a church.

It is Venice.


FOOTNOTES:

  [92] Garbett on Design, p. 74.




APPENDIX.


  1. FOUNDATION OF VENICE.

I find the chroniclers agree in fixing the year 421, if any: the
following sentence from De Monaci may perhaps interest the reader.

"God, who punishes the sins of men by war sorrows, and whose ways are
past finding out, willing both to save the innocent blood, and that a
great power, beneficial to the whole world, should arise in a spot
strange beyond belief, moved the chief men of the cities of the Venetian
province (which from the border of Pannonia, extended as far as the
Adda, a river of Lombardy), both in memory of past, and in dread of
future distress, to establish states upon the nearer islands of the
inner gulphs of the Adriatic, to which, in the last necessity, they
might retreat for refuge. And first Galienus de Fontana, Simon de
Glauconibus, and Antonius Calvus, or, as others have it, Adalburtus
Falerius, Thomas Candiano, Comes Daulus, Consuls of Padua, by the
command of their King and the desire of the citizens, laid the
foundations of the new commonwealth, under good auspices, on the island
of the Rialto, the highest and nearest to the mouth of the deep river
now called the Brenta, in the year of Our Lord, as many writers assure
us, four hundred and twenty-one, on the 25th day of March."[93]

It is matter also of very great satisfaction to know that Venice was
founded by good Christians: "La qual citade è stada hedificada da veri e
boni Christiani:" which information I found in the MS. copy of the
Zancarol Chronicle, in the library of St. Mark's.

Finally the conjecture as to the origin of her name, recorded by
Sansovino, will be accepted willingly by all who love Venice: "Fu
interpretato da alcuni, che questa voce VENETIA voglia dire _VENI
ETIAM_, cioè, vieni ancora, e ancora, percioche quante volte verrai,
sempre vedrai nuove cose, enuove bellezze."


  2. POWER OF THE DOGES.

The best authorities agree in giving the year 697 as that of the
election of the first doge, Paul Luke Anafeste. He was elected in a
general meeting of the commonalty, tribunes, and clergy, at Heraclea,
"divinis rebus procuratis," as usual, in all serious work, in those
times. His authority is thus defined by Sabellico, who was not likely to
have exaggerated it:--"Penes quem decus omne imperii ac majestas esset:
cui jus concilium cogendi quoties de republica aliquid referri
oporteret; qui tribunos annuos in singulas insulas legeret, a quibus ad
Ducem esset provocatio. Cæterum, si quis dignitatem, ecclesiam,
sacerdotumve cleri populique suffragio esset adeptus, ita demum id ratum
haberetur si dux ipse auctor factus esset." (Lib. I.) The last clause is
very important, indicating the subjection of the ecclesiastical to the
popular and ducal (or patrician) powers, which, throughout her career,
was one of the most remarkable features in the policy of Venice. The
appeal from the tribunes to the doge is also important; and the
expression "decus omne imperii," if of somewhat doubtful force, is at
least as energetic as could have been expected from an historian under
the influence of the Council of Ten.


  3. SERRAR DEL CONSIGLIO.

The date of the decree which made the right of sitting in the grand
council hereditary, is variously given; the Venetian historians
themselves saying as little as they can about it. The thing was
evidently not accomplished at once, several decrees following in
successive years: the Council of Ten was established without any doubt
in 1310, in consequence of the conspiracy of Tiepolo. The Venetian
verse, quoted by Mutinelli (Annali Urbani di Venezia, p. 153), is worth
remembering.

  "Del mille tresento e diese
   A mezzo el mese delle ceriese
   Bagiamonte passò el ponte
   E per esso fo fatto el Consegio di diese."

The reader cannot do better than take 1297 as the date of the beginning
of the change of government, and this will enable him exactly to divide
the 1100 years from the election of the first doge into 600 of monarchy
and 500 of aristocracy. The coincidence of the numbers is somewhat
curious; 697 the date of the establishment of the government, 1297 of
its change, and 1797 of its fall.


  4. S. PIETRO DI CASTELLO.

It is credibly reported to have been founded in the seventh century, and
(with somewhat less of credibility) in a place where the Trojans,
conducted by Antenor, had, after the destruction of Troy, built "un
castello, chiamato prima Troja, poscia Olivolo, interpretato, luogo
pieno." It seems that St. Peter appeared in person to the Bishop of
Heraclea, and commanded him to found in his honor, a church in that spot
of the rising city on the Rialto: "ove avesse veduto una mandra di buoi
e di pecore pascolare unitamente. Questa fu la prodigiosa origine della
Chiesa di San Pietro, che poscia, o rinovata, o ristaurata, da Orso
Participazio IV Vescovo Olivolense, divenne la Cattedrale della Nuova
citta." (Notizie Storiche delle Chiese e Monasteri di Venezia. Padua,
1758.) What there was so prodigious in oxen and sheep feeding together,
we need St. Peter, I think, to tell us. The title of Bishop of Castello
was first taken in 1091: St. Mark's was not made the cathedral church
till 1807. It may be thought hardly fair to conclude the small
importance of the old St. Pietro di Castello from the appearance of the
wretched modernisations of 1620. But these modernisations are spoken of
as improvements; and I find no notice of peculiar beauties in the older
building, either in the work above quoted, or by Sansovino; who only
says that when it was destroyed by fire (as everything in Venice was, I
think, about three times in a century), in the reign of Vital Michele,
it was rebuilt "with good thick walls, maintaining, _for all that_, the
order of its arrangement taken from the Greek mode of building." This
does not seem the description of a very enthusiastic effort to rebuild a
highly ornate cathedral. The present church is among the least
interesting in Venice; a wooden bridge, something like that of Battersea
on a small scale, connects its island, now almost deserted, with a
wretched suburb of the city behind the arsenal; and a blank level of
lifeless grass, rotted away in places rather than trodden, is extended
before its mildewed façade and solitary tower.


  5. PAPAL POWER IN VENICE.

I may refer the reader to the eleventh chapter of the twenty-eighth book
of Daru for some account of the restraints to which the Venetian clergy
were subjected. I have not myself been able to devote any time to the
examination of the original documents bearing on this matter, but the
following extract from a letter of a friend, who will not at present
permit me to give his name, but who is certainly better conversant
with the records of the Venetian State than any other Englishman, will
be of great value to the general reader:--

"In the year 1410, or perhaps at the close of the thirteenth century,
churchmen were excluded from the Grand Council and declared ineligible
to civil employment; and in the same year, 1410, the Council of Ten,
with the Giunta, decreed that whenever in the state's councils matters
concerning ecclesiastical affairs were being treated, all the kinsfolk
of Venetian beneficed clergymen were to be expelled; and, in the year
1434, the RELATIONS of churchmen were declared ineligible to the post of
ambassador at Rome.

"The Venetians never gave possession of any see in their territories to
bishops unless they had been proposed to the pope by the senate, which
elected the patriarch, who was supposed, at the end of the sixteenth
century, to be liable to examination by his Holiness, as an act of
confirmation of installation; but of course, everything depended on the
relative power at any given time of Rome and Venice: for instance, a few
days after the accession of Julius II., in 1503, he requests the
Signory, cap in hand, to ALLOW him to confer the archbishopric of Zara
on a dependant of his, one Cipico the Bishop of Famagosta. Six years
later, when Venice was overwhelmed by the leaguers of Cambrai, that
furious pope would assuredly have conferred Zara on Cipico WITHOUT
asking leave. In 1608, the rich Camaldolite Abbey of Vangadizza, in the
Polesine, fell vacant through the death of Lionardo Loredano, in whose
family it had been since some while. The Venetian ambassador at Rome
received the news on the night of the 28th December; and, on the morrow,
requested Paul IV. not to dispose of this preferment until he heard from
the senate. The pope talked of 'poor cardinals' and of his nephew, but
made no positive reply; and, as Francesco Contarini was withdrawing,
said to him: 'My Lord ambassador, with this opportunity we will inform
you that, to our very great regret, we understand that the chiefs of the
Ten mean to turn sacristans; for they order the parish priests to close
the church doors at the Ave Maria, and not to ring the bells at certain
hours. This is precisely the sacristan's office; we don't know why their
lordships, by printed edicts, which we have seen, choose to interfere in
this matter. This is pure and mere ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and
even, in case of any inconvenience arising, is there not the patriarch,
who is at any rate your own; why not apply to him, who could remedy
these irregularities? These are matters which cause us very notable
displeasure; we say so that they may be written and known: it is decided
by the councils and canons, and not uttered by us, that whosoever forms
any resolve against the ecclesiastical liberty, cannot do so without
incurring censure: and in order that Father Paul [Bacon's correspondent]
may not say hereafter, as he did in his past writings, that our
predecessors assented either tacitly or by permission, we declare that
we do not give our assent, nor do we approve it; nay, we blame it, and
let this be announced in Venice, so that, for the rest, every one may
take care of his own conscience. St. Thomas à Becket, whose festival is
celebrated this very day, suffered martyrdom for the ecclesiastical
liberty; it is our duty likewise to support and defend it.' Contarini
says: 'This remonstrance was delivered with some marks of anger, which
induced me to tell him how the tribunal of the most excellent the Lords
chiefs of the Ten is in our country supreme; that it does not do its
business unadvisedly, or condescend to unworthy matters; and that,
therefore, should those Lords have come to any public declaration of
their will, it must be attributed to orders anterior, and to immemorial
custom and authority, recollecting that, on former occasions likewise,
similar commissions were given to prevent divers incongruities;
wherefore an upright intention, such as this, ought not to be taken in
any other sense than its own, especially as the parishes of Venice were
in her own gift,' &c. &c. The pope persisted in bestowing the abbacy on
his nephew, but the republic would not give possession, and a compromise
was effected by its being conferred on the Venetian Matteo Priuli, who
allowed the cardinal five thousand ducats per annum out of its revenues.
A few years before this, this very same pope excommunicated the State,
because she had imprisoned two churchmen for heinous crimes; the strife
lasted for more than a year, and ended through the mediation of Henry
IV., at whose suit the prisoners were delivered to the French
ambassador, who made them over to a papal commissioner.

"In January, 1484, a tournament was in preparation on St. Mark's Square:
some murmurs had been heard about the distribution of the prizes having
been pre-arranged, without regard to the 'best man.' One of the chiefs
of the Ten was walking along Rialto on the 28th January, when a young
priest, twenty-two years old, a sword-cutlers son, and a Bolognese, and
one of Perugia, both men-at-arms under Robert Sansoverino, fell upon a
clothier with drawn weapons. The chief of the Ten desired they might be
seized, but at the moment the priest escaped; he was, however,
subsequently retaken, and in that very evening hanged by torch-light
between the columns with the two soldiers. Innocent VIII. was less
powerful than Paul IV.; Venice weaker in 1605 than in 1484.

"* * * The exclusion from the Grand Council, whether at the end of the
fourteenth or commencement of the following century, of the Venetian
ecclesiastics, (as induced either by the republic's acquisitions on the
main land then made, and which, through the rich benefices they
embraced, might have rendered an ambitious churchman as dangerous in the
Grand Council as a victorious condottiere; or from dread of their
allegiance being divided between the church and their country, it being
acknowledged that no man can serve two masters,) did not render them
hostile to their fatherland, whose interests were, with very few
exceptions, eagerly fathered by the Venetian prelates at Rome, who, in
their turn, received all honor at Venice, where state receptions given
to cardinals of the houses of Correr, Grimani, Cornaro, Pisani,
Contarini, Zeno, Delfino, and others, vouch for the good understanding
that existed between the 'Papalists' and their countrymen. The Cardinal
Grimani was instrumental in detaching Julius II. from the league of
Cambrai; the Cardinal Cornaro always aided the state to obtain anything
required of Leo X.; and, both before and after their times, all
Venetians that had a seat in the Sacred College were patriots rather
than pluralists: I mean that they cared more for Venice than for their
benefices, admitting thus the soundness of that policy which denied them
admission into the Grand Council."

To this interesting statement, I shall add, from the twenty-eighth book
of Daru, two passages, well deserving consideration by us English in
present days:

"Pour être parfaitement assurée contre les envahissements de la
puissance ecclésiastique, Venise commença par lui ôter tout prétexte
d'intervenir dans les affaires de l'Etat; elle resta invariablement
fidèle au dogme. Jamais aucune des opinions nouvelles n'y prit la
moindre faveur; jamais aucun hérésiarque ne sortit de Venise. Les
conciles, les disputes, les guerres de religion, se passèrent sans
qu'elle y prit jamais la moindre part. Inébranlable dans sa foi, elle ne
fut pas moins invariable dans son système de tolérance. Non seulement
ses sujets de la religion grecque conservèrent l'exercise de leur culte,
leurs évêques et leurs prêtres; mais les Protestantes, les Arméniens,
les Mahomitans, les Juifs, toutes les religions, toutes les sectes qui
se trouvaient dans Venise, avaient des temples, et la sépulture dans les
églises n'était point refusé aux hérétiques. Une police vigilante
s'appliquait avec le même soin à éteindre les discordes, et à empêcher
les fanatiques et les novateurs de troubler l'Etat."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Si on considère que c'est dans un temps où presque toutes les nations
tremblaient devant la puissance pontificale, que les Vénitiens surent
tenir leur clergé dans la dépendance, et braver souvent les censures
ecclésiastiques et les interdits, sans encourir jamais aucun reproche
sur la pureté de leur foi, on sera forcé de reconnaître que cette
république avait dévancé de loin les autres peuples dans cette partie de
la science du gouvernement. La fameuse maxime, 'Siamo veneziani, poi
christiani,' n'était qu'une formule énergique qui ne prouvait point
quils voulussent placer l'intérêt de la religion après celui de l'Etat,
mais qui annonçait leur invariable résolution de ne pas souffrir qu'un
pouvoir étranger portât atteinte aux droits de la république.

"Dans toute la durée de son existence, an milieu des revers comme dans
la prospérité cet inébranlable gouvernement ne fit qu'une seule fois des
concessions à la cour de Borne, et ce fut pour détacher le Pape Jules
II. de la ligue de Cambrai.

"Jamais il ne se relâcha du soin de tenir le clergé dans une nullité
absolue relativement aux affaires politiques; on peut en juger par la
conduite qu'il tint avec l'ordre religieux le plus redoutable et le plus
accoutumé à s'immiscer dans les secrets de l'Etat et dans les intérêts
temporels."

The main points, next stated, respecting the Jesuits are, that the
decree which permitted their establishment in Venice required formal
renewal every three years; that no Jesuit could stay in Venice more than
three years; that the slightest disobedience to the authority of the
government was instantly punished by imprisonment; that no Venetian
could enter the order without express permission from the government;
that the notaries were forbidden to sanction any testamentary disposal
of property to the Jesuits; finally, that the heads of noble families
were forbidden to permit their children to be educated in the Jesuits'
colleges, on pain of degradation from their rank.

Now, let it be observed that the enforcement of absolute exclusion of
the clergy from the councils of the state, dates exactly from the period
which I have marked for the commencement of the decline of the Venetian
power. The Romanist is welcome to his advantage in this fact, if
advantage it be; for I do not bring forward the conduct of the senate of
Venice, as Daru does, by way of an example of the general science of
government. The Venetians accomplished therein what we ridiculously call
a separation of "Church and State" (as if the State were not, in all
Christendom, necessarily also the Church[94]), but _ought_ to call a
separation of lay and clerical officers. I do not point out this
separation as subject of praise, but as the witness borne by the
Venetians against the principles of the Papacy. If they were to blame,
in yielding to their fear of the ambitious spirit of Rome so far as to
deprive their councils of all religious element, what excuse are we to
offer for the state, which, with Lords Spiritual of her own faith
already in her senate, permits the polity of Rome to be represented by
lay members? To have sacrificed religion to mistaken policy, or
purchased security with ignominy, would have been no new thing in the
world's history; but to be at once impious and impolitic, and seek for
danger through dishonor, was reserved for the English parliament of
1829.

I am glad to have this opportunity of referring to, and farther
enforcing, the note on this subject which, not without deliberation, I
appended to the "Seven Lamps;" and of adding to it the following
passage, written by my father in the year 1839, and published in one of
the journals of that year:--a passage remarkable as much for its
intrinsic value, as for having stated, twelve years ago, truths to which
the mind of England seems but now, and that slowly, awakening.

"We hear it said, that it cannot be merely the Roman religion that
causes the difficulty [respecting Ireland], for we were once all Roman
Catholics, and nations abroad of this faith are not as the Irish. It is
totally overlooked, that when we were so, our government was despotic,
and fit to cope with this dangerous religion, as most of the Continental
governments yet are. In what Roman Catholic state, or in what age of
Roman Catholic England, did we ever hear of such agitation as now exists
in Ireland by evil men taking advantage of an anomalous state of
things--Roman Catholic ignorance in the people, Protestant toleration in
the government? We have yet to feel the tremendous difficulty in which
Roman Catholic emancipation has involved us. Too late we discover that a
Roman Catholic is wholly incapable of being safely connected with the
British constitution, as it now exists, _in any near relation_. The
present constitution is no longer fit for Catholics. It is a creature
essentially Protestant, growing with the growth, and strengthening with
the strength, of Protestantism. So entirely is Protestantism interwoven
with the whole frame of our constitution and laws, that I take my stand
on this, against all agitators in existence, that the Roman religion is
totally incompatible with the British constitution. We have, in trying
to combine them, got into a maze of difficulties; we are the worse, and
Ireland none the better. It is idle to talk of municipal reform or
popular Lords Lieutenant. The mild sway of a constitutional monarchy is
not strong enough for a Roman Catholic population. The stern soul of a
Republican would not shrink from sending half the misguided population
and all the priests into exile, and planting in their place an
industrious Protestant people. But you cannot do this, and you cannot
convert the Irish, nor by other means make them fit to wear the mild
restraints of a Protestant Government. It was, moreover, a strange logic
that begot the idea of admitting Catholics to administer any part of our
laws or constitution. It was admitted by all that, by the very act of
abandoning the Roman religion, we became a free and enlightened people.
It was only by throwing off the yoke of that slavish religion that we
attained to the freedom of thought which has advanced us in the scale of
society. We are so much advanced by adopting and adhering to a reformed
religion, that to prove our liberal and unprejudiced views, we throw
down the barriers betwixt the two religions, of which the one is the
acknowledged cause of light and knowledge, the other the cause of
darkness and ignorance. We are so much altered to the better by leaving
this people entirely, and giving them neither part nor lot amongst us,
that it becomes proper to mingle again with them. We have found so much
good in leaving them, that we deem it the best possible reason for
returning to be among them. No fear of their Church again shaking us,
with all our light and knowledge. It is true, the most enlightened
nations fell under the spell of her enchantments, fell into total
darkness and superstition; but no fear of us--we are too well informed!
What miserable reasoning! infatuated presumption! I fear me, when the
Roman religion rolled her clouds of darkness over the earlier ages, that
she quenched as much light, and knowledge, and judgment as our modern
Liberals have ever displayed. I do not expect a statesman to discuss the
point of Transubstantiation betwixt Protestant and Catholic, nor to
trace the narrow lines which divide Protestant sectarians from each
other; but can any statesman that shall have taken even a cursory
glance at the face of Europe, hesitate a moment on the choice of the
Protestant religion? If he unfortunately knew nothing of its being the
true one in regard to our eternal interests, he is at least bound to see
whether it be not the best for the worldly prosperity of a people. He
may be but moderately imbued with pious zeal for the salvation of a
kingdom, but at least he will be expected to weigh the comparative
merits of religion, as of law or government; and blind, indeed, must he
be if he does not discern that, in neglecting to cherish the Protestant
faith, or in too easily yielding to any encroachments on it, he is
foregoing the use of a state engine more powerful than all the laws
which the uninspired legislators of the earth have ever promulgated, in
promoting the happiness, the peace, prosperity, and the order, the
industry, and the wealth, of a people; in forming every quality valuable
or desirable in a subject or a citizen; in sustaining the public mind at
that point of education and information that forms the best security for
the state, and the best preservative for the freedom of a people,
whether religious or political."

[Illustration: Plate XX.
               WALL VEIL DECORATION.
               CA' TREVISAN.]


  6. RENAISSANCE ORNAMENTS.

There having been three principal styles of architecture in Venice,--the
Greek or Byzantine, the Gothic, and the Renaissance, it will be shown,
in the sequel, that the Renaissance itself is divided into three
correspondent families: Renaissance engrafted on Byzantine, which is
earliest and best; Renaissance engrafted on Gothic, which is second, and
second best; Renaissance on Renaissance, which is double darkness, and
worst of all. The palaces in which Renaissance is engrafted on Byzantine
are those noticed by Commynes: they are characterized by an
ornamentation very closely resembling, and in some cases identical with,
early Byzantine work; namely, groups of colored marble circles inclosed
in interlacing bands. I have put on the opposite page one of these
ornaments, from the Ca' Trevisan, in which a most curious and delicate
piece of inlaid design is introduced into a band which is almost exactly
copied from the church of Theotocos at Constantinople, and correspondent
with others in St. Mark's. There is also much Byzantine feeling in the
treatment of the animals, especially in the two birds of the lower
compartment, while the peculiar curves of the cinque cento leafage are
visible in the leaves above. The dove, alighted, with the olive-branch
plucked off, is opposed to the raven with restless expanded wings.
Beneath are evidently the two sacrifices "of every clean fowl and of
every clean beast." The color is given with green and white marbles, the
dove relieved on a ground of greyish green, and all is exquisitely
finished.

In Plate I., p. 13, the upper figure is from the same palace (Ca'
Trevisan), and it is very interesting in its proportions. If we take
five circles in geometrical proportion, each diameter being two-thirds
of the diameter next above it, and arrange the circles so proportioned,
in contact with each other, in the manner shown in the plate, we shall
find that an increase quite imperceptible in the diameter of the circles
in the angles, will enable us to inscribe the whole in a square. The
lines so described will then run in the centre of the white bands. I
cannot be certain that this is the actual construction of the Trevisan
design, because it is on a high wall surface, where I could not get at
its measurements; but I found this construction exactly coincide with
the lines of my eye sketch. The lower figure in Plate I. is from the
front of the Ca' Dario, and probably struck the eye of Commynes in its
first brightness. Salvatico, indeed, considers both the Ca' Trevisan
(which once belonged to Bianca Cappello) and the Ca' Dario, as buildings
of the sixteenth century. I defer the discussion of the question at
present, but have, I believe, sufficient reason for assuming the Ca'
Dario to have been built about 1486, and the Ca' Trevisan not much
later.


  7. VARIETIES OF THE ORDERS.

Of these phantasms and grotesques, one of some general importance is
that commonly called Ionic, of which the idea was taken (Vitruvius says)
from a woman's hair, curled; but its lateral processes look more like
rams' horns: be that as it may, it is a mere piece of agreeable
extravagance, and if, instead of rams' horns, you put ibex horns, or
cows' horns, or an ass's head at once, you will have ibex orders, or ass
orders, or any number of other orders, one for every head or horn. You
may have heard of another order, the Composite, which is Ionic and
Corinthian mixed, and is one of the worst of ten thousand forms
referable to the Corinthian as their head: it may be described as a
spoiled Corinthian. And you may have also heard of another order, called
Tuscan (which is no order at all, but a spoiled Doric): and of another
called Roman Doric, which is Doric more spoiled, both which are simply
among the most stupid variations ever invented upon forms already known.
I find also in a French pamphlet upon architecture,[95] as applied to
shops and dwelling houses, a sixth order, the "Ordre Français," at least
as good as any of the three last, and to be hailed with acclamation,
considering whence it comes, there being usually more tendency on the
other side of the channel to the confusion of "orders" than their
multiplication: but the reader will find in the end that there are in
very deed only two orders, of which the Greek, Doric, and Corinthian are
the first examples, and _they_ not perfect, nor in anywise sufficiently
representative of the vast families to which they belong; but being the
first and the best known, they may properly be considered as the types
of the rest. The essential distinctions of the two great orders he will
find explained in §§ XXXV. and XXXVI. of Chap. XXVII., and in the
passages there referred to; but I should rather desire that these
passages might be read in the order in which they occur.


  8. THE NORTHERN ENERGY.

I have sketched above, in the First Chapter, the great events of
architectural history in the simplest and fewest words I could; but this
indraught of the Lombard energies upon the Byzantine rest, like a wild
north wind descending into a space of rarified atmosphere, and
encountered by an Arab simoom from the south, may well require from us
some farther attention; for the differences in all these schools are
more in the degrees of their impetuosity and refinement (these
qualities being, in most cases, in inverse ratio, yet much united by the
Arabs) than in the style of the ornaments they employ. The same leaves,
the same animals, the same arrangement, are used by Scandinavians,
ancient Britons, Saxons, Normans, Lombards, Romans, Byzantines, and
Arabians; all being alike descended through classic Greece from Egypt
and Assyria, and some from Phoenicia. The belts which encompass the
Assyrian bulls, in the hall of the British Museum, are the same as the
belts of the ornaments found in Scandinavian tumuli; their method of
ornamentation is the same as that of the gate of Mycenæ, and of the
Lombard pulpit of St. Ambrogio of Milan, and of the church of Theotocos
at Constantinople; the essential differences among the great schools are
their differences of temper and treatment, and science of expression; it
is absurd to talk of Norman ornaments, and Lombard ornaments, and
Byzantine ornaments, as formally distinguished; but there is
irreconcileable separation between Arab temper, and Lombard temper, and
Byzantine temper.

Now, as far as I have been able to compare the three schools, it appears
to me that the Arab and Lombard are both distinguished from the
Byzantine by their energy and love of excitement, but the Lombard stands
alone in his love of jest: Neither an Arab nor Byzantine ever jests in
his architecture; the Lombard has great difficulty in ever being
thoroughly serious; thus they represent three conditions of humanity,
one in perfect rest, the Byzantine, with exquisite perception of grace
and dignity; the Arab, with the same perception of grace, but with a
restless fever in his blood; the Lombard, equally energetic, but not
burning himself away, capable of submitting to law, and of enjoying
jest. But the Arabian feverishness infects even the Lombard in the
South, showing itself, however, in endless invention, with a refreshing
firmness and order directing the whole of it. The excitement is greatest
in the earliest times, most of all shown in St. Michele of Pavia; and I
am strongly disposed to connect much of its peculiar manifestations with
the Lombard's habits of eating and drinking, especially his
carnivorousness. The Lombard of early times seems to have been exactly
what a tiger would be, if you could give him love of a joke, vigorous
imagination, strong sense of justice, fear of hell, knowledge of
northern mythology, a stone den, and a mallet and chisel; fancy him
pacing up and down in the said den to digest his dinner, and striking on
the wall, with a new fancy in his head, at every turn, and you have the
Lombardic sculptor. As civilisation increases the supply of vegetables,
and shortens that of wild beasts, the excitement diminishes; it is still
strong in the thirteenth century at Lyons and Rouen; it dies away
gradually in the later Gothic, and is quite extinct in the fifteenth
century.

I think I shall best illustrate this general idea by simply copying the
entries in my diary which were written when, after six months' close
study of Byzantine work in Venice, I came again to the Lombard work of
Verona and Pavia. There are some other points alluded to in these
entries not pertaining to the matter immediately in hand; but I have
left them, as they will be of use hereafter.

"(Verona.) Comparing the arabesque and sculpture of the Duomo here with
St. Mark's, the first thing that strikes one is the low relief, the
second, the greater motion and spirit, with infinitely less grace and
science. With the Byzantine, however rude the cutting, every line is
lovely, and the animals or men are placed in any attitudes which secure
ornamental effect, sometimes impossible ones, always severe, restrained,
or languid. With the Romanesque workmen all the figures show the effort
(often successful) to express energetic action; hunting chiefly, much
fighting, and both spirited; some of the dogs running capitally,
straining to it, and the knights hitting hard, while yet the faces and
drawing are in the last degree barbarous. At Venice all is graceful,
fixed, or languid; the eastern torpor is in every line,--the mark of a
school formed on severe traditions, and keeping to them, and never
likely or desirous to rise beyond them, but with an exquisite sense of
beauty, and much solemn religious faith.

"If the Greek outer archivolt of St. Mark's is Byzantine, the law is
somewhat broken by its busy domesticity; figures engaged in every trade,
and in the preparation of viands of all kinds; a crowded kind of London
Christmas scene, interleaved (literally) by the superb balls of leafage,
unique in sculpture; but even this is strongly opposed to the wild war
and chase passion of the Lombard. Farther, the Lombard building is as
sharp, precise, and accurate, as that of St. Mark's is careless. The
Byzantines seem to have been too lazy to put their stones together; and,
in general, my first impression on coming to Verona, after four months
in Venice, is of the exquisitely neat masonry and perfect _feeling_
here; a style of Gothic formed by a combination of Lombard surface
ornament with Pisan Gothic, than which nothing can possibly be more
chaste, pure, or solemn."

I have said much of the shafts of the entrance to the crypt of St.
Zeno;[96] the following note of the sculptures on the archivolt above
them is to our present purpose:

"It is covered by very light but most effective bas-reliefs of jesting
subject:--two cocks carrying on their shoulders a long staff to which a
fox (?) is tied by the legs, hanging down between them: the strut of the
foremost cock, lifting one leg at right angles to the other, is
delicious. Then a stag hunt, with a centaur horseman drawing a bow; the
arrow has gone clear through the stag's throat, and is sticking there.
Several capital hunts with dogs, with fruit trees between, and birds in
them; the leaves, considering the early time, singularly well set, with
the edges outwards, sharp, and deep cut: snails and frogs filling up the
intervals, as if suspended in the air, with some saucy puppies on their
hind legs, two or three nondescript beasts; and, finally, on the centre
of one of the arches on the south side, an elephant and castle,--a very
strange elephant, yet cut as if the carver had seen one."

Observe this elephant and castle; we shall meet with him farther north.

"These sculptures of St. Zeno are, however, quite quiet and tame
compared with those of St. Michele of Pavia, which are designed also in
a somewhat gloomier mood; significative, as I think, of indigestion.
(Note that they are much earlier than St. Zeno; of the seventh century
at latest. There is more of nightmare, and less of wit in them.) Lord
Lindsay has described them admirably, but has not said half enough; the
state of mind represented by the west front is more that of a feverish
dream, than resultant from any determined architectural purpose, or even
from any definite love and delight in the grotesque. One capital is
covered with a mass of grinning heads, other heads grow out of two
bodies, or out of and under feet; the creatures are all fighting, or
devouring, or struggling which shall be uppermost, and yet in an
ineffectual way, as if they would fight for ever, and come to no
decision. Neither sphinxes nor centaurs did I notice, nor a single
peacock (I believe peacocks to be purely Byzantine), but mermaids with
_two_ tails (the sculptor having perhaps seen double at the time),
strange, large fish, apes, stags (bulls?), dogs, wolves, and horses,
griffins, eagles, long-tailed birds (cocks?), hawks, and dragons,
without end, or with a dozen of ends, as the case may be; smaller birds,
with rabbits, and small nondescripts, filling the friezes. The actual
leaf, which is used in the best Byzantine mouldings at Venice, occurs in
parts of these Pavian designs. But the Lombard animals are all _alive_,
and fiercely alive too, all impatience and spring: the Byzantine birds
peck idly at the fruit, and the animals hardly touch it with their
noses. The cinque cento birds in Venice hold it up daintily, like
train-bearers; the birds in the earlier Gothic peck at it hungrily and
naturally; but the Lombard beasts gripe at it like tigers, and tear it
off with writhing lips and glaring eyes. They are exactly like Jip with
the bit of geranium, worrying imaginary cats in it."

The notice of the leaf in the above extract is important,--it is the
vine-leaf; used constantly both by Byzantines and Lombards, but by the
latter with especial frequency, though at this time they were hardly
able to indicate what they meant. It forms the most remarkable
generality of the St. Michele decoration; though, had it not luckily
been carved on the façade, twining round a stake, and with grapes, I
should never have known what it was meant for, its general form being a
succession of sharp lobes, with incised furrows to the point of each.
But it is thrown about in endless change; four or five varieties of it
might be found on every cluster of capitals: and not content with this,
the Lombards hint the same form even in their griffin wings. They love
the vine very heartily.

In St. Michele of Lucca we have perhaps the noblest instance in Italy of
the Lombard spirit in its later refinement. It is some four centuries
later than St. Michele of Pavia, and the method of workmanship is
altogether different. In the Pavian church, nearly all the ornament is
cut in a coarse sandstone, in bold relief: a darker and harder stone (I
think, not serpentine, but its surface is so disguised by the lustre of
ages that I could not be certain) is used for the capitals of the
western door, which are especially elaborate in their sculpture;--two
devilish apes, or apish devils, I know not which, with bristly
moustaches and edgy teeth, half-crouching, with their hands
impertinently on their knees, ready for a spit or a spring if one goes
near them; but all is pure bossy sculpture; there is no inlaying, except
of some variegated tiles in the shape of saucers set concave (an
ornament used also very gracefully in St. Jacopo of Bologna): and the
whole surface of the church is enriched with the massy reliefs, well
preserved everywhere above the reach of human animals, but utterly
destroyed to some five or six feet from the ground; worn away into large
cellular hollows and caverns, some almost deep enough to render the
walls unsafe, entirely owing to the uses to which the recesses of the
church are dedicated by the refined and high-minded Italians. But St.
Michele of Lucca is wrought entirely in white marble and green
serpentine; there is hardly any relieved sculpture except in the
capitals of the shafts and cornices, and all the designs of wall
ornament are inlaid with exquisite precision--white on dark ground; the
ground being cut out and filled with serpentine, the figures left in
solid marble. The designs of the Pavian church are encrusted on the
walls; of the Lucchese, incorporated with them; small portions of real
sculpture being introduced exactly where the eye, after its rest on the
flatness of the wall, will take most delight in the piece of substantial
form. The entire arrangement is perfect beyond all praise, and the
morbid restlessness of the old designs is now appeased. Geometry seems
to have acted as a febrifuge, for beautiful geometrical designs are
introduced amidst the tumult of the hunt; and there is no more seeing
double, nor ghastly monstrosity of conception; no more ending of
everything in something else; no more disputing for spare legs among
bewildered bodies; no more setting on of heads wrong side foremost. The
fragments have come together: we are out of the Inferno with its weeping
down the spine; we are in the fair hunting-fields of the Lucchese
mountains (though they had their tears also),--with horse, and hound,
and hawk; and merry blast of the trumpet.--Very strange creatures to be
hunted, in all truth; but still creatures with a single head, and that
on their shoulders, which is exactly the last place in the Pavian church
where a head is to be looked for.

My good friend Mr. Cockerell wonders, in one of his lectures, why I give
so much praise to this "crazy front of Lucca." But it is not crazy; not
by any means. Altogether sober, in comparison with the early Lombard
work, or with our Norman. Crazy in one sense it is: utterly neglected,
to the breaking of its old stout heart; the venomous nights and salt
frosts of the Maremma winters have their way with it--"Poor Tom's a
cold!" The weeds that feed on the marsh air, have twisted themselves
into its crannies; the polished fragments of serpentine are spit and
rent out of their cells, and lie in green ruins along its ledges; the
salt sea winds have eaten away the fair shafting of its star window into
a skeleton of crumbling rays. It cannot stand much longer; may Heaven
only, in its benignity, preserve it from restoration, and the sands of
the Serchio give it honorable grave.

In the "Seven Lamps," Plate VI., I gave a faithful drawing of one of its
upper arches, to which I must refer the reader; for there is a marked
piece of character in the figure of the horseman on the left of it. And
in making this reference, I would say a few words about those much
abused plates of the "Seven Lamps." They are black, they are overbitten,
they are hastily drawn, they are coarse and disagreeable; how
disagreeable to many readers I venture not to conceive. But their truth
is carried to an extent never before attempted in architectural drawing.
It does not in the least follow that because a drawing is delicate, or
looks careful, it has been carefully drawn from the thing represented;
in nine instances out of ten, careful and delicate drawings are made at
home. It is not so easy as the reader, perhaps, imagines, to finish a
drawing altogether on the spot, especially of details seventy feet from
the ground; and any one who will try the position in which I have had to
do some of my work--standing, namely, on a cornice or window sill,
holding by one arm round a shaft, and hanging over the street (or canal,
at Venice), with my sketch-book supported against the wall from which I
was drawing, by my breast, so as to leave my right hand free--will not
thenceforward wonder that shadows should be occasionally carelessly
laid in, or lines drawn with some unsteadiness. But, steady, or infirm,
the sketches of which those plates in the "Seven Lamps" are fac-similes,
were made from the architecture itself, and represent that architecture
with its actual shadows at the time of day at which it was drawn, and
with every fissure and line of it as they now exist; so that when I am
speaking of some new point, which perhaps the drawing was not intended
to illustrate, I can yet turn back to it with perfect certainty that if
anything be found in it bearing on matters now in hand, I may depend
upon it just as securely as if I had gone back to look again at the
building.

It is necessary that my readers should understand this thoroughly, and I
did not before sufficiently explain it; but I believe I can show them
the use of this kind of truth, now that we are again concerned with this
front of Lucca. They will find a drawing of the entire front in Gally
Knight's "Architecture of Italy." It may serve to give them an idea of
its general disposition, and it looks very careful and accurate; but
every bit of the ornament on it is _drawn out of the artist's head_.
There is not _one line_ of it that exists on the building. The reader
will therefore, perhaps, think my ugly black plate of somewhat more
value, upon the whole, in its rough veracity, than the other in its
delicate fiction.[97]

[Illustration: Plate XXI.
               WALL VEIL DECORATION.]

As, however, I made a drawing of another part of the church somewhat
more delicately, and as I do not choose that my favorite church should
suffer in honor by my coarse work, I have had this, as far as might be,
fac-similied by line engraving (Plate XXI.). It represents the southern
side of the lower arcade of the west front; and may convey some idea of
the exquisite finish and grace of the whole; but the old plate, in the
"Seven Lamps," gives a nearer view of one of the upper arches, and a
more faithful impression of the present aspect of the work, and
especially of the seats of the horsemen; the limb straight, and well
down on the stirrup (the warrior's seat, observe, not the jockey's),
with a single pointed spur on the heel. The bit of the lower cornice
under this arch I could not see, and therefore had not drawn; it was
supplied from beneath another arch. I am afraid, however, the reader has
lost the thread of my story while I have been recommending my veracity
to him. I was insisting upon the healthy tone of this Lucca work as
compared with the old spectral Lombard friezes. The apes of the Pavian
church ride without stirrups, but all is in good order and harness here:
civilisation had done its work; there was reaping of corn in the Val
d'Arno, though rough hunting still upon its hills. But in the north,
though a century or two later, we find the forests of the Rhone, and its
rude limestone cotes, haunted by phantasms still (more meat-eating,
then, I think). I do not know a more interesting group of cathedrals
than that of Lyons, Vienne, and Valencia: a more interesting indeed,
generally, than beautiful; but there is a row of niches on the west
front of Lyons, and a course of panelled decoration about its doors,
which is, without exception, the most exquisite piece of Northern Gothic
I ever beheld, and with which I know nothing that is even comparable,
except the work of the north transept of Rouen, described in the "Seven
Lamps," p. 159; work of about the same date, and exactly the same plan;
quatrefoils filled with grotesques, but somewhat less finished in
execution, and somewhat less wild in imagination. I wrote down hastily,
and in their own course, the subjects of some of the quatrefoils of
Lyons; of which I here give the reader the sequence:--

   1. Elephant and castle; less graphic than the St. Zeno one.

   2. A huge head walking on two legs, turned backwards, hoofed; the
        head has a horn behind, with drapery over it, which ends in
        another head.

   3. A boar hunt; the boar under a tree, very spirited.

   4. A bird putting its head between its legs to bite its own tail,
        which ends in a head.

   5. A dragon with a human head set on the wrong way.

   6. St. Peter awakened by the angel in prison; full of spirit, the
        prison picturesque, with a trefoiled arch, the angel eager, St.
        Peter startled, and full of motion.

   7. St. Peter led out by the angel.

   8. The miraculous draught of fishes; fish and all, in the small
        space.

   9. A large leaf, with two snails rampant, coming out of nautilus
        shells, with grotesque faces, and eyes at the ends of their
        horns.

  10. A man with an axe striking at a dog's head, which comes out of
        a nautilus shell: the rim of the shell branches into a stem
        with two large leaves.

  11. Martyrdom of St. Sebastian; his body very full of arrows.

  12. Beasts coming to ark; Noah opening a kind of wicker cage.

  13. Noah building the ark on shores.

  14. A vine leaf with a dragon's head and tail, the one biting the
        other.

  15. A man riding a goat, catching a flying devil.

  16. An eel or muraena growing into a bunch of flowers, which turns
        into two wings.

  17. A sprig of hazel, with nuts, thrown all around the quatrefoils
        with a squirrel in centre, apparently attached to the tree only
        by its enormous tail, richly furrowed into hair, and nobly
        sweeping.

  18. Four hares fastened together by the ears, galloping in a circle.
        Mingled with these grotesques are many _sword_ and _buckler_
        combats, the bucklers being round and conical like a hat; I
        thought the first I noticed, carried by a man at full gallop on
        horseback, had been a small umbrella.

This list of subjects may sufficiently illustrate the feverish character
of the Northern Energy; but influencing the treatment of the whole there
is also the Northern love of what is called the Grotesque, a feeling
which I find myself, for the present, quite incapable either of
analysing or defining, though we all have a distinct idea attached to
the word: I shall try, however, in the next volume.


  9. WOODEN CHURCHES OF THE NORTH.

I cannot pledge myself to this theory of the origin of the vaulting
shaft, but the reader will find some interesting confirmations of it in
Dahl's work on the wooden churches of Norway. The inside view of the
church of Borgund shows the timber construction of one shaft run up
through a crossing architrave, and continued into the clerestory; while
the church of Urnes is in the exact form of a basilica; but the wall
above the arches is formed of planks, with a strong upright above each
capital. The passage quoted from Stephen Eddy's Life of Bishop Wilfrid,
at p. 86 of Churton's "Early English Church," gives us one of the
transformations or petrifactions of the wooden Saxon churches. "At Ripon
he built a new church of _polished stone_, with columns variously
ornamented, and porches." Mr. Churton adds: "It was perhaps in bad
imitation of the marble buildings he had seen in Italy, that he washed
the walls of this original York Minster, and made them 'whiter than
snow.'"


  10. CHURCH OF ALEXANDRIA.

The very cause which enabled the Venetians to possess themselves of the
body of St. Mark, was the destruction of the church by the caliph for
the _sake of its marbles_: the Arabs and Venetians, though bitter
enemies, thus building on the same models; these in reverence for the
destroyed church, and those with the very pieces of it. In the somewhat
prolix account of the matter given in the Notizie Storiche (above
quoted) the main points are, that "il Califa de' Saraceni, per
fabbricarsi un Palazzo presse di Babilonia, aveva ordinato che dalle
Chiese d' Cristiani si togliessero i più scelti marmi;" and that the
Venetians, "videro sotto i loro occhi flagellarsi crudelmente un
Cristiano per aver infranto un marmo." I heartily wish that the same
kind of punishment were enforced to this day, for the same sin.


  11. RENAISSANCE LANDSCAPE.

I am glad here to re-assert opinions which it has grieved me to be
suspected of having changed. The calmer tone of the second volume of
"Modern Painters," as compared with the first, induced, I believe, this
suspicion, very justifiably, in the minds of many of its readers. The
difference resulted, however, from the simple fact, that the first was
written in great haste and indignation, for a special purpose and
time;--the second, after I had got engaged, almost unawares, in
inquiries which could not be hastily nor indignantly pursued; my
opinions remaining then, and remaining now, altogether unchanged on the
subject which led me into the discussion. And that no farther doubt of
them may be entertained by any who may think them worth questioning, I
shall here, once for all, express them in the plainest and fewest words
I can. I think that J. M. W. Turner is not only the greatest (professed)
landscape painter who ever lived, but that he has in him as much as
would have furnished all the rest with such power as they had; and that
if we put Nicolo Poussin, Salvator, and our own Gainsborough out of the
group, he would cut up into Claudes, Cuyps, Ruysdaels, and such others,
by uncounted bunches. I hope this is plainly and strongly enough stated.
And farther, I like his later pictures, up to the year 1845, the best;
and believe that those persons who only like his early pictures do not,
in fact, like him at all. They do _not_ like that which is essentially
_his_. They like that in which he resembles other men; which he had
learned from Loutherbourg, Claude, or Wilson; that which is indeed his
own, they do not care for. Not that there is not much of his own in his
early works; they are all invaluable in their way; but those persons who
can find no beauty in his strangest fantasy on the Academy walls, cannot
distinguish the peculiarly Turneresque characters of the earlier
pictures. And, therefore, I again state here, that I think his pictures
painted between the years 1830 and 1845 his greatest; and that his
entire power is best represented by such pictures as the Temeraire, the
Sun of Venice going to Sea, and others, painted exactly at the time when
the public and the press were together loudest in abuse of him.

  Turner. Tintoret.
  Massaccio.
  John Bellini.
  Albert Durer.
  Giorgione.
  Paul Veronese.
  Titian.
  Rubens.
  Correggio.
  Orcagna.
  Benozzo Gozzoli.
  Giotto.
  Raffaelle.
  Perugino.

I desire, however, the reader to observe that I said, above, _professed_
landscape painters, among whom, perhaps, I should hardly have put
Gainsborough. The landscape of the great figure painters is often
majestic in the highest degree, and Tintoret's especially shows exactly
the same power and feeling as Turner's. If with Turner I were to rank
the historical painters as landscapists, estimating rather the power
they show, than the actual value of the landscape they produced, I
should class those, whose landscapes I have studied, in some such order
as this at the side of the page:--associating with the landscape of
Perugino that of Francia and Angelico, and the other severe painters of
religious subjects. I have put Turner and Tintoret side by side, not
knowing which is, in landscape, the greater; I had nearly associated in
the same manner the noble names of John Bellini and Albert Durer; but
Bellini must be put first, for his profound religious peace yet not
separated from the other, if but that we might remember his kindness to
him in Venice; and it is well we should take note of it here, for it
furnishes us with a most interesting confirmation of what was said in
the text respecting the position of Bellini as the last of the religious
painters of Venice. The following passage is quoted in Jackson's "Essay
on Wood-engraving," from Albert Durer's Diary:

"I have many good friends among the Italians who warn me not to eat or
drink with their painters, of whom several are my enemies, and copy my
picture in the church, and others of mine, wherever they can find them,
and yet they blame them, _and say they are not according to ancient art,
and therefore not good_. Giovanni Bellini, however, has praised me
highly to several gentlemen, and wishes to have something of my doing:
he called on me himself, and requested that I would paint a picture for
him, for which, he said, he would pay me well. People are all surprised
that I should be so much thought of by a person of his reputation: he is
very old, but is still the best painter of them all."

A choice little piece of description this, of the Renaissance painters,
side by side with the good old Venetian, who was soon to leave them to
their own ways. The Renaissance men are seen in perfection, envying,
stealing, and lying, but without wit enough to lie to purpose.


  12. ROMANIST MODERN ART.

It is of the highest importance, in these days, that Romanism should be
deprived of the miserable influence which its pomp and picturesqueness
have given it over the weak sentimentalism of the English people; I call
it a miserable influence, for of all motives to sympathy with the Church
of Rome, this I unhesitatingly class as the basest: I can, in some
measure, respect the other feelings which have been the beginnings of
apostasy; I can respect the desire for unity which would reclaim the
Romanist by love, and the distrust of his own heart which subjects the
proselyte to priestly power; I say I can respect these feelings, though
I cannot pardon unprincipled submission to them, nor enough wonder at
the infinite fatuity of the unhappy persons whom they have
betrayed:--Fatuity, self-inflicted, and stubborn in resistance to God's
Word and man's reason!--to talk of the authority of the Church, as if
the Church were anything else than the whole company of Christian men,
or were ever spoken of in Scripture[98] as other than a company to be
taught and fed, not to teach and feed.--Fatuity! to talk of a separation
of Church and State, as if a Christian state, and every officer therein,
were not necessarily a part of the Church,[99] and as if any state
officer could do his duty without endeavoring to aid and promote
religion, or any clerical officer do his duty without seeking for such
aid and accepting it:--Fatuity! to seek for the unity of a living body
of truth and trust in God, with a dead body of lies and trust in wood,
and thence to expect anything else than plague, and consumption by worms
undying, for both. Blasphemy as well as fatuity! to ask for any better
interpreter of God's Word than God, or to expect knowledge of it in any
other way than the plainly ordered way: if _any_ man will do he shall
know. But of all these fatuities, the basest is the being lured into the
Romanist Church by the glitter of it, like larks into a trap by broken
glass; to be blown into a change of religion by the whine of an
organ-pipe; stitched into a new creed by gold threads on priests'
petticoats; jangled into a change of conscience by the chimes of a
belfry. I know nothing in the shape of error so dark as this, no
imbecility so absolute, no treachery so contemptible. I had hardly
believed that it was a thing possible, though vague stories had been
told me of the effect, on some minds, of mere scarlet and candles, until
I came on this passage in Pugin's "Remarks on articles in the
Rambler":--

"Those who have lived in want and privation are the best qualified to
appreciate the blessings of plenty; thus, those who have been devout and
sincere members of the separated portion of the English Church; who have
prayed, and hoped, and loved, through all the poverty of the maimed
rites which it has retained--to them does the realisation of all their
longing desires appear truly ravishing. * * * Oh! then, what delight!
what joy unspeakable! when one of the solemn piles is presented to them,
in all its pristine life and glory!--the stoups are filled to the brim;
the rood is raised on high; the screen glows with sacred imagery and
rich device; the niches are filled; the altar is replaced, sustained by
sculptured shafts, the relics of the saints repose beneath, the body of
Our Lord is enshrined on its consecrated stone; the lamps of the
sanctuary burn bright; the saintly portraitures in the glass windows
shine all gloriously; and the albs hang in the oaken ambries, and the
cope chests are filled with orphreyed baudekins; and pix and pax, and
chrismatory are there, and thurible, and cross."

One might have put this man under a pix, and left him, one should have
thought; but he has been brought forward, and partly received, as an
example of the effect of ceremonial splendor on the mind of a great
architect. It is very necessary, therefore, that all those who have felt
sorrow at this should know at once that he is not a great architect,
but one of the smallest possible or conceivable architects; and that by
his own account and setting forth of himself. Hear him:--

"I believe, as regards architecture, few men have been so unfortunate as
myself. I have passed my life in thinking of fine things, studying fine
things, designing fine things, and realising very poor ones. I have
never had the chance of producing a single fine ecclesiastical building,
except my own church, where I am both paymaster and architect; but
everything else, either for want of adequate funds or injudicious
interference and control, or some other contingency, is more or less a
failure. * * *

"St. George's was spoilt by the very instructions laid down by the
committee, that it was to hold 3000 people on the floor at a limited
price; in consequence, height, proportion, everything, was sacrificed to
meet these conditions. Nottingham was spoilt by the style being
restricted to lancet,--a period well suited to a Cistercian abbey in a
secluded vale, but very unsuitable for the centre of a crowded
town. * * *

"Kirkham was spoilt through several hundred pounds being reduced on the
original estimate; to effect this, which was a great sum in proportion
to the entire cost, the area of the church was contracted, the walls
lowered, tower and spire reduced, the thickness of walls diminished, and
stone arches omitted." (Remarks, &c., by A. Welby Pugin: Dolman, 1850.)

Is that so? Phidias can niche himself into the corner of a pediment, and
Raffaelle expatiate within the circumference of a clay platter; but
Pugin is inexpressible in less than a cathedral? Let his ineffableness
be assured of this, once for all, that no difficulty or restraint ever
happened to a man of real power, but his power was the more manifested
in the contending with, or conquering it; and that there is no field so
small, no cranny so contracted, but that a great spirit can house and
manifest itself therein. The thunder that smites the Alp into dust, can
gather itself into the width of a golden wire. Whatever greatness there
was in you, had it been Buonarroti's own, you had room enough for it in
a single niche: you might have put the whole power of it into two feet
cube of Caen stone. St. George's was not high enough for want of money?
But was it want of money that made you put that blunt, overloaded,
laborious ogee door into the side of it? Was it for lack of funds that
you sunk the tracery of the parapet in its clumsy zigzags? Was it in
parsimony that you buried its paltry pinnacles in that eruption of
diseased crockets? or in pecuniary embarrassment that you set up the
belfry foolscaps, with the mimicry of dormer windows, which nobody can
ever reach nor look out of? Not so, but in mere incapability of better
things.

I am sorry to have to speak thus of any living architect; and there is
much in this man, if he were rightly estimated, which one might both
regard and profit by. He has a most sincere love for his profession, a
heartily honest enthusiasm for pixes and piscinas; and though he will
never design so much as a pix or a piscina thoroughly well, yet better
than most of the experimental architects of the day. Employ him by all
means, but on small work. Expect no cathedrals from him; but no one, at
present, can design a better finial. That is an exceedingly beautiful
one over the western door of St. George's; and there is some spirited
impishness and switching of tails in the supporting figures at the
imposts. Only do not allow his good designing of finials to be employed
as an evidence in matters of divinity, nor thence deduce the
incompatibility of Protestantism and art. I should have said all that I
have said above, of artistical apostasy, if Giotto had been now living
in Florence, and if art were still doing all that it did once for Rome.
But the grossness of the error becomes incomprehensible as well as
unpardonable, when we look to what level of degradation the human
intellect has sunk at this instant in Italy. So far from Romanism now
producing anything greater in art, it cannot even preserve what has been
given to its keeping. I know no abuses of precious inheritance half so
grievous, as the abuse of all that is best in art wherever the Romanist
priesthood gets possession of it. It amounts to absolute infatuation.
The noblest pieces of mediæval sculpture in North Italy, the two
griffins at the central (west) door of the cathedral of Verona, were
daily permitted to be brought into service, when I was there in the
autumn of 1849, by a washerwoman living in the Piazza, who tied her
clothes-lines to their beaks: and the shafts of St. Mark's at Venice
were used by a salesman of common caricatures to fasten his prints upon
(Compare Appendix 25); and this in the face of the continually passing
priests: while the quantity of noble art annually destroyed in
altarpieces by candle-droppings, or perishing by pure brutality of
neglect, passes all estimate. I do not know, as I have repeatedly
stated, how far the splendor of architecture, or other art, is
compatible with the honesty and usefulness of religious service. The
longer I live, the more I incline to severe judgment in this matter, and
the less I can trust the sentiments excited by painted glass and colored
tiles. But if there be indeed value in such things, our plain duty is to
direct our strength against the superstition which has dishonored them;
there are thousands who might possibly be benefited by them, to whom
they are now merely an offence, owing to their association with
idolatrous ceremonies. I have but this exhortation for all who love
them,--not to regulate their creeds by their taste in colors, but to
hold calmly to the right, at whatever present cost to their imaginative
enjoyment; sure that they will one day find in heavenly truth a brighter
charm than in earthly imagery, and striving to gather stones for the
eternal building, whose walls shall be salvation, and whose gates shall
be praise.


  13. MR. FERGUSSON'S SYSTEM.

The reader may at first suppose this division of the attributes of
buildings into action, voice, and beauty, to be the same division as Mr.
Fergusson's, now well known, of their merits, into technic, æsthetic and
phonetic.

But there is no connection between the two systems; mine, indeed, does
not profess to be a system, it is a mere arrangement of my subject, for
the sake of order and convenience in its treatment: but, as far as it
goes, it differs altogether from Mr. Fergusson's in these two following
respects:--

The action of a building, that is to say its standing or consistence,
depends on its good construction; and the first part of the foregoing
volume has been entirely occupied with the consideration of the
constructive merit of buildings: but construction is not their only
technical merit. There is as much of technical merit in their
expression, or in their beauty, as in their construction. There is no
more mechanical or technical admirableness in the stroke of the painter
who covers them with fresco, than in the dexterity of the mason who
cements their stones: there is just as much of what is technical in
their beauty, therefore, as in their construction; and, on the other
hand, there is often just as much intellect shown in their construction
as there is in either their expression or decoration. Now Mr. Fergusson
means by his "Phonetic" division, whatever expresses intellect: my
constructive division, therefore, includes part of his phonetic: and my
expressive and decorative divisions include part of his technical.

Secondly, Mr. Fergusson tries to make the same divisions fit the
_subjects_ of art, and art itself; and therefore talks of technic,
æsthetic, and phonetic, _arts_, (or, translating the Greek,) of artful
arts, sensitive arts, and talkative arts; but I have nothing to do with
any division of the arts, I have to deal only with the merits of
_buildings_. As, however, I have been led into reference to Mr.
Fergusson's system, I would fain say a word or two to effect Mr.
Fergusson's extrication from it. I hope to find in him a noble ally,
ready to join with me in war upon affectation, falsehood, and prejudice,
of every kind: I have derived much instruction from his most interesting
work, and I hope for much more from its continuation; but he must
disentangle himself from his system, or he will be strangled by it;
never was anything so ingeniously and hopelessly wrong throughout; the
whole of it is founded on a confusion of the instruments of man with his
capacities.

Mr. Fergusson would have us take--

  "First, man's muscular action or power." (Technics.)

  "Secondly, those developments of sense _by_ which _he does!!_ as much
    as by his muscles." (Æsthetics.)

  "Lastly, his intellect, or to confine this more correctly to its
    external action, _his power of speech!!!_" (Phonetics.)

Granting this division of humanity correct, or sufficient, the writer
then most curiously supposes that he may arrange the arts as if there
were some belonging to each division of man,--never observing that every
art must be governed by, and addressed to, one division, and executed by
another; executed by the muscular, addressed to the sensitive or
intellectual; and that, to be an art at all, it must have in it work of
the one, and guidance from the other. If, by any lucky accident, he had
been led to arrange the arts, either by their objects, and the things to
which they are addressed, or by their means, and the things by which
they are executed, he would have discovered his mistake in an instant.
As thus:--

  These arts are addressed to the,--Muscles!!
                                    Senses,
                                    Intellect;
                   or executed by,--Muscles,
                                    Senses!!
                                    Intellect.

Indeed it is true that some of the arts are in a sort addressed to the
muscles, surgery for instance; but this is not among Mr. Fergusson's
technic, but his politic, arts! and all the arts may, in a sort, be said
to be performed by the senses, as the senses guide both muscles and
intellect in their work: but they guide them as they receive
information, or are standards of accuracy, but not as in themselves
capable of action. Mr. Fergusson is, I believe, the first person who has
told us of senses that act or do, they having been hitherto supposed
only to sustain or perceive. The weight of error, however, rests just as
much in the original division of man, as in the endeavor to fit the arts
to it. The slight omission of the soul makes a considerable difference
when it begins to influence the final results of the arrangement.

Mr. Fergusson calls morals and religion "Politick arts" (as if religion
were an art at all! or as if both were not as necessary to individuals
as to societies); and therefore, forming these into a body of arts by
themselves, leaves the best of the arts to do without the soul and the
moral feeling as rest they may. Hence "expression," or "phonetics," is
of intellect only (as if men never expressed their _feelings!_); and
then, strangest and worst of all, intellect is entirely resolved into
talking! There can be no intellect but it must talk, and all talking
must be intellectual. I believe people do sometimes talk without
understanding; and I think the world would fare ill if they never
understood without talking. The intellect is an entirely silent faculty,
and has nothing to do with parts of speech any more than the moral part
has. A man may feel and know things without expressing either the
feeling or knowledge; and the talking is a _muscular_ mode of
communicating the workings of the intellect or heart--muscular, whether
it be by tongue or by sign, or by carving or writing, or by expression
of feature; so that to divide a man into muscular and talking parts, is
to divide him into body in general, and tongue in particular, the
endless confusion resulting from which arrangement is only less
marvellous in itself, than the resolution with which Mr. Fergusson has
worked through it, and in spite of it, up to some very interesting and
suggestive truths; although starting with a division of humanity which
does not in the least raise it above the brute, for a rattlesnake has
his muscular, æsthetic, and talking part as much as man, only he talks
with his tail, and says, "I am angry with you, and should like to bite
you," more laconically and effectively than any phonetic biped could,
were he so minded. And, in fact, the real difference between the brute
and man is not so much that the one has fewer means of expression than
the other, as that it has fewer thoughts to express, and that we do not
understand its expressions. Animals can talk to one another intelligibly
enough when they have anything to say, and their captains have words of
command just as clear as ours, and better obeyed. We have indeed, in
watching the efforts of an intelligent animal to talk to a human being,
a melancholy sense of its dumbness; but the fault is still in its
intelligence, more than in its tongue. It has not wit enough to
systematise its cries or signs, and form them into language.

But there is no end to the fallacies and confusions of Mr. Fergusson's
arrangement. It is a perfect entanglement of gun-cotton, and explodes
into vacuity wherever one holds a light to it. I shall leave him to do
so with the rest of it for himself, and should perhaps have left it to
his own handling altogether, but for the intemperateness of the spirit
with which he has spoken on a subject perhaps of all others demanding
gentleness and caution. No man could more earnestly have desired the
changes lately introduced into the system of the University of Oxford
than I did myself: no man can be more deeply sensible than I of grievous
failures in the practical working even of the present system: but I
believe that these failures may be almost without exception traced to
one source, the want of evangelical, and the excess of rubrical religion
among the tutors; together with such rustinesses and stiffnesses as
necessarily attend the continual operation of any intellectual machine.
The fault is, at any rate, far less in the system than in the
imperfection of its administration; and had it been otherwise, the terms
in which Mr. Fergusson speaks of it are hardly decorous in one who can
but be imperfectly acquainted with its working. They are sufficiently
answered by the structure of the essay in which they occur; for if the
high powers of mind which its author possesses had been subjected to the
discipline of the schools, he could not have wasted his time on the
development of a system which their simplest formulæ of logic would have
shown him to be untenable.

Mr. Fergusson will, however, find it easier to overthrow his system than
to replace it. Every man of science knows the difficulty of arranging a
_reasonable_ system of classification, in any subject, by any one group
of characters; and that the best classifications are, in many of their
branches, convenient rather than reasonable: so that, to any person who
is really master of his subject, many different modes of classification
will occur at different times; one of which he will use rather than
another, according to the point which he has to investigate. I need only
instance the three arrangements of minerals, by their external
characters, and their positive or negative bases, of which the first is
the most useful, the second the most natural, the third the most simple;
and all in several ways unsatisfactory.

But when the subject becomes one which no single mind can grasp, and
which embraces the whole range of human occupation and enquiry, the
difficulties become as great, and the methods as various, as the uses to
which the classification might be put; and Mr. Fergusson has entirely
forgotten to inform us what is the object to which his arrangements are
addressed. For observe: there is one kind of arrangement which is based
on the rational connection of the sciences or arts with one another; an
arrangement which maps them out like the rivers of some great country,
and marks the points of their junction, and the direction and force of
their united currents; and this without assigning to any one of them a
superiority above another, but considering them all as necessary members
of the noble unity of human science and effort. There is another kind of
classification which contemplates the order of succession in which they
might most usefully be presented to a single mind, so that the given
mind should obtain the most effective and available knowledge of them
all: and, finally, the most usual classification contemplates the powers
of mind which they each require for their pursuit, the objects to which
they are addressed, or with which they are concerned; and assigns to
each of them a rank superior or inferior, according to the nobility of
the powers they require, or the grandeur of the subjects they
contemplate.

Now, not only would it be necessary to adopt a different classification
with respect to each of these great intentions, but it might be found so
even to vary the order of the succession of sciences in the case of
every several mind to which they were addressed; and that their rank
would also vary with the power and specific character of the mind
engaged upon them. I once heard a very profound mathematician
remonstrate against the impropriety of Wordsworth's receiving a pension
from government, on the ground that he was "only a poet." If the study
of mathematics had always this narrowing effect upon the sympathies, the
science itself would need to be deprived of the rank usually assigned to
it; and there could be no doubt that, in the effect it had on the mind
of this man, and of such others, it was a very contemptible science
indeed. Hence, in estimating the real rank of any art or science, it is
necessary for us to conceive it as it would be grasped by minds of every
order. There are some arts and sciences which we underrate, because no
one has risen to show us with what majesty they may be invested; and
others which we overrate, because we are blinded to their general
meanness by the magnificence which some one man has thrown around them:
thus, philology, evidently the most contemptible of all the sciences,
has been raised to unjust dignity by Johnson.[100] And the subject is
farther complicated by the question of usefulness; for many of the arts
and sciences require considerable intellectual power for their pursuit,
and yet become contemptible by the slightness of what they accomplish:
metaphysics, for instance, exercising intelligence of a high order, yet
useless to the mass of mankind, and, to its own masters, dangerous. Yet,
as it has become so by the want of the true intelligence which its
inquiries need, and by substitution of vain subtleties in its stead, it
may in future vindicate for itself a higher rank than a man of common
sense usually concedes to it.

Nevertheless, the mere attempt at arrangement must be useful, even where
it does nothing more than develop difficulties. Perhaps the greatest
fault of men of learning is their so often supposing all other branches
of science dependent upon or inferior to their own best beloved branch;
and the greatest deficiency of men comparatively unlearned, their want
of perception of the connection of the branches with each other. He who
holds the tree only by the extremities, can perceive nothing but the
separation of its sprays. It must always be desirable to prove to those
the equality of rank, to these the closeness of sequence, of what they
had falsely supposed subordinate or separate. And, after such candid
admission of the co-equal dignity of the truly noble arts and sciences,
we may be enabled more justly to estimate the inferiority of those which
indeed seem intended for the occupation of inferior powers and narrower
capacities. In Appendix 14, following, some suggestions will be found as
to the principles on which classification might be based; but the
arrangement of all the arts is certainly not a work which could with
discretion be attempted in the Appendix to an essay on a branch of one
of them.


  14. DIVISIONS OF HUMANITY.

The reader will probably understand this part of the subject better if
he will take the trouble briefly to consider the actions of the mind and
body of man in the sciences and arts, which give these latter the
relations of rank usually attributed to them.

It was above observed (Appendix 13) that the arts were generally ranked
according to the nobility of the powers they require, that is to say,
the quantity of the being of man which they engaged or addressed. Now
their rank is not a very important matter as regards each other, for
there are few disputes more futile than that concerning the respective
dignity of arts, all of which are necessary and honorable. But it is a
very important matter as regards themselves; very important whether
they are practised with the devotion and regarded with the respect
which are necessary or due to their perfection. It does not at all
matter whether architecture or sculpture be the nobler art; but it
matters much whether the thought is bestowed upon buildings, or the
feeling is expressed in statues, which make either deserving of our
admiration. It is foolish and insolent to imagine that the art which we
ourselves practise is greater than any other; but it is wise to take
care that in our own hands it is as noble as we can make it. Let us take
some notice, therefore, in what degrees the faculties of man may be
engaged in his several arts: we may consider the entire man as made up
of body, soul, and intellect (Lord Lindsay, meaning the same thing, says
inaccurately--sense, intellect, and spirit--forgetting that there is a
moral sense as well as a bodily sense, and a spiritual body as well as a
natural body, and so gets into some awkward confusion, though right in
the main points). Then, taking the word soul as a short expression of
the moral and responsible part of being, each of these three parts has a
passive and active power. The body has senses and muscles; the soul,
feeling and resolution; the intellect, understanding and imagination.
The scheme may be put into tabular form, thus:--

              Passive or Receptive Part.    Active or Motive Part.
  Body                  Senses.                  Muscles.
  Soul                  Feeling.                 Resolution.
  Intellect             Understanding.           Imagination.

In this scheme I consider memory a part of understanding, and conscience
I leave out, as being the voice of God in the heart, inseparable from
the system, yet not an essential part of it. The sense of beauty I
consider a mixture of the Senses of the body and soul.

Now all these parts of the human system have a reciprocal action on one
another, so that the true perfection of any of them is not possible
without some relative perfection of the others, and yet any one of the
parts of the system may be brought into a morbid development,
inconsistent with the perfection of the others. Thus, in a healthy
state, the acuteness of the senses quickens that of the feelings, and
these latter quicken the understanding, and then all the three quicken
the imagination, and then all the four strengthen the resolution; while
yet there is a danger, on the other hand, that the encouraged and morbid
feeling may weaken or bias the understanding, or that the over shrewd
and keen understanding may shorten the imagination, or that the
understanding and imagination together may take place of, or undermine,
the resolution, as in Hamlet. So in the mere bodily frame there is a
delightful perfection of the senses, consistent with the utmost health
of the muscular system, as in the quick sight and hearing of an active
savage: another false delicacy of the senses, in the Sybarite,
consequent on their over indulgence, until the doubled rose-leaf is
painful; and this inconsistent with muscular perfection. Again; there is
a perfection of muscular action consistent with exquisite sense, as in
that of the fingers of a musician or of a painter, in which the muscles
are guided by the slightest feeling of the strings, or of the pencil:
another perfection of muscular action inconsistent with acuteness of
sense, as in the effort of battle, in which a soldier does not perceive
his wounds. So that it is never so much the question, what is the
solitary perfection of a given part of the man, as what is its balanced
perfection in relation to the whole of him: and again, the perfection of
any single power is not merely to be valued by the mere rank of the
power itself, but by the harmony which it indicates among the other
powers. Thus, for instance, in an archer's glance along his arrow, or a
hunter's raising of his rifle, there is a certain perfection of sense
and finger which is the result of mere practice, of a simple bodily
perfection; but there is a farther value in the habit which results from
the resolution and intellect necessary to the forming of it: in the
hunter's raising of his rifle there is a quietness implying far more
than mere practice,--implying courage, and habitual meeting of danger,
and presence of mind, and many other such noble characters. So also in a
musician's way of laying finger on his instrument, or a painter's
handling of his pencil, there are many qualities expressive of the
special sensibilities of each, operating on the production of the habit,
besides the sensibility operating at the moment of action. So that there
are three distinct stages of merit in what is commonly called mere
bodily dexterity: the first, the dexterity given by practice, called
command of tools or of weapons; the second stage, the dexterity or
grace given by character, as the gentleness of hand proceeding from
modesty or tenderness of spirit, and the steadiness of it resulting from
habitual patience coupled with decision, and the thousand other
characters partially discernible, even in a man's writing, much more in
his general handiwork; and, thirdly, there is the perfection of action
produced by the operation of _present_ strength, feeling, or
intelligence on instruments thus _previously_ perfected, as the handling
of a great painter is rendered more beautiful by his immediate care and
feeling and love of his subject, or knowledge of it, and as physical
strength is increased by strength of will and greatness of heart.
Imagine, for instance, the difference in manner of fighting, and in
actual muscular strength and endurance, between a common soldier, and a
man in the circumstances of the Horatii, or of the temper of Leonidas.

Mere physical skill, therefore, the mere perfection and power of the
body as an instrument, is manifested in three stages:

  First, Bodily power by practice;
  Secondly, Bodily power by moral habit;
  Thirdly, Bodily power by immediate energy;

and the arts will be greater or less, cæteris paribus, according to the
degrees of these dexterities which they admit. A smith's work at his
anvil admits little but the first; fencing, shooting, and riding, admit
something of the second; while the fine arts admit (merely through the
channel of the bodily dexterities) an expression almost of the whole
man.

Nevertheless, though the higher arts _admit_ this higher bodily
perfection, they do not all _require_ it in equal degrees, but can
dispense with it more and more in proportion to their dignity. The arts
whose chief element is bodily dexterity, may be classed together as arts
of the third order, of which the highest will be those which admit most
of the power of moral habit and energy, such as riding and the
management of weapons; and the rest may be thrown together under the
general title of handicrafts, of which it does not much matter which are
the most honorable, but rather, which are the most necessary and least
injurious to health, which it is not our present business to examine.
Men engaged in the practice of these are called artizans, as opposed to
artists, who are concerned with the fine arts.

The next step in elevation of art is the addition of the intelligences
which have no connection with bodily dexterity; as, for instance, in
hunting, the knowledge of the habits of animals and their places of
abode; in architecture, of mathematics; in painting, of harmonies of
color; in music, of those of sound; all this pure science being joined
with readiness of expedient in applying it, and with shrewdness in
apprehension of difficulties, either present or probable.

It will often happen that intelligence of this kind is possessed without
bodily dexterity, or the need of it; one man directing and another
executing, as for the most part in architecture, war, and seamanship.
And it is to be observed, also, that in proportion to the dignity of the
art, the bodily dexterities needed even in its subordinate agents become
less important, and are more and more replaced by intelligence; as in
the steering of a ship, the bodily dexterity required is less than in
shooting or fencing, but the intelligence far greater: and so in war,
the mere swordsmanship and marksmanship of the troops are of small
importance in comparison with their disposition, and right choice of the
moment of action. So that arts of this second order must be estimated,
not by the quantity of bodily dexterity they require, but by the
quantity and dignity of the knowledge needed in their practice, and by
the degree of subtlety needed in bringing such knowledge into play. War
certainly stands first in the general mind, not only as the greatest of
the arts which I have called of the second order, but as the greatest of
all arts. It is not, however, easy to distinguish the respect paid to
the Power, from that rendered to the Art of the soldier; the honor of
victory being more dependent, in the vulgar mind, on its results, than
its difficulties. I believe, however, that taking into consideration the
greatness of the anxieties under which this art must be practised, the
multitude of circumstances to be known and regarded in it, and the
subtleties both of apprehension and stratagem constantly demanded by it,
as well as the multiplicity of disturbing accidents and doubtful
contingencies against which it must make provision on the instant, it
must indeed rank as far the first of the arts of the second order; and
next to this great art of killing, medicine being much like war in its
stratagems and watchings against its dark and subtle death-enemy.

Then the arts of the first order will be those in which the Imaginative
part of the intellect and the Sensitive part of the soul are joined: as
poetry, architecture, and painting; these forming a kind of cross, in
their part of the scheme of the human being, with those of the second
order, which wed the Intelligent part of the intellect and Resolute part
of the soul. But the reader must feel more and more, at every step, the
impossibility of classing the arts themselves, independently of the men
by whom they are practised; and how an art, low in itself, may be made
noble by the quantity of human strength and being which a great man will
pour into it; and an art, great in itself, be made mean by the meanness
of the mind occupied in it. I do not intend, when I call painting an art
of the first, and war an art of the second, order, to class Dutch
landscape painters with good soldiers; but I mean, that if from such a
man as Napoleon we were to take away the honor of all that he had done
in law and civil government, and to give him the reputation of his
soldiership only, his name would be less, if justly weighed, than that
of Buonarroti, himself a good soldier also, when need was. But I will
not endeavor to pursue the inquiry, for I believe that of all the arts
of the first order it would be found that all that a man has, or is, or
can be, he can fully express in them, and give to any of them, and find
it not enough.


  15. INSTINCTIVE JUDGMENTS.

The same rapid judgment which I wish to enable the reader to form of
architecture, may in some sort also be formed of painting, owing to the
close connection between execution and expression in the latter; as
between structure and expression in the former. We ought to be able to
tell good painting by a side glance as we pass along a gallery; and,
until we can do so, we are not fit to pronounce judgment at all: not
that I class this easily visible excellence of painting with the great
expressional qualities which time and watchfulness only unfold. I have
again and again insisted on the supremacy of these last and shall
always continue to do so. But I perceive a tendency among some of the
more thoughtful critics of the day to forget that the business of a
painter is to _paint_, and so altogether to despise those men, Veronese
and Rubens for instance, who were painters, par excellence, and in whom
the expressional qualities are subordinate. Now it is well, when we have
strong moral or poetical feeling manifested in painting, to mark this as
the best part of the work; but it is not well to consider as a thing of
small account, the painter's language in which that feeling is conveyed,
for if that language be not good and lovely, the man may indeed be a
just moralist or a great poet, but he is not a _painter_, and it was
wrong of him to paint. He had much better put his morality into sermons,
and his poetry into verse, than into a language of which he was not
master. And this mastery of the language is that of which we should be
cognizant by a glance of the eye; and if that be not found, it is wasted
time to look farther: the man has mistaken his vocation, and his
expression of himself will be cramped by his awkward efforts to do what
he was not fit to do. On the other hand, if the man be a painter indeed,
and have the gift of colors and lines, what is in him will come from his
hand freely and faithfully; and the language itself is so difficult and
so vast, that the mere possession of it argues the man is great, and
that his works are worth reading. So that I have never yet seen the case
in which this true artistical excellence, visible by the eye-glance, was
not the index of some true expressional worth in the work. Neither have
I ever seen a good expressional work without high artistical merit: and
that this is ever denied is only owing to the narrow view which men are
apt to take both of expression and of art; a narrowness consequent on
their own especial practice and habits of thought. A man long trained to
love the monk's visions of Fra Angelico, turns in proud and ineffable
disgust from the first work of Rubens which he encounters on his return
across the Alps. But is he right in his indignation? He has forgotten,
that while Angelico prayed and wept in his _olive shade_, there was
different work doing in the dank fields of Flanders;--wild seas to be
banked out; endless canals to be dug, and boundless marshes to be
drained; hard ploughing and harrowing of the frosty clay; careful
breeding of stout horses and fat cattle; close setting of brick walls
against cold winds and snow; much hardening of hands and gross
stoutening of bodies in all this; gross jovialities of harvest homes and
Christmas feasts, which were to be the reward of it; rough affections,
and sluggish imagination; fleshy, substantial, ironshod humanities, but
humanities still; humanities which God had his eye upon, and which won,
perhaps, here and there, as much favor in his sight as the wasted
aspects of the whispering monks of Florence (Heaven forbid it should not
be so, since the most of us cannot be monks, but must be ploughmen and
reapers still). And are we to suppose there is no nobility in Rubens'
masculine and universal sympathy with all this, and with his large human
rendering of it, Gentleman though he was, by birth, and feeling, and
education, and place; and, when he chose, lordly in conception also? He
had his faults, perhaps great and lamentable faults, though more those
of his time and his country than his own; he has neither cloister
breeding nor boudoir breeding, and is very unfit to paint either in
missals or annuals; but he has an open sky and wide-world breeding in
him, that we may not be offended with, fit alike for king's court,
knight's camp, or peasant's cottage. On the other hand, a man trained
here in England, in our Sir Joshua school, will not and cannot allow
that there is any art at all in the technical work of Angelico. But he
is just as wrong as the other. Fra Angelico is as true a master of the
art necessary to his purposes, as Rubens was of that necessary for his.
We have been taught in England to think there can be no virtue but in a
loaded brush and rapid hand; but if we can shake our common sense free
of such teaching, we shall understand that there is art also in the
delicate point and in the hand which trembles as it moves; not because
it is more liable to err, but because there is more danger in its error,
and more at stake upon its precision. The art of Angelico, both as a
colorist and a draughtsman, is consummate; so perfect and beautiful,
that his work may be recognised at any distance by the rainbow-play and
brilliancy of it: However closely it may be surrounded by other works of
the same school, glowing with enamel and gold, Angelico's may be told
from them at a glance, like so many huge pieces of opal lying among
common marbles. So again with Giotto; the Arena chapel is not only the
most perfect expressional work, it is the prettiest piece of wall
decoration and fair color, in North Italy.

Now there is a correspondence of the same kind between the technical and
expressional parts of architecture;--not a true or entire
correspondence, so that when the expression is best, the building must
be also best; but so much of correspondence as that good building is
necessary to good expression, comes before it, and is to be primarily
looked for: and the more, because the manner of building is capable of
being determinately estimated and classed; but the expressional
character not so: we can at once determine the true value of technical
qualities, we can only approximate to the value of expressional
qualities: and besides this, the looking for the technical qualities
first will enable us to cast a large quantity of rubbish aside at once,
and so to narrow the difficult field of inquiry into expression: we
shall get rid of Chinese pagodas and Indian temples, and Renaissance
Palladianisms, and Alhambra stucco and filigree, in one great rubbish
heap; and shall not need to trouble ourselves about their expression, or
anything else concerning them. Then taking the buildings which have been
rightly put together, and which show common sense in their structure, we
may look for their farther and higher excellences; but on those which
are absurd in their first steps we need waste no time.


  16. STRENGTH OF SHAFTS.

I could have wished, before writing this chapter, to have given more
study to the difficult subject of the strength of shafts of different
materials and structure; but I cannot enter into every inquiry which
general criticism might suggest, and this I believe to be one which
would have occupied the reader with less profit than many others: all
that is necessary for him to note is, that the great increase of
strength gained by a tubular form in iron shafts, of given solid
contents, is no contradiction to the general principle stated in the
text, that the strength of materials is most available when they are
most concentrated. The strength of the tube is owing to certain
properties of the arch formed by its sides, not to the dispersion of its
materials: and the principle is altogether inapplicable to stone shafts.
No one would think of building a pillar of a succession of sandstone
rings; however strong it might be, it would be still stronger filled up,
and the substitution of such a pillar for a solid one of the same
contents would lose too much space; for a stone pillar, even when solid,
must be quite as thick as is either graceful or convenient, and in
modern churches is often too thick as it is, hindering sight of the
preacher, and checking the sound of his voice.


  17. ANSWER TO MR. GARBETT.

Some three months ago, and long after the writing of this passage, I met
accidentally with Mr. Garbett's elementary Treatise on Design. (Weale,
1850.) If I had cared about the reputation of originality, I should have
been annoyed--and was so, at first, on finding Mr. Garbett's
illustrations of the subject exactly the same as mine, even to the
choice of the elephant's foot for the parallel of the Doric pillar: I
even thought of omitting, or rewriting, great part of the chapter, but
determined at last to let it stand. I am striving to speak plain truths
on many simple and trite subjects, and I hope, therefore, that much of
what I say has been said before, and am quite willing to give up all
claim to originality in any reasoning or assertion whatsoever, if any
one cares to dispute it. I desire the reader to accept what I say, not
as mine, but as the truth, which may be all the world's, if they look
for it. If I remember rightly, Mr. Frank Howard promised at some
discussion respecting the "Seven Lamps," reported in the "Builder," to
pluck all my borrowed feathers off me; but I did not see the end of the
discussion, and do not know to this day how many feathers I have left:
at all events the elephant's foot must belong to Mr. Garbett, though,
strictly speaking, neither he nor I can be quite justified in using it,
for an elephant in reality stands on tiptoe; and this is by no means the
expression of a Doric shaft. As, however, I have been obliged to speak
of this treatise of Mr. Garbett's, and desire also to recommend it as of
much interest and utility in its statements of fact, it is impossible
for me to pass altogether without notice, as if unanswerable, several
passages in which the writer has objected to views stated in the "Seven
Lamps." I should at any rate have noticed the passage quoted above,
(Chap. 30th,) which runs counter to the spirit of all I have ever
written, though without referring to me; but the references to the
"Seven Lamps" I should not have answered, unless I had desired,
generally, to recommend the book, and partly also, because they may
serve as examples of the kind of animadversion which the "Seven Lamps"
had to sustain from architects, very generally; which examples being
once answered, there will be little occasion for my referring in future
to other criticisms of the kind.

The first reference to the "Seven Lamps" is in the second page, where
Mr. Garbett asks a question, "Why are not convenience and stability
enough to constitute a fine building?"--which I should have answered
shortly by asking another, "Why we have been made men, and not bees nor
termites:" but Mr. Garbett has given a very pretty, though partial,
answer to it himself, in his 4th to 9th pages,--an answer which I
heartily beg the reader to consider. But, in page 12, it is made a grave
charge against me, that I use the words beauty and ornament
interchangeably. I do so, and ever shall; and so, I believe, one day,
will Mr. Garbett himself; but not while he continues to head his pages
thus:--"Beauty not dependent on ornament, _or superfluous_ features."
What right has he to assume that ornament, rightly so called, ever was,
or can be, superfluous? I have said before, and repeatedly in other
places, that the most beautiful things are the most useless; I never
said superfluous. I said useless in the well-understood and usual sense,
as meaning, inapplicable to the service of the body. Thus I called
peacocks and lilies useless; meaning, that roast peacock was unwholesome
(taking Juvenal's word for it), and that dried lilies made bad hay: but
I do not think peacocks superfluous birds, nor that the world could get
on well without its lilies. Or, to look closer, I suppose the peacock's
blue eyes to be very useless to him; not dangerous indeed, as to their
first master, but of small service, yet I do not think there is a
superfluous eye in all his tail; and for lilies, though the great King
of Israel was not "arrayed" like one of them, can Mr. Garbett tell us
which are their superfluous leaves? Is there no Diogenes among lilies?
none to be found content to drink dew, but out of silver? The fact is, I
never met with the architect yet who did not think ornament meant a
thing to be bought in a shop and pinned on, or left off, at
architectural toilets, as the fancy seized them, thinking little more
than many women do of the other kind of ornament--the only true
kind,--St. Peter's kind,--"Not that outward adorning, but the inner--of
the heart." I do not mean that architects cannot conceive this better
ornament, but they do not understand that it is the _only_ ornament;
that _all_ architectural ornament is this, and nothing but this; that a
noble building never has any extraneous or superfluous ornament; that
all its parts are necessary to its loveliness, and that no single atom
of them could be removed without harm to its life. You do not build a
temple and then dress it.[101] You create it in its loveliness, and
leave it, as her Maker left Eve. Not unadorned, I believe, but so well
adorned as to need no feather crowns. And I use the words ornament and
beauty interchangeably, in order that architects may understand this: I
assume that their building is to be a perfect creature capable of
nothing less than it has, and needing nothing more. It may, indeed,
receive additional decoration afterwards, exactly as a woman may
gracefully put a bracelet on her arm, or set a flower in her hair: but
that additional decoration is _not_ the _architecture_. It is of
curtains, pictures, statues, things that may be taken away from the
building, and not hurt it. What has the architect to do with these? He
has only to do with what is part of the building itself, that is to say,
its own inherent beauty. And because Mr. Garbett does not understand or
acknowledge this, he is led on from error to error; for we next find him
endeavoring to define beauty as distinct from ornament, and saying that
"Positive beauty may be produced by a studious collation of whatever
will display design, order, and congruity." (p. 14.) Is that so? There
is a highly studious collation of whatever will display design, order,
and congruity, in a skull, is there not?--yet small beauty. The nose is
a decorative feature,--yet slightly necessary to beauty, it seems to me;
now, at least, for I once thought I must be wrong in considering a skull
disagreeable. I gave it fair trial: put one on my bed-room
chimney-piece, and looked at it by sunrise every morning, and by
moonlight every night, and by all the best lights I could think of, for
a month, in vain. I found it as ugly at last as I did at first. So,
also, the hair is a decoration, and its natural curl is of little use;
but can Mr. Garbett conceive a bald beauty; or does he prefer a wig,
because that is a "_studious_ collation" of whatever will produce
design, order, and congruity? So the flush of the cheek is a
decoration,--God's painting of the temple of his spirit,--and the
redness of the lip; and yet poor Viola thought it beauty truly blent;
and I hold with her.

I have answered enough to this count.

The second point questioned is my assertion, "Ornament cannot be
overcharged if it is good, and is always overcharged when it is bad." To
which Mr. Garbett objects in these terms: "I must contend, on the
contrary, that the very best ornament may be overcharged by being
misplaced."

A short sentence with two mistakes in it.

First. Mr. Garbett cannot get rid of his unfortunate notion that
ornament is a thing to be manufactured separately, and fastened on. He
supposes that an ornament may be called good in itself, in the
stonemason's yard or in the ironmonger's shop: Once for all, let him put
this idea out of his head. We may say of a thing, considered separately,
that it is a pretty thing; but before we can say it is a good ornament,
we must know what it is to adorn, and how. As, for instance, a ring of
gold is a pretty thing; it is a good ornament on a woman's finger; not a
good ornament hung through her under lip. A hollyhock, seven feet high,
would be a good ornament for a cottage-garden; not a good ornament for a
lady's head-dress. Might not Mr. Garbett have seen this without my
showing? and that, therefore, when I said "_good_" ornament, I said
"well-placed" ornament, in one word, and that, also, when Mr. Garbett
says "it may be overcharged by being misplaced," he merely says it may
be overcharged by being _bad_.

Secondly. But, granted that ornament _were_ independent of its position,
and might be pronounced good in a separate form, as books are good, or
men are good.--Suppose I had written to a student in Oxford, "You cannot
have too many books, if they be good books;" and he had answered me,
"Yes, for if I have many, I have no place to put them in but the
coal-cellar." Would that in anywise affect the general principle that
he could not have too many books?

Or suppose he had written, "I must not have too many, they confuse my
head." I should have written back to him: "Don't buy books to put in the
coal-hole, nor read them if they confuse your head; you cannot have too
many, if they be good: but if you are too lazy to take care of them, or
too dull to profit by them, you are better without them."

Exactly in the same tone, I repeat to Mr. Garbett, "You cannot have too
much ornament, if it be good: but if you are too indolent to arrange it,
or too dull to take advantage of it, assuredly you are better without
it."

The other points bearing on this question have already been stated in
the close of the 21st chapter.

The third reference I have to answer, is to my repeated assertion, that
the evidence of manual labor is one of the chief sources of value in
ornament, ("Seven Lamps," p. 49, "Modern Painters," § 1, Chap. III.,) to
which objection is made in these terms: "We must here warn the reader
against a remarkable error of Ruskin. The value of ornaments in
architecture depends _not in the slightest degree_ on the _manual labor_
they contain. If it did, the finest ornaments ever executed would be the
stone chains that hang before certain Indian rock-temples." Is that so?
Hear a parallel argument. "The value of the Cornish mines depends not in
the slightest degree on the quantity of copper they contain. If it did,
the most valuable things ever produced would be copper saucepans." It is
hardly worth my while to answer this; but, lest any of my readers should
be confused by the objection, and as I hold the fact to be of great
importance, I may re-state it for them with some explanation.

Observe, then, the appearance of labor, that is to say, the evidence of
the past industry of man, is always, in the abstract, intensely
delightful: man being meant to labor, it is delightful to see that he
_has_ labored, and to read the record of his active and worthy
existence.

The evidence of labor becomes painful only when it is a _sign of Evil
greater, as Evil, than the labor is great, as Good_. As, for instance,
if a man has labored for an hour at what might have been done by another
man in a moment, this evidence of his labor is also evidence of his
weakness; and this weakness is greater in rank of evil, than his
industry is great in rank of good.

Again, if a man have labored at what was not worth accomplishing, the
signs of his labor are the signs of his folly, and his folly dishonors
his industry; we had rather he had been a wise man in rest than a fool
in labor.

Again, if a man have labored without accomplishing anything, the signs
of his labor are the signs of his disappointment; and we have more
sorrow in sympathy with his failure, than pleasure in sympathy with his
work.

Now, therefore, in ornament, whenever labor replaces what was better
than labor, that is to say, skill and thought; wherever it substitutes
itself for these, or _negatives these by its existence_, then it is
positive evil. Copper is an evil when it alloys gold, or poisons food:
not an evil, as copper; good in the form of pence, seriously
objectionable when it occupies the room of guineas. Let Danaë cast it
out of her lap, when the gold comes from heaven; but let the poor man
gather it up carefully from the earth.

Farther, the evidence of labor is not only a good when added to other
good, but the utter absence of it destroys good in human work. It is
only good for God to create without toil; that which man can create
without toil is worthless: machine ornaments are no ornaments at all.
Consider this carefully, reader: I could illustrate it for you
endlessly; but you feel it yourself every hour of your existence. And if
you do not know that you feel it, take up, for a little time, the trade
which of all manual trades has been most honored: be for once a
carpenter. Make for yourself a table or a chair, and see if you ever
thought any table or chair so delightful, and what strange beauty there
will be in their crooked limbs.

I have not noticed any other animadversions on the "Seven Lamps" in Mr.
Garbett's volume; but if there be more, I must now leave it to his own
consideration, whether he may not, as in the above instances, have made
them incautiously: I may, perhaps, also be permitted to request other
architects, who may happen to glance at the preceding pages, not
immediately to condemn what may appear to them false in general
principle. I must often be found deficient in technical knowledge; I
may often err in my statements respecting matters of practice or of
special law. But I do not write thoughtlessly respecting principles; and
my statements of these will generally be found worth reconnoitring
before attacking. Architects, no doubt, fancy they have strong grounds
for supposing me wrong when they seek to invalidate my assertions. Let
me assure them, at least, that I mean to be their friend, although they
may not immediately recognise me as such. If I could obtain the public
ear, and the principles I have advocated were carried into general
practice, porphyry and serpentine would be given to them instead of
limestone and brick; instead of tavern and shop-fronts they would have
to build goodly churches and noble dwelling-houses; and for every
stunted Grecism and stucco Romanism, into which they are now forced to
shape their palsied thoughts, and to whose crumbling plagiarisms they
must trust their doubtful fame, they would be asked to raise whole
streets of bold, and rich, and living architecture, with the certainty
in their hearts of doing what was honorable to themselves, and good for
all men.

Before I altogether leave the question of the influence of labor on
architectural effect, the reader may expect from me a word or two
respecting the subject which this year must be interesting to all--the
applicability, namely, of glass and iron to architecture in general, as
in some sort exemplified by the Crystal Palace.

It is thought by many that we shall forthwith have great part of our
architecture in glass and iron, and that new forms of beauty will result
from the studied employment of these materials.

It may be told in a few words how far this is possible; how far
eternally impossible.

There are two means of delight in all productions of art--color and
form.

The most vivid conditions of color attainable by human art are those of
works in glass and enamel, but not the most perfect. The best and
noblest coloring possible to art is that attained by the touch of the
human hand on an opaque surface, upon which it can command any tint
required, without subjection to alteration by fire or other mechanical
means. No color is so noble as the color of a good painting on canvas or
gesso.

This kind of color being, however, impossible, for the most part, in
architecture, the next best is the scientific disposition of the natural
colors of stones, which are far nobler than any abstract hues producible
by human art.

The delight which we receive from glass painting is one altogether
inferior, and in which we should degrade ourselves by over indulgence.
Nevertheless, it is possible that we may raise some palaces like
Aladdin's with colored glass for jewels, which shall be new in the annals
of human splendor, and good in their place; but not if they superseded
nobler edifices.

Now, color is producible either on opaque or in transparent bodies: but
form is only expressible, in its perfection, on opaque bodies, without
lustre.

This law is imperative, universal, irrevocable. No perfect or refined
form can be expressed except in opaque and lustreless matter. You cannot
see the form of a jewel, nor, in any perfection, even of a cameo or
bronze. You cannot perfectly see the form of a humming-bird, on account
of its burnishing; but you can see the form of a swan perfectly. No noble
work in form can ever, therefore, be produced in transparent or lustrous
glass or enamel. All noble architecture depends for its majesty on its
form: therefore you can never have any noble architecture in transparent
or lustrous glass or enamel. Iron is, however, opaque; and both it and
opaque enamel may, perhaps, be rendered quite lustreless; and, therefore,
fit to receive noble form.

Let this be thoroughly done, and both the iron and enamel made fine in
paste or grain, and you may have an architecture as noble as cast or
struck architecture even can be: as noble, therefore, as coins can be, or
common cast bronzes, and such other multiplicable things;[102]--eternally
separated from all good and great things by a gulph which not all the
tubular bridges nor engineering of ten thousand nineteenth centuries cast
into one great bronze-foreheaded century, will ever overpass one inch of.
All art which is worth its room in this world, all art which is not a
piece of blundering refuse, occupying the foot or two of earth which, if
unencumbered by it, would have grown corn or violets, or some better
thing, is _art which proceeds from an individual mind, working through
instruments which assist, but do not supersede, the muscular action of
the human hand, upon the materials which most tenderly receive, and most
securely retain, the impressions of such human labor_.

And the value of every work of art is exactly in the ratio of the
quantity of humanity which has been put into it, and legibly expressed
upon it for ever:--

First, of thought and moral purpose;

Secondly, of technical skill;

Thirdly, of bodily industry.

The quantity of bodily industry which that Crystal Palace expresses is
very great. So far it is good.

The quantity of thought it expresses is, I suppose, a single and very
admirable thought of Mr. Paxton's, probably not a bit brighter than
thousands of thoughts which pass through his active and intelligent
brain every hour,--that it might be possible to build a greenhouse
larger than ever greenhouse was built before. This thought, and some
very ordinary algebra, are as much as all that glass can represent of
human intellect. "But one poor half-pennyworth of bread to all this
intolerable deal of sack." Alas!

  "The earth hath bubbles as the water hath:
   And this is of them."


  18. EARLY ENGLISH CAPITALS.

The depth of the cutting in some of the early English capitals is,
indeed, part of a general system of attempts at exaggerated force of
effect, like the "_black_ touches" of second-rate draughtsmen, which I
have noticed as characteristic of nearly all northern work, associated
with the love of the grotesque: but the main section of the capital is
indeed a dripstone rolled round, as above described; and dripstone
sections are continually found in northern work, where not only they
cannot increase force of effect, but are entirely invisible except on
close examination; as, for instance, under the uppermost range of stones
of the foundation of Whitehall, or under the slope of the restored base
of All Souls College, Oxford, under the level of the eye. I much doubt
if any of the Fellows be aware of its existence.

Many readers will be surprised and displeased by the disparagement of
the early English capital. That capital has, indeed, one character of
considerable value; namely, the boldness with which it stops the
mouldings which fall upon it, and severs them from the shaft,
contrasting itself with the multiplicity of their vertical lines.
Sparingly used, or seldom seen, it is thus, in its place, not
unpleasing; and we English love it from association, it being always
found in connection with our purest and loveliest Gothic arches, and
never in multitudes large enough to satiate the eye with its form. The
reader who sits in the Temple church every Sunday, and sees no
architecture during the week but that of Chancery Lane, may most
justifiably quarrel with me for what I have said of it. But if every
house in Fleet Street or Chancery Lane were Gothic, and all had early
English capitals, I would answer for his making peace with me in a
fortnight.


  19. TOMBS NEAR ST. ANASTASIA.

Whose they are, is of little consequence to the reader or to me, and I
have taken no pains to discover; their value being not in any evidence
they bear respecting dates, but in their intrinsic merit as examples of
composition. Two of them are within the gate, one on the top of it, and
this latter is on the whole the best, though all are beautiful; uniting
the intense northern energy in their figure sculpture with the most
serene classical restraint in their outlines, and unaffected, but
masculine simplicity of construction.

I have not put letters to the diagram of the lateral arch at page 154,
in order not to interfere with the clearness of the curves, but I shall
always express the same points by the same letters, whenever I have to
give measures of arches of this simple kind, so that the reader need
never have the diagrams lettered at all. The base or span of the centre
arch will always be _a b_; its vertex will always be V; the points of
the cusps will be _c c_; _p p_ will be the bases of perpendiculars let
fall from V and _c_ on _a b_; and _d_ the base of a perpendicular from
the point of the cusp to the arch line. Then _a b_ will always be a span
of the arch, V _p_ its perpendicular height, V _a_ the chord of its side
arcs, _d c_ the depth of its cusps, _c c_ the horizontal interval
between the cusps, _a c_ the length of the chord of the lower arc of the
cusp, V _c_ the length of the chord of the upper arc of the cusp,
(whether continuous or not,) and _c p_ the length of a perpendicular
from the point of the cusp on _a b_.

Of course we do not want all these measures for a single arch, but it
often happens that some of them are attainable more easily than others;
some are often unattainable altogether, and it is necessary therefore to
have expressions for whichever we may be able to determine.

V _p_ or V _a_, _a b_, and _d c_ are always essential; then either _a c_
and V _c_ or _c c_ and _c p_: when I have my choice, I always take _a
b_, V _p_, _d c_, _c c_, and _c p_, but _c p_ is not to be generally
obtained so accurately as the cusp arcs.

The measures of the present arch are:

           Ft.  In.
  _a b_,    3 ,, 8
  V _p_,    4 ,, 0
  V _c_,    2 ,, 4-1/2
  _a c_,    2 ,, 0-1/4
  _d c_,    0 ,, 3-1/2


                   20. SHAFTS OF DUCAL PALACE.

The shortness of the thicker ones at the angles is induced by the
greater depth of the enlarged capitals: thus the 36th shaft is 10 ft.
4-1/3 in. in circumference at its base, and 10 ,, 0-1/2[103] in
circumference under the fillet of its capital; but it is only 6 ,,
1-3/4 high, while the minor intermediate shafts, of which the thickest
is 7 ,, 8 round at the base, and 7 ,, 4 under capital, are yet on the
average 7 ,, 7 high. The angle shaft towards the sea (the 18th) is
nearly of the proportions of the 36th, and there are three others, the
15th, 24th, and 26th, which are thicker than the rest, though not so
thick as the angle ones. The 24th and 26th have both party walls to
bear, and I imagine the 15th must in old time have carried another,
reaching across what is now the Sala del Gran Consiglio.

They measure respectively round at the base,

  The 15th, 8 ,, 2
      24th, 9 ,, 6-1/2
      26th, 8 ,, 0-1/2

The other pillars towards the sea, and those to the 27th inclusive of
the Piazzetta, are all seven feet round at the base, and then there is a
most curious and delicate crescendo of circumference to the 36th, thus:

  The 28th, 7 ,, 3   The 33rd, 7 ,, 6
      29th, 7 ,, 4       34th, 7 ,, 8
      30th, 7 ,, 6       35th, 7 ,, 8
      31st, 7 ,, 7       36th, 10 ,, 4-1/3
      32nd, 7 ,, 5

The shafts of the upper arcade, which are above these thicker columns,
are also thicker than their companions, measuring on the average, 4 ,,
8-1/2 in circumference, while those of the sea façade, except the 29th,
average 4 ,, 7-1/2 in circumference. The 29th, which is of course above
the 15th of the lower story, is 5 ,, 5 in circumference, which little
piece of evidence will be of no small value to us by-and-by. The 35th
carries the angle of the palace, and is 6 ,, 0 round. The 47th, which
comes above the 24th and carries the party wall of the Sala del Gran
Consiglio, is strengthened by a pilaster; and the 51st, which comes over
the 26th, is 5 ,, 4-1/2 round, or nearly the same as the 29th; it
carries the party wall of the Sala del Scrutinio; a small room
containing part of St. Mark's library, coming between the two saloons;
a room which, in remembrances of the help I have received in all my
inquiries from the kindness and intelligence of its usual occupant, I
shall never easily distinguish otherwise than as "Mr. Lorenzi's."[104]

I may as well connect with these notes respecting the arcades of the
Ducal Palace, those which refer to Plate XIV., which represents one of
its spandrils. Every spandril of the lower arcade was intended to have
been occupied by an ornament resembling the one given in that plate. The
mass of the building being of Istrian stone, a depth of about two inches
is left within the mouldings of the arches, rough hewn, to receive the
slabs of fine marble composing the patterns. I cannot say whether the
design was ever completed, or the marbles have been since removed, but
there are now only two spandrils retaining their fillings, and vestiges
of them in a third. The two complete spandrils are on the sea façade,
above the 3rd and 10th capitals (_vide_ method of numbering, Chap. I.,
page 30); that is to say, connecting the 2nd arch with the 3rd, and the
9th with the 10th. The latter is the one given in Plate XIV. The white
portions of it are all white marble, the dental band surrounding the
circle is in coarse sugary marble, which I believe to be Greek, and
never found in Venice to my recollection, except in work at least
anterior to the fifteenth century. The shaded fields charged with the
three white triangles are of red Verona marble; the inner disc is green
serpentine, and the dark pieces of the radiating leaves are grey marble.
The three triangles are equilateral. The two uppermost are 1 ,, 5 each
side, and the lower 1 ,, 2.

The extreme diameter of the circle is 3 ,, 10-1/2; its field is slightly
raised above the red marbles, as shown in the section at A, on the left.
A _a_ is part of the red marble field; _a b_ the section of the dentil
moulding let into it; _b c_ the entire breadth of the rayed zone,
represented on the other side of the spandril by the line C _f_; _c d_
is the white marble band let in, with the dogtooth on the face of it;
_b c_ is 7-3/4 inches across; _c d_ 3-3/4; and at B are given two joints
of the dentil (mentioned above, in the chapter on dentils, as unique in
Venice) of their actual size. At C is given one of the inlaid leaves;
its measure being (in inches) C _f_ 7-3/4; C _h_ 3/4; _f g_ 3/4; _f e_
4-3/4, the base of the smaller leaves being of course _f e_ - _f g_ = 4.
The pattern which occupies the other spandril is similar, except that
the field _b c_, instead of the intersecting arcs, has only triangles of
grey marble, arranged like rays, with their bases towards the centre.
There being twenty round the circle, the reader can of course draw them
for himself; they being isosceles, touching the dentil with their
points, and being in contact at their bases: it has lost its central
boss. The marbles are, in both, covered with a rusty coating, through
which it is excessively difficult to distinguish the colors (another
proof of the age of the ornament). But the white marbles are certainly,
in places (except only the sugary dentil), veined with purple, and the
grey seem warmed with green.

A trace of another of these ornaments may be seen over the 21st capital;
but I doubt if the marbles have ever been inserted in the other
spandrils, and their want of ornament occasions the slight meagreness in
the effect of the lower story, which is almost the only fault of the
building.

This decoration by discs, or shield-like ornaments, is a marked
characteristic of Venetian architecture in its earlier ages, and is
carried into later times by the Byzantine Renaissance, already
distinguished from the more corrupt forms of Renaissance, in Appendix 6.
Of the disc decoration, so borrowed, we have already an example in Plate
I. In Plate VII. we have an earlier condition of it, one of the discs
being there sculptured, the others surrounded by sculptured bands: here
we have, on the Ducal Palace, the most characteristic of all, because
likest to the shield, which was probably the origin of the same ornament
among the Arabs, and assuredly among the Greeks. In Mr. Donaldson's
restoration of the gate of the treasury of Atreus, this ornament is
conjecturally employed, and it occurs constantly on the Arabian
buildings of Cairo.


  21. ANCIENT REPRESENTATIONS OF WATER.

I have long been desirous of devoting some time to an enquiry into the
effect of natural scenery upon the pagan, and especially the Greek,
mind, and knowing that my friend, Mr. C. Newton, had devoted much
thought to the elucidation of the figurative and symbolic language of
ancient art, I asked him to draw up for me a few notes of the facts
which he considered most interesting, as illustrative of its methods of
representing nature. I suggested to him, for an initiative subject, the
representation of water; because this is one of the natural objects
whose portraiture may most easily be made a test of treatment, for it is
one of universal interest, and of more closely similar aspect in all
parts of the world than any other. Waves, currents, and eddies are much
liker each other, everywhere, than either land or vegetation. Rivers and
lakes, indeed, differ widely from the sea, and the clear Pacific from
the angry Northern ocean; but the Nile is liker the Danube than a knot
of Nubian palms is to a glade of the Black Forest; and the Mediterranean
is liker the Atlantic than the Campo Felice is like Solway moss.

Mr. Newton has accordingly most kindly furnished me with the following
data. One or two of the types which he describes have been already
noticed in the main text; but it is well that the reader should again
contemplate them in the position which they here occupy in a general
system. I recommend his special attention to Mr. Newton's definitions of
the terms "figurative" and "symbolic," as applied to art, in the
beginning of the paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

In ancient art, that is to say, in the art of the Egyptian, Assyrian,
Greek, and Roman races, water is, for the most part, represented
conventionally rather than naturally.

By natural representation is here meant as just and perfect an imitation
of nature as the technical means of art will allow: on the other hand,
representation is said to be conventional, either when a confessedly
inadequate imitation is accepted in default of a better, or when
imitation is not attempted at all, and it is agreed that other modes of
representation, those by figures or by symbols, shall be its substitute
and equivalent.

In figurative representation there is always _impersonation_; the
sensible form, borrowed by the artist from organic life, is conceived to
be actuated by a will, and invested with such mental attributes as
constitute personality.

The sensible _symbol_, whether borrowed from organic or from inorganic
nature, is not a personification at all, but the conventional sign or
equivalent of some object or notion, to which it may perhaps bear no
visible resemblance, but with which the intellect or the imagination has
in some way associated it.

For instance, a city may be figuratively represented as a woman crowned
with towers; here the artist has selected for the expression of his idea
a human form animated with a will and motives of action analogous to
those of humanity generally. Or, again, as in Greek art, a bull may be a
figurative representation of a river, and, in the conception of the
artist, this animal form may contain, and be ennobled by, a human mind.

This is still impersonation; the form only in which personality is
embodied is changed.

Again, a dolphin may be used as a symbol of the sea; a man ploughing
with two oxen is a well-known symbol of a Roman colony. In neither of
these instances is there impersonation. The dolphin is not invested,
like the figure of Neptune, with any of the attributes of the human
mind; it has animal instincts, but no will; it represents to us its
native element, only as a part may be taken for a whole.

Again, the man ploughing does not, like the turreted female figure,
_personify_, but rather _typifies_ the town, standing as the visible
representation of a real event, its first foundation. To our mental
perceptions, as to our bodily senses, this figure seems no more than
man; there is no blending of his personal nature with the impersonal
nature of the colony, no transfer of attributes from the one to the
other.

Though the conventionally imitative, the figurative, and the symbolic,
are three distinct kinds of representation, they are constantly combined
in one composition, as we shall see in the following examples, cited
from the art of successive races in chronological order.

In Egyptian art the general representation of water is the
conventionally imitative. In the British Museum are two frescoes from
tombs at Thebes, Nos. 177 and 170: the subject of the first of these is
an oblong pond, ground-plan and elevation being strangely confused in
the design. In this pond water is represented by parallel zigzag lines,
in which fish are swimming about. On the surface are birds and lotos
flowers; the herbage at the edge of the pond is represented by a border
of symmetrical fan-shaped flowers; the field beyond by rows of trees,
arranged round the sides of the pond at right angles to each other, and
in defiance of all laws of perspective.

[Illustration: Fig. LXXI.]

In the fresco, No. 170, we have the representation of a river with
papyrus on its bank. Here the water is rendered by zigzag lines arranged
vertically and in parallel lines, so as to resemble herring-bone
masonry, thus. There are fish in this fresco as in the preceding, and in
both each fish is drawn very distinctly, not as it would appear to the
eye viewed through water. The mode of representing this element in
Egyptian painting is further abbreviated in their hieroglyphic writing,
where the sign of water is a zigzag line; this line is, so to speak, a
picture of water written in short hand. In the Egyptian Pantheon there
was but one aquatic deity, the god of the Nile; his type is, therefore,
the only figurative representation of water in Egyptian art. (Birch,
"Gallery of British Museum Antiquities," Pl. 13.) In Assyrian sculpture
we have very curious conventionally imitative representations of water.
On several of the friezes from Nimroud and Khorsabad, men are seen
crossing a river in boats, or in skins, accompanied by horses swimming
(see Layard, ii. p. 381). In these scenes water is represented by masses
of wavy lines somewhat resembling tresses of hair, and terminating in
curls or volutes; these wavy lines express the general character of a
deep and rapid current, like that of the Tigris. Fish are but sparingly
introduced, the idea of surface being sufficiently expressed by the
floating figures and boats. In the representation of these there is the
same want of perspective as in the Egyptian fresco which we have just
cited.

In the Assyrian Pantheon one aquatic deity has been discovered, the god
Dagon, whose human form terminates in a fish's tail. Of the character
and attributes of this deity we know but little.

The more abbreviated mode of representing water, the zigzag line, occurs
on the large silver coins with the type of a city or a war galley (see
Layard, ii. p. 386). These coins were probably struck in Assyria, not
long after the conquest of it by the Persians.

In Greek art the modes of representing water are far more varied. Two
conventional imitations, the wave moulding and the Mæander, are well
known. Both are probably of the most remote antiquity; both have been
largely employed as an architectural ornament, and subordinately as a
decoration of vases, costume, furniture and implements. In the wave
moulding we have a conventional representation of the small crisping
waves which break upon the shore of the Mediterranean, the sea of the
Greeks.

Their regular succession, and equality of force and volume, are
generalised in this moulding, while the minuter varieties which
distinguish one wave from another are merged in the general type. The
character of ocean waves is to be "for ever changing, yet the same for
ever;" it is this eternity of recurrence which the early artist has
expressed in this hieroglyphic.

With this profile representation of water may be compared the sculptured
waves out of which the head and arms of Hyperion are rising in the
pediment of the Parthenon (Elgin Room, No. (65) 91, Museum Marbles, vi.
pl. 1). Phidias has represented these waves like a mass of overlapping
tiles, thus generalising their rippling movement. In the Mæander pattern
the graceful curves of nature are represented by angles, as in the
Egyptian hieroglyphic of water: so again the earliest representation of
the labyrinth on the coins of the Cnossus is rectangular; on later coins
we find the curvilinear form introduced.

In the language of Greek mythography, the wave pattern and the Mæander
are sometimes used singly for the idea of water, but more frequently
combined with figurative representation. The number of aquatic deities
in the Greek Pantheon led to the invention of a great variety of
beautiful types. Some of these are very well known. Everybody is
familiar with the general form of Poseidon (Neptune), the Nereids, the
Nymphs and River Gods; but the modes in which these types were combined
with conventional imitation and with accessory symbols deserve careful
study, if we would appreciate the surpassing richness and beauty of the
language of art formed out of these elements.

This class of representations may be divided into two principal groups,
those relating to the sea, and those relating to fresh water.

The power of the ocean and the great features of marine scenery are
embodied in such types as Poseidon, Nereus and the Nereids, that is to
say, in human forms moving through the liquid element in chariots, or on
the back of dolphins, or who combine the human form with that of the
fish-like Tritons. The sea-monsters who draw these chariots are called
Hippocamps, being composed of the tail of a fish and the fore-part of a
horse, the legs terminating in web-feet: this union seems to express
speed and power under perfect control, such as would characterise the
movements of sea deities. A few examples have been here selected to show
how these types were combined with symbols and conventional imitation.

In the British Museum is a vase, No. 1257, engraved (Lenormant et De
Witte, Mon. Céram., i. pl. 27), of which the subject is, Europa crossing
the sea on the back of the bull. In this design the sea is represented
by a variety of expedients. First, the swimming action of the bull
suggests the idea of the liquid medium through which he moves. Behind
him stands Nereus, his staff held perpendicularly in his hand; the top
of his staff comes nearly to the level of the bull's back, and is
probably meant as the measure of the whole depth of the sea. Towards the
surface line thus indicated a dolphin is rising; in the middle depth is
another dolphin; below a shrimp and a cuttle-fish, and the bottom is
indicated by a jagged line of rocks, on which are two echini.

On a mosaic found at Oudnah in Algeria (Revue Archéol., iii. pl. 50), we
have a representation of the sea, remarkable for the fulness of details
with which it is made out.

This, though of the Roman period, is so thoroughly Greek in feeling,
that it may be cited as an example of the class of mythography now under
consideration. The mosaic lines the floor and sides of a bath, and, as
was commonly the case in the baths of the ancients, serves as a
figurative representation of the water it contained.

On the sides are hippocamps, figures riding on dolphins, and islands on
which fishermen stand; on the floor are fish, crabs, and shrimps.

These, as in the vase with Europa, indicate the bottom of the sea: the
same symbols of the submarine world appear on many other ancient
designs. Thus in vase pictures, when Poseidon upheaves the island of Cos
to overwhelm the Giant Polydotes, the island is represented as an
immense mass of rock; the parts which have been under water are
indicated by a dolphin, a shrimp, and a sepia, the parts above the water
by a goat and a serpent (Lenormant et De Witte, i., tav. 5).

Sometimes these symbols occur singly in Greek art, as the types, for
instance, of coins. In such cases they cannot be interpreted without
being viewed in relation to the whole context of mythography to which
they belong. If we find, for example, on one coin of Tarentum a shell,
on another a dolphin, on a third a figure of Tarus, the mythic founder
of the town, riding on a dolphin in the midst of the waves, and this
latter group expresses the idea of the town itself and its position on
the coast, then we know the two former types to be but portions of the
greater design, having been detached from it, as we may detach words
from sentences.

The study of the fuller and clearer examples, such as we have cited
above, enables us to explain many more compendious forms of expression.
We have, for instance, on coins several representations of ancient
harbors.

Of these, the earliest occurs on the coins of Zancle, the modern Messina
in Sicily. The ancients likened the form of this harbor to a sickle, and
on the coins of the town we find a curved object, within the area of
which is a dolphin. On this curve are four square elevations placed at
equal distances. It has been conjectured that these projections are
either towers or the large stones to which galleys were moored still to
be seen in ancient harbors (see Burgon, Numismatic Chronicle, iii. p.
40). With this archaic representation of a harbor may be compared some
examples of the Roman period. On a coin of Sept. Severus struck at
Corinth (Millingen, Sylloge of Uned. Coins, 1837, p. 57, Pl. II., No.
30) we have a female figure standing on a rock between two recumbent
male figures holding rudders. From an arch at the foot of the rock a
stream is flowing: this is a representation of the rock of the Acropolis
of Corinth: the female figure is a statue of Aphrodite, whose temple
surmounted the rock. The stream is the fountain Pirene. The two
recumbent figures are impersonations of the two harbors, Lechreum and
Cenchreia, between which Corinth was situated. Philostratus (Icon. ii.,
c. 16) describes a similar picture of the Isthmus between the two
harbors, one of which was in the form of a youth, the other of a nymph.

On another coin of Corinth we have one of the harbors in a semicircular
form, the whole arc being marked with small equal divisions, to denote
the archways under which the ancient galleys were drawn, _subductæ_; at
the either horn or extremity of the harbor is a temple; in the centre of
the mouth, a statue of Neptune. (Millingen, Médailles Inéd., Pl. II.,
No. 19. Compare also Millingen, Ancient Coins of Cities and Kings, 1831,
pp. 50-61, Pl. IV., No. 15; Mionnet, Suppl. vii. p. 79, No. 246; and the
harbor of Ostium, on the large brass coins of Nero, in which there is a
representation of the Roman fleet and a reclining figure of Neptune.)

In vase pictures we have occasionally an attempt to represent water
naturally. On a vase in the British Museum (No. 785), of which the
subject is Ulysses and the Sirens, the Sea is rendered by wavy lines
drawn in black on a red ground, and something like the effect of light
playing on the surface of the water is given. On each side of the ship
are shapeless masses of rock on which the Sirens stand.

One of the most beautiful of the figurative representations of the sea
is the well-known type of Scylla. She has a beautiful body, terminating
in two barking dogs and two serpent tails. Sometimes drowning men, the
_rari nantes in gurgite vasto_, appear caught up in the coils of these
tails. Below are dolphins. Scylla generally brandishes a rudder to show
the manner in which she twists the course of ships. For varieties of her
type see Monum. dell'Inst. Archeol. Rom., iii. Tavv. 52-3.

The representations of fresh water may be arranged under the following
heads--rivers, lakes, fountains.

There are several figurative modes of representing rivers very
frequently employed in ancient mythography.

In the type which occurs earliest we have the human form combined with
that of the bull in several ways. On an archaic coin of Metapontum in
Lucania, (see frontispiece to Millingen, Ancient Coins of Greek Cities
and Kings,) the river Achelous is represented with the figure of a man
with a shaggy beard and bull's horns and ears. On a vase of the best
period of Greek art (Brit. Mus. No. 789; Birch, Trans. Roy. Soc. of
Lit., New Series, Lond. 1843, i. p. 100) the same river is represented
with a satyr's head and long bull's horns on the forehead; his form,
human to the waist, terminates in a fish's tail; his hair falls down his
back; his beard is long and shaggy. In this type we see a combination of
the three forms separately enumerated by Sophocles, in the commencement
of the Trachiniæ.

                  [Greek: Achelôon legô,
  os m' en trisin morphaisin exêtei patros,
  phoitôn enargês auros allot' aiolos,
  drakôn heliktos, allot' andreiô kytei
  bouprôros, ek de daskiou geneiados
  krounoi dierrhainonto krênaiou potou].

In a third variety of this type the human-headed body is united at the
waist with the shoulders of a bull's body, in which it terminates. This
occurs on an early vase. (Brit. Mus., No. 452.) On the coins of Oeniadæ
in Acarnia, and on those of Ambracia, all of the period after Alexander
the Great, the Achelous has a bull's body, and head with a human face.
In this variety of the type the human element is almost absorbed, as in
the first variety cited above, the coin of Metapontum, the bull portion
of the type is only indicated by the addition of the horns and ears to
the human head. On the analogy between these, varieties in the type of
the Achelous and those under which the metamorphoses of the marine
goddess Thetis are represented, see Gerhard, Auserl. Vasenb. ii. pp.
106-113. It is probable that, in the type of Thetis, of Proteus, and
also of the Achelous, the singular combinations and transformations are
intended to express the changeful nature of the element water.

Numerous other examples may be cited, where rivers are represented by
this combination of the bull and human form, which maybe called, for
convenience, the Androtauric type. On the coins of Sicily, of the
archaic and also of the finest period of art, rivers are most usually
represented by a youthful male figure, with small budding horns; the
hair has the lank and matted form which characterises aquatic deities in
Greek mythography. The name of the river is often inscribed round the
head. When the whole figure occurs on the coin, it is always represented
standing, never reclining.

The type of the bull on the coins of Sybaris and Thurium, in Magna
Græcia, has been considered, with great probability, a representation of
this kind. On the coins of Sybaris, which are of a very early period,
the head of the bull is turned round; on those of Thurium, he stoops his
head, butting: the first of these actions has been thought to symbolise
the winding course of the river, the second, its headlong current. On
the coins of Thurium, the idea of water is further suggested by the
adjunct of dolphins and other fish in the exergue of the coin. The
ground on which the bull stands is indicated by herbage or pebbles. This
probably represents the river bank. Two bulls' head occur on the coins
of Sardis, and it has been ingeniously conjectured by Mr. Burgon that
the two rivers of the place are expressed under this type.

The representation of river-gods as human figures in a reclining
position, though probably not so much employed in earlier Greek art as
the Androtauric type, is very much more familiar to us, from its
subsequent adoption in Roman mythography. The earliest example we have
of a reclining river-god is in the figure in the Elgin Room commonly
called the Ilissus, but more probably the Cephissus. This occupied one
angle in the western pediment of the Parthenon; the other Athenian
river, the Ilissus, and the fountain Callirrhoe being represented by a
male and female figure in the opposite angle; this group, now destroyed,
is visible in the drawing made by Carrey in 1678.

It is probable that the necessities of pedimental composition first led
the artist to place the river-god in a reclining position. The head of
the Ilissus being broken off, we are not sure whether he had bull's
horns, like the Sicilian figures already described. His form is
youthful, in the folds of the drapery behind him there is a flow like
that of waves, but the idea of water is not suggested by any other
symbol. When we compare this figure with that of the Nile (Visconti,
Mus. Pio Clem., i., Pl. 38), and the figure of the Tiber in the Louvre,
both of which are of the Roman period, we see how in these later types
the artist multiplied symbols and accessories, ingrafting them on the
original simple type of the river-god, as it was conceived by Phidias in
the figure of the Ilissus. The Nile is represented as a colossal bearded
figure reclining. At his side is a cornucopia, full of the vegetable
produce of the Egyptian soil. Round his body are sixteen naked boys, who
represent the sixteen cubits, the height to which the river rose in a
favorable year. The statue is placed on a basement divided into three
compartments, one above another. In the uppermost of these, waves are
flowing over in one great sheet from the side of the river-god. In the
other two compartments are the animals and plants of the river; the
bas-reliefs on this basement are, in fact, a kind of abbreviated
symbolic panorama of the Nile.

The Tiber is represented in a very similar manner. On the base are, in
two compartments, scenes taken from the early Roman myths; flocks,
herds, and other objects on the banks of the river. (Visconti, Mus. P.
Cl. i., Pl. 39; Millin, Galerie Mythol., i. p. 77, Pl. 74, Nos. 304,
308.)

In the types of the Greek coins of Camarina, we find two interesting
representations of Lakes. On the obverse of one of these we have, within
a circle of the wave pattern, a male head, full face, with dishevelled
hair, and with a dolphin on either side; on the reverse a female figure
sailing on a swan, below which a wave moulding, and above, a dolphin.

On another coin the swan type of the reverse is associated with the
youthful head of a river-god, inscribed "Hipparis" on the obverse. On
some smaller coins we have the swan flying over the rippling waves,
which are represented by the wave moulding. When we examine the chart of
Sicily, made by the Admiralty survey, we find marked down at Camarina, a
lake through which the river Hipparis flows.

We can hardly doubt that the inhabitants of Camarina represented both
their river and their lakes on their coins. The swan flying over the
waves would represent a lake; the figure associated with it being no
doubt the Aphrodite worshipped at that place: the head, in a circle of
wave pattern, may express that part of the river which flows through the
lake.

Fountains are usually represented by a stream of water issuing from a
lion's head in the rock: see a vase (Gerhard, Auserl. Vasenb., taf.
CXXXIV.), where Hercules stands, receiving a shower-bath from a hot
spring at Thermæ in Sicily. On the coins of Syracuse the fountain
Arethusa is represented by a female head seen to the front; the flowing
lines of her dishevelled hair suggest, though they do not directly
imitate, the bubbling action of the fresh-water spring; the sea in which
it rises is symbolized by the dolphins round the head. This type
presents a striking analogy with that of the Camarina head in the circle
of wave pattern described above.

These are the principal modes of representing water in Greek
mythography. In the art of the Roman period, the same kind of figurative
and symbolic language is employed, but there is a constant tendency to
multiply accessories and details, as we have shown in the later
representations of harbors and river-gods cited above. In these crowded
compositions the eye is fatigued and distracted by the quantity it has
to examine; the language of art becomes more copious but less terse and
emphatic, and addresses itself to minds far less intelligent than the
refined critics who were the contemporaries of Phidias.

Rivers in Roman art are usually represented by reclining male figures,
generally bearded, holding reeds or other plants in their hands, and
leaning on urns from which water is flowing. On the coins of many Syrian
cities, struck in imperial times, the city is represented by a turreted
female figure seated on rocks, and resting her feet on the shoulder of a
youthful male figure, who looks up in her face, stretching out his arms,
and who is sunk in the ground as high as the waist. See Müller
(Denkmäler d. A. Kunst, i., taf. 49, No. 220) for a group of this kind
in the Vatican, and several similar designs on coins.

On the column of Trajan there occur many rude representations of the
Danube, and other rivers crossed by the Romans in their military
expeditions. The water is imitated by sculptured wavy lines, in which
boats are placed. In one scene (Bartoli, Colonna Trajana, Tav. 4) this
rude conventional imitation is combined with a figure. In a recess in
the river bank is a reclining river-god, terminating at the waist. This
is either meant for a statue which was really placed on the bank of the
river, and which therefore marks some particular locality, or we have
here figurative representation blended with conventional imitation.

On the column of Antoninus (Bartoli, Colon. Anton., Tav. 15) a storm of
rain is represented by the head of Jupiter Pluvius, who has a vast
outspread beard flowing in long tresses. In the Townley collection, in
the British Museum, is a Roman helmet found at Ribchester in Lancashire,
with a mask or vizor attached. The helmet is richly embossed with
figures in a battle scene; round the brow is a row of turrets; the hair
in the forehead is so treated as to give the idea of waves washing the
base of the turrets. This head is perhaps a figurative representation of
a town girt with fortifications and a moat, near which some great battle
was fought. It is engraved (Vetusta Monum. of Soc. Ant. London, iv., Pl.
1-4).

In the Galeria at Florence is a group in alto relievo (Gori, Inscript.
Ant. Flor. 1727, p. 76, Tab. 14) of three female figures, one of whom is
certainly Demeter Kourotrophos, or the earth; another, Thetis, or the
sea; the centre of the three seems to represent Aphrodite associated, as
on the coins of Camarina, with the element of fresh water.

This figure is seated on a swan, and holds over her head an arched veil.
Her hair is bound with reeds; above her veil grows a tall water plant,
and below the swan other water plants, and a stork seated on a _hydria_,
or pitcher, from which water is flowing. The swan, the stork, the water
plants, and the _hydria_ must all be regarded as symbols of fresh water,
the latter emblem being introduced to show that the element is fit for
the use of man.

Fountains in Roman art are generally personified as figures of nymphs
reclining with urns, or standing holding before them a large shell.

One of the latest representations of water in ancient art is the mosaic
of Palestrina (Barthélemy, in Bartoli, Peint. Antiques) which may be
described as a kind of rude panorama of some district of Upper Egypt, a
bird's-eye view, half man, half picture, in which the details are
neither adjusted to a scale, nor drawn according to perspective, but
crowded together, as they would be in an ancient bas-relief.


  22. ARABIAN ORNAMENTATION.

I do not mean what I have here said of the Inventive power of the Arab
to be understood as in the least applying to the detestable
ornamentation of the Alhambra.[105] The Alhambra is no more
characteristic of Arab work, than Milan Cathedral is of Gothic: it is a
late building, a work of the Spanish dynasty in its last decline, and
its ornamentation is fit for nothing but to be transferred to patterns
of carpets or bindings of books, together with their marbling, and
mottling, and other mechanical recommendations. The Alhambra ornament
has of late been largely used in shop-fronts, to the no small detriment
of Regent Street and Oxford Street.


  23. VARIETIES OF CHAMFER.

Let B A C, Fig. LXXII., be the original angle of the wall. Inscribe
within it a circle, _p_ Q N _p_, of the size of the bead required,
touching A B, A C, in _p_, _p_; join _p_, _p_, and draw B C parallel to
it, touching the circle.

Then the lines B C, _p p_ are the limits of the possible chamfers
constructed with curves struck either from centre A, as the line Q _q_,
N _d_, _r u_, _g c_, &c., or from any other point chosen as a centre in
the direction Q A produced: and also of all chamfers in straight lines,
as _a b_, _e f_. There are, of course, an infinite number of chamfers to
be struck between B C and _p p_, from every point in Q A produced to
infinity; thus we have infinity multiplied into infinity to express the
number of possible chamfers of this species, which are peculiarly
Italian chamfers; together with another singly infinite group of the
straight chamfers, _a b_, _e f_, &c., of which the one formed by the
line _a b_, passing through the centre of the circle, is the universal
early Gothic chamfer of Venice.

Again. Either on the line A C, or on any other lines A _l_ or A _m_,
radiating from A, any number of centres may be taken, from which, with
any radii not greater than the distance between such points and Q, an
infinite number of curves may be struck, such as _t u_, _r s_, N _n_
(all which are here struck from centres on the line A C). These lines
represent the great class of the northern chamfers, of which the number
is infinity raised to its fourth power, but of which the curve N _n_
(for northern) represents the average condition; the shallower chamfers
of the same group, _r s_, _t u_, &c., occurring often in Italy. The
lines _r u_, _t u_, and _a b_ may be taken approximating to the most
frequent conditions of the southern chamfer.

[Illustration: Fig. LXXII.]

It is evident that the chords of any of these curves will give a
relative group of rectilinear chamfers, occurring both in the North and
South; but the rectilinear chamfers, I think, invariably fall within the
line Q C, and are either parallel with it, or inclined to A C at an
angle greater than A C Q, and often perpendicular to it; but never
inclined to it at an angle less than A C Q.


  24. RENAISSANCE BASES.

The following extract from my note-book refers also to some features of
late decoration of shafts.

"The Scuola di San Rocco is one of the most interesting examples of
Renaissance work in Venice. Its fluted pillars are surrounded each by a
wreath, one of vine, another of laurel, another of oak, not indeed
arranged with the fantasticism of early Gothic; but, especially the
laurel, reminding one strongly of the laurel sprays, powerful as well as
beautiful, of Veronese and Tintoret. Their stems are curiously and
richly interlaced--the last vestige of the Byzantine wreathed work--and
the vine-leaves are ribbed on the surfaces, I think, nearly as finely as
those of the Noah,[106] though more injured by time. The capitals are
far the richest Renaissance in Venice, less corrupt and more masculine
in plan, than any other, and truly suggestive of support, though of
course showing the tendency to error in this respect; and finally, at
the angles of the pure Attic bases, on the square plinth, are set
couchant animals; one, an elephant four inches high, very curiously and
cleverly cut, and all these details worked with a spirit, finish, fancy,
and affection quite worthy of the middle ages. But they have all the
marked fault of being utterly detached from the architecture. The
wreaths round the columns look as if they would drop off the next
moment, and the animals at the bases produce exactly the effect of mice
who had got there by accident: one feels them ridiculously diminutive,
and utterly useless."

The effect of diminutiveness is, I think, chiefly owing to there being
no other groups of figures near them, to accustom the eye to the
proportion, and to the needless choice of the largest animals,
elephants, bears, and lions, to occupy a position so completely
insignificant, and to be expressed on so contemptible a scale,--not in a
bas-relief or pictorial piece of sculpture, but as independent figures.
The whole building is a most curious illustration of the appointed fate
of the Renaissance architects,--to caricature whatever they imitated,
and misapply whatever they learned.


  25. ROMANIST DECORATION OF BASES.

I have spoken above (Appendix 12) of the way in which the Roman Catholic
priests everywhere suffer their churches to be desecrated. But the worst
instances I ever saw of sacrilege and brutality, daily permitted in the
face of all men, were the uses to which the noble base of St. Mark's was
put, when I was last in Venice. Portions of nearly all cathedrals may be
found abandoned to neglect; but this base of St. Mark's is in no obscure
position. Full fronting the western sun--crossing the whole breadth of
St. Mark's Place--the termination of the most noble square in the
world--the centre of the most noble city--its purple marbles were, in
the winter of 1849, the customary _gambling tables_ of the idle children
of Venice; and the parts which flank the Great Entrance, that very
entrance where "Barbarossa flung his mantle off," were the counters of a
common bazaar for children's toys, carts, dolls, and small pewter spoons
and dishes, German caricatures and books of the Opera, mixed with those
of the offices of religion; the caricatures being fastened with twine
round the porphyry shafts of the church. One Sunday, the 24th of
February, 1850, the book-stall being somewhat more richly laid out than
usual, I noted down the titles of a few of the books in the order in
which they lay, and I give them below. The irony conveyed by the
juxtaposition of the three in Italics appears too shrewd to be
accidental; but the fact was actually so.

Along the edge of the white plinth were a row of two kinds of books,

  Officium Beatæ Virg. M.; and Officium Hebdomadæ sanctæ, juxta Formam
    Missalis et Breviarii Romani sub Urbano VIII. correcti.

Behind these lay, side by side, the following:

  Don Desiderio. Dramma Giocoso per Musica.
  Breve Esposizione della Carattere di vera Religione.

On the top of this latter, keeping its leaves open,

  La Figlia del Reggimento. Melodramma comica.
  _Carteggio di Madama la Marchesa di Pompadour, ossia
     raccolta di Lettere scritte della Medesima._
  _Istruzioni di morale Condotta per le Figlie._
  _Francesca di Rimini. Dramma per Musica._

Then, a little farther on, after a mass of plays:--

  Orazioni a Gesu Nazareno e a Maria addolorata.
  Semiramide; Melodramma tragico da rappresentarsi nel Gran Teatro
    il Fenice.
  Modo di orare per l'Acquisto del S. Giubileo, conceduto a tutto il
    Mondo Cattolico da S. S. Gregorio XVI.
  Le due illustre Rivali, Melodramma in Tre Atti, da rappresentarsi
    nel nuovo Gran Teatro il Fenice.
  Il Cristiano secondo il Cuore di Gesu, per la Pratica delle sue
    Virtu.
  Traduzione dell'Idioma Italiana.
  La chiava Chinese; Commedia del Sig. Abate Pietro Chiari.
  La Pelarina; Intermezzo de Tre Parti per Musica.
  Il Cavaliero e la Dama; Commedia in Tre Atti in Prosa.

I leave these facts without comment. But this being the last piece of
Appendix I have to add to the present volume, I would desire to close
its pages with a question to my readers--a statistical question, which,
I doubt not, is being accurately determined for us all elsewhere, and
which, therefore, it seems to me, our time would not be wasted in
determining for ourselves.

There has now been peace between England and the continental powers
about thirty-five years, and during that period the English have visited
the continent at the rate of many thousands a year, staying there, I
suppose, on the average, each two or three months; nor these an inferior
kind of English, but the kind which ought to be the best--the noblest
born, the best taught, the richest in time and money, having more
leisure, knowledge, and power than any other portion of the nation.
These, we might suppose, beholding, as they travelled, the condition of
the states in which the Papal religion is professed, and being, at the
same time, the most enlightened section of a great Protestant nation,
would have been animated with some desire to dissipate the Romanist
errors, and to communicate to others the better knowledge which they
possessed themselves. I doubt not but that He who gave peace upon the
earth, and gave it by the hand of England, expected this much of her,
and has watched every one of the millions of her travellers as they
crossed the sea, and kept count for him of his travelling expenses, and
of their distribution, in a manner of which neither the traveller nor
his courier were at all informed. I doubt not, I say, but that such
accounts have been literally kept for all of us, and that a day will
come when they will be made clearly legible to us, and when we shall see
added together, on one side of the account book, a great sum, the
certain portion, whatever it may be, of this thirty-five years'
spendings of the rich English, accounted for in this manner:--

To wooden spoons, nut-crackers, and jewellery, bought at Geneva, and
elsewhere among the Alps, so much; to shell cameos and bits of mosaic
bought at Rome, so much; to coral horns and lava brooches bought at
Naples, so much; to glass beads at Venice, and gold filigree at Genoa,
so much; to pictures, and statues, and ornaments, everywhere, so much;
to avant-couriers and extra post-horses, for show and magnificence, so
much; to great entertainments and good places for seeing sights, so
much; to ball-dresses and general vanities, so much. This, I say, will
be the sum on one side of the book; and on the other will be written:

To the struggling Protestant Churches of France, Switzerland, and
Piedmont, so much.

Had we not better do this piece of statistics for ourselves, in time?


FOOTNOTES:

  [93] Ed. Venetis, 1758, Lib. I.

  [94] Compare Appendix 12.

  [95] L'Artiste en Bâtiments, par Louis Berteaux: Dijon, 1848. My
    printer writes at the side of the page a note, which I insert with
    thanks:--"This is not the first attempt at a French order. The
    writer has a Treatise by Sebastian Le Clerc, a great man in his
    generation, which contains a Roman order, a Spanish order, which the
    inventor appears to think very grand, and a _new_ French order
    nationalised by the Gallic cock crowing and clapping its wings in
    the capital."

  [96] The lower group in Plate XVII.

  [97] One of the upper stories is also in Gally Knight's plate
    represented as merely banded, and otherwise plain: it is, in
    reality, covered with as delicate inlaying as the rest. The whole
    front is besides out of proportion, and out of perspective, at once;
    and yet this work is referred to as of authority, by our architects.
    Well may our architecture fall from its place among the fine arts,
    as it is doing rapidly; nearly all our works of value being devoted
    to the Greek architecture, which is _utterly useless_ to us--or
    worse. _One_ most noble book, however, has been dedicated to our
    English abbeys,--Mr. E. Sharpe's "Architectural Parallels"--almost a
    model of what I should like to see done for the Gothic of all
    Europe.

  [98] Except in the single passage "tell it unto the Church," which
    is simply the _extension_ of what had been commanded before, i.e.,
    tell the fault first "between thee and him," then taking "with thee
    one or two more," then, to all Christian men capable of hearing the
    cause: if he refuse to hear their common voice, "let him be unto
    thee as a heathen man and publican:" (But consider how Christ
    treated both.)

  [99] One or two remarks on this subject, some of which I had
    intended to have inserted here, and others in Appendix 5, I have
    arranged in more consistent order, and published in a separate
    pamphlet, "Notes on the Construction of Sheep-folds," for the
    convenience of readers interested in other architecture than that of
    Venetian palaces.

  [100] Not, however, by Johnson's _testimony_: Vide Adventurer, No.
    39. "Such operations as required neither celerity nor strength,--the
    low drudgery of collating copies, comparing authorities, _digesting
    dictionaries_, or accumulating compilations."

  [101] We have done so--theoretically; just as one would reason on
    the human form from the bones outwards: but the Architect of human
    form frames all at once--bone and flesh.

  [102] Of course mere multiplicability, as of an engraving, does not
    diminish the intrinsic value of the work; and if the casts of
    sculpture could be as sharp as the sculpture itself, they would hold
    to it the relation of value which engravings hold to paintings. And,
    if we choose to have our churches all alike, we might cast them all
    in bronze--we might actually coin churches, and have mints of
    Cathedrals. It would be worthy of the spirit of the century to put
    milled edges for mouldings, and have a popular currency of religious
    subjects: a new cast of nativities every Christmas. I have not heard
    this contemplated, however, and I speak, therefore, only of the
    results which I believe are contemplated, as attainable by mere
    mechanical applications of glass and iron.

  [103] I shall often have occasion to write measures in the current
    text, therefore the reader will kindly understand that whenever they
    are thus written, 2 ,, 2, with double commas between, the first
    figures stand for English feet, the second for English inches.

  [104] I cannot suffer this volume to close without also thanking my
    kind friend, Mr. Rawdon Brown, for help given me in a thousand ways
    during my stay in Venice: but chiefly for his direction to passages
    elucidatory of my subject in the MSS. of St. Mark's library.

  [105] I have not seen the building itself, but Mr. Owen Jones's work
    may, I suppose, be considered as sufficiently representing it for
    all purposes of criticism.

  [106] The sculpture of the Drunkenness of Noah on the Ducal Palace,
    of which we shall have much to say hereafter.





       *       *       *       *       *




                   THE COMPLETE WORKS

                           OF

                       JOHN RUSKIN

                       VOLUME XXIV



                 OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US

          STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

                      HORTUS INCLUSUS

----------------------------------------------------------------------

                THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE
                  NINETEENTH CENTURY.

                     TWO LECTURES

          DELIVERED AT THE LONDON INSTITUTION

             FEBRUARY 4TH AND 11TH, 1884.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS.

                                                  PAGE

PREFACE                                            iii

LECTURE I. (FEBRUARY 4)                              1

LECTURE II. (FEBRUARY 11)                           31

----------------------------------------------------------------------




PREFACE.


The following lectures, drawn up under the pressure of more
imperative and quite otherwise directed work, contain many passages
which stand in need of support, and some, I do not doubt, more or
less of correction, which I always prefer to receive openly from
the better knowledge of friends, after setting down my own
impressions of the matter in clearness as far as they reach, than
to guard myself against by submitting my manuscript, before
publication, to annotators whose stricture or suggestion I might
often feel pain in refusing, yet hesitation in admitting.

But though thus hastily, and to some extent incautiously, thrown
into form, the statements in the text are founded on patient and,
in all essential particulars, accurately recorded observations of
the sky, during fifty years of a life of solitude and leisure; and
in all they contain of what may seem to the reader questionable, or
astonishing, are guardedly and absolutely true.

In many of the reports given by the daily press, my assertion of
radical change, during recent years, in weather aspect was scouted
as imaginary, or insane. I am indeed, every day of my yet spared
life, more and more grateful that my mind is capable of imaginative
vision, and liable to the noble dangers of delusion which separate
the speculative intellect of humanity from the dreamless instinct
of brutes: but I have been able, during all active work, to use or
refuse my power of contemplative imagination, with as easy command
of it as a physicist's of his telescope: the times of morbid are
just as easily distinguished by me from those of healthy vision, as
by men of ordinary faculty, dream from waking; nor is there a
single fact stated in the following pages which I have not
verified with a chemist's analysis, and a geometer's precision.

The first lecture is printed, with only addition here and there of
an elucidatory word or phrase, precisely as it was given on the 4th
February. In repeating it on the 11th, I amplified several
passages, and substituted for the concluding one, which had been
printed with accuracy in most of the leading journals, some
observations which I thought calculated to be of more general
interest. To these, with the additions in the first text, I have
now prefixed a few explanatory notes, to which numeral references
are given in the pages they explain, and have arranged the
fragments in connection clear enough to allow of their being read
with ease as a second Lecture.

                         HERNE HILL, _12th March, 1884_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.

----------------------------------------------------------------------




THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.


Let me first assure my audience that I have no _arrière pensée_ in
the title chosen for this lecture. I might, indeed, have meant, and
it would have been only too like me to mean, any number of things
by such a title;--but, to-night, I mean simply what I have said,
and propose to bring to your notice a series of cloud phenomena,
which, so far as I can weigh existing evidence, are peculiar to our
own times; yet which have not hitherto received any special notice
or description from meteorologists.

So far as the existing evidence, I say, of former literature can be
interpreted, the storm-cloud--or more accurately plague-cloud, for
it is not always stormy--which I am about to describe to you, never
was seen but by now living, or _lately_ living eyes. It is not yet
twenty years that this--I may well call it, wonderful, cloud has
been, in its essence, recognizable. There is no description of it,
so far as I have read, by any ancient observer. Neither Homer nor
Virgil, neither Aristophanes nor Horace, acknowledge any such
clouds among those compelled by Jove. Chaucer has no word of them,
nor Dante;[1] Milton none, nor Thomson. In modern times, Scott,
Wordsworth and Byron are alike unconscious of them; and the most
observant and descriptive of scientific men, De Saussure, is
utterly silent concerning them. Taking up the traditions of air
from the year before Scott's death, I am able, by my own constant
and close observation, to certify you that in the forty following
years (1831 to 1871 approximately--for the phenomena in question
came on gradually)--no such clouds as these are, and are now often
for months without intermission, were ever seen in the skies of
England, France, or Italy.

In those old days, when weather was fine, it was luxuriously fine;
when it was bad--it was often abominably bad, but it had its fit of
temper and was done with it--it didn't sulk for three months
without letting you see the sun,--nor send you one cyclone inside
out, every Saturday afternoon, and another outside in, every Monday
morning.

In fine weather the sky was either blue or clear in its light; the
clouds, either white or golden, adding to, not abating, the luster
of the sky. In wet weather, there were two different species of
clouds,--those of beneficent rain, which for distinction's sake I
will call the non-electric rain-cloud, and those of storm, usually
charged highly with electricity. The beneficent rain-cloud was
indeed often extremely dull and gray for days together, but
gracious nevertheless, felt to be doing good, and often to be
delightful after drought; capable also of the most exquisite
coloring, under certain conditions;[2] and continually traversed in
clearing by the rainbow:--and, secondly, the storm-cloud, always
majestic, often dazzlingly beautiful, and felt also to be
beneficent in its own way, affecting the mass of the air with vital
agitation, and purging it from the impurity of all morbific
elements.

In the entire system of the Firmament, thus seen and understood,
there appeared to be, to all the thinkers of those ages, the
incontrovertible and unmistakable evidence of a Divine Power in
creation, which had fitted, as the air for human breath, so the
clouds for human sight and nourishment;--the Father who was in
heaven feeding day by day the souls of His children with marvels,
and satisfying them with bread, and so filling their hearts with
food and gladness.

Their _hearts_, you will observe, it is said, not merely their
bellies,--or indeed not at all, in this sense, their bellies--but
the heart itself, with its blood for this life, and its faith for
the next. The opposition between this idea and the notions of our
own time may be more accurately expressed by modification of the
Greek than of the English sentence. The old Greek is--

          [Greek: empiplôn trophês kai euphrosynês
          tas kardias hêmôn.]

filling with meat, and cheerfulness, our hearts. The modern Greek
should be--

          [Greek: empiplôn anemou kai aphrosynês
          tas gasteras hêmôn.]

filling with wind, and foolishness, our stomachs.

You will not think I waste your time in giving you two cardinal
examples of the sort of evidence which the higher forms of
literature furnish respecting the cloud-phenomena of former times.

When, in the close of my lecture on landscape last year at Oxford,
I spoke of stationary clouds as distinguished from passing ones,
some blockheads wrote to the papers to say that clouds never were
stationary. Those foolish letters were so far useful in causing a
friend to write me the pretty one I am about to read to you,
quoting a passage about clouds in Homer which I had myself never
noticed, though perhaps the most beautiful of its kind in the
Iliad. In the fifth book, after the truce is broken, and the
aggressor Trojans are rushing to the onset in a tumult of clamor
and charge, Homer says that the Greeks, abiding them "stood like
clouds." My correspondent, giving the passage, writes as follows:--

"SIR,--Last winter when I was at Ajaccio, I was one day reading
Homer by the open window, and came upon the lines--

          [Greek: All' emenon, nephelêsin eoikotes has te Kroniôn
          Nênemiês estêsen ep' akropoloisin oressin,
          Atremas, ophr' heudêsi menos Boreao kai allôn
          Zachreiôn anemôn, hoite nephea skioenta
          Pnoiêsin lygyrêsi diaskidnasin aentes;
          Hôs Danaoi Trôas menon empedon, oud' ephebonto.]


'But they stood, like the clouds which the Son of Kronos stablishes
in calm upon the mountains, motionless, when the rage of the North
and of all the fiery winds is asleep.' As I finished these lines, I
raised my eyes, and looking across the gulf, saw a long line of
clouds resting on the top of its hills. The day was windless, and
there they stayed, hour after hour, without any stir or motion. I
remember how I was delighted at the time, and have often since that
day thought on the beauty and the truthfulness of Homer's simile.

"Perhaps this little fact may interest you, at a time when you are
attacked for your description of clouds.

                         "I am, sir, yours faithfully,
                                      G. B. HILL."

With this bit of noonday from Homer, I will read you a sunset and a
sunrise from Byron. That will enough express to you the scope and
sweep of all glorious literature, from the orient of Greece herself
to the death of the last Englishman who loved her.[3] I will read
you from 'Sardanapalus' the address of the Chaldean priest Beleses
to the sunset, and of the Greek slave, Myrrha, to the morning.

    "The sun goes down: methinks he sets more slowly,
     Taking his last look of Assyria's empire.
     How red he glares amongst those deepening clouds,[4]
     Like the blood he predicts.[5] If not in vain,
     Thou sun that sinkest, and ye stars which rise,
     I have outwatch'd ye, reading ray by ray
     The edicts of your orbs, which make Time tremble
     For what he brings the nations, 't is the furthest
     Hour of Assyria's years. And yet how calm!
     An earthquake should announce so great a fall--
     A summer's sun discloses it. Yon disk
     To the star-read Chaldean, bears upon
     Its everlasting page the end of what
     Seem'd everlasting; but oh! thou TRUE sun!
     _The burning oracle of all that live_,
     _As fountain of all life_, and _symbol of
     Him who bestows it_, wherefore dost thou limit
     Thy lore unto calamity?[6] Why not
     Unfold the rise of days more worthy thine
     All-glorious burst from ocean? why not dart
     A beam of hope athwart the future years,
     As of wrath to its days? Hear me! oh, hear me!
     I am thy worshiper, thy priest, thy servant--
     I have gazed on thee at thy rise and fall,
     And bow'd my head beneath thy mid-day beams,
     When my eye dared not meet thee. I have watch'd
     For thee, and after thee, and pray'd to thee,
     And sacrificed to thee, and read, and fear'd thee,
     And ask'd of thee, and thou hast answer'd--but
     Only to thus much. While I speak, he sinks--
     Is gone--and leaves his beauty, not his knowledge,
     To the delighted west, which revels in
     Its hues of dying glory. Yet what is
     Death, so it be but glorious? 'T is a sunset;
     And mortals may be happy to resemble
     The gods but in decay."

Thus the Chaldean priest, to the brightness of the setting sun.
Hear now the Greek girl, Myrrha, of his rising.

    "The day at last has broken. What a night
     Hath usher'd it! How beautiful in heaven!
     Though varied with a transitory storm,
     More beautiful in that variety:[7]
     How hideous upon earth! where peace, and hope,
     And love, and revel, in an hour were trampled
     By human passions to a human chaos,
     Not yet resolved to separate elements:--
     'T is warring still! And can the sun so rise,
     So bright, so rolling back the clouds into
     _Vapors more lovely than the unclouded sky_,
     With golden pinnacles, and snowy mountains,
     And billows purpler than the ocean's, making
     In heaven a glorious mockery of the earth,
     So like,--we almost deem it permanent;
     So fleeting,--we can scarcely call it aught
     Beyond a vision, 't is so transiently
     Scatter'd along the eternal vault: and yet
     It dwells upon the soul, and soothes the soul,
     And blends itself into the soul, until
     Sunrise and sunset form the haunted epoch
     Of sorrow and of love."

How often _now_--young maids of London,--do you make _sunrise_ the
'haunted epoch' of either?

Thus much, then, of the skies that used to be, and clouds "more
lovely than the unclouded sky," and of the temper of their
observers. I pass to the account of clouds that _are_, and--I say
it with sorrow--of the _dis_temper of _their_ observers.

But the general division which I have instituted between
bad-weather and fair-weather clouds must be more carefully carried
out in the sub-species, before we can reason of it farther: and
before we begin talk either of the sub-genera and sub-species, or
super-genera and super-species of cloud, perhaps we had better
define what _every_ cloud is, and must be, to begin with.

Every cloud that can be, is thus primarily definable: "Visible
vapor of water floating at a certain height in the air." The second
clause of this definition, you see, at once implies that there is
such a thing as visible vapor of water which does _not_ float at a
certain height in the air. You are all familiar with one extremely
cognizable variety of that sort of vapor--London Particular; but
that especial blessing of metropolitan society is only a
strongly-developed and highly-seasoned condition of a form of
watery vapor which exists just as generally and widely at the
bottom of the air, as the clouds do--on what, for convenience'
sake, we may call the top of it;--only as yet, thanks to the
sagacity of scientific men, we have got no general name for the
bottom cloud, though the whole question of cloud nature begins in
this broad fact, that you have one kind of vapor that lies to a
certain depth on the ground, and another that floats at a certain
height in the sky. Perfectly definite, in both cases, the surface
level of the earthly vapor, and the roof level of the heavenly
vapor, are each of them drawn within the depth of a fathom. Under
_their_ line, drawn for the day and for the hour, the clouds will
not stoop, and above _theirs,_ the mists will not rise. Each in
their own region, high or deep, may expatiate at their pleasure;
within that, they climb, or decline,--within that they congeal or
melt away; but below their assigned horizon the surges of the cloud
sea may not sink, and the floods of the mist lagoon may not be
swollen.

That is the first idea you have to get well into your minds
concerning the abodes of this visible vapor; next, you have to
consider the manner of its visibility. Is it, you have to ask, with
cloud vapor, as with most other things, that they are seen when
they are there, and not seen when they are not there? or has cloud
vapor so much of the ghost in it, that it can be visible or
invisible as it likes, and may perhaps be all unpleasantly and
malignantly there, just as much when we don't see it, as when we
do? To which I answer, comfortably and generally, that, on the
whole, a cloud is where you see it, and isn't where you don't;
that, when there's an evident and honest thundercloud in the
northeast, you needn't suppose there's a surreptitious and slinking
one in the northwest;--when there's a visible fog at Bermondsey, it
doesn't follow there's a spiritual one, more than usual, at the
West End: and when you get up to the clouds, and can walk into them
or out of them, as you like, you find when you're in them they wet
your whiskers, or take out your curls, and when you're out of them,
they don't; and therefore you may with probability assume--not with
certainty, observe, but with probability--that there's more water
in the air where it damps your curls than where it doesn't. If it
gets much denser than that, it will begin to rain; and then you
may assert, certainly with safety, that there is a shower in one
place, and not in another; and not allow the scientific people to
tell you that the rain is everywhere, but palpable in Tooley
Street, and impalpable in Grosvenor Square.

That, I say, is broadly and comfortably so on the whole,--and yet
with this kind of qualification and farther condition in the
matter. If you watch the steam coming strongly out of an
engine-funnel,[8]--at the top of the funnel it is transparent,--you
can't see it, though it is more densely and intensely there
than anywhere else. Six inches out of the funnel it becomes
snow-white,--you see it, and you see it, observe, exactly where it
is,--it is then a real and proper cloud. Twenty yards off the
funnel it scatters and melts away; a little of it sprinkles you
with rain if you are underneath it, but the rest disappears; yet it
is still there;--the surrounding air does not absorb it all into
space in a moment; there is a gradually diffusing current of
invisible moisture at the end of the visible stream--an invisible,
yet quite substantial, vapor; but not, according to our definition,
a cloud, for a cloud is vapor _visible_.

Then the next bit of the question, of course, is, What makes the
vapor visible, when it is so? Why is the compressed steam
transparent, the loose steam white, the dissolved steam transparent
again?

The scientific people tell you that the vapor becomes visible, and
chilled, as it expands. Many thanks to them; but can they show us
any reason why particles of water should be more opaque when they
are separated than when they are close together, or give us any
idea of the difference of the state of a particle of water, which
won't _sink_ in the air, from that of one that won't _rise_ in
it?[9]

And here I must parenthetically give you a little word of, I will
venture to say, extremely useful, advice about scientific people in
general. Their first business is, of course, to tell you things
that are so, and do happen,--as that, if you warm water, it will
boil; if you cool it, it will freeze; and if you put a candle to a
cask of gunpowder, it will blow you up. Their second, and far more
important business, is to tell you what you had best do under the
circumstances,--put the kettle on in time for tea; powder your ice
and salt, if you have a mind for ices; and obviate the chance of
explosion by not making the gunpowder. But if, beyond this safe and
beneficial business, they ever try to _explain_ anything to you,
you may be confident of one of two things,--either that they know
nothing (to speak of) about it, or that they have only seen one
side of it--and not only haven't seen, but usually have no mind to
see, the other. When, for instance, Professor Tyndall explains the
twisted beds of the Jungfrau to you by intimating that the
Matterhorn is growing flat;[10] or the clouds on the lee side of
the Matterhorn by the wind's rubbing against the windward side of
it,[11]--you may be pretty sure the scientific people don't know
much (to speak of) yet, either about rock-beds, or cloud-beds. And
even if the explanation, so to call it, be sound on one side,
windward or lee, you may, as I said, be nearly certain it won't do
on the other. Take the very top and center of scientific
interpretation by the greatest of its masters: Newton explained to
you--or at least was once supposed to have explained--why an apple
fell; but he never thought of explaining the exactly correlative,
but infinitely more difficult question, how the apple got up there!

You will not, therefore, so please you, expect me to explain
anything to you,--I have come solely and simply to put before you a
few facts, which you can't see by candlelight, or in railroad
tunnels, but which are making themselves now so very distinctly
felt as well as seen, that you may perhaps have to roof, if not
wall, half London afresh before we are many years older.

I go back to my point--the way in which clouds, as a matter of
fact, become visible. I have defined the floating or sky cloud, and
defined the falling, or earth cloud. But there's a sort of thing
between the two, which needs a third definition: namely, Mist. In
the 22d page of his 'Glaciers of the Alps,' Professor Tyndall says
that "the marvelous blueness of the sky in the earlier part of the
day indicated that the air was charged, almost to saturation, with
transparent aqueous vapor." Well, in certain weather that is true.
You all know the peculiar clearness which precedes rain,--when the
distant hills are looking nigh. I take it on trust from the
scientific people that there is then a quantity--almost to
saturation--of aqueous vapor in the air, but it is aqueous vapor in
a state which makes the air more transparent than it would be
without it. What state of aqueous molecule is that, absolutely
unreflective[12] of light--perfectly transmissive of light, and
showing at once the color of blue water and blue air on the distant
hills?

I put the question--and pass round to the other side. Such a
clearness, though a certain forerunner of rain, is not always its
forerunner. Far the contrary. Thick air is a much more frequent
forerunner of rain than clear air. In cool weather, you will often
get the transparent prophecy: but in hot weather, or in certain not
hitherto defined states of atmosphere, the forerunner of rain is
mist. In a general way, after you have had two or three days of
rain, the air and sky are healthily clear, and the sun bright. If
it is hot also, the next day is a little mistier--the next misty
and sultry,--and the next and the next, getting thicker and
thicker--end in another storm, or period of rain.

I suppose the thick air, as well as the transparent, is in both
cases saturated with aqueous vapor;--but also in both, observe,
vapor that floats everywhere, as if you mixed mud with the sea; and
it takes no shape anywhere: you may have it with calm, or with
wind, it makes no difference to it. You have a nasty haze with a
bitter east wind, or a nasty haze with not a leaf stirring, and you
may have the clear blue vapor with a fresh rainy breeze, or the
clear blue vapor as still as the sky above. What difference is
there between _these_ aqueous molecules that are clear, and those
that are muddy, _these_ that must sink or rise, and those that must
stay where they are, _these_ that have form and stature, that are
bellied like whales and backed like weasels, and those that have
neither backs nor fronts, nor feet nor faces, but are a mist--and
no more--over two or three thousand square miles?

I again leave the questions with you, and pass on.

Hitherto I have spoken of all aqueous vapor as if it were either
transparent or white--visible by becoming opaque like snow, but not
by any accession of color. But even those of us who are least
observant of skies, know that, irrespective of all supervening
colors from the sun, there are white clouds, brown clouds, gray
clouds, and black clouds. Are these indeed--what they appear to
be--entirely distinct monastic disciplines of cloud: Black Friars,
and White Friars, and Friars of Orders Gray? Or is it only their
various nearness to us, their denseness, and the failing of the
light upon them, that makes some clouds look black[13] and others
snowy?

I can only give you qualified and cautious answer. There are, by
differences in their own character, Dominican clouds, and there are
Franciscan;--there are the Black Hussars of the Bandiera della
Morte, and there are the Scots Grays whose horses can run upon the
rock. But if you ask me, as I would have you ask me, why argent and
why sable, how baptized in white like a bride or a novice, and how
hooded with blackness like a Judge of the Vehmgericht Tribunal,--I
leave these questions with you, and pass on.

Admitting degrees of darkness, we have next to ask what color, from
sunshine can the white cloud receive, and what the black?

You won't expect me to tell you all that, or even the little that
is accurately known about that, in a quarter of an hour; yet note
these main facts on the matter.

On any pure white, and practically opaque, cloud, or thing like a
cloud, as an Alp, or Milan Cathedral, you can have cast by rising
or setting sunlight, any tints of amber, orange, or moderately deep
rose--you can't have lemon yellows, or any kind of green except in
negative hue by opposition; and though by stormlight you may
sometimes get the reds cast very deep, beyond a certain limit you
cannot go,--the Alps are never vermilion color, nor flamingo
color, nor canary color; nor did you ever see a full scarlet
cumulus of thundercloud.

On opaque white vapor, then, remember, you can get a glow or a
blush of color, never a flame of it.

But when the cloud is transparent as well as pure, and can be
filled with light through all the body of it, you then can have by
the light reflected[14] from its atoms any force conceivable by
human mind of the entire group of the golden and ruby colors, from
intensely burnished gold color, through a scarlet for whose
brightness there are no words, into any depth and any hue of Tyrian
crimson and Byzantine purple. These with full blue breathed between
them at the zenith, and green blue nearer the horizon, form the
scales and chords of color possible to the morning and evening sky
in pure and fine weather; the keynote of the opposition being
vermilion against green blue, both of equal tone, and at such a
height and acme of brilliancy that you cannot see the line where
their edges pass into each other.

No colors that can be fixed in earth can ever represent to you the
luster of these cloudy ones. But the actual tints may be shown you
in a lower key, and to a certain extent their power and relation to
each other.

I have painted the diagram here shown you with colors prepared for
me lately by Messrs. Newman, which I find brilliant to the height
that pigments can be; and the ready kindness of Mr. Wilson Barrett
enables me to show you their effect by a white light as pure as
that of the day. The diagram is enlarged from my careful sketch of
the sunset of 1st October, 1868, at Abbeville, which was a
beautiful example of what, in fine weather about to pass into
storm, a sunset could then be, in the districts of Kent and Picardy
unaffected by smoke. In reality, the ruby and vermilion clouds
were, by myriads, more numerous than I have had time to paint: but
the general character of their grouping is well enough expressed.
All the illumined clouds are high in the air, and nearly
motionless; beneath them, electric storm-cloud rises in a
threatening cumulus on the right, and drifts in dark flakes across
the horizon, casting from its broken masses radiating shadows on
the upper clouds. These shadows are traced, in the first place by
making the misty blue of the open sky more transparent, and
therefore darker; and secondly, by entirely intercepting the
sunbeams on the bars of cloud, which, within the shadowed spaces,
show dark on the blue instead of light.

But, mind, all that is done by reflected light--and in that light
you never get a _green_ ray from the reflecting cloud; there is no
such thing in nature as a green lighted cloud relieved from a red
sky,--the cloud is always red, and the sky green, and green,
observe, by transmitted, not reflected light.

But now note, there is another kind of cloud, pure white, and
exquisitely delicate; which acts not by reflecting, nor by
refracting, but, as it is now called, _dif_fracting, the sun's
rays. The particles of this cloud are said--with what truth I know
not[15]--to send the sunbeams round them instead of through them;
somehow or other, at any rate, they resolve them into their
prismatic elements; and then you have literally a kaleidoscope in
the sky, with every color of the prism in absolute purity; but
above all in force, now, the ruby red and the _green_,--with
purple, and violet-blue, in a virtual equality, more definite than
that of the rainbow. The red in the rainbow is mostly brick red,
the violet, though beautiful, often lost at the edge; but in the
prismatic cloud the violet, the green, and the ruby are all more
lovely than in any precious stones, and they are varied as in a
bird's breast, changing their places, depths, and extent at every
instant.

The main cause of this change being, that the prismatic cloud
itself is always in rapid, and generally in fluctuating motion. "A
light veil of clouds had drawn itself," says Professor Tyndall, in
describing his solitary ascent of Monte Rosa, "between me and the
sun, and this was flooded with the most brilliant dyes. Orange,
red, green, blue--all the hues produced by diffraction--were
exhibited in the utmost splendor.

"Three times during my ascent (the short ascent of the last peak)
similar veils drew themselves across the sun, and at each passage
the splendid phenomena were renewed. There seemed a tendency to
form circular zones of color round the sun; but the clouds were not
sufficiently uniform to permit of this, and they were consequently
broken into spaces, each steeped with the color due to the
condition of the cloud at the place."

Three times, you observe, the veil passed, and three times another
came, or the first faded and another formed; and so it is always,
as far as I have registered prismatic cloud: and the most beautiful
colors I ever saw were on those that flew fastest.

This second diagram is enlarged admirably by Mr. Arthur Severn from
my sketch of the sky in the afternoon of the 6th of August, 1880,
at Brantwood, two hours before sunset. You are looking west by
north, straight towards the sun, and nearly straight towards the
wind. From the west the wind blows fiercely towards you out of the
blue sky. Under the blue space is a flattened dome of earth-cloud
clinging to, and altogether masking the form of, the mountain,
known as the Old Man of Coniston.

The top of that dome of cloud is two thousand eight hundred feet
above the sea, the mountain two thousand six hundred, the cloud
lying two hundred feet deep on it. Behind it, westward and seaward,
all's clear; but when the wind out of that blue clearness comes
over the ridge of the earth-cloud, at that moment and that line, its
own moisture congeals into these white--I believe, _ice_-clouds;
threads, and meshes, and tresses, and tapestries, flying, failing,
melting, reappearing; spinning and unspinning themselves, coiling and
uncoiling, winding and unwinding, faster than eye or thought can
follow: and through all their dazzling maze of frosty filaments shines
a painted window in palpitation; its pulses of color interwoven in
motion, intermittent in fire,--emerald and ruby and pale purple and
violet melting into a blue that is not of the sky, but of the
sunbeam;--purer than the crystal, softer than the rainbow, and
brighter than the snow.

But you must please here observe that while my first diagram did
with some adequateness represent to you the color facts there
spoken of, the present diagram can only _explain_, not reproduce
them. The bright reflected colors of clouds _can_ be represented in
painting, because they are relieved against darker colors, or, in
many cases, _are_ dark colors, the vermilion and ruby clouds being
often much darker than the green or blue sky beyond them. But in
the case of the phenomena now under your attention, the colors are
all _brighter than pure white_,--the entire body of the cloud in
which they show themselves being white by transmitted light, so
that I can only show you what the colors are, and where they
are,--but leaving them dark on the white ground. Only artificial,
and very high illumination would give the real effect of
them,--painting cannot.

Enough, however, is here done to fix in your minds the distinction
between those two species of cloud,--one, either stationary,[16] or
slow in motion, _reflecting unresolved_ light; the other,
fast-flying, and _transmitting resolved_ light. What difference is
there in the nature of the atoms, between those two kinds of
clouds? I leave the question with you for to-day, merely hinting to
you my suspicion that the prismatic cloud is of finely-comminuted
water, or ice,[17] instead of aqueous vapor; but the only clue I
have to this idea is in the purity of the rainbow formed in frost
mist, lying close to water surfaces. Such mist, however, only
becomes prismatic as common rain does, when the sun is behind the
spectator, while prismatic clouds are, on the contrary, always
between the spectator and the sun.

The main reason, however, why I can tell you nothing yet about
these colors of diffraction or interference, is that, whenever I
try to find anything firm for you to depend on, I am stopped by the
quite frightful inaccuracy of the scientific people's terms, which
is the consequence of their always trying to write mixed Latin and
English, so losing the grace of the one and the sense of the other.
And, in this point of the diffraction of light I am stopped dead by
their confusion of idea also, in using the words undulation and
vibration as synonyms. "When," says Professor Tyndall, "you are
told that the atoms of the sun _vibrate_ at different rates, and
produce _waves_ of different sizes,--your experience of water-waves
will enable you to form a tolerably clear notion of what is meant."

'Tolerably clear'!--your toleration must be considerable, then. Do
you suppose a water-wave is like a harp-string? Vibration is the
movement of a body in a state of tension,--undulation, that of a
body absolutely lax. In vibration, not an atom of the body changes
its place in relation to another,--in undulation, not an atom of
the body remains in the same place with regard to another. In
vibration, every particle of the body ignores gravitation, or
defies it,--in undulation, every particle of the body is slavishly
submitted to it. In undulation, not one wave is like another; in
vibration, every pulse is alike. And of undulation itself, there
are all manner of visible conditions, which are not true
conditions. A flag ripples in the wind, but it does not undulate as
the sea does,--for in the sea, the water is taken from the trough
to put on to the ridge, but in the flag, though the motion is
progressive, the bits of bunting keep their place. You see a field
of corn undulating as if it was water,--it is different from the
flag, for the ears of corn bow out of their places and return to
them,--and yet, it is no more like the undulation of the sea, than
the shaking of an aspen leaf in a storm, or the lowering of the
lances in a battle.

And the best of the jest is, that after mixing up these two notions
in their heads inextricably, the scientific people apply both when
neither will fit; and when all undulation known to us presumes
weight, and all vibration, impact,--the undulating theory of light
is proposed to you concerning a medium which you can neither weigh
nor touch!

All _communicable_ vibration--of course I mean--and in dead matter:
_You_ may fall a shivering on your own account, if you like, but
you can't get a billiard-ball to fall a shivering on _its_ own
account.[18]

Yet observe that in thus signalizing the inaccuracy of the terms in
which they are taught, I neither accept, nor assail, the
conclusions respecting the oscillatory states of light, heat, and
sound, which have resulted from the postulate of an elastic, though
impalpable and imponderable ether, possessing the elasticity of
air. This only I desire you to mark with attention,--that both
light and sound are _sensations_ of the animal frame, which remain,
and must remain, wholly inexplicable, whatever manner of force,
pulse, or palpitation may be instrumental in producing them: nor
does any such force _become_ light or sound, except in its
rencontre with an animal. The leaf hears no murmur in the wind to
which it wavers on the branches, nor can the clay discern the
vibration by which it is thrilled into a ruby. The Eye and the Ear
are the creators alike of the ray and the tone; and the conclusion
follows logically from the right conception of their living
power,--"He that planted the Ear, shall He not hear? He that formed
the Eye, shall not He see?"

For security, therefore, and simplicity of definition of light, you
will find no possibility of advancing beyond Plato's "the power
that through the eye manifests color," but on that definition, you
will find, alike by Plato and all great subsequent thinkers, a
_moral_ Science of Light founded, far and away more important to
you than all the physical laws ever learned by vitreous revelation.
Concerning which I will refer you to the sixth lecture which I gave
at Oxford in 1872, on the relation of Art to the Science of Light
('The Eagle's Nest'), reading now only the sentence introducing its
subject:--"The 'Fiat lux' of creation is therefore, in the deep
sense, 'fiat anima,' and is as much, when you understand it, the
ordering of Intelligence as the ordering of Vision. It is the
appointment of change of what had been else only a mechanical
effluence from things unseen to things unseeing,--from Stars, that
did not shine, to Earth, that did not perceive,--the change, I say,
of that blind vibration into the glory of the Sun and Moon for
human eyes: so making possible the communication out of the
unfathomable truth of that portion of truth which is good for us,
and animating to us, and is set to rule over the day and over the
night of our joy and our sorrow."

Returning now to our subject at the point from which I permitted
myself, I trust not without your pardon, to diverge; you may
incidentally, but carefully, observe, that the effect of such a sky
as that represented in the second diagram, so far as it can be
abstracted or conveyed by painting at all, implies the total
absence of any pervading warmth of tint, such as artists usually
call 'tone.' Every tint must be the purest possible, and above all
the white. Partly, lest you should think, from my treatment of
these two phases of effect, that I am insensible to the quality of
tone,--and partly to complete the representation of states of
weather undefiled by plague-cloud, yet capable of the most solemn
dignity in saddening color, I show you, Diagram 3, the record of an
autumn twilight of the year 1845,--sketched while I was changing
horses between Verona and Brescia. The distant sky in this drawing
is in the glowing calm which is always taken by the great Italian
painters for the background of their sacred pictures; a broad field
of cloud is advancing upon it overhead, and meeting others
enlarging in the distance; these are rain-clouds, which will
certainly close over the clear sky, and bring on rain before
midnight: but there is no power in them to pollute the sky beyond
and above them: they do not darken the air, nor defile it, nor in
any way mingle with it; their edges are burnished by the sun like
the edges of golden shields, and their advancing march is as
deliberate and majestic as the fading of the twilight itself into a
darkness full of stars.

These three instances are all I have time to give of the former
conditions of serene weather, and of non-electric rain-cloud. But I
must yet, to complete the sequence of my subject, show you one
example of a good, old-fashioned, healthy, and mighty, storm.

In Diagram 4, Mr. Severn has beautifully enlarged my sketch of a
July thundercloud of the year 1858, on the Alps of the Val
d'Aosta, seen from Turin, that is to say, some twenty-five or
thirty miles distant. You see that no mistake is possible here
about what is good weather and what bad, or which is cloud and
which is sky; but I show you this sketch especially to give you the
scale of heights for such clouds in the atmosphere. These thunder
cumuli entirely _hide_ the higher Alps. It does not, however,
follow that they have buried them, for most of their own aspect of
height is owing to the approach of their nearer masses; but at all
events, you have cumulus there rising from its base, at about three
thousand feet above the plain, to a good ten thousand in the air.

White cirri, in reality parallel, but by perspective radiating,
catch the sunshine above, at a height of from fifteen to twenty
thousand feet; but the storm on the mountains gathers itself into a
full mile's depth of massy cloud, every fold of it involved with
thunder, but every form of it, every action, every color,
magnificent:--doing its mighty work in its own hour and its own
dominion, nor snatching from you for an instant, nor defiling with
a stain, the abiding blue of the transcendent sky, or the fretted
silver of its passionless clouds.

We so rarely now see cumulus cloud of this grand kind, that I will
yet delay you by reading the description of its nearer aspect, in
the 'Eagle's Nest.'

"The rain which flooded our fields the Sunday before last, was
followed, as you will remember, by bright days, of which Tuesday
the 20th (February, 1872) was, in London, notable for the splendor,
towards the afternoon, of its white cumulus clouds. There has been
so much black east wind lately, and so much fog and artificial
gloom, besides, that I find it is actually some two years since I
last saw a noble cumulus cloud under full light. I chanced to be
standing under the Victoria Tower at Westminster, when the largest
mass of them floated past, that day, from the northwest; and I was
more impressed than ever yet by the awfulness of the cloud-form,
and its unaccountableness, in the present state of our knowledge.
The Victoria Tower, seen against it, had no magnitude: it was like
looking at Mont Blanc over a lamp-post. The domes of cloud-snow
were heaped as definitely: their broken flanks were as gray and
firm as rocks, and the whole mountain, of a compass and height in
heaven which only became more and more inconceivable as the eye
strove to ascend it, was passing behind the tower with a steady
march, whose swiftness must in reality have been that of a tempest:
yet, along all the ravines of vapor, precipice kept pace with
precipice, and not one thrust another.

"What is it that hews them out? Why is the blue sky pure
there,--the cloud solid here; and edged like marble: and why does
the state of the blue sky pass into the state of cloud, in that
calm advance?

"It is true that you can more or less imitate the forms of cloud
with explosive vapor or steam; but the steam melts instantly, and
the explosive vapor dissipates itself. The cloud, of perfect form,
proceeds unchanged. It is not an explosion, but an enduring and
advancing presence. The more you think of it, the less explicable
it will become to you."

Thus far then of clouds that were once familiar; now at last,
entering on my immediate subject, I shall best introduce it to you
by reading an entry in my diary which gives progressive description
of the most gentle aspect of the modern plague-cloud.

                                   "_Bolton Abbey, 4th July, 1875._

Half-past eight, morning; the first bright morning for the last
fortnight.

At half-past five it was entirely clear, and entirely calm; the
moorlands glowing, and the Wharfe glittering in sacred light, and
even the thin-stemmed field-flowers quiet as stars, in the peace in
which--

    'All trees and simples, great and small,
       That balmy leaf do bear,
     Than they were painted on a wall,
       No more do move, nor steir.'


But, an hour ago, the leaves at my window first shook slightly.
They are now trembling _continuously_, as those of all the trees,
under a gradually rising wind, of which the tremulous action
scarcely permits the direction to be defined,--but which falls and
returns in fits of varying force, like those which precede a
thunderstorm--never wholly ceasing: the direction of its upper
current is shown by a few ragged white clouds, moving fast from the
north, which rose, at the time of the first leaf-shaking, behind
the edge of the moors in the east.

This wind is the plague-wind of the eighth decade of years in the
nineteenth century; a period which will assuredly be recognized in
future meteorological history as one of phenomena hitherto unrecorded
in the courses of nature, and characterized pre-eminently by the
almost ceaseless action of this calamitous wind. While I have been
writing these sentences, the white clouds above specified have
increased to twice the size they had when I began to write; and in
about two hours from this time--say by eleven o'clock, if the wind
continue,--the whole sky will be dark with them, as it was yesterday,
and has been through prolonged periods during the last five years. I
first noticed the definite character of this wind, and of the clouds
it brings with it, in the year 1871, describing it then in the July
number of 'Fors Clavigera'; but little, at that time, apprehending
either its universality, or any probability of its annual continuance.
I am able now to state positively that its range of power extends from
the North of England to Sicily; and that it blows more or less during
the whole of the year, except the early autumn. This autumnal
abdication is, I hope, beginning: it blew but feebly yesterday, though
without intermission, from the north, making every shady place cold,
while the sun was burning; its effect on the sky being only to dim the
blue of it between masses of ragged cumulus. To-day it has entirely
fallen; and there seems hope of bright weather, the first for me since
the end of May, when I had two fine days at Aylesbury; the third,
May 28th, being black again from morning to evening. There seems to be
some reference to the blackness caused by the prevalence of this wind
in the old French name of Bise, '_gray_ wind'; and, indeed, one of the
darkest and bitterest days of it I ever saw was at Vevay in 1872."

       *       *       *       *       *

The first time I recognized the clouds brought by the plague-wind
as distinct in character was in walking back from Oxford, after a
hard day's work, to Abingdon, in the early spring of 1871: it would
take too long to give you any account this evening of the
particulars which drew my attention to them; but during the
following months I had too frequent opportunities of verifying my
first thoughts of them, and on the first of July in that year wrote
the description of them which begins the 'Fors Clavigera' of
August, thus:--

"It is the first of July, and I sit down to write by the dismalest
light that ever yet I wrote by; namely, the light of this midsummer
morning, in mid-England, (Matlock, Derbyshire), in the year 1871.

"For the sky is covered with gray cloud;--not rain-cloud, but a dry
black veil, which no ray of sunshine can pierce; partly diffused in
mist, feeble mist, enough to make distant objects unintelligible,
yet without any substance, or wreathing, or color of its own. And
everywhere the leaves of the trees are shaking fitfully, as they do
before a thunder-storm; only not violently, but enough to show the
passing to and fro of a strange, bitter, blighting wind. Dismal
enough, had it been the first morning of its kind that summer had
sent. But during all this spring, in London, and at Oxford, through
meager March, through changelessly sullen April, through
despondent May, and darkened June, morning after morning has
come gray-shrouded thus.

"And it is a new thing to me, and a very dreadful one. I am fifty
years old, and more; and since I was five, have gleaned the best
hours of my life in the sun of spring and summer mornings; and I
never saw such as these, till now.

"And the scientific men are busy as ants, examining the sun, and
the moon, and the seven stars, and can tell me all about _them_, I
believe, by this time; and how they move, and what they are made
of.

"And I do not care, for my part, two copper spangles how they move,
nor what they are made of. I can't move them any other way than
they go, nor make them of anything else, better than they are made.
But I would care much and give much, if I could be told where this
bitter wind comes from, and what _it_ is made of.

"For, perhaps, with forethought, and fine laboratory science, one
might make it of something else.

"It looks partly as if it were made of poisonous smoke; very
possibly it may be: there are at least two hundred furnace chimneys
in a square of two miles on every side of me. But mere smoke would
not blow to and fro in that wild way. It looks more to me as if it
were made of dead men's souls--such of them as are not gone yet
where they have to go, and may be flitting hither and thither,
doubting, themselves, of the fittest place for them.

"You know, if there _are_ such things as souls, and if ever any of
them haunt places where they have been hurt, there must be many
about us, just now, displeased enough!"

The last sentence refers of course to the battles of the
Franco-German campaign, which was especially horrible to me, in its
digging, as the Germans should have known, a moat flooded with
waters of death between the two nations for a century to come.

Since that Midsummer day, my attention, however otherwise occupied,
has never relaxed in its record of the phenomena characteristic of
the plague-wind; and I now define for you, as briefly as possible,
the essential signs of it.

1. It is a wind of darkness,--all the former conditions of
tormenting winds, whether from the north or east were more or less
capable of co-existing with sunlight, and often with steady and
bright sunlight; but whenever, and wherever the plague-wind blows,
be it but for ten minutes, the sky is darkened instantly.

2. It is a malignant _quality_ of wind, unconnected with any one
quarter of the compass; it blows indifferently from all, attaching
its own bitterness and malice to the worst characters of the proper
winds of each quarter. It will blow either with drenching rain, or
dry rage, from the south,--with ruinous blasts from the west,--with
bitterest chills from the north,--and with venomous blight from the
east.

Its own favorite quarter, however, is the southwest, so that it is
distinguished in its malignity equally from the Bise of Provence,
which is a north wind always, and from our own old friend, the
east.

3. It always blows _tremulously_, making the leaves of the trees
shudder as if they were all aspens, but with a peculiar fitfulness
which gives them--and I watch them this moment as I write--an
expression of anger as well as of fear and distress. You may see
the kind of quivering, and hear the ominous whimpering, in the
gusts that precede a great thunderstorm; but plague-wind is more
panic-struck, and feverish; and its sound is a hiss instead of a
wail.

When I was last at Avallon, in South France, I went to see 'Faust'
played at the little country theater: it was done with scarcely any
means of pictorial effect, except a few old curtains, and a blue
light or two. But the night on the Brocken was nevertheless
extremely appalling to me,--a strange ghastliness being obtained in
some of the witch scenes merely by fine management of gesture and
drapery; and in the phantom scenes, by the half-palsied,
half-furious, faltering or fluttering past of phantoms stumbling as
into graves; as if of not only soulless, but senseless, Dead,
moving with the very action, the rage, the decrepitude, and the
trembling of the plague-wind.

4. Not only tremulous at every moment, it is also _intermittent_
with a rapidity quite unexampled in former weather. There are,
indeed, days--and weeks, on which it blows without cessation, and
is as inevitable as the Gulf Stream; but also there are days when
it is contending with healthy weather, and on such days it will
remit for half an hour, and the sun will begin to show itself, and
then the wind will come back and cover the whole sky with clouds
in ten minutes; and so on, every half-hour, through the whole day;
so that it is often impossible to go on with any kind of drawing in
color, the light being never for two seconds the same from morning
till evening.

5. It degrades, while it intensifies, ordinary storm; but before I
read you any description of its efforts in this kind, I must
correct an impression which has got abroad through the papers, that
I speak as if the plague-wind blew now always, and there were no
more any natural weather. On the contrary, the winter of 1878-9 was
one of the most healthy and lovely I ever saw ice in;--Coniston
lake shone under the calm clear frost in one marble field, as
strong as the floor of Milan Cathedral, half a mile across and four
miles down; and the first entries in my diary which I read you
shall be from the 22d to 26th June, 1876, of perfectly lovely and
natural weather.

                                   "_Sunday, 25th June, 1876._

Yesterday, an entirely glorious sunset, unmatched in beauty since
that at Abbeville,--deep scarlet, and purest rose, on purple gray,
in bars; and stationary, plumy, sweeping filaments above in upper
sky, like '_using up the brush_,' said Joanie; remaining in glory,
every moment best, changing from one good into another, (but only
in color or light--_form steady_,) for half an hour full, and the
clouds afterwards fading into the gray against amber twilight,
_stationary in the same form for about two hours_, at least. The
darkening rose tint remained till half-past ten, the grand time
being at nine.

The day had been fine,--exquisite green light on afternoon hills.

                                   _Monday, 26th June, 1876._

Yesterday an entirely perfect summer light on the Old Man;
Lancaster Bay all clear; Ingleborough and the great Pennine fault
as on a map. Divine beauty of western color on thyme and
rose,--then twilight of clearest _warm_ amber far into night, of
_pale_ amber all night long; hills dark-clear against it.

And so it continued, only growing more intense in blue and
sunlight, all day. After breakfast, I came in from the well under
strawberry bed, to say I had never seen anything like it, so pure
or intense, in Italy; and so it went glowing on, cloudless, with
soft north wind, all day.

                                   _16th July._

The sunset almost too bright _through the blinds_ for me to read
Humboldt at tea by,--finally, new moon like a lime-light, reflected
on breeze-struck water; traces, across dark calm, of reflected
hills."

These extracts are, I hope, enough to guard you against the
absurdity of supposing that it all only means that I am myself
soured, or doting, in my old age, and always in an ill humor.
Depend upon it, when old men are worth anything, they are better
humored than young ones; and have learned to see what good there
is, and pleasantness, in the world they are likely so soon to have
orders to quit.

Now then--take the following sequences of accurate description of
thunderstorm, _with_ plague-wind.

                                   _"22d June, 1876._

Thunderstorm; pitch dark, with no _blackness_,--but deep, high,
_filthiness_ of lurid, yet not sublimely lurid, smoke-cloud; dense
manufacturing mist; fearful squalls of shivery wind, making Mr.
Severn's sail quiver like a man in a fever fit--all about four,
afternoon--but only two or three claps of thunder, and feeble,
though near, flashes. I never saw such a dirty, weak, foul storm.
It cleared suddenly, after raining all afternoon, at half-past
eight to nine, into pure, natural weather,--low rain-clouds on
quite clear, green, wet hills.

                                   _Brantwood, 13th August, 1879._

The most terrific and horrible thunderstorm, this morning, I ever
remember. It waked me at six, or a little before--then rolling
incessantly, like railway luggage trains, quite ghastly in its
mockery of them--the air one loathsome mass of sultry and foul fog,
like smoke; scarcely raining at all, but increasing to heavier
rollings, with flashes quivering vaguely through all the air, and
at last terrific double streams of reddish-violet fire, not forked
or zigzag, but rippled rivulets--two at the same instant some
twenty to thirty degrees apart, and lasting on the eye at least
half a second, with grand artillery-peals following; not rattling
crashes, or irregular cracklings, but delivered volleys. It lasted
an hour, then passed off, clearing a little, without rain to speak
of,--not a glimpse of blue,--and now, half-past seven, seems
settling down again into Manchester devil's darkness.

Quarter to eight, morning.--Thunder returned, all the air collapsed
into one black fog, the hills invisible, and scarcely visible the
opposite shore; heavy rain in short fits, and frequent, though less
formidable, flashes, and shorter thunder. While I have written this
sentence the cloud has again dissolved itself, like a nasty
solution in a bottle, with miraculous and unnatural rapidity, and
the hills are in sight again; a double-forked flash--rippled, I
mean, like the others--starts into its frightful ladder of light
between me and Wetherlam, as I raise my eyes. All black above, a
rugged spray cloud on the Eaglet. (The 'Eaglet' is my own name for
the bold and elevated crag to the west of the little lake above
Coniston mines. It had no name among the country people, and is one
of the most conspicuous features of the mountain chain, as seen
from Brantwood.)

Half-past eight.--Three times light and three times dark since last
I wrote, and the darkness seeming each time as it settles more
loathsome, at last stopping my reading in mere blindness. One lurid
gleam of white cumulus in upper lead-blue sky, seen for half a
minute through the sulphurous chimney-pot vomit of blackguardly
cloud beneath, where its rags were thinnest.

                                   _Thursday, 22d Feb. 1883._

Yesterday a fearfully dark mist all afternoon, with steady, south
plague-wind of the bitterest, nastiest, poisonous blight, and
fretful flutter. I could scarcely stay in the wood for the horror
of it. To-day, really rather bright blue, and bright semi-cumuli,
with the frantic Old Man blowing sheaves of lancets and chisels
across the lake--not in strength enough, or whirl enough, to raise
it in spray, but tracing every squall's outline in black on the
silver gray waves, and whistling meanly, and as if on a flute made
of a file.

                                   _Sunday, 17th August, 1879._

Raining in foul drizzle, slow and steady; sky pitch-dark, and I
just get a little light by sitting in the bow-window; diabolic
clouds over everything: and looking over my kitchen garden
yesterday, I found it one miserable mass of weeds gone to seed, the
roses in the higher garden putrefied into brown sponges, feeling
like dead snails; and the half-ripe strawberries all rotten at the
stalks."

6. And now I come to the most important sign of the plague-wind and
the plague-cloud: that in bringing on their peculiar darkness, they
_blanch_ the sun instead of reddening it. And here I must note
briefly to you the uselessness of observation by instruments, or
machines, instead of eyes. In the first year when I had begun to
notice the specialty of the plague-wind, I went of course to the
Oxford observatory to consult its registrars. They have their
anemometer always on the twirl, and can tell you the force, or at
least the pace, of a gale,[19] by day or night. But the anemometer
can only record for you how often it has been driven round, not at
all whether it went round _steadily_, or went round _trembling_.
And on that point depends the entire question whether it is a
plague breeze or a healthy one: and what's the use of telling you
whether the wind's strong or not, when it can't tell you whether
it's a strong medicine, or a strong poison?

But again--you have your _sun_-measure, and can tell exactly at any
moment how strong, or how weak, or how wanting, the sun is. But the
sun-measurer can't tell you whether the rays are stopped by a dense
_shallow_ cloud, or a thin _deep_ one. In healthy weather, the sun
is hidden behind a cloud, as it is behind a tree; and, when the
cloud is past, it comes out again, as bright as before. But in
plague-wind, the sun is choked out of the whole heaven, all day
long, by a cloud which may be a thousand miles square and five
miles deep.

And yet observe: that thin, scraggy, filthy, mangy, miserable
cloud, for all the depth of it, can't turn the sun red, as a good,
business-like fog does with a hundred feet or so of itself. By the
plague-wind every breath of air you draw is polluted, half round
the world; in a London fog the air itself is pure, though you
choose to mix up dirt with it, and choke yourself with your own
nastiness.

Now I'm going to show you a diagram of a sunset in entirely pure
weather, above London smoke. I saw it and sketched it from my old
post of observation--the top garret of my father's house at Herne
Hill. There, when the wind is south, we are outside of the smoke
and above it; and this diagram, admirably enlarged from my own
drawing by my, now in all things best aide-de-camp, Mr.
Collingwood, shows you an old-fashioned sunset--the sort of thing
Turner and I used to have to look at,--(nobody else ever would)
constantly. Every sunset and every dawn, in fine weather, had
something of the sort to show us. This is one of the last pure
sunsets I ever saw, about the year 1876,--and the point I want you
to note in it is, that the air being pure, the smoke on the
horizon, though at last it hides the sun, yet hides it through gold
and vermilion. Now, don't go away fancying there's any exaggeration
in that study. The _prismatic_ colors, I told you, were simply
impossible to paint; these, which are transmitted colors, can
indeed be suggested, but no more. The brightest pigment we have
would look dim beside the truth.

I should have liked to have blotted down for you a bit of
plague-cloud to put beside this; but Heaven knows, you can see
enough of it now-a-days without any trouble of mine; and if you
want, in a hurry, to see what the sun looks like through it, you've
only to throw a bad half-crown into a basin of soap and water.

Blanched Sun,--blighted grass,--blinded man.--If, in conclusion,
you ask me for any conceivable cause or meaning of these things--I
can tell you none, according to your modern beliefs; but I can tell
you what meaning it would have borne to the men of old time.
Remember, for the last twenty years, England, and all foreign
nations, either tempting her, or following her, have blasphemed[20]
the name of God deliberately and openly; and have done iniquity by
proclamation, every man doing as much injustice to his brother as
it is in his power to do. Of states in such moral gloom every seer
of old predicted the physical gloom, saying, "The light shall be
darkened in the heavens thereof, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining." All Greek, all Christian, all Jewish prophecy insists on
the same truth through a thousand myths; but of all the chief, to
former thought, was the fable of the Jewish warrior and prophet,
for whom the sun hasted not to go down, with which I leave you to
compare at leisure the physical result of your own wars and
prophecies, as declared by your own elect journal not fourteen days
ago,--that the Empire of England, on which formerly the sun never
set, has become one on which he never rises.

What is best to be done, do you ask me? The answer is plain.
Whether you can affect the signs of the sky or not, you _can_ the
signs of the times. Whether you can bring the _sun_ back or not,
you can assuredly bring back your own cheerfulness, and your own
honesty. You may not be able to say to the winds, "Peace; be
still," but you can cease from the insolence of your own lips, and
the troubling of your own passions. And all _that_ it would be
extremely well to do, even though the day _were_ coming when the
sun should be as darkness, and the moon as blood. But, the paths of
rectitude and piety once regained, who shall say that the promise
of old time would not be found to hold for us also?--"Bring ye all
the tithes into my storehouse, and prove me now herewith, saith the
Lord God, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour
you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive
it."




LECTURE II.

                                   _March 11th, 1884._


It was impossible for me, this spring, to prepare, as I wished to
have done, two lectures for the London Institution: but finding its
members more interested in the subject chosen than I had
anticipated, I enlarged my lecture at its second reading by some
explanations and parentheses, partly represented, and partly
farther developed, in the following notes; which led me on,
however, as I arranged them, into branches of the subject untouched
in the former lecture, and it seems to me of no inferior interest.

[Footnote 1: The vapor over the pool of Anger in the 'Inferno,' the
clogging stench which rises from Caina, and the fog of the circle
of Anger in the 'Purgatorio' resemble, indeed, the cloud of the
Plague-wind very closely,--but are conceived only as supernatural.
The reader will no doubt observe, throughout the following lecture,
my own habit of speaking of beautiful things as 'natural,' and of
ugly ones as 'unnatural.' In the conception of recent philosophy,
the world is one Kosmos in which diphtheria is held to be as
natural as song, and cholera as digestion. To my own mind, and the
more distinctly the more I see, know, and feel, the Earth, as
prepared for the abode of man, appears distinctly ruled by agencies
of health and disease, of which the first may be aided by his
industry, prudence, and piety; while the destroying laws are
allowed to prevail against him, in the degree in which he allows
himself in idleness, folly, and vice. Had the point been distinctly
indicated where the degrees of adversity necessary for his
discipline pass into those intended for his punishment, the world
would have been put under a manifest theocracy; but the declaration
of the principle is at least distinct enough to have convinced all
sensitive and earnest persons, from the beginning of speculation in
the eyes and mind of Man: and it has been put in my power by one
of the singular chances which have always helped me in my work when
it was in the right direction, to present to the University
of Oxford the most distinct expression of this first principle
of mediæval Theology which, so far as I know, exists in
fifteenth-century art. It is one of the drawings of the Florentine
book which I bought for a thousand pounds, against the British
Museum, some ten or twelve years since; being a compendium of
classic and mediæval religious symbolism. In the two pages of it,
forming one picture, given to Oxford, the delivery of the Law on
Sinai is represented on the left hand, (_contrary to the Scriptural
narrative_, but in deeper expression of the benediction of the
Sacred Law to all nations,) as in the midst of bright and calm
light, the figure of the Deity being supported by luminous and
level clouds, and attended by happy angels: while opposite, on the
right hand, the worship of the Golden Calf is symbolized by a
single decorated pillar, with the calf on its summit, surrounded by
the clouds and darkness of a furious storm, issuing from the mouths
of fiends;--uprooting the trees, and throwing down the rocks, above
the broken tables of the Law, of which the fragments lie in the
foreground.]

[Footnote 2: These conditions are mainly in the arrangement of the
lower rain-clouds in flakes thin and detached enough to be
illuminated by early or late sunbeams: their textures are then more
softly blended than those of the upper cirri, and have the
qualities of painted, instead of burnished or inflamed, color.

They were thus described in the 4th chapter of the 7th part of
'Modern Painters':--

"Often in our English mornings, the rain-clouds in the dawn form
soft level fields, which melt imperceptibly into the blue; or when
of less extent, gather into apparent bars, crossing the sheets of
broader cloud above; and all these bathed throughout in an
unspeakable light of pure rose-color, and purple, and amber, and
blue, not shining, but misty-soft, the barred masses, when seen
nearer, found to be woven in tresses of cloud, like floss silk,
looking as if each knot were a little swathe or sheaf of lighted
rain.

"No clouds form such skies, none are so tender, various,
inimitable; Turner himself never caught them. Correggio, putting
out his whole strength, could have painted them,--no other man."]

[Footnote 3: I did not, in writing this sentence, forget Mr.
Gladstone's finely scholastic enthusiasm for Homer; nor Mr.
Newton's for Athenian--(I wish it had not been also for
Halicarnassian) sculpture. But Byron loved Greece herself--through
her death--and _to_ his own; while the subsequent refusal of
England to give Greece one of our own princes for a king, has
always been held by me the most ignoble, cowardly, and lamentable,
of all our base commercial _im_policies.]

[Footnote 4: 'Deepening' clouds.--Byron never uses an epithet
vainly,--he is the most accurate, and therefore the most powerful,
of all modern describers. The deepening of the cloud is essentially
necessary to the redness of the orb. Ordinary observers are
continually unaware of this fact, and imagine that a red sun can be
darker than the sky round it! Thus Mr. Gould, though a professed
naturalist, and passing most of his life in the open air, over and
over again, in his 'British Birds,' draws the setting sun dark on
the sky!]

[Footnote 5: 'Like the blood he predicts.'--The astrological power
of the planet Mars was of course ascribed to it in the same
connection with its red color. The reader may be interested to see
the notice, in 'Modern Painters,' of Turner's constant use of the
same symbol; partly an expression of his own personal feeling,
partly, the employment of a symbolic language known to all careful
readers of solar and stellar tradition.

"He was very definitely in the habit of indicating the association
of any subject with circumstances of death, especially the death of
multitudes, by placing it under one of his most deeply _crimsoned_
sunset skies.

"The color of blood is thus plainly taken for the leading tone in
the storm-clouds above the 'Slave-ship.' It occurs with similar
distinctness in the much earlier picture of 'Ulysses and
Polypheme,' in that of 'Napoleon at St. Helena,' and, subdued by
softer hues, in the 'Old Téméraire.'

"The sky of this Goldau is, in its scarlet and crimson, the deepest
in tone of all that I know in Turner's drawings.

"Another feeling, traceable in several of his former works, is an
acute sense of the contrast between the careless interests and idle
pleasures of daily life, and the state of those whose time for
labor, or knowledge, or delight, is passed forever. There is
evidence of this feeling in the introduction of the boys at play in
the churchyard of Kirkby Lonsdale, and the boy climbing for his
kite among the thickets above the little mountain churchyard of
Brignal-bank; it is in the same tone of thought that he has placed
here the two figures fishing, leaning against these shattered
flanks of rock,--the sepulchral stones of the great mountain Field
of Death."]

[Footnote 6: 'Thy lore unto calamity.'--It is, I believe,
recognized by all who have in any degree become interested in the
traditions of Chaldean astrology, that its warnings were
distinct,--its promises deceitful. Horace thus warns Leuconoe
against reading the Babylonian numbers to learn the time of her
death,--he does not imply their promise of previous happiness; and
the continually deceptive character of the Delphic oracle itself,
tempted always rather to fatal than to fortunate conduct, unless
the inquirer were more than wise in his reading. Byron gathers into
the bitter question all the sorrow of former superstition, while in
the lines italicized, just above, he sums in the briefest and
plainest English, all that we yet know, or may wisely think, about
the Sun. It is the '_Burning_ oracle' (other oracles there are by
sound, or feeling, but this by fire) of all that lives; the only
means of our accurate knowledge of the things round us, and that
affect our lives: it is the _fountain_ of all life,--Byron does not
say the _origin_;--the origin of life would be the origin of the
sun itself; but it is the visible _source_ of vital energy, as the
spring is of a stream, though the origin is the sea. "And symbol of
Him who bestows it."--This the sun has always been, to every one
who believes there is a bestower; and a symbol so perfect and
beautiful that it may also be thought of as partly an apocalypse.]

[Footnote 7: 'More beautiful in that variety.'--This line, with the
one italicized beneath, expresses in Myrrha's mind, the feeling
which I said, in the outset, every thoughtful watcher of heaven
necessarily had in those old days; whereas now, the variety is for
the most part, only in modes of disagreeableness; and the vapor,
instead of adding light to the unclouded sky, takes away the aspect
and destroys the functions of sky altogether.]

[Footnote 8: 'Steam out of an engine funnel.'--Compare the sixth
paragraph of Professor Tyndall's 'Forms of Water,' and the
following seventh one, in which the phenomenon of transparent steam
becoming opaque is thus explained. "Every bit of steam shrinks,
when chilled, to a much more minute particle of water. The liquid
particles thus produced form a kind of water dust of exceeding
fineness, which floats in the air, and is called a cloud."

But the author does not tell us, in the first place, what is the
shape or nature of a 'bit of steam,' nor, in the second place, how
the contraction of the individual bits of steam is effected without
any diminution of the whole mass of them, but on the contrary,
during its steady _expansion_; in the third place he assumes that
the particles of water dust are solid, not vesicular, which is not
yet ascertained; in the fourth place, he does not tell us how their
number and size are related to the quantity of invisible moisture
in the air; in the fifth place, he does not tell us how cool
invisible moisture differs from hot invisible moisture; and in the
sixth, he does not tell us why the cool visible moisture stays
while the hot visible moisture melts away. So much for the present
state of 'scientific' information, or at least communicativeness,
on the first and simplest conditions of the problem before us!

In its wider range that problem embraces the total mystery of
volatile power in substance; and of the visible states consequent
on sudden--and presumably, therefore, imperfect--vaporization; as
the smoke of frankincense, or the sacred fume of modern devotion
which now fills the inhabited world, as that of the rose and violet
its deserts. What,--it would be useful to know, is the actual bulk
of an atom of orange perfume?--what of one of vaporized tobacco, or
gunpowder?--and where do _these_ artificial vapors fall back in
beneficent rain? or through what areas of atmosphere exist, as
invisible, though perhaps not innocuous, cloud?

All these questions were put, closely and precisely,
four-and-twenty years ago, in the 1st chapter of the 7th part of
'Modern Painters,' paragraphs 4 to 9, of which I can here allow
space only for the last, which expresses the final difficulties of
the matter better than anything said in this lecture:--

"But farther: these questions of volatility, and visibility, and
hue, are all complicated with those of shape. How is a cloud
outlined? Granted whatever you choose to ask, concerning its
material, or its aspect, its loftiness and luminousness,--how of
its limitation? What hews it into a heap, or spins it into a web?
Cold is usually shapeless, I suppose, extending over large spaces
equally, or with gradual diminution. You cannot have in the open
air, angles, and wedges, and coils, and cliffs, of cold. Yet the
vapor stops suddenly, sharp and steep as a rock, or thrusts itself
across the gates of heaven in likeness of a brazen bar; or braids
itself in and out, and across and across, like a tissue of
tapestry; or falls into ripples, like sand; or into waving shreds
and tongues, as fire. On what anvils and wheels is the vapor
pointed, twisted, hammered, whirled, as the potter's clay? By what
hands is the incense of the sea built up into domes of marble?"]

[Footnote 9: The opposed conditions of the higher and lower orders
of cloud, with the balanced intermediate one, are beautifully seen
on mountain summits of rock or earth. On snowy ones they are far
more complex: but on rock summits there are three distinct forms of
attached cloud in serene weather; the first that of cloud veil
laid over them, and _falling_ in folds through their ravines,
(the obliquely descending clouds of the entering chorus in
Aristophanes); secondly, the ascending cloud, which develops itself
loosely and independently as it rises, and does not attach itself
to the hill-side, while the falling veil cloud clings to it close
all the way down;--and lastly the throned cloud, which rests indeed
on the mountain summit, with its base, but rises high above into
the sky, continually changing its outlines, but holding its seat
perhaps all day long.

These three forms of cloud belong exclusively to calm weather;
attached drift cloud, (see Note 11) can only be formed in the
wind.]

[Footnote 10: 'Glaciers of the Alps,' page 10.--"Let a pound weight
be placed upon a cube of granite" (size of supposed cube not
mentioned), "the cube is flattened, though in an infinitesimal
degree. Let the weight be removed, the cube remains a little
flattened. Let us call the cube thus flattened No. 1. Starting with
No. 1 as a new mass, let the pound weight be laid upon it. We have
a more flattened mass, No. 2.... Apply this to squeezed rocks, to
those, for example, which form the base of an obelisk like the
Matterhorn,--the conclusion seems inevitable _that the mountain is
sinking by its own weight_," etc., etc. Similarly the Nelson statue
must be gradually flattening the Nelson column, and in time
Cleopatra's needle will be as flat as her pincushion?]

[Footnote 11: 'Glaciers of the Alps,' page 146.--"The sun was near
the western horizon, and I remained alone upon the Grat to see his
last beams illuminate the mountains, which, with one exception,
were without a trace of cloud.

"This exception was the Matterhorn, the appearance of which was
extremely instructive. The obelisk appeared to be divided in two
halves by a vertical line, drawn from its summit half-way down, to
the windward of which we had the bare cliffs of the mountain; and
to the left of it a cloud which appeared to cling tenaciously to
the rocks.

"In reality, however, there was no clinging; the condensed vapor
incessantly got away, but it was ever renewed, and thus a river of
cloud had been sent from the mountain over the valley of Aosta. The
wind, in fact, blew lightly up the valley of St. Nicholas, charged
with moisture, and when the air that held it _rubbed against the
cold cone_ of the Matterhorn, the vapor was chilled and
precipitated in his lee."

It is not explained, why the wind was not chilled by rubbing
against any of the neighboring mountains, nor why the cone of the
Matterhorn, mostly of rock, should be colder than cones of snow.
The phenomenon was first described by De Saussure, who gives the
same explanation as Tyndall; and from whom, in the first volume of
'Modern Painters,' I adopted it without sufficient examination.
Afterwards I re-examined it, and showed its fallacy, with respect
to the cap or helmet cloud, in the fifth volume of 'Modern
Painters,' page 124, in the terms given in the subjoined note,[A]
but I still retained the explanation of Saussure for the lee-side
cloud, engraving in plate 69 the modes of its occurrence on the
Aiguille Dru, of which the most ordinary one was afterwards
represented by Tyndall in his 'Glaciers of the Alps,' under the
title of 'Banner-cloud.' Its less imaginative title, in 'Modern
Painters,' of 'Lee-side cloud,' is more comprehensive, for this
cloud forms often under the brows of far-terraced precipices, where
it has no resemblance to a banner. No true explanation of it has
ever yet been given; for the first condition of the problem has
hitherto been unobserved,--namely, that such cloud is constant in
certain states of weather, under precipitous rocks;--but never
developed with distinctness by domes of snow.

[Illustration]

But my former expansion of Saussure's theory is at least closer to
the facts than Professor Tyndall's "rubbing against the rocks," and
I therefore allow room for it here, with its illustrative wood-cut.

"When a moist wind blows in clear weather over a cold summit, it
has not time to get chilled as it approaches the rock, and
therefore the air remains clear, and the sky bright on the windward
side; but under the lee of the peak, there is partly a back eddy,
and partly still air; and in that lull and eddy the wind gets time
to be chilled by the rock, and the cloud appears, as a boiling mass
of white vapor, rising continually with the return current to the
upper edge of the mountain, where it is caught by the straight wind
and partly torn, partly melted away in broken fragments.

"In the accompanying figure, the dark mass represents the mountain
peak, the arrow the main direction of the wind, the curved lines
show the directions of such current and its concentration, and the
dotted line encloses the space in which cloud forms densely,
floating away beyond and above in irregular tongues and flakes."

[Footnote A: "But both Saussure and I ought to have known,--we did
know, but did not think of it,--that the covering or cap-cloud
forms on hot summits as well as cold ones;--that the red and bare
rocks of Mont Pilate, hotter, certainly, after a day's sunshine
than the cold storm-wind which sweeps to them from the Alps,
nevertheless have been renowned for their helmet of cloud, ever
since the Romans watched the cloven summit, gray against the south,
from the ramparts of Vindonissa, giving it the name from which the
good Catholics of Lucerne have warped out their favorite piece of
terrific sacred biography. And both my master and I should also
have reflected that if our theory about its formation had been
generally true, the helmet cloud ought to form on every cold
summit, at the approach of rain, in approximating proportions to
the bulk of the glaciers; which is so far from being the case that
not only (A) the cap-cloud may often be seen on lower summits of
grass or rock, while the higher ones are splendidly clear (which
may be accounted for by supposing the wind containing the moisture
not to have risen so high); but (B) the cap-cloud always shows a
preference for hills of a conical form, such as the Mole or Niesen,
which can have very little power in chilling the air, even
supposing they were cold themselves; while it will entirely refuse
to form huge masses of mountain, which, supposing them of chilly
temperament, must have discomforted the atmosphere in their
neighborhood for leagues."]]

[Footnote 12: See below, on the different uses of the word
'reflection,' note 14, and note that throughout this lecture I use
the words 'aqueous molecules,' alike of water liquid or vaporized,
not knowing under what conditions or at what temperatures
water-dust becomes water-gas; and still less, supposing pure
water-gas blue, and pure air blue, what are the changes in either
which make them what sailors call "dirty "; but it is one of the
worst omissions of the previous lecture, that I have not stated
among the characters of the plague-cloud that it is _always_
dirty,[A] and _never blue under any conditions_, neither when deep
in the distance, nor when in the electric states which produce
sulphurous blues in natural cloud. But see the next note.

[Footnote A: In my final collation of the lectures given at Oxford
last year on the Art of England, I shall have occasion to take
notice of the effect of this character of plague-cloud on our
younger painters, who have perhaps never in their lives seen a
_clean_ sky!]]

[Footnote 13: Black clouds.--For the sudden and extreme local
blackness of thundercloud, see Turner's drawing of Winchelsea,
(England series), and compare Homer, of the Ajaces, in the 4th book
of the Iliad,--(I came on the passage in verifying Mr. Hill's
quotation from the 5th.)

                    "[Greek: hama de nephos eipeto pezôn.
     Hôs d' hot' apo skopiês eiden nephos aipolos anêr
     Erchomenon kata ponton hypo Zephyroio iôês,
     Tô de t', aneuthen eonti, melanteron, êute pissa
     Phainet', ion kata ponton, agei de te lailapa pollên;
     Rhigêsen te idôn, hypo te speos êlase mêla;
     Toiai ham Aiantessin arêithoôn aizêôn
     Dêion es polemon pykinai kinynto phalanges
     Kyaneai,]"

I give Chapman's version--noting only that his _breath_ of
Zephyrus, ought to have been 'cry' or 'roar' of Zephyrus, the
blackness of the cloud being as much connected with the wildness of
the wind as, in the formerly quoted passage, its brightness with
calm of air.

                            "Behind them hid the ground
    A cloud of foot, that seemed to smoke. And as a Goatherd spies
    On some hill top, out of the sea a rainy vapor rise,
    Driven by the breath of Zephyrus, which though far off he rests,
    Comes on as black as pitch, and brings a tempest in his breast
    Whereat he, frighted, drives his herds apace into a den;
    So, darkening earth, with swords and shields, showed these with
        all their men."

I add here Chapman's version of the other passage, which is
extremely beautiful and close to the text, while Pope's is
hopelessly erroneous.

                            "Their ground they still made good,
    And in their silence and set powers, like fair still clouds they stood,
    With which Jove crowns the tops of hills in any quiet day
    When Boreas, and the ruder winds that use to drive away
    Air's _dusky vapors_, being _loose_, in many a whistling gale,
    Are pleasingly bound up and calm, and not a breath exhale."]

[Footnote 14: 'Reflected.'--The reader must be warned in this place
of the difference implied by my use of the word 'cast' in page 11,
and 'reflected' here: that is to say, between light or color which
an object possesses, whatever the angle it is seen at, and the
light which it reverberates at one angle only. The Alps, under the
rose[A] of sunset, are exactly of the same color whether you see
them from Berne or Schaffhausen. But the gilding to our eyes of a
burnished cloud depends, I believe, at least for a measure of its
luster, upon the angle at which the rays incident upon it are
reflected to the eye, just as much as the glittering of the sea
beneath it--or the sparkling of the windows of the houses on the
shore.

Previously, at page 10, in calling the molecules of transparent
atmospheric 'absolutely' unreflective of light, I mean, in like
manner, unreflective from their _surfaces_. Their blue color seen
against a dark ground is indeed a kind of reflection, but one of
which I do not understand the nature. It is seen most simply in
wood smoke, blue against trees, brown against clear light; but in
both cases the color is communicated to (or left in) the
_transmitted_ rays.

So also the green of the sky (p. 13) is said to be given by
transmitted light, yellow rays passing through blue air: much yet
remains to be known respecting translucent colors of this kind;
only let them always be clearly distinguished in our minds from the
firmly possessed color of opaque substances, like grass or
malachite.

[Footnote A: In speaking, at p. 11 of the first lecture, of the
limits of depth in the rose-color cast on snow, I ought to have
noted the greater strength of the tint possible under the light of
the tropics. The following passage, in Mr. Cunningham's 'Natural
History of the Strait of Magellan,' is to me of the greatest
interest, because of the beautiful effect described as seen on the
occasion of his visit to "the small town of Santa Rosa," (near
Valparaiso.) "The day, though clear, had not been sunny, so that,
although the snowy heights of the Andes had been distinctly visible
throughout the greater part of our journey, they had not been
illuminated by the rays of the sun. But now, as we turned the
corner of a street, the chain of the Cordillera suddenly burst on
our gaze in such a blaze of splendor that it almost seemed as if
the windows of heaven had been opened for a moment, permitting a
flood of _crimson_ light to stream forth upon the snow. The sight
was so unexpected, and so transcendently magnificent, that a
breathless silence fell upon us for a few moments, while even the
driver stopped his horses. This deep red glow lasted for three or
four minutes, and then rapidly faded into that lovely rosy hue so
characteristic of snow at sunset among the Alps."]]

[Footnote 15: Diffraction.--Since these passages were written, I
have been led, in conversation with a scientific friend, to doubt
my statement that the colored portions of the lighted clouds were
brighter than the white ones. He was convinced that the resolution
of the rays would diminish their power, and in _thinking_ over the
matter, I am disposed to agree with him, although my impression at
the time has been always that the diffracted colors rose out of the
white, as a rainbow does out of the gray. But whatever the facts
may be, in this respect the statement in the text of the
impossibility of representing diffracted color in painting is
equally true. It may be that the resolved hues are darker than the
white, as colored panes in a window are darker than the colorless
glass, but all are alike in a key which no artifice of painting can
approach.

For the rest, the phenomena of diffraction are not yet arranged
systematically enough to be usefully discussed; some of them
involving the resolution of the light, and others merely its
intensification. My attention was first drawn to them near St.
Laurent, on the Jura mountains, by the vivid reflection, (so it
seemed), of the image of the sun from a particular point of a cloud
in the west, after the sun itself was beneath the horizon: but in
this image there were no prismatic colors, neither is the
constantly seen metamorphosis of pine forests into silver filigree
on ridges behind which the sun is rising or setting, accompanied
with any prismatic hue; the trees become luminous, but not
iridescent: on the other hand, in his great account of his ascent
of Mont Blanc with Mr. Huxley, Professor Tyndall thus describes the
sun's remarkable behavior on that occasion:--"As we attained the
brow which forms the entrance to the Grand Plateau, he _hung his
disk upon a spike of rock_ to our left, and, surrounded by a glory
of interference spectra of the most gorgeous colors, blazed down
upon us." ('Glaciers of the Alps,' p. 76.)

Nothing irritates me more, myself, than having the color of my own
descriptions of phenomena in anywise attributed by the reader to
accidental states either of my mind or body;--but I cannot, for
once, forbear at least the innocent question to Professor Tyndall,
whether the extreme beauty of these 'interference spectra' may not
have been partly owing to the extreme _sobriety_ of the observer?
no refreshment, it appears, having been attainable the night before
at the Grands Mulets, except the beverage diluted with dirty snow,
of which I have elsewhere quoted the Professor's pensive
report,--"my memory of that tea is not pleasant."]

[Footnote 16: 'Either stationary or slow in motion, reflecting
unresolved light.'

The rate of motion is of course not essentially connected with the
method of illumination; their connection, in this instance, needs
explanation of some points which could not be dealt with in the
time of a single lecture.

It is before said, with reserve only, that "a cloud is where it is
seen, and is not where it is not seen." But thirty years ago, in
'Modern Painters,' I pointed out (see the paragraph quoted in note
8th), the extreme difficulty of arriving at the cause of cloud
outline, or explaining how, if we admitted at any given moment the
atmospheric moisture to be generally diffused, it could be chilled
by formal _chills_ into formal clouds. How, for instance, in the
upper cirri, a thousand little chills, alternating with a thousand
little warmths, could stand still as a thousand little feathers.

But the first step to any elucidation of the matter is in the
firmly fixing in our minds the difference between windless clouds,
unaffected by any conceivable local accident, and windy clouds,
affected by some change in their circumstances as they move.

In the sunset at Abbeville, represented in my first diagram, the
air is absolutely calm at the ground surface, and the motion of its
upper currents extremely slow. There is no local reason assignable
for the presence of the cirri above, or of the thundercloud below.
There is no conceivable cause either in the geology, or the moral
character, of the two sides of the town of Abbeville, to explain
why there should be decorative fresco on the sky over the southern
suburb, and a muttering heap of gloom and danger over the northern.
The electric cloud is as calm in motion as the harmless one; it
changes its forms, indeed; but imperceptibly; and, so far as can
be discerned, only at its own will is exalted, and with its own
consent abased.

But in my second diagram are shown forms of vapor sustaining at
every instant all kinds of varying local influences; beneath,
fastened down by mountain attraction, above, flung afar by
distracting winds; here, spread abroad into blanched sheets beneath
the sunshine, and presently gathered into strands of coiled cordage
in the shade. Their total existence is in metamorphosis, and their
every aspect a surprise, or a deceit.]

[Footnote 17: 'Finely comminuted water or _ice_.'

My impression that these clouds were glacial was at once confirmed
by a member of my audience, Dr. John Rae, in conversation after the
lecture, in which he communicated to me the perfectly definite
observations which he has had the kindness to set down with their
dates for me, in the following letter:--

                    "4, ADDISON GARDENS, KENSINGTON, _4th Feb., 1884._

DEAR SIR,--I have looked up my old journal of thirty years ago,
written in pencil because it was impossible to keep ink unfrozen in
the snow-hut in which I passed the winter of 1853-4, at Repulse
Bay, on the Arctic Circle.[A]

On the 1st of February, 1854, I find the following:--

'A beautiful appearance of some cirrus clouds near the sun, the
central part of the cloud being of a fine pink or red, then green,
and pink fringe. This continued for about a quarter of an hour. The
same was observed on the 27th of the month, but not so bright.
Distance of clouds from sun, from 3° to 6°.'

On the 1st February the temperature was 38° below zero, and on the
27th February 26° below.

'On the 23d and 30th (of March) the same splendid appearance of
clouds as mentioned in last month's journal was observed. On the
first of these days, about 10.30 a.m., it was extremely beautiful.
The clouds were about 8° or 10° from the sun, below him and
slightly to the eastward,--having a green fringe all round, then
pink; the center part at first green, and then pink or red.'

The temperature was 21° below zero, Fahrenheit.

There may have been other colors--blue, perhaps--but I merely noted
the most prominent; and what I call green may have been bluish,
although I do not mention this last color in my notes.

From the lowness of the temperature at the time, the clouds _must_
have been frozen moisture.

The phenomenon is by no means common, even in the Arctic zone.

The second beautiful cloud-picture shown this afternoon brought so
visibly to my memory the appearance seen by me as above described,
that I could not avoid remarking upon it.

                         Believe me very truly yours,
                         JOHN RAE." (M.D., F.R.S.)

Now this letter enables me to leave the elements of your problem
for you in very clear terms.

Your sky--altogether--may be composed of one or more of four
things:--

     Molecules of water in warm weather.
     Molecules of ice in cold weather.
     Molecules of water-vapor in warm weather.
     Molecules of ice-vapor in cold weather.

But of the size, distances, or modes of attraction between these
different kinds of particles, I find no definite information
anywhere, except the somewhat vague statement by Sir William
Thomson, that "if a drop of water could be magnified so as to be as
large as the earth, and have a diameter of eight thousand miles,
then a molecule of this water in it would appear _somewhat larger
than a shot_." (What kind of shot?) "_and somewhat smaller than a
cricket-ball_"!

And as I finally review the common accounts given of cloud
formation, I find it quite hopeless for the general reader to deal
with the quantity of points which have to be kept in mind and
severally valued, before he can account for any given phenomena. I
have myself, in many of the passages of 'Modern Painters' before
referred to, conceived of cloud too narrowly as always produced by
_cold_, whereas the temperature of a cloud must continually, like
that of our visible breath in frosty weather, or of the visible
current of steam, or the smoking of a warm lake surface under
sudden frost, be above that of the surrounding atmosphere; and yet
I never remember entering a cloud without being chilled by it, and
the darkness of the plague-wind, unless in electric states of the
air, is always accompanied by deadly chill.

Nor, so far as I can read, has any proper account yet been given of
the balance, in serene air, of the warm air under the cold, in
which the warm air is at once compressed by weight, and expanded by
heat, and the cold air is thinned by its elevation, yet contracted
by its cold. There is indeed no possibility of embracing the
conditions in a single sentence, any more than in a single thought.
But the practical balance is effected in calm air, so that its
lower strata have no tendency to rise, like the air in a fire
balloon, nor its higher strata to fall, unless they congeal into
rain or snow.

I believe it will be an extreme benefit to my younger readers if I
write for them a little 'Grammar of Ice and Air,' collecting the
known facts on all these matters, and I am much minded to put by my
ecclesiastical history for a while, in order to relate what is
legible of the history of the visible Heaven.

[Footnote A: I trust that Dr. Rae will forgive my making the reader
better aware of the real value of this communication by allowing
him to see also the following passage from the kind private letter
by which it was supplemented:--

"Many years in the Hudson's Bay Company's service, I and my men
became educated for Arctic work, in which I was five different
times employed, in two of which expeditions we lived wholly by our
own hunting and fishing for twelve months, once in a stone house
(very disagreeable), and another winter in a snow hut (better),
_without fire of any kind to warm us_. On the first of these
expeditions, 1846-7, my little party, there being no officer but
myself, surveyed seven hundred miles of coast of Arctic America by
a sledge journey, which Parry, Ross, Bach, and Lyon had failed to
accomplish, costing the country about £70,000 or £80,000 at the
lowest computation. The total expense of my little party, including
my own pay, was under fourteen hundred pounds sterling.

"My Arctic work has been recognized by the award of the founder's
gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society (before the completion
of the whole of it)."]]

[Footnote 18: 'You can't get a billiard ball to fall a shivering on
its own account.'--I am under correction in this statement by the
Lucasian professor of Cambridge, with respect to the molecules of
bodies capable of 'epipolizing' light. "Nothing seems more natural
than to suppose that the incident vibrations of the luminiferous
ether produce vibratory movements among the ultimate molecules of
sensitive substances, and that the molecules in return, _swinging
on their own account_, produce vibrations in the luminous ether,
and thus cause the sensation of light. The periodic times of these
vibrations depend upon the periods in which the molecules are
_disposed to swing_." ('On the Changes of Refrangibility of Light,'
p. 549.)

It seems to me a pleasant conclusion, this, of recent science, and
suggestive of a perfectly regenerate theology. The 'Let there be
light' of the former Creation is first expanded into 'Let there be
a disposition of the molecules to swing,' and the destinies of
mankind, no less than the vitality of the universe, depend
thereafter upon this amiable, but perhaps capricious, and at all
events not easily influenced or anticipated, disposition!

Is it not also strange that in a treatise entering into so high
mathematical analysis as that from which I quote, the false word
'swing,' expressing the action of a body liable to continuous
arrest by gravitation, should be employed to signify the
oscillation, wholly unaffected by gravity, of substance in which
the motion once originated, may cease only with the essence of the
body?

It is true that in men of high scientific caliber, such as the
writer in this instance, carelessness in expression does not affect
the security of their conclusions. But in men of lower rank, mental
defects in language indicate fatal flaws in thought. And although
the constant habit to which I owe my (often foolishly praised)
"command of language"--of never allowing a sentence to pass proof
in which I have not considered whether, for the vital word in it, a
better could be found in the dictionary, makes me somewhat morbidly
intolerant of careless diction, it may be taken for an extremely
useful and practical rule, that if a man can think clearly he will
write well, and that no good science was ever written in bad
English. So that, before you consider whether a scientific author
says a true or a false thing, you had better first look if he is
able properly to say _any_thing,--and secondly, whether his conceit
permits him to say anything properly.

Thus, when Professor Tyndall, endeavoring to write poetically of
the sun, tells you that "The Lilies of the field are his
workmanship," you may observe, first, that since the sun is not a
man, nothing that he does is workmanship; while even the figurative
statement that he rejoices _as_ a strong man to run his course, is
one which Professor Tyndall has no intention whatever of admitting.
And you may then observe, in the second place, that, if even in
that figurative sense, the lilies of the field are the sun's
workmanship, in the same sense the lilies of the hothouse are the
stove's workmanship,--and in perfectly logical parallel, you, who
are alive here to listen to me, because you have been warmed and
fed through the winter, are the workmanship of your own
coal-scuttles.

Again, when Mr. Balfour Stewart begins a treatise on the
'Conservation of Energy,' which is to conclude, as we shall see
presently, with the prophecy of its total extinction as far as the
present world is concerned,--by clothing in a "properly scientific
garb," our innocent impression that there is some difference
between the blow of a rifle stock and a rifle ball; he prepares for
the scientific toilet by telling us in italics that "the something
which the rifle ball possesses in contradistinction to the rifle
stock is clearly the power of overcoming resistance," since "it can
penetrate through oak-wood or through water--or (alas! that it
should be so often tried) through the human body; and _this power
of penetration_" (italics now mine) "_is the distinguishing
characteristic of a substance moving with very great velocity_. Let
us define by the term 'Energy,' this power which the rifle ball
possesses of overcoming obstacles, or of doing work."

Now, had Mr. Stewart been a better scholar, he would have felt,
even if he had not known, that the Greek word 'energy' could only
be applied to the living--and of living, with perfect propriety
only to the _mental_, action of animals, and that it could no more
be applied as a 'scientific garb,' to the flight of a rifle ball,
than to the fall of a dead body. And, if he had attained thus much,
even of the science of language, it is just possible that the small
forte and faculty of thought he himself possesses might have been
energized so far as to perceive that the force of all inertly
moving bodies, whether rifle stock, rifle ball, or rolling world,
is under precisely one and the same relation to their weights and
velocities; that the effect of their impact depends--not merely on
their pace, but their constitution; and on the relative forms and
stability of the substances they encounter, and that there is no
more quality of Energy, though much less quality of Art, in the
swiftly penetrating shot, or crushing ball, than in the
deliberately contemplative and administrative puncture by a gnat's
proboscis, or a seamstress' needle.

Mistakes of this kind, beginning with affectations of diction, do
not always invalidate general statements or conclusions,--for a bad
writer often equivocates out of a blunder as he equivocates into
one,--but I have been strict in pointing out the confusions of idea
admitted in scientific books between the movement of a swing, that
of a sounding violin chord, and that of an agitated liquid, because
these confusions have actually enabled Professor Tyndall to keep
the scientific world in darkness as to the real nature of glacier
motion for the last twenty years; and to induce a resultant
quantity of aberration in the scientific mind concerning glacial
erosion, of which another twenty years will scarcely undo the
damage.]

[Footnote 19: 'Force and pace.'--Among the nearer questions which
the careless terminology on which I have dwelt in the above note
has left unsettled, I believe the reader will be surprised, as much
as I am myself, to find that of the mode of impulse in a common
gust of wind! Whence is its strength communicated to it, and how
gathered in it? and what is the difference of manner in the impulse
between compressible gas and incompressible fluid? For instance:
The water at the head of a weir is passing every instant from
slower into quicker motion; but (until broken in the air) the fast
flowing water is just as dense as the slowly flowing water. But a
fan alternately compresses and rarefies the air between it and the
cheek, and the violence of a destructive gust in a gale of wind
means a momentary increase in velocity and density of which I
cannot myself in the least explain,--and find in no book on
dynamics explained,--the mechanical causation.

The following letter, from a friend whose observations on natural
history for the last seven or eight years have been consistently
valuable and instructive to me, will be found, with that subjoined
in the note, in various ways interesting; but especially in its
notice of the inefficiency of ordinary instrumental registry in
such matters:--

                    "6, MOIRA PLACE, SOUTHAMPTON, _Feb. 8th, 1884_.

DEAR MR. RUSKIN,--Some time since I troubled you with a note or two
about sea-birds, etc.... but perhaps I should never have ventured
to trouble you again, had not your lecture on the 'Storm Clouds'
touched a subject which has deeply interested me for years past. I
had, of course, no idea that you had noticed this thing, though I
might have known that, living the life you do, you must have done
so. As for me, it has been a source of perplexity for years: so
much so, that I began to wonder at times whether I was not under
some mental delusion about it, until the strange theatrical
displays, of the last few months, for which I was more or less
prepared, led so many to use their eyes, unmuzzled by brass or
glass, for a time. I know you do not bother, or care much to read
newspapers, but I have taken the liberty of cutting out and
sending a letter of mine, sent on the 1st January to an evening
paper,[A] upon this subject, thinking you might like to know that
one person, at any rate, has seen that strange, bleared look about
the sun, shining so seldom except through a ghastly glare of pale,
persistent haze. May it be that the singular coloring of the
sunsets marks an end of this long period of plague-cloud, and that
in them we have promise of steadier weather? (No: those sunsets
were entirely distinct phenomena, and promised, if anything, only
evil.--R.)

I was glad to see that in your lecture you gave the dependants upon
the instrument-makers a warning. On the 26th I had a heavy
sailing-boat lifted and blown, from where she lay hauled up, a
distance of four feet, which, as the boat has four hundred-weight
of iron upon her keel, gives a wind-gust, or force, not easily
measured by instruments.

                         Believe me, dear Mr. Ruskin,
                                   Yours sincerely,
                                   ROBT. C. LESLIE."

I am especially delighted, in this letter, by my friend's
vigorously accurate expression, eyes "unmuzzled by brass or glass."
I have had occasion continually, in my art-lectures, to dwell on
the great law of human perception and power, that the beauty which
is good for us is prepared for the natural focus of the sight, and
the sounds which are delightful to us for the natural power of the
nerves of the ear; and the art which is admirable in us, is the
exercise of our own bodily powers, and not carving by sand-blast,
nor oratorizing through a speaking trumpet, nor dancing with spring
heels. But more recently, I have become convinced that even in
matters of science, although every added mechanical power has its
proper use and sphere, yet the things which are vital to our
happiness and prosperity can only be known by the rational use and
subtle skill of our natural powers. We may trust the instrument
with the prophecy of storm, or registry of rainfall; but the
conditions of atmospheric change, on which depend the health of
animals and fruitfulness of seeds, can only be discerned by the eye
and the bodily sense.

Take, for simplest and nearest example, this question of the stress
of wind. It is not the actual _power_ that is immeasurable, if only
it would stand to be measured! Instruments could easily now be
invented which would register not only a blast that could lift a
sailing boat, but one that would sink a ship of the line. But,
lucklessly--the blast won't pose to the instrument! nor can the
instrument be adjusted to the blast. In the gale of which my friend
speaks in his next letter, 26th January, a gust came down the hill
above Coniston village upon two old oaks, which were well rooted in
the slate rock, and some fifty or sixty feet high--the one, some
twenty yards below the other. The blast tore the highest out of the
ground, peeling its roots from the rock as one peels an
orange--swept the head of the lower tree away with it in one ruin,
and snapped the two leader branches of the upper one over the
other's stump, as one would break one's cane over some people's
heads, if one got the chance. In wind action of this kind the
amount of actual force used is the least part of the business;--it
is the suddenness of its concentration, and the lifting and
twisting strength, as of a wrestler, which make the blast fatal;
none of which elements of storm-power can be recognized by
mechanical tests. In my friend's next letter, however, he gives us
some evidence of the _consistent_ strength of this same gale, and
of the electric conditions which attended it:--the prefatory notice
of his pet bird I had meant for 'Love's Meinie,' but it will help
us through the grimness of our studies here.

                                   "_March 3d, 1884._

My small blackheaded gull Jack is still flourishing, and the time
is coming when I look for that singularly sudden change in the
plumage of his head which took place last March. I have asked all
my ocean-going friends to note whether these little birds are not
the gulls _par excellence_ of the sea; and so far all I have heard
from them confirms this. It seems almost incredible; but my son, a
sailor, who met that hurricane of the 26th of January, writes to me
to say that out in the Bay of Biscay on the morning after the gale,
'though it was blowing like blazes, I observed some little gulls of
Jacky's species, and they followed us half way across the Bay,
seeming to find shelter under the lee of our ship. Some alighted
now and then, and rested upon the water as if tired.' When one
considers that these birds must have been at sea all that night
somewhere, it gives one a great idea of their strength and
endurance. My son's ship, though a powerful ocean steamer, was for
two whole hours battling head to sea off the Eddystone that night,
and for that time the lead gave no increase of soundings, so that
she could have made no headway during those two hours; while all
the time her yards had the St. Elmo's fire at their ends, looking
as though a blue light was burning at each yard-arm, and this was
about all they could see.

                         Yours sincerely,
                         ROBT. C. LESLIE."

The next letter, from a correspondent with whom I have the most
complete sympathy in some expressions of his postscript which are
yet, I consider, more for my own private ear than for the public
eye, describes one of the more malignant phases of the plague-wind,
which I forgot to notice in my lecture.

                         "BURNHAM, SOMERSET, _February 7th, 1884_.

DEAR SIR,--I read with great interest your first lecture at Oxford
on cloud and wind (very indifferently reported in 'The Times'). You
have given a name to a wind I've known for years. You call it the
plague--I call it the devil-wind: _e. g._, on April 29th, 1882,
morning warmer, then rain storms from east; afternoon, rain
squalls; wind, west by south, rough; barometer falling awfully;
4.30 p.m., tremendous wind.--April 30th, all the leaves of the
trees, all plants black and dead, as if a fiery blast had swept
over them. _All the hedges on windward side black as black tea._

Another devil-wind came towards the end of last summer. The next
day, all the leaves were falling sere and yellow, as if it were
late autumn.

                         I am, dear sir,
                                   Yours faithfully,
                                     A. H. BIRKETT."

I remember both these blights well; they were entirely terrific;
but only sudden maxima of the constant morbific power of this
wind;--which, if Mr. Birkett saw my _personal_ notices of,
intercalated among the scientific ones, he would find alluded to in
terms quite as vigorously damning as he could desire: and the
actual effect of it upon my thoughts and work has been precisely
that which would have resulted from the visible phantom of an evil
spirit, the absolute opponent of the Queen of the Air,--Typhon
against Athena,--in a sense of which I had neither the experience
nor the conception when I wrote the illustrations of the myth of
Perseus in 'Modern Painters.' Not a word of all those explanations
of Homer and Pindar could have been written in weather like that
of the last twelve years; and I am most thankful to have got them
written, before the shadow came, and I could still see what Homer
and Pindar saw. I quote one passage only--Vol. v., p. 141--for the
sake of a similitude which reminds me of one more thing I have to
say here--and a bit of its note--which I think is a precious little
piece, not of word-painting, but of simply told feeling--(_that_,
if people knew it, is my real power).

"On the Yorkshire and Derbyshire hills, when the rain-cloud is low
and much broken, and the steady west wind fills all space with its
strength,[B] the sun-gleams fly like golden vultures; they are
flashes rather than shinings; the dark spaces and the dazzling race
and skim along the acclivities, and dart and _dip from crag to
dell, swallow-like_."

The dipping of the shadows here described of course is caused only
by that of the dingles they cross; but I have not in any of my
books yet dwelt enough on the difference of character between the
dipping and the mounting winds. Our wildest phase of the west wind
here at Coniston is 'swallow-like' with a vengeance, coming down on
the lake in swirls which spurn the spray under them as a fiery
horse does the dust. On the other hand, the softly ascending winds
express themselves in the grace of their cloud motion, as if set to
the continuous music of a distant song.[C]

The reader will please note also that whenever, either in 'Modern
Painters' or elsewhere, I speak of rate of flight in clouds, I am
thinking of it as measured by the horizontal distance overpast in
given time, and not as apparent only, owing to the nearness of the
spectator. All low clouds appear to move faster than high ones, the
pace being supposed equal in both: but when I speak of quick or
slow cloud, it is always with respect to a given altitude. In a
fine summer morning, a cloud will wait for you among the pines,
folded to and fro among their stems, with a branch or two coming
out here, and a spire or two there: you walk through it, and look
back to it. At another time, on the same spot, the fury of
cloud-flood drifts past you like the Rhine at Schaffhausen.

The space even of the doubled lecture does not admit of my entering
into any general statement of the action of the plague-cloud in
Switzerland and Italy; but I must not omit the following notes of
its aspect in the high Alps.

                              "SALLENCHES, _11th September, 1882_.

This morning, at half-past five, the Mont Blanc summit was clear,
and the greater part of the Aiguilles du Plan and Midi clear
dark--all, against pure cirri, lighted beneath by sunrise; the sun
of course not visible yet from the valley.

By seven o'clock, the plague-clouds had formed in _brown_ flakes,
down to the base of the Aiguille de Bionassay; entirely covering
the snowy ranges; the sun, as it rose to us here, shone only for
about ten minutes--gilding in its old glory the range of the
Dorons,--before one had time to look from peak to peak of it, the
plague-cloud formed from the west, hid Mont Joli, and steadily
choked the valley with advancing streaks of dun-colored mist.
Now--twenty minutes to nine--there is not _one ray_ of sunshine on
the whole valley, or on its mountains, from the Forclaz down to
Cluse.

These phenomena are only the sequel of a series of still more
strange and sad conditions of the air, which have continued among
the Savoy Alps for the last eight days, (themselves the sequel of
others yet more general, prolonged, and harmful). But the weather
was perfectly fine at Dijon, and I doubt not at Chamouni, on the
1st of this month. On the 2d, in the evening, I saw, from the Jura,
heavy thunderclouds in the west; on the 3d, the weather broke at
Morez, in hot thunder-showers, with intervals of scorching sun; on
the 4th, 5th, and 6th there was nearly continuous rain at St.
Cergues, the Alps being totally invisible all the time. The sky
cleared on the night of the 6th, and on the 7th I saw from the top
of the Dole all the western plateaux of Jura quite clearly; but
_the entire range of the Alps_, from the Moleson to the Salève, and
all beyond,--snow, crag and hill-side,--were wrapped and buried in
one unbroken gray-brown winding-sheet, of such cloud _as I had
never seen till that day touch an Alpine summit_.

The wind, from the east, (so that it blew _up_ over the edge of the
Dole cliff, and admitted of perfect shelter on the slope to the
west,) was bitter cold, and extremely violent: the sun overhead,
bright enough, and remained so during the afternoon; the
plague-cloud reaching from the Alps only about as far as the
southern shore of the lake of Geneva; but we could not see the
Salève; nor even the north shore, farther than to Morges! I reached
the Col de la Faucille at sunset, when, for a few minutes, the Mont
Blanc and Aiguille Verte showed themselves in dull red light, but
were buried again, before the sun was quite down, in the rising
deluge of cloud-poison. I saw no farther than the Voirons and
Brezon--and scarcely those, during the electric heat of the 9th at
Geneva; and last Saturday and Sunday have been mere whirls and
drifts of indecisive, but always sullen, storm. This morning I saw
the snows clear for the first time, having been, during the whole
past week, on steady watch for them.

I have written that the clouds of the 7th were such as I never
before saw on the Alps. Often, during the past ten years, I have
seen them on my own hills, and in Italy in 1874; but it has always
chanced to be fine weather, or common rain and cold, when I have
been among the snowy chains; and now from the Dole for the first
time I saw the plague-cloud on _them_."

[Footnote A: 'THE LOOK OF THE SKY.

'_To the_ EDITOR _of the_ ST. JAMES'S GAZETTE.

'SIR,--I have been a very constant though not a scientific observer
of the sky for a period of forty years; and I confess to a certain
feeling of astonishment at the way in which the "recent celestial
phenomena" seem to have taken the whole body of scientific
observers by surprise. It would even appear that something like
these extraordinary sunsets was necessary to call the attention of
such observers to what has long been a source of perplexity to a
variety of common folk, like sailors, farmers, and fishermen. But
to such people the look of the weather, and what comes of that
look, is of far more consequence than the exact amount of ozone or
the depth or width of a band of the spectrum.

'Now, to all such observers, including myself, it has been plain
that of late neither the look of the sky nor the character of the
weather has been, as we should say, what it used to be; and those
whose eyes were strong enough to look now and then toward the sun
have noticed a very marked increase of what some would call a
watery look about him, which might perhaps be better expressed as a
white sheen or glare, at times developing into solar halo or mock
suns, as noted in your paper of the 2d of October last year. A
fisherman would describe it as "white and davery-like." So far as
my observation goes, this appearance was only absent here for a
limited period during the present summer, when we had a week or two
of nearly normal weather; the summer before it was seldom absent.

'Again, those whose business or pleasure has depended on the use of
wind-power have all remarked the strange persistence of hard
westerly and easterly winds, the westerly ones at times partaking
of an almost trade-wind-like force and character. The summer of
1882 was especially remarkable for these winds, while each stormy
November has been followed by a period about mid-winter of mild
calm weather with dense fog. During these strong winds in summer
and early autumn the weather would remain bright and sunny, and to
a landsman would be not remarkable in any way, while the barometer
has been little affected by them; but it has been often observed by
those employed on the water that when it ceased blowing half a gale
the sky at once became overcast, with damp weather or rain. This
may all seem common enough to most people; but to those accustomed
to gauge the wind by the number of reefs wanted in a mainsail or
foresail it was not so; and the number of consecutive days when two
or more reefs have been kept tied down during the last few summers
has been remarkable--alternating at times with equally persistent
spells of calm and fog such as we are now passing through. Again,
we have had an unusually early appearance of ice in the Atlantic,
and most abnormal weather over Central Europe; while in a letter I
have just received from an old hand on board a large Australian
clipper, he speaks of heavy gales and big seas off that coast in
almost the height of their summer.

'Now, upon all this, in our season of long twilights, we have
bursting upon us some clear weather; with a display of cloud-forms
or vapor at such an elevation that, looking at them one day through
an opening in the nearer clouds, they seemed so distant as to
resemble nothing but the delicate grain of ivory upon a
billiard-ball. And yet with the fact that two-thirds of this earth
is covered with water, and bearing in mind the effect which a very
small increase of sun-power would have in producing cloud and
lifting it above its normal level for a time, we are asked to
believe that this sheen is all dust of some kind or other, in order
to explain what are now known as the "recent sunsets": though I
venture to think that we shall see more of them yet when the sun
comes our way again.

'At first sight, increased sun-power would seem to mean more
sunshine; but a little reflection would show us that this would not
be for long, while any considerable addition to the sun's power
would be followed by such a vast increase of vapor that we should
only see him, in our latitudes, at very short intervals. I am aware
that all this is most unscientific; but I have read column after
column of explanation written by those who are supposed to know all
about such things, and find myself not a jot the wiser for it. Do
you know anybody who is?--I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

                              'AN UNSCIENTIFIC OBSERVER. (R. LESLIE.)
                              _January 1_.']

[Footnote B: "I have been often at great heights on the Alps in
rough weather, and have seen strong gusts of storm in the plains of
the south. But, to get full expression of the very heart and
meaning of wind, there is no place like a Yorkshire moor. I think
Scottish breezes are thinner, very bleak and piercing, but not
substantial. If you lean on them they will let you fall, but one
may rest against a Yorkshire breeze as one would on a quickset
hedge. I shall not soon forget,--having had the good fortune to
meet a vigorous one on an April morning, between Hawes and Settle,
just on the flat under Wharnside,--the vague sense of wonder _with
which I watched Ingleborough stand without rocking_."]

[Footnote C: Compare Wordsworth's

    "Oh beauteous birds, methinks ye measure
     Your movements to some heavenly tune."

And again--

                         "While the mists,
    Flying and rainy vapors, call out shapes,
    And phantoms from the crags and solid earth,
    As fast as a musician scatters sounds
    Out of an instrument."

And again--

    "The Knight had ridden down from Wensley moor,
     With the slow motion of a summer cloud."]]

[Footnote 20: 'Blasphemy.'--If the reader can refer to my papers on
Fiction in the 'Nineteenth Century,' he will find this word
carefully defined in its Scriptural, and evermore necessary,
meaning,--'Harmful speaking'--not against God only, but against
man, and against all the good works and purposes of Nature. The
word is accurately opposed to 'Euphemy,' the right or well-speaking
of God and His world; and the two modes of speech are those which
going out of the mouth sanctify or defile the man.

Going out of the mouth, that is to say, deliberately and of
purpose. A French postilion's 'Sacr-r-ré'--loud, with the low 'Nom
de Dieu' following between his teeth, is not blasphemy, unless
against his horse;--but Mr. Thackeray's close of his Waterloo
chapter in 'Vanity Fair,' "And all the night long Amelia was
praying for George, who was lying on his face dead with a bullet
through his heart," is blasphemy of the most fatal and subtle kind.

And the universal instinct of blasphemy in the modern vulgar
scientific mind is above all manifested in its love of what is
ugly, and natural inthrallment by the abominable;--so that it is
ten to one if, in the description of a new bird, you learn much
more of it than the enumerated species of vermin that stick to its
feathers; and in the natural history museum of Oxford, humanity has
been hitherto taught, not by portraits of great men, but by the
skulls of cretins.

But the _deliberate_ blasphemy of science, the assertion of its own
virtue and dignity against the always implied, and often asserted,
vileness of all men and--Gods,--heretofore, is the most wonderful
phenomenon, so far as I can read or perceive, that hitherto has
arisen in the always marvelous course of the world's mental
history.

Take, for brief general type, the following 92d paragraph of the
'Forms of Water':--

"But while we thus acknowledge our limits, there is also reason for
wonder at the extent to which Science has mastered the system of
nature. From age to age and from generation to generation, fact has
been added to fact and law to law, the true method and order of the
Universe being thereby more and more revealed. In doing this,
Science has encountered and overthrown various forms of
superstition and deceit, of credulity and imposture. But the world
continually produces weak persons and wicked persons, and as long
as they continue to exist side by side, as they do in this our day,
very debasing beliefs will also continue to infest the world."

The debasing beliefs meant being simply those of Homer, David, and
St. John[A]--as against a modern French gamin's. And what the
results of the intended education of English gamins of every degree
in that new higher theology will be, England is I suppose by this
time beginning to discern.

In the last 'Fors'[B] which I have written, on education of a safer
kind, still possible, one practical point is insisted on
chiefly,--that learning by heart, and repetition with perfect
accent and cultivated voice, should be made quite principal
branches of school discipline up to the time of going to the
university.

And of writings to be learned by heart, among other passages of
indisputable philosophy and perfect poetry, I include certain
chapters of the--now for the most part forgotten--wisdom of
Solomon; and of these, there is one selected portion which I
should recommend not only school-boys and girls, but persons of
every age, if they don't know it, to learn forthwith, as the
shortest summary of Solomon's wisdom;--namely, the seventeenth
chapter of Proverbs, which being only twenty-eight verses long, may
be fastened in the dullest memory at the rate of a verse a day in
the shortest month of the year. Out of the twenty-eight verses, I
will read you seven, for example of their tenor,--the last of the
seven I will with your good leave dwell somewhat upon. You have
heard the verses often before, but probably without remembering
that they are all in this concentrated chapter.

1. Verse 1.--Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than
a house full of good eating, with strife.

(Remember, in reading this verse, that though England has chosen
the strife, and set every man's hand against his neighbor, her
house is not yet so full of good eating as she expected, even
though she gets half of her victuals from America.)

2. Verse 3.--The fining pot is for silver, the furnace for gold,
but the Lord tries the heart.

(Notice the increasing strength of trial for the more precious
thing: only the melting-pot for the silver--the fierce furnace for
the gold--but the Fire of the Lord for the heart.)

3. Verse 4.--A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips.

(That means, for _you_, that, intending to live by usury and
swindling, you read Mr. Adam Smith and Mr. Stuart Mill, and other
such political economists.)

4. Verse 5.--Whoso mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker.

(Mocketh,--by saying that his poverty is his fault, no less than
his misfortune,--England's favorite theory now-a-days.)

5. Verse 12.--Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather
than a fool in his folly.

(Carlyle is often now accused of false scorn in his calling the
passengers over London Bridge, "mostly fools,"--on the ground that
men are only to be justly held foolish if their intellect is under,
as only wise when it is above, the average. But the reader will
please observe that the essential function of modern education is
to develop what capacity of mistake a man has. Leave him at his
forge and plow,--and those tutors teach him his true value, indulge
him in no error, and provoke him to no vice. But take him up to
London,--give him her papers to read, and her talk to hear,--and it
is fifty to one you send him presently on a fool's errand over
London Bridge.)

6. Now listen, for this verse is the question you have mainly to
ask yourselves about your beautiful all-over-England system of
competitive examination:--

Verse 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get
wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it?

(You know perfectly well it isn't the wisdom you want, but the
"station in life,"--and the money!)

7. Lastly, Verse 7.--Wisdom is before him that hath understanding,
but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

"And in the beginnings of it"! Solomon would have written, had he
lived in our day; but we will be content with the ends at present.
No scientific people, as I told you at first, have taken any notice
of the more or less temporary phenomena of which I have to-night
given you register. But, from the constant arrangements of the
universe, the same respecting which the thinkers of former time
came to the conclusion that they were essentially good, and to end
in good, the modern speculator arrives at the quite opposite and
extremely uncomfortable conclusion that they are essentially evil,
and to end--in nothing.

And I have here a volume,[C] before quoted, by a very foolish and
very lugubrious author, who in his concluding chapter gives
us,--founded, you will observe, on a series of 'ifs,'--the latest
scientific views concerning the order of creation. "We have spoken
already about a medium pervading space"--this is the Scientific
God, you observe, differing from the unscientific one, in that the
purest in heart cannot see--nor the softest in heart feel--this
spacious Deity--a _Medium_, pervading space--"the office of which"
(italics all mine) "appears to be to _degrade_ and ultimately
_extinguish_, all differential motion. It has been well pointed out
by Thomson, that, looked at _in this light_, the universe is a
system that had a beginning and must have an end, for a process of
degradation cannot be eternal. If we could view the Universe as a
candle not lit, then it is perhaps conceivable to regard it as
having been always in existence; but if we regard it rather as a
candle that has been lit, we become absolutely certain that it
cannot have been burning from eternity, and that a time will come
when it will cease to burn. We are led to look to a beginning in
which the particles of matter were in a diffuse chaotic state, but
endowed with the power of gravitation; and we are led to look to an
end in which the whole Universe will be one equally heated inert
mass, _and from which everything like life, or motion, or beauty,
will have utterly gone away_."

Do you wish me to congratulate you on this extremely cheerful
result of telescopic and microscopic observation, and so at once
close my lecture? or may I venture yet to trespass on your time by
stating to you any of the more comfortable views held by persons
who did not regard the universe in what my author humorously calls
"this _light_"?

In the peculiarly characteristic notice with which the 'Daily News'
honored my last week's lecture, that courteous journal charged me,
in the metaphorical term now classical on Exchange, with "hedging,"
to conceal my own opinions. The charge was not prudently chosen,
since, of all men now obtaining any portion of popular regard, I am
pretty well known to be precisely the one who cares least either
for hedge or ditch, when he chooses to go across country. It is
certainly true that I have not the least mind to pin my heart on my
sleeve, for the daily daw, or nightly owl, to peck at; but the
essential reason for my not telling you my own opinions on this
matter is--that I do not consider them of material consequence to
you.

It _might_ possibly be of some advantage for you to know what--were
he now living, Orpheus would have thought, or Æschylus, or a Daniel
come to judgment, or John the Baptist, or John the Son of Thunder;
but what either you, or I, or any other Jack or Tom of us all,
think,--even if we knew what to think,--is of extremely small
moment either to the Gods, the clouds, or ourselves.

Of myself, however, if you care to hear it, I will tell you thus
much: that had the weather when I was young been such as it is now,
no book such as 'Modern Painters' ever would or _could_ have been
written; for every argument, and every sentiment in that book, was
founded on the personal experience of the beauty and blessing of
nature, all spring and summer long; and on the then demonstrable
fact that over a great portion of the world's surface the air and
the earth were fitted to the education of the spirit of man as
closely as a school-boy's primer is to his labor, and as gloriously
as a lover's mistress is to his eyes.

That harmony is now broken, and broken the world round: fragments,
indeed, of what existed still exist, and hours of what is past
still return; but month by month the darkness gains upon the day,
and the ashes of the Antipodes glare through the night.[D]

What consolation, or what courage, through plague, danger, or
darkness, you can find in the conviction that you are nothing more
than brute beasts driven by brute forces, your other tutors can
tell you--not I: but _this_ I can tell you--and with the authority
of all the masters of thought since time was time,--that, while by
no manner of vivisection you can learn what a _Beast_ is, by only
looking into your own hearts you may know what a _Man_ is,--and
know that his only true happiness is to live in Hope of something
to be won by him, in Reverence of something to be worshiped by him,
and in Love of something to be cherished by him, and cherished--forever.

Having these instincts, his only rational conclusion is that the
objects which can fulfill them may be by his effort gained, and by
his faith discerned; and his only earthly wisdom is to accept the
united testimony of the men who have sought these things in the way
they were commanded. Of whom no single one has ever said that his
obedience or his faith had been vain, or found himself cast out
from the choir of the living souls, whether here, or departed, for
whom the song was written:--

    God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause His face to shine
        upon us;
    That Thy way may be known upon earth, Thy saving health among all
        nations.

    Oh let the nations rejoice and sing for joy, for Thou shalt judge
        the people righteously and govern the nations upon earth.
    _Then_ shall the earth yield her increase, and God, even our own God,
        shall bless us.
    God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear Him.

[Footnote A: With all who died in Faith, not having received the
Promises, nor--according to your modern teachers--ever to receive.]

[Footnote B: Hence to the end the text is that read in termination
of the lecture on its second delivery, only with an added word or
two of comment on Proverbs xvii.]

[Footnote C: 'The Conservation of Energy.' King and Co., 1873.]

[Footnote D: Written under the impression that the lurid and
prolonged sunsets of last autumn had been proved to be connected
with the flight of volcanic ashes. This has been since, I hear,
disproved again. Whatever their cause, those sunsets were, in the
sense in which I myself use the word, altogether 'unnatural' and
terrific: but they have no connection with the far more fearful,
because protracted and increasing, power of the Plague-wind. The
letter from White's 'History of Selborne,' quoted by the Rev. W. R.
Andrews in his letter to the 'Times,' (dated January 8th) seems to
describe aspects of the sky like these of 1883, just a hundred
years before, in 1783: and also some of the circumstances noted,
especially the variation of the wind to all quarters without
alteration in the air, correspond with the character of the
plague-wind; but the fog of 1783 made the sun dark, with
iron-colored rays--not pale, with blanching rays. I subjoin Mr.
Andrews' letter, extremely valuable in its collation of the records
of simultaneous volcanic phenomena; praying the reader also to
observe the instantaneous acknowledgment, by the true 'Naturalist,'
of horror in the violation of beneficent natural law.

"THE RECENT SUNSETS AND VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS.

"SIR,--It may, perhaps, be interesting at the present time, when so
much attention has been given to the late brilliant sunsets and
sunrises, to be reminded that almost identically the same
appearances were observed just a hundred years ago.

Gilbert White writes in the year 1783, in his 109th letter,
published in his 'Natural History of Selborne':--

'The summer of the year 1783 was an amazing and portentous one, and
full of horrible phenomena; for besides the alarming meteors and
tremendous thunderstorms that affrighted and distressed the
different counties of this kingdom, the peculiar haze or smoky fog
that prevailed for many weeks in this island and in every part of
Europe, and even beyond its limits, was a most extraordinary
appearance, unlike anything known within the memory of man. By my
journal I find that I had noticed this strange occurrence from June
23d to July 20th inclusive, during which period the wind varied to
every quarter without making any alteration in the air. The sun at
noon looked as black as a clouded moon, and shed a ferruginous
light on the ground and floors of rooms, but was particularly lurid
and blood-colored at rising and setting. The country people began
to look with a superstitious awe at the red lowering aspect of the
sun; and, indeed, there was reason for the most enlightened person
to be apprehensive, for all the while Calabria and part of the Isle
of Sicily were torn and convulsed with earthquakes, and about that
juncture a volcano sprang out of the sea on the coast of Norway.'

Other writers also mention volcanic disturbances in this same year,
1783. We are told by Lyell and Geikie, that there were great
volcanic eruptions in and near Iceland. A submarine volcano burst
forth in the sea, thirty miles southwest of Iceland, which ejected
so much pumice that the ocean was covered with this substance, to
the distance of 150 miles, and ships were considerably impeded in
their course; and a new island was formed, from which fire and
smoke and pumice were emitted.

Besides this submarine eruption, the volcano Skaptar-Jökull, on the
mainland, on June 11th, 1783, threw out a torrent of lava, so
immense as to surpass in magnitude the bulk of Mont Blanc, and
ejected so vast an amount of fine dust, that the atmosphere over
Iceland continued loaded with it for months afterwards. It fell in
such quantities over parts of Caithness--a distance of 600
miles--as to destroy the crops, and that year is still spoken of by
the inhabitants as the year of 'the ashie.'

These particulars are gathered from the text-books of Lyell and
Geikie.

I am not aware whether the coincidence in time of the Icelandic
eruptions, and of the peculiar appearance of the sun, described by
Gilbert White, has yet been noticed; but this coincidence may very
well be taken as some little evidence towards explaining the
connection between the recent beautiful sunsets and the tremendous
volcanic explosion of the Isle of Krakatoa in August last.

               W. R. ANDREWS, F. G. S.
               Teffont Ewyas Rectory, Salisbury, January 8th."]]




THE TWO PATHS

By John Ruskin, M.A.




CONTENTS.


THE TWO PATHS.


LECTURE I.
THE DETERIORATIVE POWER OF CONVENTIONAL ART OVER NATIONS

LECTURE II.
THE UNITY OF ART

LECTURE III.
MODERN MANUFACTURE AND DESIGN

LECTURE IV.
THE INFLUENCE OF IMAGINATION IN ARCHITECTURE

LECTURE V.
THE WORK OF IRON, IN NATURE, ART, AND POLICY

APPENDICES





LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


THE TWO PATHS.

THE IDEAL OF AN ANGEL
THE SERPENT BEGUILING EVE
CONTRAST
SYMMETRY
ORNAMENT
CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE
CENTREPIECE OF BALCONY
GENERAL EFFECT OF MASSES
PROFILE
TEETH OF THE BORDER
BORDER AT THE SIDE OF BALCONY
OUTLINE OF RETRACTED LEAVES




PREFACE.


The following addresses, though spoken at different times, are
intentionally connected in subject; their aim being to set one or two
main principles of art in simple light before the general student, and
to indicate their practical bearing on modern design. The law which it
has been my effort chiefly to illustrate is the dependence of all noble
design, in any kind, on the sculpture or painting of Organic Form.

This is the vital law; lying at the root of all that I have ever tried
to teach respecting architecture or any other art. It is also the law
most generally disallowed.

I believe this must be so in every subject. We are all of us willing
enough to accept dead truths or blunt ones; which can be fitted
harmlessly into spare niches, or shrouded and coffined at once out of
the way, we holding complacently the cemetery keys, and supposing we
have learned something. But a sapling truth, with earth at its root and
blossom on its branches; or a trenchant truth, that can cut its way
through bars and sods; most men, it seems to me, dislike the sight or
entertainment of, if by any means such guest or vision may be avoided.
And, indeed, this is no wonder; for one such truth, thoroughly
accepted, connects itself strangely with others, and there is no saying
what it may lead us to.

And thus the gist of what I have tried to teach about architecture has
been throughout denied by my architect readers, even when they thought
what I said suggestive in other particulars. "Anything but that. Study
Italian Gothic?--perhaps it would be as well: build with pointed
arches?--there is no objection: use solid stone and well-burnt brick?--
by all means: but--learn to carve or paint organic form ourselves! How
can such a thing be asked? We are above all that. The carvers and painters
are our servants--quite subordinate people. They ought to be glad if we
leave room for them."

Well: on that it all turns. For those who will not learn to carve or
paint, and think themselves greater men because they cannot, it is
wholly wasted time to read any words of mine; in the truest and
sternest sense they can read no words of mine; for the most familiar I
can use--"form," "proportion," "beauty," "curvature," "colour"--are
used in a sense which by no effort I can communicate to such readers;
and in no building that I praise, is the thing that I praise it for,
visible to them.

And it is the more necessary for me to state this fully; because so-
called Gothic or Romanesque buildings are now rising every day around
us, which might be supposed by the public more or less to embody the
principles of those styles, but which embody not one of them, nor any
shadow or fragment of them; but merely serve to caricature the noble
buildings of past ages, and to bring their form into dishonour by
leaving out their soul.

The following addresses are therefore arranged, as I have just stated,
to put this great law, and one or two collateral ones, in less
mistakeable light, securing even in this irregular form at least
clearness of assertion. For the rest, the question at issue is not one
to be decided by argument, but by experiment, which if the reader is
disinclined to make, all demonstration must be useless to him.

The lectures are for the most part printed as they were read, mending
only obscure sentences here and there. The parts which were trusted to
extempore speaking are supplied, as well as I can remember (only with
an addition here and there of things I forgot to say), in the words, or
at least the kind of words, used at the time; and they contain, at all
events, the substance of what I said more accurately than hurried
journal reports. I must beg my readers not in general to trust to such,
for even in fast speaking I try to use words carefully; and any
alteration of expression will sometimes involve a great alteration in
meaning. A little while ago I had to speak of an architectural design,
and called it "elegant," meaning, founded on good and well "elected"
models; the printed report gave "excellent" design (that is to say,
design _excellingly_ good), which I did not mean, and should, even
in the most hurried speaking, never have said.

The illustrations of the lecture on iron were sketches made too roughly
to be engraved, and yet of too elaborate subjects to allow of my
drawing them completely. Those now substituted will, however, answer
the purpose nearly as well, and are more directly connected with the
subjects of the preceding lectures; so that I hope throughout the
volume the student will perceive an insistance upon one main truth, nor
lose in any minor direction of inquiry the sense of the responsibility
which the acceptance of that truth fastens upon him; responsibility for
choice, decisive and conclusive, between two modes of study, which
involve ultimately the development, or deadening, of every power he
possesses. I have tried to hold that choice clearly out to him, and to
unveil for him to its farthest the issue of his turning to the right
hand or the left. Guides he may find many, and aids many; but all these
will be in vain unless he has first recognised the hour and the point
of life when the way divides itself, one way leading to the Olive
mountains--one to the vale of the Salt Sea. There are few cross roads,
that I know of, from one to the other. Let him pause at the parting of
THE TWO PATHS.




THE TWO PATHS


_BEING_

LECTURES ON ART, AND ITS APPLICATION TO DECORATION AND
MANUFACTURE DELIVERED IN 1858-9.




LECTURE I.

THE DETERIORATIVE POWER OF CONVENTIONAL ART OVER
NATIONS.


_An Inaugural Lecture, Delivered at the Kensington Museum,
January, 1858._

[Footnote: A few introductory words, in which, at the opening of this
lecture, I thanked the Chairman (Mr. Cockerell), for his support on the
occasion, and asked his pardon for any hasty expressions in my
writings, which might have seemed discourteous towards him, or other
architects whose general opinions were opposed to mine, may be found by
those who care for preambles, not much misreported, in the _Building
Chronicle;_ with such comments as the genius of that journal was
likely to suggest to it.]


As I passed, last summer, for the first time, through the north of
Scotland, it seemed to me that there was a peculiar painfulness in its 
scenery, caused by the non-manifestation of the powers of human art. I
had never travelled in, nor even heard or conceived of such a country
before; nor, though I had passed much of my life amidst mountain
scenery in the south, was I before aware how much of its charm depended
on the little gracefulnesses and tendernesses of human work, which are
mingled with the beauty of the Alps, or spared by their desolation. It
is true that the art which carves and colours the front of a Swiss
cottage is not of any very exalted kind; yet it testifies to the
completeness and the delicacy of the faculties of the mountaineer; it
is true that the remnants of tower and battlement, which afford footing
to the wild vine on the Alpine promontory, form but a small part of the
great serration of its rocks; and yet it is just that fragment of their
broken outline which gives them their pathetic power, and historical
majesty. And this element among the wilds of our own country I found
wholly wanting. The Highland cottage is literally a heap of gray
stones, choked up, rather than roofed over, with black peat and
withered heather; the only approach to an effort at decoration consists
in the placing of the clods of protective peat obliquely on its roof,
so as to give a diagonal arrangement of lines, looking somewhat as if
the surface had been scored over by a gigantic claymore.

And, at least among the northern hills of Scotland, elements of more
ancient architectural interest are equally absent. The solitary peel-
house is hardly discernible by the windings of the stream; the roofless
aisle of the priory is lost among the enclosures of the village; and
the capital city of the Highlands, Inverness, placed where it might
ennoble one of the sweetest landscapes, and by the shore of one of the
loveliest estuaries in the world;--placed between the crests of the
Grampians and the flowing of the Moray Firth, as if it were a jewel
clasping the folds of the mountains to the blue zone of the sea,--is
only distinguishable from a distance by one architectural feature, and
exalts all the surrounding landscape by no other associations than
those which can be connected with its modern castellated gaol.

While these conditions of Scottish scenery affected me very painfully,
it being the first time in my life that I had been in any country
possessing no valuable monuments or examples of art, they also forced
me into the consideration of one or two difficult questions respecting
the effect of art on the human mind; and they forced these questions
upon me eminently for this reason, that while I was wandering
disconsolately among the moors of the Grampians, where there was no art
to be found, news of peculiar interest was every day arriving from a
country where there was a great deal of art, and art of a delicate
kind, to be found. Among the models set before you in this institution,
and in the others established throughout the kingdom for the teaching
of design, there are, I suppose, none in their kind more admirable than
the decorated works of India. They are, indeed, in all materials
capable of colour, wool, marble, or metal, almost inimitable in their
delicate application of divided hue, and fine arrangement of fantastic
line. Nor is this power of theirs exerted by the people rarely, or
without enjoyment; the love of subtle design seems universal in the
race, and is developed in every implement that they shape, and every
building that they raise; it attaches itself with the same intensity,
and with the same success, to the service of superstition, of pleasure
or of cruelty; and enriches alike, with one profusion on enchanted
iridescence, the dome of the pagoda, the fringe of the girdle and the
edge of the sword.

So then you have, in these two great populations, Indian and Highland--
in the races of the jungle and of the moor--two national capacities
distinctly and accurately opposed. On the one side you have a race
rejoicing in art, and eminently and universally endowed with the gift
of it; on the other you have a people careless of art, and apparently
incapable of it, their utmost effort hitherto reaching no farther than
to the variation of the positions of the bars of colour in square
chequers. And we are thus urged naturally to enquire what is the effect
on the moral character, in each nation, of this vast difference in
their pursuits and apparent capacities? and whether those rude chequers
of the tartan, or the exquisitely fancied involutions of the Cashmere,
fold habitually over the noblest hearts? We have had our answer. Since
the race of man began its course of sin on this earth, nothing has ever
been done by it so significative of all bestial, and lower than bestial
degradation, as the acts the Indian race in the year that has just
passed by. Cruelty as fierce may indeed have been wreaked, and
brutality as abominable been practised before, but never under like
circumstances; rage of prolonged war, and resentment of prolonged
oppression, have made men as cruel before now; and gradual decline into
barbarism, where no examples of decency or civilization existed around
them, has sunk, before now, isolated populations to the lowest level of
possible humanity. But cruelty stretched to its fiercest against the
gentle and unoffending, and corruption festered to its loathsomest in
the midst of the witnessing presence of a disciplined civilization,--
these we could not have known to be within the practicable compass of
human guilt, but for the acts of the Indian mutineer. And, as thus, on
the one hand, you have an extreme energy of baseness displayed by these
lovers of art; on the other,--as if to put the question into the
narrowest compass--you have had an extreme energy of virtue displayed
by the despisers of art. Among all the soldiers to whom you owe your
victories in the Crimea, and your avenging in the Indies, to none are
you bound by closer bonds of gratitude than to the men who have been
born and bred among those desolate Highland moors. And thus you have
the differences in capacity and circumstance between the two nations,
and the differences in result on the moral habits of two nations, put
into the most significant--the most palpable--the most brief
opposition. Out of the peat cottage come faith, courage, self-
sacrifice, purity, and piety, and whatever else is fruitful in the work
of Heaven; out of the ivory palace come treachery, cruelty, cowardice,
idolatry, bestiality,--whatever else is fruitful in the work of Hell.

But the difficulty does not close here. From one instance, of however
great apparent force, it would be wholly unfair to gather any general
conclusion--wholly illogical to assert that because we had once found
love of art connected with moral baseness, the love of art must be the
general root of moral baseness; and equally unfair to assert that,
because we had once found neglect of art coincident with nobleness of
disposition, neglect of art must be always the source or sign of that
nobleness. But if we pass from the Indian peninsula into other
countries of the globe; and from our own recent experience, to the
records of history, we shall still find one great fact fronting us, in
stern universality--namely, the apparent connection of great success in
art with subsequent national degradation. You find, in the first place,
that the nations which possessed a refined art were always subdued by
those who possessed none: you find the Lydian subdued by the Mede; the
Athenian by the Spartan; the Greek by the Roman; the Roman by the Goth;
the Burgundian by the Switzer: but you find, beyond this--that even
where no attack by any external power has accelerated the catastrophe
of the state, the period in which any given people reach their highest
power in art is precisely that in which they appear to sign the warrant
of their own ruin; and that, from the moment in which a perfect statue
appears in Florence, a perfect picture in Venice, or a perfect fresco
in Rome, from that hour forward, probity, industry, and courage seem to
be exiled from their walls, and they perish in a sculpturesque
paralysis, or a many-coloured corruption.

But even this is not all. As art seems thus, in its delicate form, to
be one of the chief promoters of indolence and sensuality,--so, I need
hardly remind you, it hitherto has appeared only in energetic
manifestation when it was in the service of superstition. The four
greatest manifestations of human intellect which founded the four
principal kingdoms of art, Egyptian, Babylonian, Greek, and Italian,
were developed by the strong excitement of active superstition in the
worship of Osiris, Belus, Minerva, and the Queen of Heaven. Therefore,
to speak briefly, it may appear very difficult to show that art has
ever yet existed in a consistent and thoroughly energetic school,
unless it was engaged in the propagation of falsehood, or the
encouragement of vice.

And finally, while art has thus shown itself always active in the
service of luxury and idolatry, it has also been strongly directed to
the exaltation of cruelty. A nation which lives a pastoral and innocent
life never decorates the shepherd's staff or the plough-handle, but
races who live by depredation and slaughter nearly always bestow
exquisite ornaments on the quiver, the helmet, and the spear.

Does it not seem to you, then, on all these three counts, more than
questionable whether we are assembled here in Kensington Museum to any
good purpose? Might we not justly be looked upon with suspicion and
fear, rather than with sympathy, by the innocent and unartistical
public? Are we even sure of ourselves? Do we know what we are about?
Are we met here as honest people? or are we not rather so many
Catilines assembled to devise the hasty degradation of our country, or,
like a conclave of midnight witches, to summon and send forth, on new
and unexpected missions, the demons of luxury, cruelty, and
superstition?

I trust, upon the whole, that it is not so: I am sure that Mr. Redgrave
and Mr. Cole do not at all include results of this kind in their
conception of the ultimate objects of the institution which owes so
much to their strenuous and well-directed exertions. And I have put
this painful question before you, only that we may face it thoroughly,
and, as I hope, out-face it. If you will give it a little sincere
attention this evening, I trust we may find sufficiently good reasons
for our work, and proceed to it hereafter, as all good workmen should
do, with clear heads, and calm consciences.

To return, then, to the first point of difficulty, the relations
between art and mental disposition in India and Scotland. It is quite
true that the art of India is delicate and refined. But it has one
curious character distinguishing it from all other art of equal merit
in design--_it never represents a natural fact_. It either forms
its compositions out of meaningless fragments of colour and flowings of
line; or if it represents any living creature, it represents that
creature under some distorted and monstrous form. To all the facts and
forms of nature it wilfully and resolutely opposes itself; it will not
draw a man, but an eight-armed monster; it will not draw a flower, but
only a spiral or a zigzag.

It thus indicates that the people who practise it are cut off from all
possible sources of healthy knowledge or natural delight; that they
have wilfully sealed up and put aside the entire volume of the world,
and have got nothing to read, nothing to dwell upon, but that
imagination of the thoughts of their hearts, of which we are told that
"it is only evil continually." Over the whole spectacle of creation
they have thrown a veil in which there is no rent. For them no star
peeps through the blanket of the dark--for them neither their heaven
shines nor their mountains rise--for them the flowers do not blossom--
for them the creatures of field and forest do not live. They lie bound
in the dungeon of their own corruption, encompassed only by doleful
phantoms, or by spectral vacancy.

Need I remind you what an exact reverse of this condition of mind, as
respects the observance of nature, is presented by the people whom we
have just been led to contemplate in contrast with the Indian race? You
will find upon reflection, that all the highest points of the Scottish
character are connected with impressions derived straight from the
natural scenery of their country. No nation has ever before shown, in
the general tone of its language--in the general current of its
literature--so constant a habit of hallowing its passions and
confirming its principles by direct association with the charm, or
power, of nature. The writings of Scott and Burns--and yet more, of the
far greater poets than Burns who gave Scotland her traditional
ballads,--furnish you in every stanza--almost in every line--with
examples of this association of natural scenery with the passions;
[Footnote: The great poets of Scotland, like the great poets of all
other countries, never write dissolutely, either in matter or method;
but with stern and measured meaning in every syllable. Here's a bit of
first-rate work for example:

                      "Tweed said to Till,
                      'What gars ye rin sae still?'
                       Till said to Tweed,
                      'Though ye rin wi' speed,
                       And I rin slaw,
                       Whar ye droon ae man,
                       I droon twa.'"]

but an instance of its farther connection with moral principle struck
me forcibly just at the time when I was most lamenting the absence of
art among the people. In one of the loneliest districts of Scotland,
where the peat cottages are darkest, just at the western foot of that
great mass of the Grampians which encircles the sources of the Spey and
the Dee, the main road which traverses the chain winds round the foot
of a broken rock called Crag, or Craig Ellachie. There is nothing
remarkable in either its height or form; it is darkened with a few
scattered pines, and touched along its summit with a flush of heather;
but it constitutes a kind of headland, or leading promontory, in the
group of hills to which it belongs--a sort of initial letter of the
mountains; and thus stands in the mind of the inhabitants of the
district, the Clan Grant, for a type of their country, and of the
influence of that country upon themselves. Their sense of this is
beautifully indicated in the war-cry of the clan, "Stand fast, Craig
Ellachie." You may think long over those few words without exhausting
the deep wells of feeling and thought contained in them--the love of
the native land, the assurance of their faithfulness to it; the subdued
and gentle assertion of indomitable courage--I _may_ need to be
told to stand, but, if I do, Craig Ellachie does. You could not but
have felt, had you passed beneath it at the time when so many of
England's dearest children were being defended by the strength of heart
of men born at its foot, how often among the delicate Indian palaces,
whose marble was pallid with horror, and whose vermilion was darkened
with blood, the remembrance of its rough grey rocks and purple heaths
must have risen before the sight of the Highland soldier; how often the
hailing of the shot and the shriek of battle would pass away from his
hearing, and leave only the whisper of the old pine branches--"Stand 
fast, Craig Ellachie!"

You have, in these two nations, seen in direct opposition the effects
on moral sentiment of art without nature, and of nature without art.
And you see enough to justify you in suspecting--while, if you choose
to investigate the subject more deeply and with other examples, you
will find enough to justify you in _concluding_--that art,
followed as such, and for its own sake, irrespective of the
interpretation of nature by it, is destructive of whatever is best and 
noblest in humanity; but that nature, however simply observed, or
imperfectly known, is, in the degree of the affection felt for it,
protective and helpful to all that is noblest in humanity.

You might then conclude farther, that art, so far as it was devoted to
the record or the interpretation of nature, would be helpful and
ennobling also.

And you would conclude this with perfect truth. Let me repeat the
assertion distinctly and solemnly, as the first that I am permitted to
make in this building, devoted in a way so new and so admirable to the
service of the art-students of England--Wherever art is practised for
its own sake, and the delight of the workman is in what he _does_
and _produces_, instead of what he _interprets_ or _exhibits_,
--there art has an influence of the most fatal kind on brain and heart,
and it issues, if long so pursued, in the _destruction both of intellectual
power_ and _moral principal_; whereas art, devoted humbly and self-
forgetfully to the clear statement and record of the facts of the universe,
is always helpful and beneficent to mankind, full of comfort, strength,
and salvation.

Now, when you were once well assured of this, you might logically infer
another thing, namely, that when Art was occupied in the function in
which she was serviceable, she would herself be strengthened by the
service, and when she was doing what Providence without doubt intended
her to do, she would gain in vitality and dignity just as she advanced
in usefulness. On the other hand, you might gather, that when her
agency was distorted to the deception or degradation of mankind, she
would herself be equally misled and degraded--that she would be checked
in advance, or precipitated in decline.

And this is the truth also; and holding this clue you will easily and
justly interpret the phenomena of history. So long as Art is steady in
the contemplation and exhibition of natural facts, so long she herself
lives and grows; and in her own life and growth partly implies, partly
secures, that of the nation in the midst of which she is practised. But
a time has always hitherto come, in which, having thus reached a
singular perfection, she begins to contemplate that perfection, and to
imitate it, and deduce rules and forms from it; and thus to forget her
duty and ministry as the interpreter and discoverer of Truth. And in
the very instant when this diversion of her purpose and forgetfulness
of her function take place--forgetfulness generally coincident with her
apparent perfection--in that instant, I say, begins her actual
catastrophe; and by her own fall--so far as she has influence--she
accelerates the ruin of the nation by which she is practised.

The study, however, of the effect of art on the mind of nations is one
rather for the historian than for us; at all events it is one for the
discussion of which we have no more time this evening. But I will ask
your patience with me while I try to illustrate, in some further
particulars, the dependence of the healthy state and power of art
itself upon the exercise of its appointed function in the
interpretation of fact.

You observe that I always say _interpretation_, never
_imitation_. My reason for so doing is, first, that good art
rarely imitates; it usually only describes or explains. But my second
and chief reason is that good art always consists of two things: First,
the observation of fact; secondly, the manifesting of human design and
authority in the way that fact is told. Great and good art must unite
the two; it cannot exist for a moment but in their unity; it consists
of the two as essentially as water consists of oxygen and hydrogen, or
marble of lime and carbonic acid.

Let us inquire a little into the nature of each of the elements. The
first element, we say, is the love of Nature, leading to the effort to
observe and report her truly. And this is the first and leading
element. Review for yourselves the history of art, and you will find
this to be a manifest certainty, that _no great school ever yet
existed which had not for primal aim the representation of some natural
fact as truly as possible_. There have only yet appeared in the
world three schools of perfect art--schools, that is to say, that did
their work as well as it seems possible to do it. These are the
Athenian, [Footnote: See below, the farther notice of the real spirit
of Greek work, in the address at Bradford.] Florentine, and Venetian.
The Athenian proposed to itself the perfect representation of the form
of the human body. It strove to do that as well as it could; it did
that as well as it can be done; and all its greatness was founded upon
and involved in that single and honest effort. The Florentine school
proposed to itself the perfect expression of human emotion--the showing
of the effects of passion in the human face and gesture. I call this
the Florentine school, because, whether you take Raphael for the
culminating master of expressional art in Italy, or Leonardo, or
Michael Angelo, you will find that the whole energy of the national
effort which produced those masters had its root in Florence; not at
Urbino or Milan. I say, then, this Florentine or leading Italian school
proposed to itself human expression for its aim in natural truth; it
strove to do that as well as it could--did it as well as it can be
done--and all its greatness is rooted in that single and honest effort.
Thirdly, the Venetian school propose the representation of the effect
of colour and shade on all things; chiefly on the human form. It tried
to do that as well as it could--did it as well as it can be done--and
all its greatness is founded on that single and honest effort.

Pray, do not leave this room without a perfectly clear holding of these
three ideas. You may try them, and toss them about afterwards, as much
as you like, to see if they'll bear shaking; but do let me put them
well and plainly into your possession. Attach them to three works of
art which you all have either seen or continually heard of. There's the
(so-called) "Theseus" of the Elgin marbles. That represents the whole
end and aim of the Athenian school--the natural form of the human body.
All their conventional architecture--their graceful shaping and
painting of pottery--whatsoever other art they practised--was dependent
for its greatness on this sheet-anchor of central aim: true shape of
living man. Then take, for your type of the Italian school, Raphael's
"Disputa del Sacramento;" that will be an accepted type by everybody,
and will involve no possibly questionable points: the Germans will
admit it; the English academicians will admit it; and the English
purists and pre-Raphaelites will admit it. Well, there you have the
truth of human expression proposed as an aim. That is the way people
look when they feel this or that--when they have this or that other
mental character: are they devotional, thoughtful, affectionate,
indignant, or inspired? are they prophets, saints, priests, or kings?
then--whatsoever is truly thoughtful, affectionate, prophetic,
priestly, kingly--_that_ the Florentine school tried to discern,
and show; _that_ they have discerned and shown; and all their
greatness is first fastened in their aim at this central truth--the
open expression of the living human soul. Lastly, take Veronese's
"Marriage in Cana" in the Louvre. There you have the most perfect
representation possible of colour, and light, and shade, as they affect
the external aspect of the human form, and its immediate accessories,
architecture, furniture, and dress. This external aspect of noblest
nature was the first aim of the Venetians, and all their greatness
depended on their resolution to achieve, and their patience in
achieving it.

Here, then, are the three greatest schools of the former world
exemplified for you in three well-known works. The Phidian "Theseus"
represents the Greek school pursuing truth of form; the "Disputa" of
Raphael, the Florentine school pursuing truth of mental expression; the
"Marriage in Cana," the Venetian school pursuing truth of colour and
light. But do not suppose that the law which I am stating to you--the
great law of art-life--can only be seen in these, the most powerful of
all art schools. It is just as manifest in each and every school that
ever has had life in it at all. Wheresoever the search after truth
begins, there life begins; wheresoever that search ceases, there life
ceases. As long as a school of art holds any chain of natural facts,
trying to discover more of them and express them better daily, it may
play hither and thither as it likes on this side of the chain or that;
it may design grotesques and conventionalisms, build the simplest
buildings, serve the most practical utilities, yet all it does will be
gloriously designed and gloriously done; but let it once quit hold of
the chain of natural fact, cease to pursue that as the clue to its
work; let it propose to itself any other end than preaching this living
word, and think first of showing its own skill or its own fancy, and
from that hour its fall is precipitate--its destruction sure; nothing
that it does or designs will ever have life or loveliness in it more;
its hour has come, and there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither it goeth.

Let us take for example that school of art over which many of you would
perhaps think this law had but little power--the school of Gothic
architecture. Many of us may have been in the habit of thinking of that
school rather as of one of forms than of facts--a school of pinnacles,
and buttresses, and conventional mouldings, and disguise of nature by
monstrous imaginings--not a school of truth at all. I think I shall be
able, even in the little time we have to-night, to show that this is
not so; and that our great law holds just as good at Amiens and
Salisbury, as it does at Athens and Florence.

I will go back then first to the very beginnings of Gothic art, and
before you, the students of Kensington, as an impanelled jury, I will
bring two examples of the barbarism out of which Gothic art emerges,
approximately contemporary in date and parallel in executive skill;
but, the one, a barbarism that did not get on, and could not get on;
the other, a barbarism that could get on, and did get on; and you, the
impanelled jury, shall judge what is the essential difference between
the two barbarisms, and decide for yourselves what is the seed of life
in the one, and the sign of death in the other.

The first,--that which has in it the sign of death,--furnishes us at
the same time with an illustration far too interesting to be passed by,
of certain principles much depended on by our common modern designers.
Taking up one of our architectural publications the other day, and
opening it at random, I chanced upon this piece of information, put in
rather curious English; but you shall have it as it stands--

"Aristotle asserts, that the greatest species of the beautiful are
Order, Symmetry, and the Definite."

I should tell you, however, that this statement is not given as
authoritative; it is one example of various Architectural teachings,
given in a report in the _Building Chronicle_ for May, 1857, of a
lecture on Proportion; in which the only thing the lecturer appears to
have proved was that,--

The system of dividing the diameter of the shaft of a column into
parts for copying the ancient architectural remains of Greece and Rome,
adopted by architects from Vitruvius (circa B.C. 25) to the present
period, as a method for producing ancient architecture, _is entirely
useless_, for the several parts of Grecian architecture cannot be
reduced or subdivided by this system; neither does it apply to the
architecture of Rome.

Still, as far as I can make it out, the lecture appears to have been
one of those of which you will just at present hear so many, the
protests of architects who have no knowledge of sculpture--or of any
other mode of expressing natural beauty--_against_ natural beauty;
and their endeavour to substitute mathematical proportions for the
knowledge of life they do not possess, and the representation of life
of which they are incapable.[Illustration] Now, this substitution of
obedience to mathematical law for sympathy with observed life, is the
first characteristic of the hopeless work of all ages; as such, you
will find it eminently manifested in the specimen I have to give you of
the hopeless Gothic barbarism; the barbarism from which nothing could
emerge--for which no future was possible but extinction. The
Aristotelian principles of the Beautiful are, you remember, Order,
Symmetry, and the Definite. Here you have the three, in perfection,
applied to the ideal of an angel, in a psalter of the eighth century,
existing in the library of St. John's College, Cambridge.[Footnote: I
copy this woodcut from Westwood's "Palaeographia Sacra."]

Now, you see the characteristics of this utterly dead school are, first
the wilful closing of its eyes to natural facts;--for, however ignorant
a person may be, he need only look at a human being to see that it has
a mouth as well as eyes; and secondly, the endeavour to adorn or
idealize natural fact according to its own notions: it puts red spots
in the middle of the hands, and sharpens the thumbs, thinking to
improve them. Here you have the most pure type possible of the
principles of idealism in all ages: whenever people don't look at
Nature, they always think they can improve her. You will also admire,
doubtless, the exquisite result of the application of our great modern 
architectural principle of beauty--symmetry, or equal balance of part
by part; you see even the eyes are made symmetrical--entirely round,
instead of irregular, oval; and the iris is set properly in the middle,
instead of--as nature has absurdly put it--rather under the upper lid.
You will also observe the "principle of the pyramid" in the general
arrangement of the figure, and the value of "series" in the placing of
dots.

From this dead barbarism we pass to living barbarism--to work done by
hands quite as rude, if not ruder, and by minds as uninformed; and yet
work which in every line of it is prophetic of power, and has in it the
sure dawn of day. You have often heard it said that Giotto was the
founder of art in Italy. He was not: neither he, nor Giunta Pisano, nor
Niccolo Pisano. They all laid strong hands to the work, and brought it
first into aspect above ground; but the foundation had been laid for
them by the builders of the Lombardic churches in the valleys of the
Adda and the Arno. It is in the sculpture of the round arched churches
of North Italy, bearing disputable dates, ranging from the eighth to
the twelfth century, that you will find the lowest struck roots of the
art of Titian and Raphael. [Footnote: I have said elsewhere, "the root
of _all_ art is struck in the thirteenth century." This is quite
true: but of course some of the smallest fibres run lower, as in this
instance.] I go, therefore, to the church which is certainly the
earliest of these, St. Ambrogio, of Milan, said still to retain some
portions of the actual structure from which St. Ambrose excluded
Theodosius, and at all events furnishing the most archaic examples of
Lombardic sculpture in North Italy. I do not venture to guess their
date; they are barbarous enough for any date.

We find the pulpit of this church covered with interlacing patterns,
closely resembling those of the manuscript at Cambridge, but among them
is figure sculpture of a very different kind. It is wrought with mere
incisions in the stone, of which the effect may be tolerably given by
single lines in a drawing. Remember, therefore, for a moment--as
characteristic of culminating Italian art--Michael Angelo's fresco of
the "Temptation of Eve," in the Sistine chapel, and you will be more
interested in seeing the birth of Italian art, illustrated by the same
subject, from St. Ambrogio, of Milan, the "Serpent beguiling Eve."
[Footnote: This cut is ruder than it should be: the incisions in the
marble have a lighter effect than these rough black lines; but it is
not worth while to do it better.]

Yet, in that sketch, rude and ludicrous as it is, you have the elements
of life in their first form. The people who could do that were sure to
get on. For, observe, the workman's whole aim is straight at the facts,
as well as he can get them; and not merely at the facts, but at the
very heart of the facts. A common workman might have looked at nature
for his serpent, but he would have thought only of its scales. But this
fellow does not want scales, nor coils; he can do without them; he
wants the serpent's heart--malice and insinuation;--and he has actually
got them to some extent. So also a common workman, even in this
barbarous stage of art, might have carved Eve's arms and body a good
deal better; but this man does not care about arms and body, if he can
only get at Eve's mind--show that she is pleased at being flattered,
and yet in a state of uncomfortable hesitation. And some look of
listening, of complacency, and of embarrassment he has verily got:--
note the eyes slightly askance, the lips compressed, and the right hand
nervously grasping the left arm: nothing can be declared impossible to
the people who could begin thus--the world is open to them, and all
that is in it; while, on the contrary, nothing is possible to the man
who did the symmetrical angel--the world is keyless to him; he has
built a cell for himself in which he must abide, barred up for ever--
there is no more hope for him than for a sponge or a madrepore.

I shall not trace from this embryo the progress of Gothic art in Italy,
because it is much complicated and involved with traditions of other
schools, and because most of the students will be less familiar with
its results than with their own northern buildings. So, these two
designs indicating Death and Life in the beginnings of mediaeval art,
we will take an example of the _progress_ of that art from our
northern work. Now, many of you, doubtless, have been interested by the
mass, grandeur, and gloom of Norman architecture, as much as by Gothic
traceries; and when you hear me say that the root of all good work lies
in natural facts, you doubtless think instantly of your round arches,
with their rude cushion capitals, and of the billet or zigzag work by
which they are surrounded, and you cannot see what the knowledge of
nature has to do with either the simple plan or the rude mouldings. But
all those simple conditions of Norman art are merely the expiring of it
towards the extreme north. Do not study Norman architecture in
Northumberland, but in Normandy, and then you will find that it is just
a peculiarly manly, and practically useful, form of the whole great
French school of rounded architecture. And where has that French school
its origin? Wholly in the rich conditions of sculpture, which, rising
first out of imitations of the Roman bas-reliefs, covered all the
façades of the French early churches with one continuous arabesque of
floral or animal life. If you want to study round-arched buildings, do
not go to Durham, but go to Poictiers, and there you will see how all
the simple decorations which give you so much pleasure even in their
isolated application were invented by persons practised in carving men,
monsters, wild animals, birds, and flowers, in overwhelming redundance;
and then trace this architecture forward in central France, and you
will find it loses nothing of its richness--it only gains in truth, and
therefore in grace, until just at the moment of transition into the
pointed style, you have the consummate type of the sculpture of the
school given you in the west front of the Cathedral of Chartres. From
that front I have chosen two fragments to illustrate it. [Footnote:
This part of the lecture was illustrated by two drawings, made
admirably by Mr. J. T. Laing, with the help of photographs from statues
at Chartres. The drawings may be seen at present at the Kensington
Museum: but any large photograph of the west front of Chartres will
enable the reader to follow what is stated in the lecture, as far as is
needful.]

These statues have been long, and justly, considered as representative
of the highest skill of the twelfth or earliest part of the thirteenth
century in France; and they indeed possess a dignity and delicate
charm, which are for the most part wanting in later works. It is owing
partly to real nobleness of feature, but chiefly to the grace, mingled
with severity, of the falling lines of excessively _thin_ drapery;
as well as to a most studied finish in composition, every part of the
ornamentation tenderly harmonizing with the rest. So far as their power
over certain tones of religious mind is owing to a palpable degree of
non-naturalism in them, I do not praise it--the exaggerated thinness of
body and stiffness of attitude are faults; but they are noble faults,
and give the statues a strange look of forming part of the very
building itself, and sustaining it--not like the Greek caryatid,
without effort--nor like the Renaissance caryatid, by painful or
impossible effort--but as if all that was silent and stern, and
withdrawn apart, and stiffened in chill of heart against the terror of
earth, had passed into a shape of eternal marble; and thus the Ghost
had given, to bear up the pillars of the church on earth, all the
patient and expectant nature that it needed no more in heaven. This is
the transcendental view of the meaning of those sculptures. I do not
dwell upon it. What I do lean upon is their purely naturalistic and
vital power. They are all portraits--unknown, most of them, I believe,
--but palpably and unmistakeably portraits, if not taken from the actual
person for whom the statue stands, at all events studied from some
living person whose features might fairly represent those of the king
or saint intended. Several of them I suppose to be authentic: there is
one of a queen, who has evidently, while she lived, been notable for
her bright black eyes. The sculptor has cut the iris deep into the
stone, and her dark eyes are still suggested with her smile.

There is another thing I wish you to notice specially in these statues
--the way in which the floral moulding is associated with the vertical
lines of the figure. You have thus the utmost complexity and richness
of curvature set side by side with the pure and delicate parallel
lines, and both the characters gain in interest and beauty; but there
is deeper significance in the thing than that of mere effect in
composition; significance not intended on the part of the sculptor, but
all the more valuable because unintentional. I mean the close
association of the beauty of lower nature in animals and flowers, with
the beauty of higher nature in human form. You never get this in Greek
work. Greek statues are always isolated; blank fields of stone, or
depths of shadow, relieving the form of the statue, as the world of
lower nature which they despised retired in darkness from their hearts.
Here, the clothed figure seems the type of the Christian spirit--in
many respects feebler and more contracted--but purer; clothed in its
white robes and crown, and with the riches of all creation at its side.

The next step in the change will be set before you in a moment, merely
by comparing this statue from the west front of Chartres with that of
the Madonna, from the south transept door of Amiens. [Footnote: There
are many photographs of this door and of its central statue. Its
sculpture in the tympanum is farther described in the Fourth Lecture.]

This Madonna, with the sculpture round her, represents the culminating
power of Gothic art in the thirteenth century. Sculpture has been
gaining continually in the interval; gaining, simply because becoming
every day more truthful, more tender, and more suggestive. By the way,
the old Douglas motto, "Tender and true," may wisely be taken up again
by all of us, for our own, in art no less than in other things. Depend
upon it, the first universal characteristic of all great art is
Tenderness, as the second is Truth. I find this more and more every
day: an infinitude of tenderness is the chief gift and inheritance of
all the truly great men. It is sure to involve a relative intensity of
disdain towards base things, and an appearance of sternness and
arrogance in the eyes of all hard, stupid, and vulgar people--quite
terrific to such, if they are capable of terror, and hateful to them,
if they are capable of nothing higher than hatred. Dante's is the great
type of this class of mind. I say the first inheritance is Tenderness--
the second Truth, because the Tenderness is in the make of the
creature, the Truth in his acquired habits and knowledge; besides, the
love comes first in dignity as well as in time, and that is always pure
and complete: the truth, at best, imperfect.

To come back to our statue. You will observe that the arrangement of
this sculpture is exactly the same as at Chartres--severe falling
drapery, set off by rich floral ornament at the side; but the statue is
now completely animated: it is no longer fixed as an upright pillar,
but bends aside out of its niche, and the floral ornament, instead of
being a conventional wreath, is of exquisitely arranged hawthorn. The
work, however, as a whole, though perfectly characteristic of the
advance of the age in style and purpose, is in some subtler qualities
inferior to that of Chartres. The individual sculptor, though trained
in a more advanced school, has been himself a man of inferior order of
mind compared to the one who worked at Chartres. But I have not time to
point out to you the subtler characters by which I know this.

This statue, then, marks the culminating point of Gothic art, because,
up to this time, the eyes of its designers had been steadily fixed on
natural truth--they had been advancing from flower to flower, from form
to form, from face to face,--gaining perpetually in knowledge and
veracity--therefore, perpetually in power and in grace. But at this
point a fatal change came over their aim. From the statue they now
began to turn the attention chiefly to the niche of the statue, and
from the floral ornament to the mouldings that enclosed the floral
ornament. The first result of this was, however, though not the
grandest, yet the most finished of northern genius. You have, in the
earlier Gothic, less wonderful construction, less careful masonry, far
less expression of harmony of parts in the balance of the building.
Earlier work always has more or less of the character of a good solid
wall with irregular holes in it, well carved wherever there is room.
But the last phase of good Gothic has no room to spare; it rises as
high as it can on narrowest foundation, stands in perfect strength with
the least possible substance in its bars; connects niche with niche,
and line with line, in an exquisite harmony, from which no stone can be
removed, and to which you can add not a pinnacle; and yet introduces in
rich, though now more calculated profusion, the living element of its
sculpture: sculpture in the quatrefoils--sculpture in the brackets--
sculpture in the gargoyles--sculpture in the niches--sculpture in the
ridges and hollows of its mouldings,--not a shadow without meaning, and
not a light without life. [Footnote: The two _transepts_ of Rouen
Cathedral illustrate this style. There are plenty of photographs of
them. I take this opportunity of repeating what I have several times
before stated, for the sake of travellers, that St. Ouen, impressive as
it is, is entirely inferior to the transepts of Rouen Cathedral.] But
with this very perfection of his work came the unhappy pride of the
builder in what he had done. As long as he had been merely raising
clumsy walls and carving them like a child, in waywardness of fancy,
his delight was in the things he thought of as he carved; but when he
had once reached this pitch of constructive science, he began to think
only how cleverly he could put the stones together. The question was
not now with him, What can I represent? but, How high can I build--how
wonderfully can I hang this arch in air, or weave this tracery across
the clouds? And the catastrophe was instant and irrevocable.
Architecture became in France a mere web of waving lines,--in England a
mere grating of perpendicular ones. Redundance was substituted for
invention, and geometry for passion; tho Gothic art became a mere
expression of wanton expenditure, and vulgar mathematics; and was swept
away, as it then deserved to be swept away, by the severer pride, and
purer learning, of the schools founded on classical traditions.

You cannot now fail to see, how, throughout the history of this
wonderful art--from its earliest dawn in Lombardy to its last
catastrophe in France and England--sculpture, founded on love of
nature, was the talisman of its existence; wherever sculpture was
practised, architecture arose--wherever that was neglected,
architecture expired; and, believe me, all you students who love this
mediaeval art, there is no hope of your ever doing any good with it,
but on this everlasting principle. Your patriotic associations with it
are of no use; your romantic associations with it--either of chivalry
or religion--are of no use; they are worse than useless, they are
false. Gothic is not an art for knights and nobles; it is an art for
the people: it is not an art for churches or sanctuaries; it is an art
for houses and homes: it is not an art for England only, but an art for
the world: above all, it is not an art of form or tradition only, but
an art of vital practice and perpetual renewal. And whosoever pleads
for it as an ancient or a formal thing, and tries to teach it you as an
ecclesiastical tradition or a geometrical science, knows nothing of its
essence, less than nothing of its power.

Leave, therefore, boldly, though not irreverently, mysticism and
symbolism on the one side; cast away with utter scorn geometry and
legalism on the other; seize hold of God's hand and look full in the
face of His creation, and there is nothing He will not enable you to
achieve.

Thus, then, you will find--and the more profound and accurate your
knowledge of the history of art the more assuredly you will find--that
the living power in all the real schools, be they great or small, is
love of nature. But do not mistake me by supposing that I mean this law
to be all that is necessary to form a school. There needs to be much
superadded to it, though there never must be anything superseding it.
The main thing which needs to be superadded is the gift of design.

It is always dangerous, and liable to diminish the clearness of
impression, to go over much ground in the course of one lecture. But I
dare not present you with a maimed view of this important subject: I
dare not put off to another time, when the same persons would not be
again assembled, the statement of the great collateral necessity which,
as well as the necessity of truth, governs all noble art.

That collateral necessity is _the visible operation of human
intellect in the presentation of truth, _the evidence of what is
properly called design or plan in the work, no less than of veracity. A
looking-glass does not design--it receives and communicates
indiscriminately all that passes before it; a painter designs when he
chooses some things, refuses others, and arranges all.

This selection and arrangement must have influence over everything that
the art is concerned with, great or small--over lines, over colours,
and over ideas. Given a certain group of colours, by adding another
colour at the side of them, you will either improve the group and
render it more delightful, or injure it, and render it discordant and
unintelligible. "Design" is the choosing and placing the colour so as
to help and enhance all the other colours it is set beside. So of
thoughts: in a good composition, every idea is presented in just that
order, and with just that force, which will perfectly connect it with
all the other thoughts in the work, and will illustrate the others as
well as receive illustration from them; so that the entire chain of
thoughts offered to the beholder's mind shall be received by him with
as much delight and with as little effort as is possible. And thus you
see design, properly so called, is human invention, consulting human
capacity. Out of the infinite heap of things around us in the world, it
chooses a certain number which it can thoroughly grasp, and presents
this group to the spectator in the form best calculated to enable him
to grasp it also, and to grasp it with delight.

And accordingly, the capacities of both gatherer and receiver being
limited, the object is to make _everything that you offer helpful_
and precious. If you give one grain of weight too much, so as to
increase fatigue without profit, or bulk without value--that added
grain is hurtful; if you put one spot or one syllable out of its proper
place, that spot or syllable will be destructive--how far destructive
it is almost impossible to tell: a misplaced touch may sometimes
annihilate the labour of hours. Nor are any of us prepared to
understand the work of any great master, till we feel this, and feel it
as distinctly as we do the value of arrangement in the notes of music.
Take any noble musical air, and you find, on examining it, that not one
even of the faintest or shortest notes can be removed without
destruction to the whole passage in which it occurs; and that every
note in the passage is twenty times more beautiful so introduced, than
it would have been if played singly on the instrument. Precisely this
degree of arrangement and relation must exist between every touch
[Footnote: Literally. I know how exaggerated this statement sounds; but
I mean it,--every syllable of it.--See Appendix IV.] and line in a
great picture. You may consider the whole as a prolonged musical
composition: its parts, as separate airs connected in the story; its
little bits and fragments of colour and line, as separate passages or
bars in melodies; and down to the minutest note of the whole--down to
the minutest _touch_,--if there is one that can be spared--that
one is doing mischief.

Remember therefore always, you have two characters in which all
greatness of art consists:--First, the earnest and intense seizing of
natural facts; then the ordering those facts by strength of human
intellect, so as to make them, for all who look upon them, to the
utmost serviceable, memorable, and beautiful. And thus great art is
nothing else than the type of strong and noble life; for, as the
ignoble person, in his dealings with all that occurs in the world about
him, first sees nothing clearly,--looks nothing fairly in the face, and
then allows himself to be swept away by the trampling torrent, and
unescapable force, of the things that he would not foresee, and could
not understand: so the noble person, looking the facts of the world
full in the face, and fathoming them with deep faculty, then deals with
them in unalarmed intelligence and unhurried strength, and becomes,
with his human intellect and will, no unconscious nor insignificant
agent, in consummating their good, and restraining their evil.

Thus in human life you have the two fields of rightful toil for ever
distinguished, yet for ever associated; Truth first--plan or design,
founded thereon; so in art, you have the same two fields for ever
distinguished, for ever associated; Truth first--plan, or design,
founded thereon.

Now hitherto there is not the least difficulty in the subject; none of
you can look for a moment at any great sculptor or painter without
seeing the full bearing of these principles. But a difficulty arises
when you come to examine the art of a lower order, concerned with
furniture and manufacture, for in that art the element of design enters
without, apparently, the element of truth. You have often to obtain
beauty and display invention without direct representation of nature.
Yet, respecting all these things also, the principle is perfectly
simple. If the designer of furniture, of cups and vases, of dress
patterns, and the like, exercises himself continually in the imitation
of natural form in some leading division of his work; then, holding by
this stem of life, he may pass down into all kinds of merely
geometrical or formal design with perfect safety, and with noble
results.[Footnote: This principle, here cursorily stated, is one of the
chief subjects of inquiry in the following Lectures.] Thus Giotto,
being primarily a figure painter and sculptor, is, secondarily, the
richest of all designers in mere mosaic of coloured bars and triangles;
thus Benvenuto Cellini, being in all the higher branches of metal work
a perfect imitator of nature, is in all its lower branches the best
designer of curve for lips of cups and handles of vases; thus Holbein,
exercised primarily in the noble art of truthful portraiture, becomes,
secondarily, the most exquisite designer of embroideries of robe, and
blazonries on wall; and thus Michael Angelo, exercised primarily in the
drawing of body and limb, distributes in the mightiest masses the order
of his pillars, and in the loftiest shadow the hollows of his dome. But
once quit hold of this living stem, and set yourself to the designing
of ornamentation, either in the ignorant play of your own heartless
fancy, as the Indian does, or according to received application of
heartless laws, as the modern European does, and there is but one word
for you--Death:--death of every healthy faculty, and of every noble
intelligence, incapacity of understanding one great work that man has
ever done, or of doing anything that it shall be helpful for him to
behold. You have cut yourselves off voluntarily, presumptuously,
insolently, from the whole teaching of your Maker in His Universe; you
have cut yourselves off from it, not because you were forced to
mechanical labour for your bread--not because your fate had appointed
you to wear away your life in walled chambers, or dig your life out of
dusty furrows; but, when your whole profession, your whole occupation--
all the necessities and chances of your existence, led you straight to
the feet of the great Teacher, and thrust you into the treasury of His
works; where you have nothing to do but to live by gazing, and to grow
by wondering;--wilfully you bind up your eyes from the splendour--
wilfully bind up your life-blood from its beating--wilfully turn your
backs upon all the majesties of Omnipotence--wilfully snatch your hands
from all the aids of love, and what can remain for you, but
helplessness and blindness,--except the worse fate than the being blind
yourselves--that of becoming Leaders of the blind?

Do not think that I am speaking under excited feeling, or in any
exaggerated terms. I have written the words I use, that I may know what
I say, and that you, if you choose, may see what I have said. For,
indeed, I have set before you tonight, to the best of my power, the sum
and substance of the system of art to the promulgation of which I have
devoted my life hitherto, and intend to devote what of life may still
be spared to me. I have had but one steady aim in all that I have ever
tried to teach, namely--to declare that whatever was great in human art
was the expression of man's delight in God's work.

And at this time I have endeavoured to prove to you--if you investigate
the subject you may more entirely prove to yourselves--that no school
ever advanced far which had not the love of natural fact as a primal
energy. But it is still more important for you to be assured that the
conditions of life and death in the art of nations are also the
conditions of life and death in your own; and that you have it, each in
his power at this very instant, to determine in which direction his
steps are turning. It seems almost a terrible thing to tell you, that
all here have all the power of knowing at once what hope there is for
them as artists; you would, perhaps, like better that there was some
unremovable doubt about the chances of the future--some possibility
that you might be advancing, in unconscious ways, towards unexpected
successes--some excuse or reason for going about, as students do so
often, to this master or the other, asking him if they have genius, and
whether they are doing right, and gathering, from his careless or
formal replies, vague flashes of encouragement, or fitfulnesses of
despair. There is no need for this--no excuse for it. All of you have
the trial of yourselves in your own power; each may undergo at this
instant, before his own judgment seat, the ordeal by fire. Ask
yourselves what is the leading motive which actuates you while you are
at work. I do not ask you what your leading motive is for working--that
is a different thing; you may have families to support--parents to
help--brides to win; you may have all these, or other such sacred and
pre-eminent motives, to press the morning's labour and prompt the
twilight thought. But when you are fairly _at_ the work, what is
the motive then which tells upon every touch of it? If it is the love
of that which your work represents--if, being a landscape painter, it
is love of hills and trees that moves you--if, being a figure painter,
it is love of human beauty and human soul that moves you--if, being a
flower or animal painter, it is love, and wonder, and delight in petal
and in limb that move you, then the Spirit is upon you, and the earth
is yours, and the fulness thereof. But if, on the other hand, it is
petty self-complacency in your own skill, trust in precepts and laws,
hope for academical or popular approbation, or avarice of wealth,--it
is quite possible that by steady industry, or even by fortunate chance,
you may win the applause, the position, the fortune, that you desire;--
but one touch of true art you will never lay on canvas or on stone as
long as you live.

Make, then, your choice, boldly and consciously, for one way or other
it _must_ be made. On the dark and dangerous side are set, the
pride which delights in self-contemplation--the indolence which rests
in unquestioned forms--the ignorance that despises what is fairest
among God's creatures, and the dulness that denies what is marvellous
in His working: there is a life of monotony for your own souls, and of
misguiding for those of others. And, on the other side, is open to your
choice the life of the crowned spirit, moving as a light in creation--
discovering always--illuminating always, gaining every hour in
strength, yet bowed down every hour into deeper humility; sure of being
right in its aim, sure of being irresistible in its progress; happy in
what it has securely done--happier in what, day by day, it may as
securely hope; happiest at the close of life, when the right hand
begins to forget its cunning, to remember, that there never was a touch
of the chisel or the pencil it wielded, but has added to the knowledge
and quickened the happiness of mankind.




LECTURE II.

THE UNITY OF ART.

_Part of an Address delivered at Manchester, 14th March, 1859._

[Footnote: I was prevented, by press of other engagements, from
preparing this address with the care I wished; and forced to trust to
such expression as I could give at the moment to the points of
principal importance; reading, however, the close of the preceding
lecture, which I thought contained some truths that would bear
repetition. The whole was reported, better than it deserved, by Mr.
Pitman, of the _Manchester Courier_, and published nearly
verbatim. I have here extracted, from the published report, the facts
which I wish especially to enforce; and have a little cleared their
expression; its loose and colloquial character I cannot now help,
unless by re-writing the whole, which it seems not worth while to do.]


It is sometimes my pleasant duty to visit other cities, in the hope of
being able to encourage their art students; but here it is my
pleasanter privilege to come for encouragement myself. I do not know
when I have received so much as from the report read this evening by
Mr. Hammersley, bearing upon a subject which has caused me great
anxiety. For I have always felt in my own pursuit of art, and in my
endeavors to urge the pursuit of art on others, that while there are
many advantages now that never existed before, there are certain
grievous difficulties existing, just in the very cause that is giving
the stimulus to art--in the immense spread of the manufactures of every
country which is now attending vigorously to art. We find that
manufacture and art are now going on always together; that where there
is no manufacture there is no art. I know how much there is of
pretended art where there is no manufacture: there is much in Italy,
for instance; no country makes so bold pretence to the production of
new art as Italy at this moment; yet no country produces so little. If
you glance over the map of Europe, you will find that where the
manufactures are strongest, there art also is strongest. And yet I
always felt that there was an immense difficulty to be encountered by
the students who were in these centres of modern movement. They had to
avoid the notion that art and manufacture were in any respect one. Art
may be healthily associated with manufacture, and probably in future
will always be so; but the student must be strenuously warned against
supposing that they can ever be one and the same thing, that art can
ever be followed on the principles of manufacture. Each must be
followed separately; the one must influence the other, but each must be
kept distinctly separate from the other.

It would be well if all students would keep clearly in their mind the
real distinction between those words which we use so often,
"Manufacture," "Art," and "Fine Art." "MANUFACTURE" is, according to
the etymology and right use of the word, "the making of anything by
hands,"--directly or indirectly, with or without the help of
instruments or machines. Anything proceeding from the hand of man is
manufacture; but it must have proceeded from his hand only, acting
mechanically, and uninfluenced at the moment by direct intelligence.

Then, secondly, ART is the operation of the hand and the intelligence
of man together; there is an art of making machinery; there is an art
of building ships; an art of making carriages; and so on. All these,
properly called Arts, but not Fine Arts, are pursuits in which the hand
of man and his head go together, working at the same instant.

Then FINE ART is that in which the hand, the head, and the _heart_
of man go together.

Recollect this triple group; it will help you to solve many difficult
problems. And remember that though the hand must be at the bottom of
everything, it must also go to the top of everything; for Fine Art must
be produced by the hand of man in a much greater and clearer sense than
manufacture is. Fine Art must always be produced by the subtlest of all
machines, which is the human hand. No machine yet contrived, or
hereafter contrivable, will ever equal the fine machinery of the human
fingers. Thoroughly perfect art is that which proceeds from the heart,
which involves all the noble emotions;--associates with these the head,
yet as inferior to the heart; and the hand, yet as inferior to the
heart and head; and thus brings out the whole man.

Hence it follows that since Manufacture is simply the operation of the
hand of man in producing that which is useful to him, it essentially
separates itself from the emotions; when emotions interfere with
machinery they spoil it: machinery must go evenly, without emotion. But
the Fine Arts cannot go evenly; they always must have emotion ruling
their mechanism, and until the pupil begins to feel, and until all he
does associates itself with the current of his feeling, he is not an
artist. But pupils in all the schools in this country are now exposed
to all kinds of temptations which blunt their feelings. I constantly
feel discouraged in addressing them because I know not how to tell them
boldly what they ought to do, when I feel how practically difficult it
is for them to do it. There are all sorts of demands made upon them in
every direction, and money is to be made in every conceivable way but
the right way. If you paint as you ought, and study as you ought,
depend upon it the public will take no notice of you for a long while.
If you study wrongly, and try to draw the attention of the public upon
you,--supposing you to be clever students--you will get swift reward;
but the reward does not come fast when it is sought wisely; it is
always held aloof for a little while; the right roads of early life are
very quiet ones, hedged in from nearly all help or praise. But the
wrong roads are noisy,--vociferous everywhere with all kinds of demand
upon you for art which is not properly art at all; and in the various
meetings of modern interests, money is to be made in every way; but art
is to be followed only in _one_ way. That is what I want mainly to
say to you, or if not to you yourselves (for, from what I have heard
from your excellent master to-night, I know you are going on all
rightly), you must let me say it through you to others. Our Schools of
Art are confused by the various teaching and various interests that are
now abroad among us. Everybody is talking about art, and writing about
it, and more or less interested in it; everybody wants art, and there
is not art for everybody, and few who talk know what they are talking
about; thus students are led in all variable ways, while there is only
one way in which they can make steady progress, for true art is always
and will be always one. Whatever changes may be made in the customs of
society, whatever new machines we may invent, whatever new manufactures
we may supply, Fine Art must remain what it was two thousand years ago,
in the days of Phidias; two thousand years hence, it will be, in all
its principles, and in all its great effects upon the mind of man, just
the same. Observe this that I say, please, carefully, for I mean it to
the very utmost. _There is but one right way of doing any given thing
required of an artist_; there may be a hundred wrong, deficient, or
mannered ways, but there is only one complete and right way. Whenever
two artists are trying to do the same thing with the same materials,
and do it in different ways, one of them is wrong; he may be charmingly
wrong, or impressively wrong--various circumstances in his temper may
make his wrong pleasanter than any person's right; it may for him,
under his given limitations of knowledge or temper, be better perhaps
that he should err in his own way than try for anybody else's--but for
all that his way is wrong, and it is essential for all masters of
schools to know what the right way is, and what right art is, and to
see how simple and how single all right art has been, since the
beginning of it.

But farther, not only is there but one way of _doing_ things
rightly, but there is only one way of _seeing_ them, and that is,
seeing the whole of them, without any choice, or more intense
perception of one point than another, owing to our special
idiosyncrasies. Thus, when Titian or Tintoret look at a human being,
they see at a glance the whole of its nature, outside and in; all that
it has of form, of colour, of passion, or of thought; saintliness, and
loveliness; fleshly body, and spiritual power; grace, or strength, or
softness, or whatsoever other quality, those men will see to the full,
and so paint, that, when narrower people come to look at what they have
done, every one may, if he chooses, find his own special pleasure in
the work. The sensualist will find sensuality in Titian; the thinker
will find thought; the saint, sanctity; the colourist, colour; the
anatomist, form; and yet the picture will never be a popular one in the 
full sense, for none of these narrower people will find their special
taste so alone consulted, as that the qualities which would ensure
their gratification shall be sifted or separated from others; they are
checked by the presence of the other qualities which ensure the
gratification of other men. Thus, Titian is not soft enough for the
sensualist, Correggio suits him better; Titian is not defined enough
for the formalist,--Leonardo suits him better; Titian is not pure
enough for the religionist,--Raphael suits him better; Titian is not
polite enough for the man of the world,--Vandyke suits him better;
Titian is not forcible enough for the lovers of the picturesque,--
Rembrandt suits him better. So Correggio is popular with a certain set,
and Vandyke with a certain set, and Rembrandt with a certain set. All
are great men, but of inferior stamp, and therefore Vandyke is popular,
and Rembrandt is popular, [Footnote: And Murillo, of all true painters
the narrowest, feeblest, and most superficial, for those reasons the
most popular.] but nobody cares much at heart about Titian; only there
is a strange under-current of everlasting murmur about his name, which
means the deep consent of all great men that he is greater than they--
the consent of those who, having sat long enough at his feet, have
found in that restrained harmony of his strength there are indeed
depths of each balanced power more wonderful than all those separate
manifestations in inferior painters: that there is a softness more
exquisite than Correggio's, a purity loftier than Leonardo's, a force
mightier than Rembrandt's, a sanctity more solemn even than
Raffaelle's.

Do not suppose that in saying this of Titian, I am returning to the old
eclectic theories of Bologna; for all those eclectic theories, observe,
were based, not upon an endeavour to unite the various characters of
nature (which it is possible to do), but the various narrownesses of
taste, which it is impossible to do. Rubens is not more vigorous than
Titian, but less vigorous; but because he is so narrow-minded as to
enjoy vigour only, he refuses to give the other qualities of nature,
which would interfere with that vigour and with our perception of it.
Again, Rembrandt is not a greater master of chiaroscuro than Titian;--
he is a less master, but because he is so narrow-minded as to enjoy
chiaroscuro only, he withdraws from you the splendour of hue which
would interfere with this, and gives you only the shadow in which you
can at once feel it.

Now all these specialties have their own charm in their own way: and
there are times when the particular humour of each man is refreshing to
us from its very distinctness; but the effort to add any other
qualities to this refreshing one instantly takes away the
distinctiveness, and therefore the exact character to be enjoyed in its
appeal to a particular humour in us. Our enjoyment arose from a
weakness meeting a weakness, from a partiality in the painter fitting
to a partiality in us, and giving us sugar when we wanted sugar, and
myrrh when we wanted myrrh; but sugar and myrrh are not meat: and when
we want meat and bread, we must go to better men.

The eclectic schools endeavoured to unite these opposite partialities
and weaknesses. They trained themselves under masters of exaggeration,
and tried to unite opposite exaggerations. That was impossible. They
did not see that the only possible eclecticism had been already
accomplished;--the eclecticism of temperance, which, by the restraint
of force, gains higher force; and by the self-denial of delight, gains
higher delight. This you will find is ultimately the case with every
true and right master; at first, while we are tyros in art, or before
we have earnestly studied the man in question, we shall see little in
him; or perhaps see, as we think, deficiencies; we shall fancy he is
inferior to this man in that, and to the other man in the other; but as
we go on studying him we shall find that he has got both that and the
other; and both in a far higher sense than the man who seemed to
possess those qualities in excess. Thus in Turner's lifetime, when
people first looked at him, those who liked rainy, weather, said he was
not equal to Copley Fielding; but those who looked at Turner long
enough found that he could be much more wet than Copley Fielding, when
he chose. The people who liked force, said that "Turner was not strong
enough for them; he was effeminate; they liked De Wint,--nice strong
tone;--or Cox--great, greeny, dark masses of colour--solemn feeling of
the freshness and depth of nature;--they liked Cox--Turner was too hot
for them." Had they looked long enough they would have found that he
had far more force than De Wint, far more freshness than Cox when he
chose,--only united with other elements; and that he didn't choose to
be cool, if nature had appointed the weather to be hot. The people who
liked Prout said "Turner had not firmness of hand--he did not know
enough about architecture--he was not picturesque enough." Had they
looked at his architecture long, they would have found that it
contained subtle picturesquenesses, infinitely more picturesque than
anything of Prout's. People who liked Callcott said that "Turner was
not correct or pure enough--had no classical taste." Had they looked at
Turner long enough they would have found him as severe, when he chose,
as the greater Poussin;--Callcott, a mere vulgar imitator of other
men's high breeding. And so throughout with all thoroughly great men,
their strength is not seen at first, precisely because they unite, in
due place and measure, every great quality.

Now the question is, whether, as students, we are to study only these
mightiest men, who unite all greatness, or whether we are to study the
works of inferior men, who present us with the greatness which we
particularly like? That question often comes before me when I see a
strong idiosyncrasy in a student, and he asks me what he should study.
Shall I send him to a true master, who does not present the quality in
a prominent way in which that student delights, or send him to a man
with whom he has direct sympathy? It is a hard question. For very
curious results have sometimes been brought out, especially in late
years, not only by students following their own bent, but by their
being withdrawn from teaching altogether. I have just named a very
great man in his own field--Prout. We all know his drawings, and love
them: they have a peculiar character which no other architectural
drawings ever possessed, and which no others can possess, because all
Prout's subjects are being knocked down or restored. (Prout did not
like restored buildings any more than I do.) There will never be any
more Prout drawings. Nor could he have been what he was, or expressed
with that mysteriously effective touch that peculiar delight in broken
and old buildings, unless he had been withdrawn from all high art
influence. You know that Prout was born of poor parents--that he was
educated down in Cornwall;--and that, for many years, all the art-
teaching he had was his own, or the fishermen's. Under the keels of the
fishing-boats, on the sands of our southern coasts, Prout learned all
that he needed to learn about art. Entirely by himself, he felt his way
to this particular style, and became the painter of pictures which I
think we should all regret to lose. It becomes a very difficult
question what that man would have been, had he been brought under some
entirely wholesome artistic influence, He had immense gifts of
composition. I do not know any man who had more power of invention than
Prout, or who had a sublimer instinct in his treatment of things; but
being entirely withdrawn from all artistical help, he blunders his way
to that short-coming representation, which, by the very reason of its
short-coming, has a certain charm we should all be sorry to lose. And
therefore I feel embarrassed when a student comes to me, in whom I see
a strong instinct of that kind: and cannot tell whether I ought to say
to him, "Give up all your studies of old boats, and keep away from the
sea-shore, and come up to the Royal Academy in London, and look at
nothing but Titian." It is a difficult thing to make up one's mind to
say that. However, I believe, on the whole, we may wisely leave such
matters in the hands of Providence; that if we have the power of
teaching the right to anybody, we should teach them the right; if we
have the power of showing them the best thing, we should show them the
best thing; there will always, I fear, be enough want of teaching, and
enough bad teaching, to bring out very curious erratical results if we
want them. So, if we are to teach at all, let us teach the right thing,
and ever the right thing. There are many attractive qualities
inconsistent with rightness;--do not let us teach them,--let us be
content to waive them. There are attractive qualities in Burns, and
attractive qualities in Dickens, which neither of those writers would
have possessed if the one had been educated, and the other had been
studying higher nature than that of cockney London; but those
attractive qualities are not such as we should seek in a school of
literature. If we want to teach young men a good manner of writing, we
should teach it from Shakspeare,--not from Burns; from Walter Scott,--
and not from Dickens. And I believe that our schools of painting are at
present inefficient in their action, because they have not fixed on
this high principle what are the painters to whom to point; nor boldly
resolved to point to the best, if determinable. It is becoming a matter
of stern necessity that they should give a simple direction to the
attention of the student, and that they should say, "This is the mark
you are to aim at; and you are not to go about to the print-shops, and
peep in, to see how this engraver does that, and the other engraver
does the other, and how a nice bit of character has been caught by a
new man, and why this odd picture has caught the popular attention. You
are to have nothing to do with all that; you are not to mind about
popular attention just now; but here is a thing which is eternally
right and good: you are to look at that, and see if you cannot do
something eternally right and good too."

But suppose you accept this principle: and resolve to look to some
great man, Titian, or Turner, or whomsoever it may be, as the model of
perfection in art;--then the question is, since this great man pursued
his art in Venice, or in the fields of England, under totally different
conditions from those possible to us now--how are you to make your
study of him effective here in Manchester? how bring it down into
patterns, and all that you are called upon as operatives to produce?
how make it the means of your livelihood, and associate inferior
branches of art with this great art? That may become a serious doubt to
you. You may think there is some other way of producing clever, and
pretty, and saleable patterns than going to look at Titian, or any
other great man. And that brings me to the question, perhaps the most
vexed question of all amongst us just now, between conventional and 
perfect art. You know that among architects and artists there are, and
have been almost always, since art became a subject of much discussion,
two parties, one maintaining that nature should be always altered and
modified, and that the artist is greater than nature; they do not
maintain, indeed, in words, but they maintain in idea, that the artist
is greater than the Divine Maker of these things, and can improve them;
while the other party say that he cannot improve nature, and that
nature on the whole should improve him. That is the real meaning of the
two parties, the essence of them; the practical result of their several
theories being that the Idealists are always producing more or less
formal conditions of art, and the Realists striving to produce in all
their art either some image of nature, or record of nature; these,
observe, being quite different things, the image being a resemblance,
and the record, something which will give information about nature, but
not necessarily imitate it.

[Footnote: The portion of the lecture here omitted was a recapitulation
of that part of the previous one which opposed conventional art to
natural art.]

       *       *       *       *       *

You may separate these two groups of artists more distinctly in your
mind as those who seek for the pleasure of art, in the relations of its
colours and lines, without caring to convey any truth with it; and
those who seek for the truth first, and then go down from the truth to
the pleasure of colour and line. Marking those two bodies distinctly as
separate, and thinking over them, you may come to some rather notable
conclusions respecting the mental dispositions which are involved in
each mode of study. You will find that large masses of the art of the
world fall definitely under one or the other of these heads. Observe,
pleasure first and truth afterwards, (or not at all,) as with the
Arabians and Indians; or, truth first and pleasure afterwards, as with 
Angelico and all other great European painters. You will find that the
art whose end is pleasure only is pre-eminently the gift of cruel and
savage nations, cruel in temper, savage in habits and conception; but
that the art which is especially dedicated to natural fact always
indicates a peculiar gentleness and tenderness of mind, and that all
great and successful work of that kind will assuredly be the production
of thoughtful, sensitive, earnest, kind men, large in their views of
life, and full of various intellectual power. And farther, when you
examine the men in whom the gifts of art are variously mingled, or
universally mingled, you will discern that the ornamental, or
pleasurable power, though it may be possessed by good men, is not in
itself an indication of their goodness, but is rather, unless balanced
by other faculties, indicative of violence of temper, inclining to
cruelty and to irreligion. On the other hand, so sure as you find any
man endowed with a keen and separate faculty of representing natural
fact, so surely you will find that man gentle and upright, full of
nobleness and breadth of thought. I will give you two instances, the
first peculiarly English, and another peculiarly interesting because it
occurs among a nation not generally very kind or gentle.

I am inclined to think that, considering all the disadvantages of
circumstances and education under which his genius was developed, there
was perhaps hardly ever born a man with a more intense and innate gift
of insight into nature than our own Sir Joshua Reynolds. Considered as
a painter of individuality in the human form and mind, I think him,
even as it is, the prince of portrait painters. Titian paints nobler
pictures, and Vandyke had nobler subjects, but neither of them entered
so subtly as Sir Joshua did into the minor varieties of human heart and
temper; arid when you consider that, with a frightful conventionality
of social habitude all around him, he yet conceived the simplest types
of all feminine and childish loveliness;--that in a northern climate,
and with gray, and white, and black, as the principal colours around
him, he yet became a colourist who can be crushed by none, even of the
Venetians;--and that with Dutch painting and Dresden china for the
prevailing types of art in the saloons of his day, he threw himself at
once at the feet of the great masters of Italy, and arose from their
feet to share their throne--I know not that in the whole history of art
you can produce another instance of so strong, so unaided, so unerring
an instinct for all that was true, pure, and noble.

Now, do you recollect the evidence respecting the character of this
man,--the two points of bright peculiar evidence given by the sayings
of the two greatest literary men of his day, Johnson and Goldsmith?
Johnson, who, as you know, was always Reynolds' attached friend, had
but one complaint to make against him, that he hated nobody:--
"Reynolds," he said, "you hate no one living; I like a good hater!"
Still more significant is the little touch in Goldsmith's
"Retaliation." You recollect how in that poem he describes the various
persons who met at one of their dinners at St. James's Coffee-house,
each person being described under the name of some appropriate dish.
You will often hear the concluding lines about Reynolds Quoted--

                  "He shifted his trumpet," &c;--

less often, or at least less attentively, the preceding ones, far more
important--

        "Still born to improve us in every part--
         His pencil our faces, his _manners our heart;_"

and never, the most characteristic touch of all, near the beginning:--

        "Our dean shall be venison, just fresh from the plains;
         Our Burke shall be tongue, with a garnish of brains.
         To make out the dinner, full certain I am,
         That Rich is anchovy, and Reynolds is _lamb_."

The other painter whom I would give you as an instance of this
gentleness is a man of another nation, on the whole I suppose one of
the most cruel civilized nations in the world--the Spaniards. They
produced but one great painter, only one; but he among the very
greatest of painters, Velasquez. You would not suppose, from looking at
Velasquez' portraits generally, that he was an especially kind or good
man; you perceive a peculiar sternness about them; for they were as
true as steel, and the persons whom he had to paint being not generally
kind or good people, they were stern in expression, and Velasquez gave
the sternness; but he had precisely the same intense perception of
truth, the same marvellous instinct for the rendering of all natural
soul and all natural form that our Reynolds had. Let me, then, read you
his character as it is given by Mr. Stirling, of Kier:--

"Certain charges, of what nature we are not informed, brought against
him after his death, made it necessary for his executor, Fuensalida, to
refute them at a private audience granted to him by the king for that
purpose. After listening to the defence of his friend, Philip
immediately made answer: 'I can believe all you say of the excellent
disposition of Diego Velasquez.' Having lived for half his life in
courts, he was yet capable both of gratitude and generosity, and in the
misfortunes, he could remember the early kindness of Olivares. The
friend of the exile of Loeches, it is just to believe that he was also
the friend of the all-powerful favourite at Buenretiro. No mean
jealousy ever influenced his conduct to his brother artists; he could
afford not only to acknowledge the merits, but to forgive the malice,
of his rivals. His character was of that _rare and happy kind, in
which high intellectual power is combined with indomitable strength of
will, and a winning sweetness of temper_, and which seldom fails to
raise the possessor above his fellow-men, making his life a

               'laurelled victory, and smooth success
                Be strewed before his feet.'"

I am sometimes accused of trying to make art too moral; yet, observe, I
do not say in the least that in order to be a good painter you must be
a good man; but I do say that in order to be a good natural painter
there must be strong elements of good in the mind, however warped by
other parts of the character. There are hundreds of other gifts of
painting which are not at all involved with moral conditions, but this
one, the perception of nature, is never given but under certain moral
conditions. Therefore, now you have it in your choice; here are your
two paths for you: it is required of you to produce conventional
ornament, and you may approach the task as the Hindoo does, and as the
Arab did,--without nature at all, with the chance of approximating your
disposition somewhat to that of the Hindoos and Arabs; or as Sir Joshua
and Velasquez did, with, not the chance, but the certainty, of
approximating your disposition, according to the sincerity of your
effort--to the disposition of those great and good men.

And do you suppose you will lose anything by approaching your
conventional art from this higher side? Not so. I called, with
deliberate measurement of my expression, long ago, the decoration of
the Alhambra "detestable," not merely because indicative of base
conditions of moral being, but because merely as decorative work,
however captivating in some respects, it is wholly wanting in the real,
deep, and intense qualities of ornamental art. Noble conventional
decoration belongs only to three periods. First, there is the
conventional decoration of the Greeks, used in subordination to their
sculpture. There are then the noble conventional decoration of the
early Gothic schools, and the noble conventional arabesque of the great
Italian schools. All these were reached from above, all reached by
stooping from a knowledge of the human form. Depend upon it you will
find, as you look more and more into the matter, that good subordinate
ornament has ever been rooted in a higher knowledge; and if you are
again to produce anything that is noble, you must have the higher
knowledge first, and descend to all lower service; condescend as much
as you like,--condescension never does any man any harm,--but get your
noble standing first. So, then, without any scruple, whatever branch of
art you may be inclined as a student here to follow,--whatever you are
to make your bread by, I say, so far as you have time and power, make
yourself first a noble and accomplished artist; understand at least
what noble and accomplished art is, and then you will be able to apply
your knowledge to all service whatsoever.

I am now going to ask your permission to name the masters whom I think
it would be well if we could agree, in our Schools of Art in England,
to consider our leaders. The first and chief I will not myself presume
to name; he shall be distinguished for you by the authority of those
two great painters of whom we have just been speaking--Reynolds and
Velasquez. You may remember that in your Manchester Art Treasures
Exhibition the most impressive things were the works of those two men--
nothing told upon the eye so much; no other pictures retained it with
such a persistent power. Now, I have the testimony, first of Reynolds
to Velasquez, and then of Velasquez to the man whom I want you to take
as the master of all your English schools. The testimony of Reynolds to
Velasquez is very striking. I take it from some fragments which have
just been published by Mr. William Cotton--precious fragments--of
Reynolds' diaries, which I chanced upon luckily as I was coming down
here: for I was going to take Velasquez' testimony alone, and then fell
upon this testimony of Reynolds to Velasquez, written most fortunately
in Reynolds' own hand-you may see the manuscript. "What _we_ are
all," said Reynolds, "attempting to do with great labor, Velasquez does
at once." Just think what is implied when a man of the enormous power
and facility that Reynolds had, says he was "trying to do with great
labor" what Velasquez "did at once."

Having thus Reynolds' testimony to Velasquez, I will take Velasquez'
testimony to somebody else. You know that Velasquez was sent by Philip
of Spain to Italy, to buy pictures for him. He went all over Italy, saw
the living artists there, and all their best pictures when freshly
painted, so that he had every opportunity of judging; and never was a
man so capable of judging. He went to Rome and ordered various works of
living artists; and while there, he was one day asked by Salvator Rosa
what he thought of Raphael. His reply, and the ensuing conversation,
are thus reported by Boschini, in curious Italian verse, which, thus
translated by Dr. Donaldson, is quoted in Mr. Stirling's Life of
Velasquez:--

          "The master" [Velasquez] "stiffly bowed his figure tall
             And said, 'For Rafael, to speak the truth--
             I always was plain-spoken from my youth--
           I cannot say I like his works at all.'

          "'Well,' said the other" [Salvator], 'if you can run down
             So great a man, I really cannot see
             What you can find to like in Italy;
           To him we all agree to give the crown.'

          "Diego answered thus: 'I saw in Venice
             The true test of the good and beautiful;
             First in my judgment, ever stands that school,
           And Titian first of all Italian men is.'"

          "_Tizian ze quel die porta la bandiera_"

Learn that line by heart and act, at all events for some time to come,
upon Velasquez' opinion in that matter. Titian is much the safest
master for you. Raphael's power, such as it characters in his mind; it
is "Raphaelesque," properly so called; but Titian's power is simply the
power of doing right. Whatever came before Titian, he did wholly as it
_ought_ to be done. Do not suppose that now in recommending Titian
to you so strongly, and speaking of nobody else to-night, I am
retreating in anywise from what some of you may perhaps recollect in my
works, the enthusiasm with which I have always spoken of another
Venetian painter. There are three Venetians who are never separated in
my mind--Titian, Veronese, and Tintoret. They all have their own
unequalled gifts, and Tintoret especially has imagination and depth of
soul which I think renders him indisputably the greatest man; but,
equally indisputably, Titian is the greatest painter; and therefore the
greatest painter who ever lived. You may be led wrong by Tintoret
[Footnote: See Appendix I.--"Right and Wrong."] in many respects, wrong
by Raphael in more; all that you learn from Titian will be right. Then,
with Titian, take Leonardo, Rembrandt, and Albert Dürer. I name those
three masters for this reason: Leonardo has powers of subtle drawing
which are peculiarly applicable in many ways to the drawing of fine
ornament, and are very useful for all students. Rembrandt and Dürer are
the only men whose actual work of hand you can have to look at; you can
have Rembrandt's etchings, or Dürer's engravings actually hung in your
schools; and it is a main point for the student to see the real thing,
and avoid judging of masters at second-hand. As, however, in obeying
this principle, you cannot often have opportunities of studying
Venetian painting, it is desirable that you should have a useful
standard of colour, and I think it is possible for you to obtain this.
I cannot, indeed, without entering upon ground which might involve the
hurting the feelings of living artists, state exactly what I believe to
be the relative position of various painters in England at present with
respect to power of colour. But I may say this, that in the peculiar
gifts of colour which will be useful to you as students, there are only
one or two of the pre-Raphaelites, and William Hunt, of the old Water
Colour Society, who would be safe guides for you: and as quite a safe
guide, there is nobody but William Hunt, because the pre-Raphaelites
are all more or less affected by enthusiasm and by various morbid
conditions of intellect and temper; but old William Hunt--I am sorry to
say "old," but I say it in a loving way, for every year that has added
to his life has added also to his skill--William Hunt is as right as
the Venetians, as far as he goes, and what is more, nearly as
inimitable as they. And I think if we manage to put in the principal
schools of England a little bit of Hunt's work, and make that somewhat
of a standard of colour, that we can apply his principles of colouring
to subjects of all kinds. Until you have had a work of his long near
you; nay, unless you have been labouring at it, and trying to copy it,
you do not know the thoroughly grand qualities that are concentrated in
it. Simplicity, and intensity, both of the highest character;--
simplicity of aim, and intensity of power and success, are involved in
that man's unpretending labour.

Finally, you cannot believe that I would omit my own favourite, Turner.
I fear from the very number of his works left to the nation, that there
is a disposition now rising to look upon his vast bequest with some
contempt. I beg of you, if in nothing else, to believe me in this, that
you cannot further the art of England in any way more distinctly than
by giving attention to every fragment that has been left by that man.
The time will come when his full power and right place will be
acknowledged; that time will not be for many a day yet: nevertheless,
be assured--as far as you are inclined to give the least faith to
anything I may say to you, be assured--that you can act for the good of
art in England in no better way than by using whatever influence any of
you have in any direction to urge the reverent study and yet more
reverent preservation of the works of Turner. I do not say "the
exhibition" of his works, for we are not altogether ripe for it: they
are still too far above us; uniting, as I was telling you, too many
qualities for us yet to feel fully their range and their influence;--
but let us only try to keep them safe from harm, and show thoroughly
and conveniently what we show of them at all, and day by day their
greatness will dawn upon us more and more, and be the root of a school
of art in England, which I do not doubt may be as bright, as just, and
as refined as even that of Venice herself. The dominion of the sea
seems to have been associated, in past time, with dominion in the arts
also: Athens had them together; Venice had them together; but by so
much as our authority over the ocean is wider than theirs over the
Ægean or Adriatic, let us strive to make our art more widely beneficent
than theirs, though it cannot be more exalted; so working out the
fulfilment, in their wakening as well as their warning sense, of those
great words of the aged Tintoret:

                    "Sempre si fa il mare maggiore."




LECTURE III.

MODERN MANUFACTURE AND DESIGN.

_A Lecture delivered at Bradford, March, 1859_.


It is with a deep sense of necessity for your indulgence that I venture
to address you to-night, or that I venture at any time to address the
pupils of schools of design intended for the advancement of taste in
special branches of manufacture. No person is able to give useful and
definite help towards such special applications of art, unless he is
entirely familiar with the conditions of labour and natures of material
involved in the work; and indefinite help is little better than no help
at all. Nay, the few remarks which I propose to lay before you this
evening will, I fear, be rather suggestive of difficulties than helpful
in conquering them: nevertheless, it may not be altogether
unserviceable to define clearly for you (and this, at least, I am able
to do) one or two of the more stern general obstacles which stand at
present in the way of our success in design; and to warn you against
exertion of effort in any vain or wasteful way, till these main
obstacles are removed.

The first of these is our not understanding the scope and dignity of
Decorative design. With all our talk about it, the very meaning of the
words "Decorative art" remains confused and undecided. I want, if
possible, to settle this question for you to-night, and to show you
that the principles on which you must work are likely to be false, in
proportion as they are narrow; true, only as they are founded on a
perception of the connection of all branches of art with each other.

Observe, then, first--the only essential distinction between Decorative
and other art is the being fitted for a fixed place; and in that place,
related, either in subordination or command, to the effect of other
pieces of art. And all the greatest art which the world has produced is
thus fitted for a place, and subordinated to a purpose. There is no
existing highest-order art but is decorative. The best sculpture yet
produced has been the decoration of a temple front--the best painting,
the decoration of a room. Raphael's best doing is merely the wall-
colouring of a suite of apartments in the Vatican, and his cartoons
were made for tapestries. Correggio's best doing is the decoration of
two small church cupolas at Parma; Michael Angelo's of a ceiling in the
Pope's private chapel; Tintoret's, of a ceiling and side wall belonging
to a charitable society at Venice; while Titian and Veronese threw out
their noblest thoughts, not even on the inside, but on the outside of
the common brick and plaster walls of Venice.

Get rid, then, at once of any idea of Decorative art being a degraded
or a separate kind of art. Its nature or essence is simply its being
fitted for a definite place; and, in that place, forming part of a
great and harmonious whole, in companionship with other art; and so far
from this being a degradation to it--so far from Decorative art being
inferior to other art because it is fixed to a spot--on the whole it
may be considered as rather a piece of degradation that it should be
portable. Portable art--independent of all place--is for the most part
ignoble art. Your little Dutch landscape, which you put over your
sideboard to-day, and between the windows tomorrow, is a far more
contemptible piece of work than the extents of field and forest with
which Benozzo has made green and beautiful the once melancholy arcade
of the Campo Santo at Pisa; and the wild boar of silver which you use
for a seal, or lock into a velvet case, is little likely to be so noble
a beast as the bronze boar who foams forth the fountain from under his
tusks in the market-place of Florence. It is, indeed, possible that the
portable picture or image may be first-rate of its kind, but it is not
first-rate because it is portable; nor are Titian's frescoes less than
first-rate because they are fixed; nay, very frequently the highest
compliment you can pay to a cabinet picture is to say--"It is as grand
as a fresco."

Keeping, then, this fact fixed in our minds,--that all art _may_
be decorative, and that the greatest art yet produced has been
decorative,--we may proceed to distinguish the orders and dignities of
decorative art, thus:--

I. The first order of it is that which is meant for places where it
cannot be disturbed or injured, and where it can be perfectly seen; and
then the main parts of it should be, and have always been made, by the
great masters, as perfect, and as full of nature as possible.

You will every day hear it absurdly said that room decoration should be
by flat patterns--by dead colours--by conventional monotonies, and I
know not what. Now, just be assured of this--nobody ever yet used
conventional art to decorate with, when he could do anything better,
and knew that what he did would be safe. Nay, a great painter will
always give you the natural art, safe or not. Correggio gets a
commission to paint a room on the ground floor of a palace at Parma:
any of our people--bred on our fine modern principles--would have
covered it with a diaper, or with stripes or flourishes, or mosaic
patterns. Not so Correggio: he paints a thick trellis of vine-leaves,
with oval openings, and lovely children leaping through them into the
room; and lovely children, depend upon it, are rather more desirable
decorations than diaper, if you can do them--but they are not quite so
easily done. In like manner Tintoret has to paint the whole end of the
Council Hall at Venice. An orthodox decorator would have set himself to
make the wall look like a wall--Tintoret thinks it would be rather
better, if he can manage it, to make it look a little like Paradise;--
stretches his canvas right over the wall, and his clouds right over his
canvas; brings the light through his clouds--all blue and clear--zodiac
beyond zodiac; rolls away the vaporous flood from under the feet of
saints, leaving them at last in infinitudes of light--unorthodox in the
last degree, but, on the whole, pleasant.

And so in all other cases whatever, the greatest decorative art is
wholly unconventional--downright, pure, good painting and sculpture,
but always fitted for its place; and subordinated to the purpose it has
to serve in that place.

II. But if art is to be placed where it is liable to injury--to wear
and tear; or to alteration of its form; as, for instance, on domestic
utensils, and armour, and weapons, and dress; in which either the
ornament will be worn out by the usage of the thing, or will be cast
into altered shape by the play of its folds; then it is wrong to put
beautiful and perfect art to such uses, and you want forms of inferior
art, such as will be by their simplicity less liable to injury; or, by
reason of their complexity and continuousness, may show to advantage,
however distorted by the folds they are cast into.

And thus arise the various forms of inferior decorative art, respecting
which the general law is, that the lower the place and office of the
thing, the less of natural or perfect form you should have in it; a
zigzag or a chequer is thus a better, because a more consistent
ornament for a cup or platter than a landscape or portrait is: hence
the general definition of the true forms of conventional ornament is,
that they consist in the bestowal of as much beauty on the object as
shall be consistent with its Material, its Place, and its Office.

Let us consider these three modes of consistency a little.

(A.) Conventionalism by cause of inefficiency of material.

If, for instance, we are required to represent a human figure with
stone only, we cannot represent its colour; we reduce its colour to
whiteness. That is not elevating the human body, but degrading it; only
it would be a much greater degradation to give its colour falsely.
Diminish beauty as much as you will, but do not misrepresent it. So
again, when we are sculpturing a face, we can't carve its eyelashes. 
The face is none the better for wanting its eyelashes--it is injured by
the want; but would be much more injured by a clumsy representation of
them.

Neither can we carve the hair. We must be content with the
conventionalism of vile solid knots and lumps of marble, instead of the
golden cloud that encompasses the fair human face with its waving
mystery. The lumps of marble are not an elevated representation of
hair--they are a degraded one; yet better than any attempt to imitate
hair with the incapable material.

In all cases in which such imitation is attempted, instant degradation
to a still lower level is the result. For the effort to imitate shows
that the workman has only a base and poor conception of the beauty of
the reality--else he would know his task to be hopeless, and give it up
at once; so that all endeavours to avoid conventionalism, when the
material demands it, result from insensibility to truth, and are among
the worst forms of vulgarity. Hence, in the greatest Greek statues, the
hair is very slightly indicated--not because the sculptor disdained
hair, but because he knew what it was too well to touch it insolently.
I do not doubt but that the Greek painters drew hair exactly as Titian
does. Modern attempts to produce finished pictures on glass result from
the same base vulgarism. No man who knows what painting means, can
endure a painted glass window which emulates painter's work. But he
rejoices in a glowing mosaic of broken colour: for that is what the
glass has the special gift and right of producing. [Footnote: See
Appendix II., Sir Joshua Reynolds's disappointment.]

(B.) Conventionalism by cause of inferiority of place.

When work is to be seen at a great distance, or in dark places, or in
some other imperfect way, it constantly becomes necessary to treat it
coarsely or severely, in order to make it effective. The statues on
cathedral fronts, in good times of design, are variously treated
according to their distances: no fine execution is put into the
features of the Madonna who rules the group of figures above the south
transept of Rouen at 150 feet above the ground; but in base modern
work, as Milan Cathedral, the sculpture is finished without any
reference to distance; and the merit of every statue is supposed to
consist in the visitor's being obliged to ascend three hundred steps
before he can see it.

(C.) Conventionalism by cause of inferiority of office.

When one piece of ornament is to be subordinated to another (as the
moulding is to the sculpture it encloses, or the fringe of a drapery to
the statue it veils), this inferior ornament needs to be degraded in
order to mark its lower office; and this is best done by refusing, more
or less, the introduction of natural form. The less of nature it
contains, the more degraded is the ornament, and the fitter for a
humble place; but, however far a great workman may go in refusing the
higher organisms of nature, he always takes care to retain the
magnificence of natural lines; that is to say, of the infinite curves,
such as I have analyzed in the fourth volume of "Modern Painters." His
copyists, fancying that they can follow him without nature, miss
precisely the essence of all the work; so that even the simplest piece
of Greek conventional ornament loses the whole of its value in any
modern imitation of it, the finer curves being always missed. Perhaps
one of the dullest and least justifiable mistakes which have yet been
made about my writing, is the supposition that I have attacked or
despised Greek work. I have attacked Palladian work, and modern
imitation of Greek work. Of Greek work itself I have never spoken but
with a reverence quite infinite: I name Phidias always in exactly the
same tone with which I speak of Michael Angelo, Titian, and Dante. My
first statement of this faith, now thirteen years ago, was surely clear
enough. "We shall see by this light three colossal images standing up
side by side, looming in their great rest of spirituality above the
whole world horizon. Phidias, Michael Angelo, and Dante,--from these we
may go down step by step among the mighty men of every age, securely
and certainly observant of diminished lustre in every appearance of
restlessness and effort, until the last trace of inspiration vanishes
in the tottering affectation or tortured insanities of modern times."
("Modern Painters," vol. ii., p. 253.) This was surely plain speaking
enough, and from that day to this my effort has been not less
continually to make the heart of Greek work known than the heart of
Gothic: namely, the nobleness of conception of form derived from
perpetual study of the figure; and my complaint of the modern architect
has been not that he followed the Greeks, but that he denied the first
laws of life in theirs as in all other art.

The fact is, that all good subordinate forms of ornamentation ever yet
existent in the world have been invented, and others as beautiful can
only be invented, by men primarily exercised in drawing or carving the
human figure. I will not repeat here what I have already twice insisted
upon, to the students of London and Manchester, respecting the
degradation of temper and intellect which follows the pursuit of art
without reference to natural form, as among the Asiatics: here, I will
only trespass on your patience so far as to mark the inseparable
connection between figure-drawing and good ornamental work, in the
great European schools, and all that are connected with them.

Tell me, then, first of all, what ornamental work is usually put before
our students as the type of decorative perfection? Raphael's
arabesques; are they not? Well, Raphael knew a little about the figure,
I suppose, before he drew them. I do not say that I like those
arabesques; but there are certain qualities in them which are
inimitable by modern designers; and those qualities are just the fruit
of the master's figure study. What is given the student as next to
Raphael's work? Cinquecento ornament generally. Well, cinquecento
generally, with its birds, and cherubs, and wreathed foliage, and
clustered fruit, was the amusement of men who habitually and easily
carved the figure, or painted it. All the truly fine specimens of it
have figures or animals as main parts of the design.

"Nay, but," some anciently or mediævally minded person will exclaim,
"we don't want to study cinquecento. We want severer, purer
conventionalism." What will you have? Egyptian ornament? Why, the whole
mass of it is made up of multitudinous human figures in every kind of
action--and magnificent action; their kings drawing their bows in their
chariots, their sheaves of arrows rattling at their shoulders; the
slain falling under them as before a pestilence; their captors driven
before them in astonied troops; and do you expect to imitate Egyptian
ornament without knowing how to draw the human figure? Nay, but you
will take Christian ornament--purest mediaeval Christian--thirteenth
century! Yes: and do you suppose you will find the Christian less
human? The least natural and most purely conventional ornament of the
Gothic schools is that of their painted glass; and do you suppose
painted glass, in the fine times, was ever wrought without figures? We
have got into the way, among our other modern wretchednesses, of trying
to make windows of leaf diapers, and of strips of twisted red and
yellow bands, looking like the patterns of currant jelly on the top of
Christmas cakes; but every casement of old glass contained a saint's
history. The windows of Bourges, Chartres, or Rouen have ten, fifteen,
or twenty medallions in each, and each medallion contains two figures
at least, often six or seven, representing every event of interest in
the history of the saint whose life is in question. Nay, but, you say
those figures are rude and quaint, and ought not to be imitated. Why,
so is the leafage rude and quaint, yet you imitate that. The coloured
border pattern of geranium or ivy leaf is not one whit better drawn, or
more like geraniums and ivy, than the figures are like figures; but you
call the geranium leaf idealized--why don't you call the figures so?
The fact is, neither are idealized, but both are conventionalized on
the same principles, and in the same way; and if you want to learn how
to treat the leafage, the only way is to learn first how to treat the
figure. And you may soon test your powers in this respect. Those old
workmen were not afraid of the most familiar subjects. The windows of
Chartres were presented by the trades of the town, and at the bottom of
each window is a representation of the proceedings of the tradesmen at
the business which enabled them to pay for the window. There are smiths
at the forge, curriers at their hides, tanners looking into their pits,
mercers selling goods over the counter--all made into beautiful
medallions. Therefore, whenever you want to know whether you have got
any real power of composition or adaptation in ornament, don't be
content with sticking leaves together by the ends,--anybody can do
that; but try to conventionalize a butcher's or a greengrocer's, with
Saturday night customers buying cabbage and beef. That will tell you if
you can design or not.

I can fancy your losing patience with me altogether just now. "We asked
this fellow down to tell our workmen how to make shawls, and he is only
trying to teach them how to caricature." But have a little patience
with me, and examine, after I have done, a little for yourselves into
the history of ornamental art, and you will discover why I do this. You
will discover, I repeat, that all great ornamental art whatever is
founded on the effort of the workman to draw the figure, and, in the
best schools, to draw all that he saw about him in living nature. The
best art of pottery is acknowledged to be that of Greece, and all the
power of design exhibited in it, down to the merest zigzag, arises
primarily from the workman having been forced to outline nymphs and
knights; from those helmed and draped figures he holds his power. Of
Egyptian ornament I have just spoken. You have everything given there
that the workman saw; people of his nation employed in hunting,
fighting, fishing, visiting, making love, building, cooking--everything
they did is drawn, magnificently or familiarly, as was needed. In
Byzantine ornament, saints, or animals which are types of various
spiritual power, are the main subjects; and from the church down to the
piece of enamelled metal, figure,--figure,--figure, always principal.
In Norman and Gothic work you have, with all their quiet saints, also
other much disquieted persons, hunting, feasting, fighting, and so on;
or whole hordes of animals racing after each other. In the Bayeux
tapestry, Queen Matilda gave, as well as she could,--in many respects
graphically enough,--the whole history of the conquest of England.
Thence, as you increase in power of art, you have more and more
finished figures, up to the solemn sculptures of Wells Cathedral, or
the cherubic enrichments of the Venetian Madonna dei Miracoli.
Therefore, I will tell you fearlessly, for I know it is true, you must
raise your workman up to life, or you will never get from him one line
of well-imagined conventionalism. We have at present no good ornamental
design. We can't have it yet, and we must be patient if we want to have
it. Do not hope to feel the effect of your schools at once, but raise
the men as high as you can, and then let them stoop as low as you need;
no great man ever minds stooping. Encourage the students, in sketching
accurately and continually from nature anything that comes in their
way--still life, flowers, animals; but, above all, figures; and so far
as you allow of any difference between an artist's training and theirs,
let it be, not in what they draw, but in the degree of conventionalism
you require in the sketch.

For my own part, I should always endeavour to give thorough artistical
training first; but I am not certain (the experiment being yet untried)
what results may be obtained by a truly intelligent practice of
conventional drawing, such as that of the Egyptians, Greeks, or
thirteenth century French, which consists in the utmost possible
rendering of natural form by the fewest possible lines. The animal and
bird drawing of the Egyptians is, in their fine age, quite magnificent
under its conditions; magnificent in two ways--first, in keenest
perception of the main forms and facts in the creature; and, secondly,
in the grandeur of line by which their forms are abstracted and
insisted on, making every asp, ibis, and vulture a sublime spectre of
asp or ibis or vulture power. The way for students to get some of this
gift again (_some_ only, for I believe the fulness of the gift
itself to be connected with vital superstition, and with resulting
intensity of reverence; people were likely to know something about
hawks and ibises, when to kill one was to be irrevocably judged to
death) is never to pass a day without drawing some animal from the
life, allowing themselves the fewest possible lines and colours to do
it with, but resolving that whatever is characteristic of the animal
shall in some way or other be shown. [Footnote: Plate 75 in Vol. V. of
Wilkinson's "Ancient Egypt" will give the student an idea of how to set
to work.] I repeat, it cannot yet be judged what results might be
obtained by a nobly practised conventionalism of this kind; but,
however that may be, the first fact,--the necessity of animal and
figure drawing, is absolutely certain, and no person who shrinks from
it will ever become a great designer.

One great good arises even from the first step in figure drawing, that
it gets the student quit at once of the notion of formal symmetry. If
you learn only to draw a leaf well, you are taught in some of our
schools to turn it the other way, opposite to itself; and the two
leaves set opposite ways are called "a design:" and thus it is supposed
possible to produce ornamentation, though you have no more brains than
a looking-glass or a kaleidoscope has. But if you once learn to draw
the human figure, you will find that knocking two men's heads together
does not necessarily constitute a good design; nay, that it makes a
very bad design, or no design at all; and you will see at once that to
arrange a group of two or more figures, you must, though perhaps it may
be desirable to balance, or oppose them, at the same time vary their
attitudes, and make one, not the reverse of the other, but the
companion of the other.

I had a somewhat amusing discussion on this subject with a friend, only
the other day; and one of his retorts upon me was so neatly put, and
expresses so completely all that can either be said or shown on the
opposite side, that it is well worth while giving it you exactly in the
form it was sent to me. My friend had been maintaining that the essence
of ornament consisted in three things:--contrast, series, and symmetry.
I replied (by letter) that "none of them, nor all of them together,
would produce ornament. Here"--(making a ragged blot with the back of
my pen on the paper)--"you have contrast; but it isn't ornament: here,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,"--(writing the numerals)--"You have series; but it
isn't ornament: and here,"--(sketching a rough but symmetrical "stick-
figure" sketch of a human body at the side)--"you have symmetry; but it
isn't ornament."

My friend replied:--

"Your materials were not ornament, because you did not apply them. I
send them to you back, made up into a choice sporting neckerchief:"

[Illustration: Sketch of a square of cloth decorated with a diagonal
grid pattern of stick-figure human forms, with repeated and reflected
ink-blot shapes at the corners and the digits 1 through 6 arranged into
simple symmetrical shapes and repeated around the border.]

               Symmetrical figure         Unit of diaper.
               Contrast                   Corner ornaments.
               Series                     Border ornaments.

"Each figure is converted into a harmony by being revolved on its two
axes, the whole opposed in contrasting series."

My answer was--or rather was to the effect (for I must expand it a
little, here)--that his words, "because you did not apply them,"
contained the gist of the whole matter;--that the application of them,
or any other things, was precisely the essence of design; the non-
application, or wrong application, the negation of design: that his use
of the poor materials was in this case admirable; and that if he could
explain to me, in clear words, the principles on which he had so used
them, he would be doing a very great service to all students of art.

"Tell me, therefore (I asked), these main points:

"1. How did you determine the number of figures you would put into the
neckerchief? Had there been more, it would have been mean and
ineffective,--a pepper-and-salt sprinkling of figures. Had there been
fewer, it would have been monstrous. How did you fix the number?

"2. How did you determine the breadth of the border and relative size
of the numerals?

"3. Why are there two lines outside of the border, and one only inside?
Why are there no more lines? Why not three and two, or three and five?
Why lines at all to separate the barbarous figures; and why, if lines
at all, not double or treble instead of single?

"4. Why did you put the double blots at the corners? Why not at the
angles of the chequers,--or in the middle of the border?

"It is precisely your knowing why _not_ to do these things, and
why to do just what you have done, which constituted your power of
design; and like all the people I have ever known who had that power,
you are entirely unconscious of the essential laws by which you work,
and confuse other people by telling them that the design depends on
symmetry and series, when, in fact, it depends entirely on your own
sense and judgment."

This was the substance of my last answer--to which (as I knew
beforehand would be the case) I got no reply; but it still remains to
be observed that with all the skill and taste (especially involving the
architect's great trust, harmony of proportion), which my friend could
bring to bear on the materials given him, the result is still only--a
sporting neckerchief--that is to say, the materials addressed, first,
to recklessness, in the shape of a mere blot; then to computativeness
in a series of figures; and then to absurdity and ignorance, in the
shape of an ill-drawn caricature--such materials, however treated, can
only work up into what will please reckless, computative, and vulgar
persons,--that is to say, into a sporting neckerchief. The difference
between this piece of ornamentation and Correggio's painting at Parma
lies simply and wholly in the additions (somewhat large ones), of truth
and of tenderness: in the drawing being lovely as well as symmetrical--
and representative of realities as well as agreeably disposed. And
truth, tenderness, and inventive application or disposition are indeed
the roots of ornament--not contrast, nor symmetry.

It ought yet farther to be observed, that _the nobler the materials,
the less their symmetry is endurable_. In the present case, the
sense of fitness and order, produced by the repetition of the figures,
neutralizes, in some degree, their reckless vulgarity; and is wholly,
therefore, beneficent to them. But draw the figures better, and their
repetition will become painful. You may harmlessly balance a mere
geometrical form, and oppose one quatrefoil or cusp by another exactly
like it. But put two Apollo Belvideres back to back, and you will not
think the symmetry improves them. _Whenever the materials of ornament
are noble, they must be various_; and repetition of parts is either
the sign of utterly bad, hopeless, and base work; or of the intended
degradation of the parts in which such repetition is allowed, in order
to foil others more noble.

Such, then, are a few of the great principles, by the enforcement of
which you may hope to promote the success of the modern student of
design; but remember, none of these principles will be useful at all,
unless you understand them to be, in one profound and stern sense,
useless. [Footnote: I shall endeavour for the future to put my self-
contradictions in short sentences and direct terms, in order to save
sagacious persons the trouble of looking for them.]

That is to say, unless you feel that neither you nor I, nor any one,
can, in the great ultimate sense, teach anybody how to make a good
design.

If designing _could_ be taught, all the world would learn: as all
the world reads--or calculates. But designing is not to be spelled, nor
summed. My men continually come to me, in my drawing class in London,
thinking I am to teach them what is instantly to enable them to gain
their bread. "Please, sir, show us how to design." "Make designers of
us." And you, I doubt not, partly expect me to tell you to-night how to
make designers of your Bradford youths. Alas! I could as soon tell you
how to make or manufacture an ear of wheat, as to make a good artist of
any kind. I can analyze the wheat very learnedly for you--tell you
there is starch in it, and carbon, and silex. I can give you starch,
and charcoal, and flint; but you are as far from your ear of wheat as
you were before. All that can possibly be done for any one who wants
ears of wheat is to show them where to find grains of wheat, and how to
sow them, and then, with patience, in Heaven's time, the ears will
come--or will perhaps come--ground and weather permitting. So in this
matter of making artists--first you must find your artist in the grain;
then you must plant him; fence and weed the field about him; and with
patience, ground and weather permitting, you may get an artist out of
him--not otherwise. And what I have to speak to you about, tonight, is
mainly the ground and the weather, it being the first and quite most
material question in this matter, whether the ground and weather of
Bradford, or the ground and weather of England in general,--suit wheat.

And observe in the outset, it is not so much what the present
circumstances of England are, as what we wish to make them, that we
have to consider. If you will tell me what you ultimately intend
Bradford to be, perhaps I can tell you what Bradford can ultimately
produce. But you must have your minds clearly made up, and be distinct
in telling me what you do want. At present I don't know what you are
aiming at, and possibly on consideration you may feel some doubt
whether you know yourselves. As matters stand, all over England, as
soon as one mill is at work, occupying two hundred hands, we try, by
means of it, to set another mill at work, occupying four hundred. That
is all simple and comprehensive enough--but what is it to come to? How
many mills do we want? or do we indeed want no end of mills? Let us
entirely understand each other on this point before we go any farther.
Last week, I drove from Rochdale to Bolton Abbey; quietly, in order to
see the country, and certainly it was well worth while. I never went
over a more interesting twenty miles than those between Rochdale and
Burnley. Naturally, the valley has been one of the most beautiful in
the Lancashire hills; one of the far away solitudes, full of old
shepherd ways of life. At this time there are not,--I speak
deliberately, and I believe quite literally,--there are not, I think,
more than a thousand yards of road to be traversed anywhere, without
passing a furnace or mill.

Now, is that the kind of thing you want to come to everywhere? Because,
if it be, and you tell me so distinctly, I think I can make several
suggestions to-night, and could make more if you give me time, which
would materially advance your object. The extent of our operations at
present is more or less limited by the extent of coal and ironstone,
but we have not yet learned to make proper use of our clay. Over the
greater part of England, south of the manufacturing districts, there
are magnificent beds of various kinds of useful clay; and I believe
that it would not be difficult to point out modes of employing it which
might enable us to turn nearly the whole of the south of England into a
brickfield, as we have already turned nearly the whole of the north
into a coal-pit. I say "nearly" the whole, because, as you are
doubtless aware, there are considerable districts in the south composed
of chalk renowned up to the present time for their downs and mutton.
But, I think, by examining carefully into the conceivable uses of
chalk, we might discover a quite feasible probability of turning all
the chalk districts into a limekiln, as we turn the clay districts into
a brickfield. There would then remain nothing but the mountain
districts to be dealt with; but, as we have not yet ascertained all the
uses of clay and chalk, still less have we ascertained those of stone;
and I think, by draining the useless inlets of the Cumberland, Welsh,
and Scotch lakes, and turning them, with their rivers, into navigable
reservoirs and canals, there would be no difficulty in working the
whole of our mountain districts as a gigantic quarry of slate and
granite, from which all the rest of the world might be supplied with
roofing and building stone.

Is this, then, what you want? You are going straight at it at present;
and I have only to ask under what limitations I am to conceive or
describe your final success? Or shall there be no limitations? There
are none to your powers; every day puts new machinery at your disposal,
and increases, with your capital, the vastness of your undertakings.
The changes in the state of this country are now so rapid, that it
would be wholly absurd to endeavour to lay down laws of art education
for it under its present aspect and circumstances; and therefore I must
necessarily ask, how much of it do you seriously intend within the next
fifty years to be coal-pit, brickfield, or quarry? For the sake of
distinctness of conclusion, I will suppose your success absolute: that
from shore to shore the whole of the island is to be set as thick with
chimneys as the masts stand in the docks of Liverpool: and there shall
be no meadows in it; no trees; no gardens; only a little corn grown
upon the housetops, reaped and threshed by steam: that you do not leave
even room for roads, but travel either over the roofs of your mills, on
viaducts; or under their floors, in tunnels: that, the smoke having
rendered the light of the sun unserviceable, you work always by the
light of your own gas: that no acre of English ground shall be without
its shaft and its engine; and therefore, no spot of English ground
left, on which it shall be possible to stand, without a definite and
calculable chance of being blown off it, at any moment, into small
pieces.

Under these circumstances, (if this is to be the future of England,) no
designing or any other development of beautiful art will be possible.
Do not vex your minds, nor waste your money with any thought or effort
in the matter. Beautiful art can only be produced by people who have
beautiful things about them, and leisure to look at them; and unless
you provide some elements of beauty for your workmen to be surrounded
by, you will find that no elements of beauty can be invented by them.

I was struck forcibly by the bearing of this great fact upon our modern
efforts at ornamentation in an afternoon walk, last week, in the
suburbs of one of our large manufacturing towns. I was thinking of the
difference in the effect upon the designer's mind, between the scene
which I then came upon, and the scene which would have presented itself
to the eyes of any designer of the middle ages, when he left his
workshop. Just outside the town I came upon an old English cottage, or
mansion, I hardly know which to call it, set close under the hill, and
beside the river, perhaps built somewhere in the Charles's time, with
mullioned windows and a low arched porch; round which, in the little
triangular garden, one can imagine the family as they used to sit in
old summer times, the ripple of the river heard faintly through the
sweetbrier hedge, and the sheep on the far-off wolds shining in the
evening sunlight. There, uninhabited for many and many a year, it had
been left in unregarded havoc of ruin; the garden-gate still swung
loose to its latch; the garden, blighted utterly into a field of ashes,
not even a weed taking root there; the roof torn into shapeless rents;
the shutters hanging about the windows in rags of rotten wood; before
its gate, the stream which had gladdened it now soaking slowly by,
black as ebony, and thick with curdling scum; the bank above it trodden
into unctuous, sooty slime: far in front of it, between it and the old
hills, the furnaces of the city foaming forth perpetual plague of
sulphurous darkness; the volumes of their storm clouds coiling low over
a waste of grassless fields, fenced from each other, not by hedges, but
by slabs of square stone, like gravestones, riveted together with iron.

That was your scene for the designer's contemplation in his afternoon
walk at Rochdale. Now fancy what was the scene which presented itself,
in his afternoon walk, to a designer of the Gothic school of Pisa--Nino
Pisano, or any of his men.

On each side of a bright river he saw rise a line of brighter palaces,
arched and pillared, and inlaid with deep red porphyry, and with
serpentine; along the quays before their gates were riding troops of
knights, noble in face and form, dazzling in crest and shield; horse
and man one labyrinth of quaint colour and gleaming light--the purple,
and silver, and scarlet fringes flowing over the strong limbs and
clashing mail, like sea-waves over rocks at sunset. Opening on each
side from the river were gardens, courts, and cloisters; long
successions of white pillars among wreaths of vine; leaping of
fountains through buds of pomegranate and orange: and still along the
garden-paths, and under and through the crimson of the pomegranate
shadows, moving slowly, groups of the fairest women that Italy ever
saw--fairest, because purest and thoughtfullest; trained in all high
knowledge, as in all courteous art--in dance, in song, in sweet wit, in
lofty learning, in loftier courage, in loftiest love--able alike to
cheer, to enchant, or save, the souls of men. Above all this scenery of
perfect human life, rose dome and bell-tower, burning with white
alabaster and gold; beyond dome and bell-tower the slopes of mighty
hills, hoary with olive; far in the north, above a purple sea of peaks
of solemn Apennine, the clear, sharp-cloven Carrara mountains sent up
their steadfast flames of marble summit into amber sky; the great sea
itself, scorching with expanse of light, stretching from their feet to
the Gorgonian isles; and over all these, ever present, near or far--
seen through the leaves of vine, or imaged with all its march of clouds
in the Arno's stream, or set with its depth of blue close against the
golden hair and burning cheek of lady and knight,--that untroubled and
sacred sky, which was to all men, in those days of innocent faith,
indeed the unquestioned abode of spirits, as the earth was of men; and
which opened straight through its gates of cloud and veils of dew into
the awfulness of the eternal world;--a heaven in which every cloud that
passed was literally the chariot of an angel, and every ray of its
Evening and Morning streamed from the throne of God.

What think you of that for a school of design?

I do not bring this contrast before you as a ground of hopelessness in
our task; neither do I look for any possible renovation of the Republic
of Pisa, at Bradford, in the nineteenth century; but I put it before
you in order that you may be aware precisely of the kind of difficulty
you have to meet, and may then consider with yourselves how far you can
meet it. To men surrounded by the depressing and monotonous
circumstances of English manufacturing life, depend upon it, design is
simply impossible. This is the most distinct of all the experiences I
have had in dealing with the modern workman. He is intelligent and
ingenious in the highest degree--subtle in touch and keen in sight: but
he is, generally speaking, wholly destitute of designing power. And if
you want to give him the power, you must give him the materials, and
put him in the circumstances for it. Design is not the offspring of
idle fancy: it is the studied result of accumulative observation and
delightful habit. Without observation and experience, no design--
without peace and pleasurableness in occupation, no design--and all the
lecturings, and teachings, and prizes, and principles of art, in the
world, are of no use, so long as you don't surround your men with happy
influences and beautiful things. It is impossible for them to have
right ideas about colour, unless they see the lovely colours of nature
unspoiled; impossible for them to supply beautiful incident and action
in their ornament, unless they see beautiful incident and action in the
world about them. Inform their minds, refine their habits, and you form
and refine their designs; but keep them illiterate, uncomfortable, and
in the midst of unbeautiful things, and whatever they do will still be
spurious, vulgar, and valueless.

I repeat, that I do not ask you nor wish you to build a new Pisa for
them. We don't want either the life or the decorations of the
thirteenth century back again; and the circumstances with which you
must surround your workmen are those simply of happy modern English
life, because the designs you have now to ask for from your workmen are
such as will make modern English life beautiful. All that gorgeousness
of the middle ages, beautiful as it sounds in description, noble as in
many respects it was in reality, had, nevertheless, for foundation and
for end, nothing but the pride of life--the pride of the so-called
superior classes; a pride which supported itself by violence and
robbery, and led in the end to the destruction both of the arts
themselves and the States in which they nourished.

The great lesson of history is, that all the fine arts hitherto--having
been supported by the selfish power of the noblesse, and never having
extended their range to the comfort or the relief of the mass of the
people--the arts, I say, thus practised, and thus matured, have only
accelerated the ruin of the States they adorned; and at the moment
when, in any kingdom, you point to the triumphs of its greatest
artists, you point also to the determined hour of the kingdom's
decline. The names of great painters are like passing bells: in the
name of Velasquez, you hear sounded the fall of Spain; in the name of
Titian, that of Venice; in the name of Leonardo, that of Milan; in the
name of Raphael, that of Rome. And there is profound justice in this;
for in proportion to the nobleness of the power is the guilt of its use
for purposes vain or vile; and hitherto the greater the art, the more
surely has it been used, and used solely, for the decoration of pride,
[Footnote:  Whether religious or profane pride,--chapel or banqueting
room,--is no matter.] or the provoking of sensuality. Another course
lies open to us. We may abandon the hope--or if you like the words
better--we may disdain the temptation, of the pomp and grace of Italy
in her youth. For us there can be no more the throne of marble--for us
no more the vault of gold--but for us there is the loftier and lovelier
privilege of bringing the power and charm of art within the reach of
the humble and the poor; and as the magnificence of past ages failed by
its narrowness and its pride, ours may prevail and continue, by its
universality and its lowliness.

And thus, between the picture of too laborious England, which we
imagined as future, and the picture of too luxurious Italy, which we
remember in the past, there may exist--there will exist, if we do our
duty--an intermediate condition, neither oppressed by labour nor wasted
in vanity--the condition of a peaceful and thoughtful temperance in
aims, and acts, and arts.

We are about to enter upon a period of our world's history in which
domestic life, aided by the arts of peace, will slowly, but at last
entirely, supersede public life and the arts of war. For our own
England, she will not, I believe, be blasted throughout with furnaces;
nor will she be encumbered with palaces. I trust she will keep her
green fields, her cottages, and her homes of middle life; but these
ought to be, and I trust will be enriched with a useful, truthful,
substantial form of art. We want now no more feasts of the gods, nor
martyrdoms of the saints; we have no need of sensuality, no place for
superstition, or for costly insolence. Let us have learned and faithful
historical painting--touching and thoughtful representations of human
nature, in dramatic painting; poetical and familiar renderings of
natural objects and of landscape; and rational, deeply-felt
realizations of the events which are the subjects of our religious
faith. And let these things we want, as far as possible, be scattered
abroad and made accessible to all men.

So also, in manufacture: we require work substantial rather than rich
in make; and refined, rather than splendid in design. Your stuffs need
not be such as would catch the eye of a duchess; but they should be
such as may at once serve the need, and refine the taste, of a
cottager. The prevailing error in English dress, especially among the
lower orders, is a tendency to flimsiness and gaudiness, arising mainly
from the awkward imitation of their superiors. [Footnote: If their
superiors would give them simplicity and economy to imitate, it would,
in the issue, be well for themselves, as well as for those whom they
guide. The typhoid fever of passion for dress, and all other display,
which has struck the upper classes of Europe at this time, is one of
the most dangerous political elements we have to deal with. Its
wickedness I have shown elsewhere (Polit. Economy of Art, p. 62, _et
seq._); but its wickedness is, in the minds of most persons, a
matter of no importance. I wish I had time also to show them its
danger. I cannot enter here into political investigation; but this is a
certain fact, that the wasteful and vain expenses at present indulged
in by the upper classes are hastening the advance of republicanism more
than any other element of modern change. No agitators, no clubs, no
epidemical errors, ever were, or will be, fatal to social order in any
nation. Nothing but the guilt of the upper classes, wanton,
accumulated, reckless, and merciless, ever overthrows them Of such
guilt they have now much to answer for--let them look to it in time.]
It should be one of the first objects of all manufacturers to produce
stuffs not only beautiful and quaint in design, but also adapted for
every-day service, and decorous in humble and secluded life. And you
must remember always that your business, as manufacturers, is to form
the market, as much as to supply it. If, in shortsighted and reckless
eagerness for wealth, you catch at every humour of the populace as it
shapes itself into momentary demand--if, in jealous rivalry with
neighbouring States, or with other producers, you try to attract
attention by singularities, novelties, and gaudinesses--to make every
design an advertisement, and pilfer every idea of a successful
neighbour's, that you may insidiously imitate it, or pompously eclipse
--no good design will ever be possible to you, or perceived by you. You
may, by accident, snatch the market; or, by energy, command it; you may
obtain the confidence of the public, and cause the ruin of opponent
houses; or you may, with equal justice of fortune, be ruined by them.
But whatever happens to you, this, at least, is certain, that the whole
of your life will have been spent in corrupting public taste and
encouraging public extravagance. Every preference you have won by
gaudiness must have been based on the purchaser's vanity; every demand
you have created by novelty has fostered in the consumer a habit of
discontent; and when you retire into inactive life, you may, as a
subject of consolation for your declining years, reflect that precisely
according to the extent of your past operations, your life has been
successful in retarding the arts,--tarnishing the virtues, and
confusing the manners of your country.

But, on the other hand, if you resolve from the first that, so far as
you can ascertain or discern what is best, you will produce what is
best, on an intelligent consideration of the probable tendencies and
possible tastes of the people whom you supply, you may literally become
more influential for all kinds of good than many lecturers on art, or
many treatise-writers on morality. Considering the materials dealt
with, and the crude state of art knowledge at the time, I do not know
that any more wide or effective influence in public taste was ever
exercised than that of the Staffordshire manufacture of pottery under
William Wedgwood, and it only rests with the manufacturer in every
other business to determine whether he will, in like manner, make his
wares educational instruments, or mere drugs of the market. You all
should, be, in a certain sense, authors: you must, indeed, first catch
the public eye, as an author must the public ear; but once gain your
audience, or observance, and as it is in the writer's power
thenceforward to publish what will educate as it amuses--so it is in
yours to publish what will educate as it adorns. Nor is this surely a
subject of poor ambition. I hear it said continually that men are too
ambitious: alas! to me, it seems they are never enough ambitious. How
many are content to be merely the thriving merchants of a state, when
they might be its guides, counsellors, and rulers--wielding powers of
subtle but gigantic beneficence, in restraining its follies while they
supplied its wants. Let such duty, such ambition, be once accepted in
their fulness, and the best glory of European art and of European
manufacture may yet be to come. The paintings of Raphael and of
Buonaroti gave force to the falsehoods of superstition, and majesty to
the imaginations of sin; but the arts of England may have, for their
task, to inform the soul with truth, and touch the heart with
compassion. The steel of Toledo and the silk of Genoa did but give
strength to oppression and lustre to pride: let it be for the furnace
and for the loom of England, as they have already richly earned, still
more abundantly to bestow, comfort on the indigent, civilization on the
rude, and to dispense, through the peaceful homes of nations, the grace
and the preciousness of simple adornment, and useful possession.




LECTURE IV.

INFLUENCE OF IMAGINATION IN ARCHITECTURE

_An Address Delivered to the Members of the Architectural
Association, in Lyon's Inn Hall, 1857._


If we were to be asked abruptly, and required to answer briefly, what
qualities chiefly distinguish great artists from feeble artists, we
should answer, I suppose, first, their sensibility and tenderness;
secondly, their imagination; and thirdly, their industry. Some of us
might, perhaps, doubt the justice of attaching so much importance to
this last character, because we have all known clever men who were
indolent, and dull men who were industrious. But though you may have
known clever men who were indolent, you never knew a great man who was
so; and, during such investigation as I have been able to give to the
lives of the artists whose works are in all points noblest, no fact
ever looms so large upon me--no law remains so steadfast in the
universality of its application, as the fact and law that they are all
great workers: nothing concerning them is matter of more astonishment
than the quantity they have accomplished in the given length of their
life; and when I hear a young man spoken of, as giving promise of high
genius, the first question I ask about him is always--

Does he work?

But though this quality of industry is essential to an artist, it does
not in anywise make an artist; many people are busy, whose doings are
little worth. Neither does sensibility make an artist; since, as I
hope, many can feel both strongly and nobly, who yet care nothing about
art. But the gifts which distinctively mark the artist--_without_
which he must be feeble in life, forgotten in death--_with_ which
he may become one of the shakers of the earth, and one of the signal
lights in heaven--are those of sympathy and imagination. I will not
occupy your time, nor incur the risk of your dissent, by endeavouring
to give any close definition of this last word. We all have a general
and sufficient idea of imagination, and of its work with our hands and
in our hearts: we understand it, I suppose, as the imaging or picturing
of new things in our thoughts; and we always show an involuntary
respect for this power, wherever we can recognize it, acknowledging it
to be a greater power than manipulation, or calculation, or
observation, or any other human faculty. If we see an old woman
spinning at the fireside, and distributing her thread dexterously from
the distaff, we respect her for her manipulation--if we ask her how
much she expects to make in a year, and she answers quickly, we respect
her for her calculation--if she is watching at the same time that none
of her grandchildren fall into the fire, we respect her for her
observation--yet for all this she may still be a commonplace old woman
enough. But if she is all the time telling her grandchildren a fairy
tale out of her head, we praise her for her imagination, and say, she
must be a rather remarkable old woman. Precisely in like manner, if an
architect does his working-drawing well, we praise him for his
manipulation--if he keeps closely within his contract, we praise him
for his honest arithmetic--if he looks well to the laying of his beams,
so that nobody shall drop through the floor, we praise him for his
observation. But he must, somehow, tell us a fairy tale out of his head
beside all this, else we cannot praise him for his imagination, nor
speak of him as we did of the old woman, as being in any wise out of
the common way, a rather remarkable architect. It seemed to me,
therefore, as if it might interest you to-night, if we were to consider
together what fairy tales are, in and by architecture, to be told--what
there is for you to do in this severe art of yours "out of your heads,"
as well as by your hands.

Perhaps the first idea which a young architect is apt to be allured by,
as a head-problem in these experimental days, is its being incumbent
upon him to invent a "new style" worthy of modern civilization in
general, and of England in particular; a style worthy of our engines
and telegraphs; as expansive as steam, and as sparkling as electricity.

But, if there are any of my hearers who have been impressed with this
sense of inventive duty, may I ask them first, whether their plan is
that every inventive architect among us shall invent a new style for
himself, and have a county set aside for his conceptions, or a province
for his practice? Or, must every architect invent a little piece of the
new style, and all put it together at last like a dissected map? And if
so, when the new style is invented, what is to be done next? I will
grant you this Eldorado of imagination--but can you have more than one
Columbus? Or, if you sail in company, and divide the prize of your
discovery and the honour thereof, who is to come after you clustered
Columbuses? to what fortunate islands of style are your architectural
descendants to sail, avaricious of new lands? When our desired style is
invented, will not the best we can all do be simply--to build in it?--
and cannot you now do that in styles that are known? Observe, I grant,
for the sake of your argument, what perhaps many of you know that I
would not grant otherwise--that a new style _can_ be invented. I
grant you not only this, but that it shall be wholly different from any
that was ever practised before. We will suppose that capitals are to be
at the bottom of pillars instead of the top; and that buttresses shall
be on the tops of pinnacles instead of at the bottom; that you roof
your apertures with stones which shall neither be arched nor
horizontal; and that you compose your decoration of lines which shall
neither be crooked nor straight. The furnace and the forge shall be at
your service: you shall draw out your plates of glass and beat out your
bars of iron till you have encompassed us all,--if your style is of the
practical kind,--with endless perspective of black skeleton and
blinding square,--or if your style is to be of the ideal kind--you
shall wreathe your streets with ductile leafage, and roof them with
variegated crystal--you shall put, if you will, all London under one
blazing dome of many colours that shall light the clouds round it with
its flashing, as far as to the sea. And still, I ask you, What after
this? Do you suppose those imaginations of yours will ever lie down
there asleep beneath the shade of your iron leafage, or within the
coloured light of your enchanted dome? Not so. Those souls, and
fancies, and ambitions of yours, are wholly infinite; and, whatever may
be done by others, you will still want to do something for yourselves;
if you cannot rest content with Palladio, neither will you with Paxton:
all the metal and glass that ever were melted have not so much weight
in them as will clog the wings of one human spirit's aspiration.

If you will think over this quietly by yourselves, and can get the
noise out of your ears of the perpetual, empty, idle, incomparably
idiotic talk about the necessity of some novelty in architecture, you
will soon see that the very essence of a Style, properly so called, is
that it should be practised _for ages_, and applied to all
purposes; and that so long as any given style is in practice, all that
is left for individual imagination to accomplish must be within the
scope of that style, not in the invention of a new one. If there are
any here, therefore, who hope to obtain celebrity by the invention of
some strange way of building which must convince all Europe into its
adoption, to them, for the moment, I must not be understood to address
myself, but only to those who would be content with that degree of
celebrity which an artist may enjoy who works in the manner of his
forefathers;--which the builder of Salisbury Cathedral might enjoy in
England, though he did not invent Gothic; and which Titian might enjoy
at Venice, though he did not invent oil painting. Addressing myself
then to those humbler, but wiser, or rather, only wise students who are
content to avail themselves of some system of building already
understood, let us consider together what room for the exercise of the
imagination may be left to us under such conditions. And, first, I
suppose it will be said, or thought, that the architect's principal
field for exercise of his invention must be in the disposition of
lines, mouldings, and masses, in agreeable proportions. Indeed, if you
adopt some styles of architecture, you cannot exercise invention in any
other way. And I admit that it requires genius and special gift to do
this rightly. Not by rule, nor by study, can the gift of graceful
proportionate design be obtained; only by the intuition of genius can
so much as a single tier of façade be beautifully arranged; and the man
has just cause for pride, as far as our gifts can ever be a cause for
pride, who finds himself able, in a design of his own, to rival even
the simplest arrangement of parts in one by Sanmicheli, Inigo Jones, or
Christopher Wren.

Invention, then, and genius being granted, as necessary to accomplish
this, let me ask you, What, after all, with this special gift and
genius, you _have_ accomplished, when you have arranged the lines
of a building beautifully?

In the first place you will not, I think, tell me that the beauty there
attained is of a touching or pathetic kind. A well-disposed group of
notes in music will make you sometimes weep and sometimes laugh. You
can express the depth of all affections by those dispositions of sound:
you can give courage to the soldier, language to the lover, consolation
to the mourner, more joy to the joyful, more humility to the devout.
Can you do as much by your group of lines? Do you suppose the front of
Whitehall, a singularly beautiful one ever inspires the two Horse
Guards, during the hour they sit opposite to it, with military ardour?
Do you think that the lovers in our London walk down to the front of
Whitehall for consolation when mistresses are unkind; or that any
person wavering in duty, or feeble in faith, was ever confirmed in
purpose or in creed by the pathetic appeal of those harmonious
architraves? You will not say so. Then, if they cannot touch, or
inspire, or comfort any one, can your architectural proportions amuse
any one? Christmas is just over; you have doubtless been at many merry
parties during the period. Can you remember any in which architectural
proportions contributed to the entertainment of the evening?
Proportions of notes in music were, I am sure, essential to your
amusement; the setting of flowers in hair, and of ribands on dresses,
were also subjects of frequent admiration with you, not inessential to
your happiness. Among the juvenile members of your society the
proportion of currants in cake, and of sugar in comfits, became
subjects of acute interest; and, when such proportions were harmonious,
motives also of gratitude to cook and to confectioner. But did you ever
see either young or old amused by the architrave of the door? Or
otherwise interested in the proportions of the room than as they
admitted more or fewer friendly faces? Nay, if all the amusement that
there is in the best proportioned architecture of London could be
concentrated into one evening, and you were to issue tickets for
nothing to this great proportional entertainment;--how do you think it
would stand between you and the Drury pantomine?

You are, then, remember, granted to be people of genius--great and
admirable; and you devote your lives to your art, but you admit that
you cannot comfort anybody, you cannot encourage anybody, you cannot
improve anybody, and you cannot amuse anybody. I proceed then farther
to ask, Can you inform anybody? Many sciences cannot be considered as
highly touching or emotional; nay, perhaps not specially amusing;
scientific men may sometimes, in these respects, stand on the same
ground with you. As far as we can judge by the results of the late war,
science helps our soldiers about as much as the front of Whitehall; and
at the Christmas parties, the children wanted no geologists to tell
them about the behaviour of bears and dragons in Queen Elizabeth's
time. Still, your man of science teaches you something; he may be dull
at a party, or helpless in a battle, he is not always that; but he can
give you, at all events, knowledge of noble facts, and open to you the
secrets of the earth and air. Will your architectural proportions do as
much? Your genius is granted, and your life is given, and what do you
teach us?--Nothing, I believe, from one end of that life to the other,
but that two and two make four, and that one is to two as three is to
six.

You cannot, then, it is admitted, comfort any one, serve or amuse any
one, nor teach any one. Finally, I ask, Can you be of _Use_ to any
one? "Yes," you reply; "certainly we are of some use--we architects--in
a climate like this, where it always rains." You are of use certainly;
but, pardon me, only as builders--not as proportionalists. We are not
talking of building as a protection, but only of that special work
which your genius is to do; not of building substantial and comfortable
houses like Mr. Cubitt, but of putting beautiful façades on them like
Inigo Jones. And, again, I ask--Are you of use to any one? Will your
proportions of the façade heal the sick, or clothe the naked? Supposing
you devoted your lives to be merchants, you might reflect at the close
of them, how many, fainting for want, you had brought corn to sustain;
how many, infected with disease, you had brought balms to heal; how
widely, among multitudes of far-away nations, you had scattered the
first seeds of national power, and guided the first rays of sacred
light. Had you been, in fine, _anything_ else in the world
_but_ architectural designers, you might have been of some use or
good to people. Content to be petty tradesmen, you would have saved the
time of mankind;--rough-handed daily labourers, you would have added to
their stock of food or of clothing. But, being men of genius, and
devoting your lives to the exquisite exposition of this genius, on what
achievements do you think the memories of your old age are to fasten?
Whose gratitude will surround you with its glow, or on what
accomplished good, of that greatest kind for which men show _no_
gratitude, will your life rest the contentment of its close? Truly, I
fear that the ghosts of proportionate lines will be thin phantoms at
your bedsides--very speechless to you; and that on all the emanations
of your high genius you will look back with less delight than you might
have done on a cup of cold water given to him who was thirsty, or to a
single moment when you had "prevented with your bread him that fled."

Do not answer, nor think to answer, that with your great works and
great payments of workmen in them, you would do this; I know you would,
and will, as Builders; but, I repeat, it is not your _building_
that I am talking about, but your _brains_; it is your invention
and imagination of whose profit I am speaking. The good done through
the building, observe, is done by your employers, not by you--you share
in the benefit of it. The good that _you_ personally must do is by
your designing; and I compare you with musicians who do good by their
pathetic composing, not as they do good by employing fiddlers in the
orchestra; for it is the public who in reality do that, not the
musicians. So clearly keeping to this one question, what good we
architects are to do by our genius; and having found that on our
proportionate system we can do no good to others, will you tell me,
lastly, what good we can do to _ourselves_?

Observe, nearly every other liberal art or profession has some intense
pleasure connected with it, irrespective of any good to others. As
lawyers, or physicians, or clergymen, you would have the pleasure of
investigation, and of historical reading, as part of your work: as men
of science you would be rejoicing in curiosity perpetually gratified
respecting the laws and facts of nature: as artists you would have
delight in watching the external forms of nature: as day labourers or
petty tradesmen, supposing you to undertake such work with as much
intellect as you are going to devote to your designing, you would find
continued subjects of interest in the manufacture or the agriculture
which you helped to improve; or in the problems of commerce which bore
on your business. But your architectural designing leads you into no
pleasant journeys,--into no seeing of lovely things,--no discerning of
just laws,--no warmths of compassion, no humilities of veneration, no
progressive state of sight or soul. Our conclusion is--must be--that
you will not amuse, nor inform, nor help anybody; you will not amuse,
nor better, nor inform yourselves; you will sink into a state in which
you can neither show, nor feel, nor see, anything, but that one is to
two as three is to six. And in that state what should we call
ourselves? Men? I think not. The right name for us would be--numerators
and denominators. Vulgar Fractions.

Shall we, then, abandon this theory of the soul of architecture being
in proportional lines, and look whether we can find anything better to
exert our fancies upon?

May we not, to begin with, accept this great principle--that, as our
bodies, to be in health, must be _generally_ exercised, so our
minds, to be in health, must be _generally_ cultivated? You would
not call a man healthy who had strong arms but was paralytic in his
feet; nor one who could walk well, but had no use of his hands; nor one
who could see well, if he could not hear. You would not voluntarily
reduce your bodies to any such partially developed state. Much more,
then, you would not, if you could help it, reduce your minds to it.
Now, your minds are endowed with a vast number of gifts of totally
different uses--limbs of mind as it were, which, if you don't exercise,
you cripple. One is curiosity; that is a gift, a capacity of pleasure
in knowing; which if you destroy, you make yourselves cold and dull.
Another is sympathy; the power of sharing in the feelings of living
creatures, which if you destroy, you make yourselves hard and cruel.
Another of your limbs of mind is admiration; the power of enjoying
beauty or ingenuity, which, if you destroy, you make yourselves base
and irreverent. Another is wit; or the power of playing with the lights
on the many sides of truth; which if you destroy, you make yourselves
gloomy, and less useful and cheering to others than you might be. So
that in choosing your way of work it should be your aim, as far as
possible, to bring out all these faculties, as far as they exist in
you; not one merely, nor another, but all of them. And the way to bring
them out, is simply to concern yourselves attentively with the subjects
of each faculty. To cultivate sympathy you must be among living
creatures, and thinking about them; and to cultivate admiration, you
must be among beautiful things and looking at them.

All this sounds much like truism, at least I hope it does, for then you
will surely not refuse to act upon it; and to consider farther, how, as
architects, you are to keep yourselves in contemplation of living
creatures and lovely things.

You all probably know the beautiful photographs which have been
published within the last year or two of the porches of the Cathedral
of Amiens. I hold one of these up to you, (merely that you may know
what I am talking about, as of course you cannot see the detail at this
distance, but you will recognise the subject.) Have you ever considered
how much sympathy, and how much humour, are developed in filling this
single doorway [Footnote: The tympanum of the south transcept door; it
is to be found generally among all collections of architectural
photographs] with these sculptures of the history of St. Honoré (and,
by the way, considering how often we English are now driving up and
down the Rue St. Honoré, we may as well know as much of the saint as
the old architect cared to tell us). You know in all legends of saints
who ever were bishops, the first thing you are told of them is that
they didn't want to be bishops. So here is St. Honoré, who doesn't want
to be a bishop, sitting sulkily in the corner; he hugs his book with
both hands, and won't get up to take his crosier; and here are all the
city aldermen of Amiens come to _poke_ him up; and all the monks
in the town in a great puzzle what they shall do for a bishop if St.
Honoré won't be; and here's one of the monks in the opposite corner who
is quite cool about it, and thinks they'll get on well enough without
St Honoré,--you see that in his face perfectly. At last St. Honoré
consents to be bishop, and here he sits in a throne, and has his book
now grandly on his desk instead of his knees, and he directs one of his
village curates how to find relics in a wood; here is the wood, and
here is the village curate, and here are the tombs, with the bones of
St. Victorien and Gentien in them.

After this, St. Honoré performs grand mass, and the miracle occurs of
the appearance of a hand blessing the wafer, which occurrence
afterwards was painted for the arms of the abbey. Then St. Honoré dies;
and here is his tomb with his statue on the top; and miracles are being
performed at it--a deaf man having his ear touched, and a blind man
groping his way up to the tomb with his dog. Then here is a great
procession in honour of the relics of St. Honoré; and under his coffin
are some cripples being healed; and the coffin itself is put above the
bar which separates the cross from the lower subjects, because the
tradition is that the figure on the crucifix of the Church of St.
Firmin bowed its head in token of acceptance, as the relics of St.
Honoré passed beneath.

Now just consider the amount of sympathy with human nature, and
observance of it, shown in this one bas-relief; the sympathy with
disputing monks, with puzzled aldermen, with melancholy recluse, with
triumphant prelate, with palsy-stricken poverty, with ecclesiastical
magnificence, or miracle-working faith. Consider how much intellect was
needed in the architect, and how much observance of nature before he
could give the expression to these various figures--cast these
multitudinous draperies--design these rich and quaint fragments of
tombs and altars--weave with perfect animation the entangled branches
of the forest.

But you will answer me, all this is not architecture at all--it is
sculpture. Will you then tell me precisely where the separation exists
between one and the other? We will begin at the very beginning. I will
show you a piece of what you will certainly admit to be a piece of pure
architecture; [Footnote: See Appendix III., "Classical Architecture."]
it is drawn on the back of another photograph, another of these
marvellous tympana from Notre Dame, which you call, I suppose, impure.
Well, look on this picture, and on this. Don't laugh; you must not
laugh, that's very improper of you, this is classical architecture. I
have taken it out of the essay on that subject in the "Encyclopædia
Britannica."

Yet I suppose none of you would think yourselves particularly ingenious
architects if you had designed nothing more than this; nay, I will even
let you improve it into any grand proportion you choose, and add to it
as many windows as you choose; the only thing I insist upon in our
specimen of pure architecture is, that there shall be no mouldings nor
ornaments upon it. And I suspect you don't quite like your architecture
so "pure" as this. We want a few mouldings, you will say--just a few.
Those who want mouldings, hold up their hands. We are unanimous, I
think. Will, you, then, design the profiles of these mouldings
yourselves, or will you copy them? If you wish to copy them, and to
copy them always, of course I leave you at once to your authorities,
and your imaginations to their repose. But if you wish to design them
yourselves, how do you do it? You draw the profile according to your
taste, and you order your mason to cut it. Now, will you tell me the
logical difference between drawing the profile of a moulding and giving
_that_ to be cut, and drawing the folds of the drapery of a statue
and giving _those_ to be cut. The last is much more difficult to
do than the first; but degrees of difficulty constitute no specific
difference, and you will not accept it, surely, as a definition of the
difference between architecture and sculpture, that "architecture is
doing anything that is easy, and sculpture anything that is difficult."

It is true, also, that the carved moulding represents nothing, and the
carved drapery represents something; but you will not, I should think,
accept, as an explanation of the difference between architecture and
sculpture, this any more than the other, that "sculpture is art which
has meaning, and architecture art which has none."

Where, then, is your difference? In this, perhaps, you will say; that
whatever ornaments we can direct ourselves, and get accurately cut to
order, we consider architectural. The ornaments that we are obliged to
leave to the pleasure of the workman, or the superintendence of some 
other designer, we consider sculptural, especially if they are more or
less extraneous and incrusted--not an essential part of the building.

Accepting this definition, I am compelled to reply, that it is in
effect nothing more than an amplification of my first one--that
whatever is easy you call architecture, whatever is difficult you call
sculpture. For you cannot suppose the arrangement of the place in which
the sculpture is to be put is so difficult or so great a part of the
design as the sculpture itself. For instance: you all know the pulpit
of Niccolo Pisano, in the baptistry at Pisa. It is composed of seven
rich _relievi_, surrounded by panel mouldings, and sustained on
marble shafts. Do you suppose Niccolo Pisano's reputation--such part of
it at least as rests on this pulpit (and much does)--depends on the
panel mouldings, or on the relievi? The panel mouldings are by his
hand; he would have disdained to leave even them to a common workman;
but do you think he found any difficulty in them, or thought there was
any credit in them? Having once done the sculpture, those enclosing
lines were mere child's play to him; the determination of the diameter
of shafts and height of capitals was an affair of minutes; his
_work_ was in carving the Crucifixion and the Baptism.

Or, again, do you recollect Orcagna's tabernacle in the church of San
Michele, at Florence? That, also, consists of rich and multitudinous
bas-reliefs, enclosed in panel mouldings, with shafts of mosaic, and
foliated arches sustaining the canopy. Do you think Orcagna, any more
than Pisano, if his spirit could rise in the midst of us at this
moment, would tell us that he had trusted his fame to the foliation, or
had put his soul's pride into the panelling? Not so; he would tell you
that his spirit was in the stooping figures that stand round the couch
of the dying Virgin.

Or, lastly, do you think the man who designed the procession on the
portal of Amiens was the subordinate workman? that there was an
architect over _him_, restraining him within certain limits, and
ordering of him his bishops at so much a mitre, and his cripples at so
much a crutch? Not so. _Here_, on this sculptured shield, rests
the Master's hand; _this_ is the centre of the Master's thought;
from this, and in subordination to this, waved the arch and sprang the
pinnacle. Having done this, and being able to give human expression and
action to the stone, all the rest--the rib, the niche, the foil, the
shaft--were mere toys to his hand and accessories to his conception:
and if once you also gain the gift of doing this, if once you can carve
one fronton such as you have here, I tell you, you would be able--so
far as it depended on your invention--to scatter cathedrals over
England as fast as clouds rise from its streams after summer rain.

Nay, but perhaps you answer again, our sculptors at present do not
design cathedrals, and could not. No, they could not; but that is
merely because we have made architecture so dull that they cannot take
any interest in it, and, therefore, do not care to add to their higher
knowledge the poor and common knowledge of principles of building. You
have thus separated building from sculpture, and you have taken away
the power of both; for the sculptor loses nearly as much by never
having room for the development of a continuous work, as you do from
having reduced your work to a continuity of mechanism. You are
essentially, and should always be, the same body of men, admitting only
such difference in operation as there is between the work of a painter
at different times, who sometimes labours on a small picture, and
sometimes on the frescoes of a palace gallery.

This conclusion, then, we arrive at, _must_ arrive at; the fact
being irrevocably so:--that in order to give your imagination and the
other powers of your souls full play, you must do as all the great
architects of old time did--you must yourselves be your sculptors.
Phidias, Michael Angelo, Orcagna, Pisano, Giotto,--which of these men,
do you think, could not use his chisel? You say, "It is difficult;
quite out of your way." I know it is; nothing that is great is easy;
and nothing that is great, so long as you study building without
sculpture, can be _in_ your way. I want to put it in your way, and
you to find your way to it. But, on the other hand, do not shrink from
the task as if the refined art of perfect sculpture were always
required from you. For, though architecture and sculpture are not
separate arts, there is an architectural _manner_ of sculpture;
and it is, in the majority of its applications, a comparatively easy
one. Our great mistake at present, in dealing with stone at all, is
requiring to have all our work too refined; it is just the same mistake
as if we were to require all our book illustrations to be as fine work
as Raphael's. John Leech does not sketch so well as Leonardo da Vinci;
but do you think that the public could easily spare him; or that he is
wrong in bringing out his talent in the way in which it is most
effective? Would you advise him, if he asked your advice, to give up
his wood-blocks and take to canvas? I know you would not; neither would
you tell him, I believe, on the other hand, that because he could not
draw as well as Leonardo, therefore he ought to draw nothing but
straight lines with a ruler, and circles with compasses, and no figure-
subjects at all. That would be some loss to you; would it not? You
would all be vexed if next week's _Punch_ had nothing in it but
proportionate lines. And yet, do not you see that you are doing
precisely the same thing with _your_ powers of sculptural design
that he would be doing with his powers of pictorial design, if he gave
you nothing but such lines. You feel that you cannot carve like
Phidias; therefore you will not carve at all, but only draw mouldings;
and thus all that intermediate power which is of especial value in
modern days,--that popular power of expression which is within the
attainment of thousands,--and would address itself to tens of
thousands,--is utterly lost to us in stone, though in ink and paper it
has become one of the most desired luxuries of modern civilization.

Here, then, is one part of the subject to which I would especially
invite your attention, namely, the distinctive character which may be
wisely permitted to belong to architectural sculpture, as distinguished
from perfect sculpture on one side, and from mere geometrical
decoration on the other.

And first, observe what an indulgence we have in the distance at which
most work is to be seen. Supposing we were able to carve eyes and lips
with the most exquisite precision, it would all be of no use as soon as
the work was put far above the eye; but, on the other hand, as beauties
disappear by being far withdrawn, so will faults; and the mystery and
confusion which are the natural consequence of distance, while they
would often render your best skill but vain, will as often render your
worst errors of little consequence; nay, more than this, often a deep
cut, or a rude angle, will produce in certain positions an effect of
expression both startling and true, which you never hoped for. Not that
mere distance will give animation to the work, if it has none in
itself; but if it has life at all, the distance will make that life
more perceptible and powerful by softening the defects of execution. So 
that you are placed, as workmen, in this position of singular
advantage, that you may give your fancies free play, and strike hard
for the expression that you want, knowing that, if you miss it, no one
will detect you; if you at all touch it, nature herself will help you,
and with every changing shadow and basking sunbeam bring forth new
phases of your fancy.

But it is not merely this privilege of being imperfect which belongs to
architectural sculpture. It has a true privilege of imagination, far
excelling all that can be granted to the more finished work, which, for
the sake of distinction, I will call,--and I don't think we can have a
much better term--"furniture sculpture;" sculpture, that is, which can
be moved from place to furnish rooms.

For observe, to that sculpture the spectator is usually brought in a
tranquil or prosaic state of mind; he sees it associated rather with
what is sumptuous than sublime, and under circumstances which address
themselves more to his comfort than his curiosity. The statue which is
to be pathetic, seen between the flashes of footmen's livery round the
dining-table, must have strong elements of pathos in itself; and the
statue which is to be awful, in the midst of the gossip of the drawing-
room, must have the elements of awe wholly in itself. But the spectator
is brought to _your_ work already in an excited and imaginative
mood. He has been impressed by the cathedral wall as it loomed over the
low streets, before he looks up to the carving of its porch--and his
love of mystery has been touched by the silence and the shadows of the
cloister, before he can set himself to decipher the bosses on its
vaulting. So that when once he begins to observe your doings, he will
ask nothing better from you, nothing kinder from you, than that you
would meet this imaginative temper of his half way;--that you would
farther touch the sense of terror, or satisfy the expectation of things
strange, which have been prompted by the mystery or the majesty of the
surrounding scene. And thus, your leaving forms more or less undefined,
or carrying out your fancies, however extravagant, in grotesqueness of
shadow or shape, will be for the most part in accordance with the
temper of the observer; and he is likely, therefore, much more
willingly to use his fancy to help your meanings, than his judgment to
detect your faults.

Again. Remember that when the imagination and feelings are strongly
excited, they will not only bear with strange things, but they will
_look_ into _minute_ things with a delight quite unknown in
hours of tranquillity. You surely must remember moments of your lives
in which, under some strong excitement of feeling, all the details of
visible objects presented themselves with a strange intensity and
insistance, whether you would or no; urging themselves upon the mind,
and thrust upon the eye, with a force of fascination which you could
not refuse. Now, to a certain extent, the senses get into this state
whenever the imagination is strongly excited. Things trivial at other
times assume a dignity or significance which we cannot explain; but
which is only the more attractive because inexplicable: and the powers
of attention, quickened by the feverish excitement, fasten and feed
upon the minutest circumstances of detail, and remotest traces of
intention. So that what would at other times be felt as more or less
mean or extraneous in a work of sculpture, and which would assuredly be
offensive to the perfect taste in its moments of languor, or of
critical judgment, will be grateful, and even sublime, when it meets
this frightened inquisitiveness, this fascinated watchfulness, of the
roused imagination. And this is all for your advantage; for, in the
beginnings of your sculpture, you will assuredly find it easier to
imitate minute circumstances of costume or character, than to perfect
the anatomy of simple forms or the flow of noble masses; and it will be
encouraging to remember that the grace you cannot perfect, and the
simplicity you cannot achieve, would be in great part vain, even if you
could achieve them, in their appeal to the hasty curiosity of
passionate fancy; but that the sympathy which would be refused to your
science will be granted to your innocence: and that the mind of the
general observer, though wholly unaffected by the correctness of
anatomy or propriety of gesture, will follow you with fond and pleased
concurrence, as you carve the knots of the hair, and the patterns of
the vesture.

Farther yet. We are to remember that not only do the associated
features of the larger architecture tend to excite the strength of
fancy, but the architectural laws to which you are obliged to submit 
your decoration stimulate its _ingenuity_. Every crocket which you
are to crest with sculpture,--every foliation which you have to fill,
presents itself to the spectator's fancy, not only as a pretty thing,
but as a _problematic_ thing. It contained, he perceives
immediately, not only a beauty which you wished to display, but a
necessity which you were forced to meet; and the problem, how to occupy
such and such a space with organic form in any probable way, or how to
turn such a boss or ridge into a conceivable image of life, becomes at
once, to him as to you, a matter of amusement as much as of admiration.
The ordinary conditions of perfection in form, gesture, or feature, are
willingly dispensed with, when the ugly dwarf and ungainly goblin have
only to gather themselves into angles, or crouch to carry corbels; and
the want of skill which, in other kinds of work would have been
required for the finishing of the parts, will at once be forgiven here,
if you have only disposed ingeniously what you have executed roughly,
and atoned for the rudeness of your hands by the quickness of your
wits.

Hitherto, however, we have been considering only the circumstances in
architecture favourable to the development of the _powers_ of
imagination. A yet more important point for us seems, to me, the place
which it gives to all the _objects_ of imagination.

For, I suppose, you will not wish me to spend any time in proving, that
imagination must be vigorous in proportion to the quantity of material
which it has to handle; and that, just as we increase the range of what
we see, we increase the richness of what we can imagine. Granting this,
consider what a field is opened to your fancy merely in the subject
matter which architecture admits. Nearly every other art is severely
limited in its subjects--the landscape painter, for instance, gets
little help from the aspects of beautiful humanity; the historical
painter, less, perhaps, than he ought, from the accidents of wild
nature; and the pure sculptor, still less, from the minor details of
common life. But is there anything within range of sight, or
conception, which may not be of use to _you_, or in which your
interest may not be excited with advantage to your art? From visions of
angels, down to the least important gesture of a child at play,
whatever may be conceived of Divine, or beheld of Human, may be dared
or adopted by you: throughout the kingdom of animal life, no creature
is so vast, or so minute, that you cannot deal with it, or bring it
into service; the lion and the crocodile will couch about your shafts;
the moth and the bee will sun themselves upon your flowers; for you,
the fawn will leap; for you, the snail be slow; for you, the dove
smooth her bosom; and the hawk spread her wings toward the south. All
the wide world of vegetation blooms and bends for you; the leaves
tremble that you may bid them be still under the marble snow; the thorn
and the thistle, which the earth casts forth as evil, are to you the
kindliest servants; no dying petal, nor drooping tendril, is so feeble
as to have no more help for you; no robed pride of blossom so kingly,
but it will lay aside its purple to receive at your hands the pale
immortality. Is there anything in common life too mean,--in common too
trivial,--to be ennobled by your touch? As there is nothing in life, so
there is nothing in lifelessness which has not its lesson for you, or
its gift; and when you are tired of watching the strength of the plume,
and the tenderness of the leaf, you may walk down to your rough river
shore, or into the thickest markets of your thoroughfares, and there is
not a piece of torn cable that will not twine into a perfect moulding;
there is not a fragment of cast-away matting, or shattered basket-work,
that will not work into a chequer or capital. Yes: and if you gather up
the very sand, and break the stone on which you tread, among its
fragments of all but invisible shells you will find forms that will
take their place, and that proudly, among the starred traceries of your
vaulting; and you, who can crown the mountain with its fortress, and
the city with its towers, are thus able also to give beauty to ashes,
and worthiness to dust.

Now, in that your art presents all this material to you, you have
already much to rejoice in. But you have more to rejoice in, because
all this is submitted to you, not to be dissected or analyzed, but to
be sympathized with, and to bring out, therefore, what may be
accurately called the moral part of imagination. We saw that, if we
kept ourselves among lines only, we should have cause to envy the
naturalist, because he was conversant with facts; but you will have
little to envy now, if you make yourselves conversant with the feelings
that arise out of his facts. For instance, the naturalist coming upon a
block of marble, has to begin considering immediately how far its
purple is owing to iron, or its whiteness to magnesia; he breaks his
piece of marble, and at the close of his day, has nothing but a little
sand in his crucible and some data added to the theory of the elements.
But _you_ approach your marble to sympathize with it, and rejoice
over its beauty. You cut it a little indeed; but only to bring out its
veins more perfectly; and at the end of your day's work you leave your
marble shaft with joy and complacency in its perfectness, as marble.
When you have to watch an animal instead of a stone, you differ from
the naturalist in the same way. He may, perhaps, if he be an amiable
naturalist, take delight in having living creatures round him;--still,
the major part of his work is, or has been, in counting feathers,
separating fibres, and analyzing structures. But _your_ work is
always with the living creature; the thing you have to get at in him is
his life, and ways of going about things. It does not matter to you how
many cells there are in his bones, or how many filaments in his
feathers; what you want is his moral character and way of behaving
himself; it is just that which your imagination, if healthy, will first
seize--just that which your chisel, if vigorous, will first cut. You
must get the storm spirit into your eagles, and the lordliness into
your lions, and the tripping fear into your fawns; and in order to do
this, you must be in continual sympathy with every fawn of them; and be
hand-in-glove with all the lions, and hand-in-claw with all the hawks.
And don't fancy that you will lower yourselves by sympathy with the
lower creatures; you cannot sympathize rightly with the higher, unless
you do with those: but you have to sympathize with the higher, too--
with queens, and kings, and martyrs, and angels. Yes, and above all,
and more than all, with simple humanity in all its needs and ways, for
there is not one hurried face that passes you in the street that will
not be impressive, if you can only fathom it. All history is open to
you, all high thoughts and dreams that the past fortunes of men can
suggest, all fairy land is open to you--no vision that ever haunted
forest, or gleamed over hill-side, but calls you to understand how it
came into men's hearts, and may still touch them; and all Paradise is
open to you--yes, and the work of Paradise; for in bringing all this,
in perpetual and attractive truth, before the eyes of your fellow-men,
you have to join in the employment of the angels, as well as to imagine
their companies.

And observe, in this last respect, what a peculiar importance, and
responsibility, are attached to your work, when you consider its
permanence, and the multitudes to whom it is addressed. We frequently
are led, by wise people, to consider what responsibility may sometimes
attach to words, which yet, the chance is, will be heard by few, and
forgotten as soon as heard. But none of _your_ words will be heard
by few, and none will be forgotten, for five or six hundred years, if
you build well. You will talk to all who pass by; and all those little
sympathies, those freaks of fancy, those jests in stone, those
workings-out of problems in caprice, will occupy mind after mind of
utterly countless multitudes, long after you are gone. You have not,
like authors, to plead for a hearing, or to fear oblivion. Do but build
large enough, and carve boldly enough, and all the world will hear you;
they cannot choose but look.

I do not mean to awe you by this thought; I do not mean that because
you will have so many witnesses and watchers, you are never to jest, or
do anything gaily or lightly; on the contrary, I have pleaded, from the
beginning, for this art of yours, especially because it has room for
the whole of your character--if jest is in you, let the jest be jested;
if mathematical ingenuity is yours, let your problem be put, and your
solution worked out, as quaintly as you choose; above all, see that
your work is easily and happily done, else it will never make anybody 
else happy; but while you thus give the rein to all your impulses, see
that those impulses be headed and centred by one noble impulse; and let
that be Love--triple love--for the art which you practise, the creation
in which you move, and the creatures to whom you minister.

I. I say, first, Love for the art which you practise. Be assured that
if ever any other motive becomes a leading one in your mind, as the
principal one for exertion, except your love of art, that moment it is
all over with your art. I do not say you are to desire money, nor to
desire fame, nor to desire position; you cannot but desire all three;
nay, you may--if you are willing that I should use the word Love in a
desecrated sense--love all three; that is, passionately covet them, yet
you must not covet or love them in the first place. Men of strong
passions and imaginations must always care a great deal for anything
they care for at all; but the whole question is one of first or second.
Does your art lead you, or your gain lead you? You may like making
money exceedingly; but if it come to a fair question, whether you are
to make five hundred pounds less by this business, or to spoil your
building, and you choose to spoil your building, there's an end of you.
So you may be as thirsty for fame as a cricket is for cream; but, if it
come to a fair question, whether you are to please the mob, or do the
thing as you know it ought to be done; and you can't do both, and
choose to please the mob, it's all over with you--there's no hope for
you; nothing that you can do will ever be worth a man's glance as he
passes by. The test is absolute, inevitable--Is your art first with
you? Then you are artists; you may be, after you have made your money,
misers and usurers; you may be, after you have got your fame, jealous,
and proud, and wretched, and base: but yet, _as long as you won't
spoil your work_, you are artists. On the other hand--Is your money
first with you, and your fame first with you? Then, you may be very
charitable with your money, and very magnificent with your money, and
very graceful in the way you wear your reputation, and very courteous
to those beneath you, and very acceptable to those above you; but you
are _not artists_. You are mechanics, and drudges.

II. You must love the creation you work in the midst of. For, wholly in
proportion to the intensity of feeling which you bring to the subject
you have chosen, will be the depth and justice of our perception of its
character. And this depth of feeling is not to be gained on the
instant, when you want to bring it to bear on this or that. It is the
result of the general habit of striving to feel rightly; and, among
thousands of various means of doing this, perhaps the one I ought
specially to name to you, is the keeping yourselves clear of petty and
mean cares. Whatever you do, don't be anxious, nor fill your heads with
little chagrins and little desires. I have just said, that you may be
great artists, and yet be miserly and jealous, and troubled about many
things. So you may be; but I said also that the miserliness or trouble
must not be in your hearts all day. It is possible that you may get a
habit of saving money; or it is possible, at a time of great trial, you
may yield to the temptation of speaking unjustly of a rival,--and you
will shorten your powers arid dim your sight even by this;--but the
thing that you have to dread far more than any such unconscious habit,
or--any such momentary fall--is the _constancy of small emotions_;--the
anxiety whether Mr. So-and-so will like your work; whether such and such
a workman will do all that you want of him, and so on;--not wrong feelings
or anxieties in themselves, but impertinent, and wholly incompatible with
the full exercise of your imagination.

Keep yourselves, therefore, quiet, peaceful, with your eyes open. It
doesn't matter at all what Mr. So-and-so thinks of your work; but it
matters a great deal what that bird is doing up there in its nest, or
how that vagabond child at the street corner is managing his game of
knuckle-down. And remember, you cannot turn aside from your own
interests, to the birds' and the children's interests, unless you have
long before got into the habit of loving and watching birds and
children; so that it all comes at last to the forgetting yourselves,
and the living out of yourselves, in the calm of the great world, or if
you will, in its agitation; but always in a calm of your own bringing.
Do not think it wasted time to submit yourselves to any influence which
may bring upon you any noble feeling. Rise early, always watch the
sunrise, and the way the clouds break from the dawn; you will cast your
statue-draperies in quite another than your common way, when the
remembrance of that cloud motion is with you, and of the scarlet
vesture of the morning. Live always in the springtime in the country;
you do not know what leaf-form means, unless you have seen the buds
burst, and the young leaves breathing low in the sunshine, and
wondering at the first shower of rain. But above all, accustom
yourselves to look for, and to love, all nobleness of gesture and
feature in the human form; and remember that the highest nobleness is
usually among the aged, the poor, and the infirm; you will find, in the
end, that it is not the strong arm of the soldier, nor the laugh of the
young beauty, that are the best studies for you. Look at them, and look
at them reverently; but be assured that endurance is nobler than
strength, and patience than beauty; and that it is not in the high
church pews, where the gay dresses are, but in the church free seats,
where the widows' weeds are, that you may see the faces that will fit
best between the angels' wings, in the church porch.

III. And therefore, lastly, and chiefly, you must love the creatures to
whom you minister, your fellow-men; for, if you do not love them, not
only will you be little interested in the passing events of life, but
in all your gazing at humanity, you will be apt to be struck only by
outside form, and not by expression. It is only kindness and tenderness
which will ever enable you to see what beauty there is in the dark eyes
that are sunk with weeping, and in the paleness of those fixed faces
which the earth's adversity has compassed about, till they shine in
their patience like dying watchfires through twilight. But it is not
this only which makes it needful for you, if you would be great, to be
also kind; there is a most important and all-essential reason in the
very nature of your own art. So soon as you desire to build largely,
and with addition of noble sculpture, you will find that your work must
be associative. You cannot carve a whole cathedral yourself--you can
carve but few and simple parts of it. Either your own work must be
disgraced in the mass of the collateral inferiority, or you must raise
your fellow-designers to correspondence of power. If you have genius,
you will yourselves take the lead in the building you design; you will
carve its porch and direct its disposition. But for all subsequent
advancement of its detail, you must trust to the agency and the
invention of others; and it rests with you either to repress what
faculties your workmen have, into cunning subordination to your own; or
to rejoice in discovering even the powers that may rival you, and
leading forth mind after mind into fellowship with your fancy, and
association with your fame.

I need not tell you that if you do the first--if you endeavour to
depress or disguise the talents of your subordinates--you are lost; for
nothing could imply more darkly and decisively than this, that your art
and your work were not beloved by you; that it was your own prosperity
that you were seeking, and your own skill only that you cared to
contemplate. I do not say that you must not be jealous at all; it is
rarely in human nature to be wholly without jealousy; and you may be
forgiven for going some day sadly home, when you find some youth,
unpractised and unapproved, giving the life-stroke to his work which
you, after years of training, perhaps, cannot reach; but your jealousy
must not conquer--your love of your building must conquer, helped by
your kindness of heart. See--I set no high or difficult standard before
you. I do not say that you are to surrender your pre-eminence in
_mere_ unselfish generosity. But I do say that you must surrender
your pre-eminence in your love of your building helped by your
kindness; and that whomsoever you find better able to do what will
adorn it than you,--that person you are to give place to; and to
console yourselves for the humiliation, first, by your joy in seeing
the edifice grow more beautiful under his chisel, and secondly, by your
sense of having done kindly and justly. But if you are morally strong
enough to make the kindness and justice the first motive, it will be
better;--best of all, if you do not consider it as kindness at all, but
bare and stern justice; for, truly, such help as we can give each other
in this world is a _debt_ to each other; and the man who perceives
a superiority or a capacity in a subordinate, and neither confesses,
nor assists it, is not merely the withholder of kindness, but the
committer of injury. But be the motive what you will, only see that you
do the thing; and take the joy of the consciousness that, as your art
embraces a wider field than all others--and addresses a vaster
multitude than all others--and is surer of audience than all others--so
it is profounder and holier in Fellowship than all others. The artist,
when his pupil is perfect, must see him leave his side that he may
declare his distinct, perhaps opponent, skill. Man of science wrestles
with man of science for priority of discovery, and pursues in pangs of
jealous haste his solitary inquiry. You alone are called by kindness,--
by necessity,--by equity, to fraternity of toil; and thus, in those
misty and massive piles which rise above the domestic roofs of our
ancient cities, there was--there may be again--a meaning more profound
and true than any that fancy so commonly has attached to them. Men say
their pinnacles point to heaven. Why, so does every tree that buds, and
every bird that rises as it sings. Men say their aisles are good for
worship. Why, so is every mountain glen, and rough sea-shore. But this
they have of distinct and indisputable glory,--that their mighty walls
were never raised, and never shall be, but by men who love and aid each
other in their weakness;--that all their interlacing strength of
vaulted stone has its foundation upon the stronger arches of manly
fellowship, and all their changing grace of depressed or lifted
pinnacle owes its cadence and completeness to sweeter symmetries of
human soul.




LECTURE V.

THE WORK OP IRON, IN NATURE, ART, AND POLICY.

_A Lecture Delivered at Tunbridge Wells, February, 1858._


When first I heard that you wished me to address you this evening, it
was a matter of some doubt with me whether I could find any subject
that would possess any sufficient interest for you to justify my
bringing you out of your comfortable houses on a winter's night. When I
venture to speak about my own special business of art, it is almost
always before students of art, among whom I may sometimes permit myself
to be dull, if I can feel that I am useful: but a mere talk about art,
especially without examples to refer to (and I have been unable to
prepare any careful illustrations for this lecture), is seldom of much
interest to a general audience. As I was considering what you might
best bear with me in speaking about, there came naturally into my mind
a subject connected with the origin and present prosperity of the town
you live in; and, it seemed to me, in the out-branchings of it, capable
of a very general interest. When, long ago (I am afraid to think how
long), Tunbridge Wells was my Switzerland, and I used to be brought
down here in the summer, a sufficiently active child, rejoicing in the
hope of clambering sandstone cliffs of stupendous height above the
common, there used sometimes, as, I suppose, there are in the lives of
all children at the Wells, to be dark days in my life--days of
condemnation to the pantiles and band--under which calamities my only
consolation used to be in watching, at every turn in my walk, the
welling forth of the spring over the orange rim of its marble basin.
The memory of the clear water, sparkling over its saffron stain, came
back to me as the strongest image connected with the place; and it
struck me that you might not be unwilling, to-night, to think a little
over the full significance of that saffron stain, and of the power, in
other ways and other functions, of the steelly element to which so many
here owe returning strength and life;--chief as it has been always, and
is yet more and more markedly so day by day, among the precious gifts
of the earth.

The subject is, of course, too wide to be more than suggestively
treated; and even my suggestions must be few, and drawn chiefly from my
own fields of work; nevertheless, I think I shall have time to indicate
some courses of thought which you may afterwards follow out for
yourselves if they interest you; and so I will not shrink from the full
scope of the subject which I have announced to you--the functions of
Iron, in Nature, Art, and Policy.
