waited, while Jo called after them, just as Marmee used to do:

'Girls, have you got nice pocket-handkerchiefs?' They all smiled at
the familiar words, and three white banners waved as they drove away,
leaving the spider to watch for her first fly. She did not wait long.
Daisy was lying down with a wet cheek on the little hymnbook out of
which she and Nat used to sing together; so Mrs Jo strolled about
the lawn, looking very like a wandering mushroom with her large buff
umbrella.

Dan had gone for a ten-mile stroll; and Nat was supposed to have
accompanied him, but presently came sneaking back, unable to tear
himself away from the Dovecote or lose a moment of nearness to his idol
that last day. Mrs Jo saw him at once, and beckoned him to a rustic seat
under the old elm, where they could have their confidences undisturbed,
and both keep an eye on a certain white-curtained window, half hidden in
vines.

'Nice and cool here. I'm not up to one of Dan's tramps today--it's so
warm, and he goes so like a steam-engine. He headed for the swamp where
his pet snakes used to live, and I begged to be excused,' said Nat,
fanning himself with his straw hat, though the day was not oppressive.

'I'm glad you did. Sit and rest with me, and have one of our good old
talks. We've both been so busy lately, I feel as if I didn't half know
your plans; and I want to,' answered Mrs Jo, feeling sure that though
they might start with Leipzig they would bring up at Plumfield.

'You are very kind, and there's nothing I'd like better. I don't realize
I'm going so far--suppose I shan't till I get afloat. It's a splendid
start, and I don't know how I can ever thank Mr Laurie for all he's
done, or you either,' added Nat, with a break in his voice; for he was a
tender-hearted fellow, and never forgot a kindness.

'You can thank us beautifully by being and doing all we hope and expect
of you, my dear. In the new life you are going to there will be a
thousand trials and temptations, and only your own wit and wisdom to
rely on. That will be the time to test the principles we have tried
to give you, and see how firm they are. Of course, you will make
mistakes--we all do; but don't let go of your conscience and drift along
blindly. Watch and pray, dear Nat; and while your hand gains skill, let
your head grow wiser, and keep your heart as innocent and warm as it is
now.'

'I'll try, Mother Bhaer, my very best to be a credit to you. I know I
shall improve in my music--can't help it there; but I never shall be
very wise, I'm afraid. As for my heart, you know, I leave it behind me
in good keeping.'

As he spoke, Nat's eyes were fixed on the window with a look of love and
longing that made his quiet face both manly and sad--plainly showing how
strong a hold this boyish affection had upon him.

'I want to speak of that; and I know you will forgive what seems hard,
because I do most heartily sympathize with you,' said Mrs Jo, glad to
have her say.

'Yes, do talk about Daisy! I think of nothing but leaving and losing
her. I have no hope--I suppose it is too much to ask; only I can't help
loving her, wherever I am!' cried Nat, with a mixture of defiance and
despair in his face that rather startled Mrs Jo.

'Listen to me and I'll try to give you both comfort and good advice. We
all know that Daisy is fond of you, but her mother objects, and being a
good girl she tries to obey. Young people think they never can change,
but they do in the most wonderful manner, and very few die of broken
hearts.' Mrs Jo smiled as she remembered another boy whom she had once
tried to comfort, and then went soberly on while Nat listened as if his
fate hung upon her lips.

'One of two things will happen. You will find someone else to love,
or, better still, be so busy and happy in your music that you will be
willing to wait for time to settle the matter for you both. Daisy will
perhaps forget when you are gone, and be glad you are only friends. At
any rate it is much wiser to have no promises made; then both are free,
and in a year or two may meet to laugh over the little romance nipped in
the bud.'

'Do you honestly think that?' asked Nat, looking at her so keenly that
the truth had to come; for all his heart was in those frank blue eyes of
his.

'No, I don't!' answered Mrs Jo. 'Then if you were in my place, what
would you do?' he added, with a tone of command never heard in his
gentle voice before.

'Bless me! the boy is in dead earnest, and I shall forget prudence
in sympathy I'm afraid,' thought Mrs Jo, surprised and pleased by the
unexpected manliness Nat showed.

'I'll tell you what I should do. I'd say to myself:

"I'll prove that my love is strong and faithful, and make Daisy's
mother proud to give her to me by being not only a good musician but an
excellent man, and so command respect and confidence. This I will try
for; and if I fail, I shall be the better for the effort, and find
comfort in the thought that I did my best for her sake."'

'That is what I meant to do. But I wanted a word of hope to give me
courage,' cried Nat, firing up as if the smouldering spark was set
ablaze by a breath of encouragement. 'Other fellows, poorer and stupider
than I, have done great things and come to honour. Why may not I, though
I'm nothing now? I know Mrs Brooke remembers what I came from, but my
father was honest though everything went wrong; and I have nothing to
be ashamed of though I was a charity boy. I never will be ashamed of my
people or myself, and I'll make other folks respect me if I can.'

'Good! that's the right spirit, Nat. Hold to it and make yourself a man.
No one will be quicker to see and admire the brave work than my sister
Meg. She does not despise your poverty or your past; but mothers are
very tender over their daughters, and we Marches, though we have been
poor, are, I confess, a little proud of our good family. We don't care
for money; but a long line of virtuous ancestors is something to desire
and to be proud of.'

'Well, the Blakes are a good lot. I looked 'em up, and not one was
ever in prison, hanged, or disgraced in any way. We used to be rich and
honoured years ago, but we've died out and got poor, and father was a
street musician rather than beg; and I'll be one again before I'll do
the mean things some men do and pass muster.'

Nat was so excited that Mrs Jo indulged in a laugh to calm him, and both
went on more quietly.

'I told my sister all that and it pleased her. I am sure if you do well
these next few years that she will relent and all be happily settled,
unless that wonderful change, which you don't believe possible, should
occur. Now, cheer up; don't be lackadaisical and blue. Say good-bye
cheerfully and bravely, show a manly front, and leave a pleasant memory
behind you. We all wish you well and hope much for you. Write to me
every week and I'll send a good, gossipy answer. Be careful what you
write to Daisy; don't gush or wail, for sister Meg will see the letters;
and you can help your cause very much by sending sensible, cheery
accounts of your life to us all.'

'I will; I will; it looks brighter and better already, and I won't lose
my one comfort by any fault of my own. Thank you so much, Mother Bhaer,
for taking my side. I felt so ungrateful and mean and crushed when I
thought you all considered me a sneak who had no business to love such
a precious girl as Daisy. No one said anything, but I knew how you felt,
and that Mr Laurie sent me off partly to get me out of the way. Oh dear,
life is pretty tough sometimes, isn't it?' And Nat took his head in both
hands as if it ached with the confusion of hopes and fears, passions and
plans that proved boyhood was past and manhood had begun.

'Very tough, but it is that very struggle with obstacles which does us
good. Things have been made easy for you in many ways, but no one can do
everything. You must paddle your own canoe now, and learn to avoid the
rapids and steer straight to the port you want to reach. I don't know
just what your temptations will be for you have no bad habits and seem
to love music so well, nothing can lure you from it. I only hope you
won't work too hard.'

'I feel as if I could work like a horse, I'm so eager to get on; but
I'll take care. Can't waste time being sick, and you've given me doses
enough to keep me all right, I guess.' Nat laughed as he remembered
the book of directions Mrs Jo had written for him to consult on all
occasions.

She immediately added some verbal ones on the subject of foreign messes,
and having mounted one of her pet hobbies, was in full gallop when Emil
was seen strolling about on the roof of the old house, that being his
favourite promenade; for there he could fancy himself walking the deck,
with only blue sky and fresh air about him.

'I want a word with the Commodore, and up there we shall be nice and
quiet. Go and play to Daisy: it will put her to sleep and do you both
good. Sit in the porch, so I can keep an eye on you as I promised'; and
with a motherly pat on the shoulder Mrs Jo left Nat to his delightful
task and briskly ascended to the house-top, not up the trellis as of old
but by means of the stairs inside.

Emerging on the platform she found Emil cutting his initials afresh in
the wood-work and singing 'Pull for the Shore', like the tuneful mariner
he was.

'Come aboard and make yourself at home, Aunty,' he said, with a playful
salute. 'I'm just leaving a P.P.C. in the old place, so when you fly up
here for refuge you'll remember me.'

'Ah, my dear, I'm not likely to forget you. It doesn't need E. B. H. cut
on all the trees and railings to remind me of my sailor boy'; and Mrs Jo
took the seat nearest the blue figure astride the balustrade, not quite
sure how to begin the little sermon she wanted to preach.

'Well, you don't pipe your eye and look squally when I sheer off as you
used to, and that's a comfort. I like to leave port in fair weather and
have a jolly send-off all round. Specially this time, for it will be a
year or more before we drop anchor here again,' answered Emil, pushing
his cap back, and glancing about him as if he loved old Plum and would
be sorry never to see it any more.

'You have salt water enough without my adding to it. I'm going to be
quite a Spartan mother, and send my sons to battle with no wailing, only
the command:

"With your shield or on it",' said Mrs Jo cheerfully, adding after a
pause: 'I often wish I could go too, and some day I will, when you are
captain and have a ship of your own--as I've no doubt you will before
long, with Uncle Herman to push you on.'

'When I do I'll christen her the Jolly Jo and take you as first mate.
It would be regular larks to have you aboard, and I'd be a proud man to
carry you round the world you've wanted to see so long and never could,'
answered Emil, caught at once by this splendid vision.

'I'll make my first voyage with you and enjoy myself immensely in spite
of seasickness and all the stormy winds that blow. I've always thought
I'd like to see a wreck, a nice safe one with all saved after great
danger and heroic deeds, while we clung like Mr Pillicoddy to main-top
jibs and lee scuppers.'

'No wrecks yet, ma'am, but we'll try to accommodate customers. Captain
says I'm a lucky dog and bring fair weather, so we'll save the dirty
weather for you if you want it,' laughed Emil, digging at the ship in
full sail which he was adding to his design.

'Thanks, I hope you will. This long voyage will give you new
experiences, and being an officer, you will have new duties and
responsibilities. Are you ready for them? You take everything so gaily,
I've been wondering if you realized that now you will have not only to
obey but to command also, and power is a dangerous thing. Be careful
that you don't abuse it or let it make a tyrant of you.'

'Right you are, ma'am. I've seen plenty of that, and have got my
bearings pretty well, I guess. I shan't have very wide swing with Peters
over me, but I'll see that the boys don't get abused when he's bowsed up
his jib. No right to speak before, but now I won't stand it.'

'That sounds mysteriously awful; could I ask what nautical torture
"bowsing jibs" is?' asked Mrs Jo, in a tone of deep interest.

'Getting drunk. Peters can hold more grog than any man I ever saw; he
keeps right side up, but is as savage as a norther, and makes things
lively all round. I've seen him knock a fellow down with a belaying pin,
and couldn't lend a hand. Better luck now, I hope.' And Emil frowned as
if he already trod the quarter-deck, lord of all he surveyed.

'Don't get into trouble, for even Uncle Herman's favour won't cover
insubordination, you know. You have proved yourself a good sailor; now
be a good officer, which is a harder thing, I fancy. It takes a fine
character to rule justly and kindly; you will have to put by your boyish
ways and remember your dignity. That will be excellent training for you,
Emil, and sober you down a bit. No more skylarking except here, so mind
your ways, and do honour to your buttons,' said Mrs Jo, tapping one
of the very bright brass ones that ornamented the new suit Emil was so
proud of.

'I'll do my best. I know my time for skirmshander (chaff) is over, and
I must steer a straighter course; but don't you fear, Jack ashore is a
very different craft from what he is with blue water under his keel. I
had a long talk with Uncle last night and got my orders; I won't forget
'em nor all I owe him. As for you, I'll name my first ship as I say, and
have your bust for the figurehead, see if I don't,' and Emil gave his
aunt a hearty kiss to seal the vow, which proceeding much amused Nat,
playing softly in the porch of the Dovecote.

'You do me proud, Captain. But, dear, I want to say one thing and then
I'm done; for you don't need much advice of mine after my good man has
spoken. I read somewhere that every inch of rope used in the British
Navy has a strand of red in it, so that wherever a bit of it is found
it is known. That is the text of my little sermon to you. Virtue, which
means honour, honesty, courage, and all that makes character, is the
red thread that marks a good man wherever he is. Keep that always and
everywhere, so that even if wrecked by misfortune, that sign shall still
be found and recognized. Yours is a rough life, and your mates not all
we could wish, but you can be a gentleman in the true sense of the word;
and no matter what happens to your body, keep your soul clean, your
heart true to those who love you, and do your duty to the end.'

As she spoke Emil had risen and stood listening with his cap off and a
grave, bright look as if taking orders from a superior officer; when she
ended, he answered briefly, but heartily:

'Please God, I will!'

'That's all; I have little fear for you, but one never knows when or how
the weak moment may come, and sometimes a chance word helps us, as so
many my dear mother spoke come back to me now for my own comfort and the
guidance of my boys,' said Mrs Jo, rising; for the words had been said
and no more were needed.

'I've stored 'em up and know where to find 'em when wanted. Often and
often in my watch I've seen old Plum, and heard you and Uncle talking
so plainly, I'd have sworn I was here. It is a rough life, Aunty, but
a wholesome one if a fellow loves it as I do, and has an anchor to
windward as I have. Don't worry about me, and I'll come home next year
with a chest of tea that will cheer your heart and give you ideas enough
for a dozen novels. Going below? All right, steady in the gangway! I'll
be along by the time you've got out the cake-box. Last chance for a good
old lunch ashore.'

Mrs Jo descended laughing, and Emil finished his ship whistling
cheerfully, neither dreaming when and where this little chat on the
house-top would return to the memory of one of them.

Dan was harder to catch, and not until evening did a quiet moment come
in that busy family; when, while the rest were roaming about, Mrs Jo sat
down to read in the study, and presently Dan looked in at the window.

'Come and rest after your long tramp; you must be tired,' she called,
with an inviting nod towards the big sofa where so many boys had
reposed--as much as that active animal ever does.

'Afraid I shall disturb you'; but Dan looked as if he wanted to stay his
restless feet somewhere.

'Not a bit; I'm always ready to talk, shouldn't be a woman if I were
not,' laughed Mrs Jo, as Dan swung himself in and sat down with an air
of contentment very pleasant to see.

'Last day is over, yet somehow I don't seem to hanker to be off.
Generally, I'm rather anxious to cut loose after a short stop. Odd,
ain't it?' asked Dan, gravely picking grass and leaves out of his hair
and beard; for he had been lying on the grass, thinking many thoughts in
the quiet summer night.

'Not at all; you are beginning to get civilized. It's a good sign, and
I'm glad to see it,' answered Mrs Jo promptly. 'You've had your swing,
and want a change. Hope the farming will give it to you, though helping
the Indians pleases me more: it is so much better to work for others
than for one's self alone.'

'So 'tis,' assented Dan heartily. 'I seem to want to root somewhere
and have folks of my own to take care of. Tired of my own company, I
suppose, now I've seen so much better. I'm a rough, ignorant lot, and
I've been thinking maybe I've missed it loafing round creation, instead
of going in for education as the other chaps did. Hey?'

He looked anxiously at Mrs Jo; and she tried to hide the surprise this
new outburst caused her; for till now Dan had scorned books and gloried
in his freedom.

'No; I don't think so in your case. So far I'm sure the free life was
best. Now that you are a man you can control that lawless nature better;
but as a boy only great activity and much adventure could keep you out
of mischief. Time is taming my colt, you see, and I shall yet be proud
of him, whether he makes a pack-horse of himself to carry help to the
starving or goes to ploughing as Pegasus did.'

Dan liked the comparison, and smiled as he lounged in the sofa-corner,
with the new thoughtfulness in his eyes.

'Glad you think so. The fact is it's going to take a heap of taming to
make me go well in harness anywhere. I want to, and I try now and then,
but always kick over the traces and run away. No lives lost yet; but I
shouldn't wonder if there was some time, and a general smash-up.'

'Why, Dan, did you have any dangerous adventures during this last
absence? I fancied so, but didn't ask before, knowing you'd tell me if I
could help in any way. Can I?' And Mrs Jo looked anxiously at him; for a
sudden lowering expression had come into his face, and he leaned forward
as if to hide it.

'Nothing very bad; but 'Frisco isn't just a heaven on earth, you know,
and it's harder to be a saint there than here,' he answered slowly;
then, as if he had made up his mind to ''fess', as the children used to
say, he sat up, and added rapidly, in a half-defiant, half-shamefaced
way, 'I tried gambling, and it wasn't good for me.'

'Was that how you made your money?'

'Not a penny of it! That's all honest, if speculation isn't a bigger
sort of gambling. I won a lot; but I lost or gave it away, and cut the
whole concern before it got the better of me.'

'Thank heaven for that! Don't try it again; it may have the terrible
fascination for you it has for so many. Keep to your mountains and
prairies, and shun cities, if these things tempt you, Dan. Better lose
your life than your soul, and one such passion leads to worse sins, as
you know better than I.'

Dan nodded, and seeing how troubled she was, said, in a lighter tone,
though still the shadow of that past experience remained:

'Don't be scared; I'm all right now; and a burnt dog dreads the fire. I
don't drink, or do the things you dread; don't care for 'em; but I
get excited, and then this devilish temper of mine is more than I can
manage. Fighting a moose or a buffalo is all right; but when you pitch
into a man, no matter how great a scamp he is, you've got to look out.
I shall kill someone some day; that's all I'm afraid of. I do hate a
sneak!' And Dan brought his fist down on the table with a blow that made
the lamp totter and the books skip.

'That always was your trial, Dan, and I can sympathize with you; for
I've been trying to govern my own temper all my life, and haven't learnt
yet,' said Mrs Jo, with a sigh. 'For heaven's sake, guard your demon
well, and don't let a moment's fury ruin all your life. As I said to
Nat, watch and pray, my dear boy. There is no other help or hope for
human weakness but God's love and patience.'

Tears were in Mrs Jo's eyes as she spoke; for she felt this deeply, and
knew how hard a task it is to rule these bosom sins of ours. Dan looked
touched, also uncomfortable, as he always did when religion of any sort
was mentioned, though he had a simple creed of his own, and tried to
live up to it in his blind way.

'I don't do much praying; don't seem to come handy to me; but I can
watch like a redskin, only it's easier to mount guard over a lurking
grizzly than my own cursed temper. It's that I'm afraid of, if I settle
down. I can get on with wild beasts first-rate; but men rile me awfully,
and I can't take it out in a free fight, as I can with a bear or a
wolf. Guess I'd better head for the Rockies, and stay there a spell
longer--till I'm tame enough for decent folks, if I ever am.' And Dan
leaned his rough head on his hands in a despondent attitude.

'Try my sort of help, and don't give up. Read more, study a little, and
try to meet a better class of people, who won't "rile", but soothe and
strengthen you. We don't make you savage, I'm sure; for you have been as
meek as a lamb, and made us very happy.'

'Glad of it; but I've felt like a hawk in a hen-house all the same,
and wanted to pounce and tear more than once. Not so much as I used,
though,' added Dan, after a short laugh at Mrs Jo's surprised face.
'I'll try your plan, and keep good company this bout if I can; but a man
can't pick and choose, knocking about as I do.'

'Yes, you can this time; for you are going on a peaceful errand and can
keep clear of temptation if you try. Take some books and read; that's
an immense help; and books are always good company if you have the right
sort. Let me pick out some for you.' And Mrs Jo made a bee-line to the
well-laden shelves, which were the joy of her heart and the comfort of
her life.

'Give me travels and stories, please; don't want any pious works, can't
seem to relish 'em, and won't pretend I do,' said Dan, following to look
over her head with small favour at the long lines of well-worn volumes.

Mrs Jo turned short round, and putting a hand on either broad shoulder,
looked him in the eye, saying soberly:

'Now, Dan, see here; never sneer at good things or pretend to be worse
than you are. Don't let false shame make you neglect the religion
without which no man can live. You needn't talk about it if you don't
like, but don't shut your heart to it in whatever shape it comes. Nature
is your God now; she has done much for you; let her do more, and lead
you to know and love a wiser and more tender teacher, friend, and
comforter than she can ever be. That is your only hope; don't throw it
away, and waste time; for sooner or later you will feel the need of Him,
and He will come to you and hold you up when all other help fails.'

Dan stood motionless, and let her read in his softened eyes the dumb
desire that lived in his heart, though he had no words to tell it,
and only permitted her to catch a glimpse of the divine spark which
smoulders or burns clearly in every human soul. He did not speak; and
glad to be spared some answer which should belie his real feelings, Mrs
Jo hastened to say, with her most motherly smile:

'I saw in your room the little Bible I gave you long ago; it was well
worn outside, but fresh within, as if not much read. Will you promise me
to read a little once a week, dear, for my sake? Sunday is a quiet day
everywhere, and this book is never old nor out of place. Begin with the
stories you used to love when I told them to you boys. David was your
favourite, you remember? Read him again; he'll suit you even better now,
and you'll find his sins and repentance useful reading till you come to
the life and work of a diviner example than he. You will do it, for
love of mother Bhaer, who always loved her "firebrand" and hoped to save
him?'

'I will,' answered Dan, with a sudden brightening of face that was like
a sunburst through a cloud, full of promise though so short-lived and
rare.

Mrs Jo turned at once to the books and began to talk of them, knowing
well that Dan would not hear any more just then. He seemed relieved; for
it was always hard for him to show his inner self, and he took pride in
hiding it as an Indian does in concealing pain or fear.

'Hallo, here's old Sintram! I remember him; used to like him and his
tantrums, and read about 'em to Ted. There he is riding ahead with Death
and the Devil alongside.'

As Dan looked at the little picture of the young man with horse and
hound going bravely up the rocky defile, accompanied by the companions
who ride beside most men through this world, a curious impulse made Mrs
Jo say quickly:

'That's you, Dan, just you at this time! Danger and sin are near you in
the life you lead; moods and passions torment you; the bad father left
you to fight alone, and the wild spirit drives you to wander up and down
the world looking for peace and self-control. Even the horse and hound
are there, your Octoo and Don, faithful friends, unscared by the strange
mates that go with you. You have not got the armour yet, but I'm trying
to show you where to find it. Remember the mother Sintram loved and
longed to find, and did find when his battle was bravely fought, his
reward well earned? You can recollect your mother; and I have always
felt that all the good qualities you possess come from her. Act out the
beautiful old story in this as in the other parts, and try to give her
back a son to be proud of.'

Quite carried away by the likeness of the quaint tale to Dan's life and
needs, Mrs Jo went on pointing to the various pictures which illustrated
it, and when she looked up was surprised to see how struck and
interested he seemed to be. Like all people of his temperament he was
very impressionable, and his life among hunters and Indians had made him
superstitious; he believed in dreams, liked weird tales, and whatever
appealed to the eye or mind, vividly impressed him more than the wisest
words. The story of poor, tormented Sintram came back clearly as he
looked and listened, symbolizing his secret trials even more truly than
Mrs Jo knew; and just at that moment this had an effect upon him that
never was forgotten. But all he said was:

'Small chance of that. I don't take much stock in the idea of meeting
folks in heaven. Guess mother won't remember the poor little brat she
left so long ago; why should she?'

'Because true mothers never forget their children; and I know she was
one, from the fact that she ran away from the cruel husband, to save
her little son from bad influences. Had she lived, life would have been
happier for you, with this tender friend to help and comfort you. Never
forget that she risked everything for your sake, and don't let it be in
vain.'

Mrs Jo spoke very earnestly, knowing that this was the one sweet memory
of Dan's early life, and glad to have recalled it at this moment; for
suddenly a great tear splashed down on the page where Sintram kneels
at his mother's feet, wounded, but victorious over sin and death. She
looked up, well pleased to have touched Dan to the heart's core, as that
drop proved; but a sweep of the arm brushed away the tell-tale, and his
beard hid the mate to it, as he shut the book, saying with a suppressed
quiver in his strong voice:

'I'll keep this, if nobody wants it. I'll read it over, and maybe it
will do me good. I'd like to meet her anywhere, but don't believe I ever
shall.'

'Keep it and welcome. My mother gave it to me; and when you read it try
to believe that neither of your mothers will ever forget you.'

Mrs Jo gave the book with a caress; and simply saying: 'Thanks; good
night,' Dan thrust it into his pocket, and walked straight away to the
river to recover from this unwonted mood of tenderness and confidence.

Next day the travellers were off. All were in good spirits, and a cloud
of handkerchiefs whitened the air as they drove away in the old bus,
waving their hats to everyone and kissing their hands, especially to
mother Bhaer, who said in her prophetic tone as she wiped her eyes, when
the familiar rumble died away:

'I have a feeling that something is going to happen to some of them, and
they will never come back to me, or come back changed. Well, I can only
say, God be with my boys!'

And He was.



Chapter 7. THE LION AND THE LAMB

When the boys were gone a lull fell upon Plumfield, and the family
scattered to various places for brief outings, as August had come and
all felt the need of change. The Professor took Mrs Jo to the mountains.
The Laurences were at the seashore, and there Meg's family and the Bhaer
boys took turns to visit, as someone must always be at home to keep
things in order.

Mrs Meg, with Daisy, was in office when the events occurred which we are
about to relate. Rob and Ted were just up from Rocky Nook, and Nan
was passing a week with her friend as the only relaxation she allowed
herself. Demi was off on a run with Tom, so Rob was man of the house,
with old Silas as general overseer. The sea air seemed to have gone to
Ted's head, for he was unusually freakish, and led his gentle aunt and
poor Rob a life of it with his pranks. Octoo was worn out with the wild
rides he took, and Don openly rebelled when ordered to leap and show
off his accomplishments; while the girls at college were both amused and
worried by the ghosts who haunted the grounds at night, the unearthly
melodies that disturbed their studious hours, and the hairbreadth
escapes of this restless boy by flood and field and fire. Something
happened at length which effectually sobered Ted and made a lasting
impression on both the boys; for sudden danger and a haunting fear
turned the Lion into a lamb and the Lamb into a lion, as far as courage
went.

On the first of September--the boys never forgot the date--after a
pleasant tramp and good luck with their fishing, the brothers were
lounging in the barn; for Daisy had company, and the lads kept out of
the way.

'I tell you what it is, Bobby, that dog is sick. He won't play, nor eat,
nor drink, and acts queerly. Dan will kill us if anything happens to
him,' said Ted, looking at Don, who lay near his kennel resting a moment
after one of the restless wanderings which kept him vibrating between
the door of Dan's room and the shady corner of the yard, where his
master had settled him with an old cap to guard till he came back.

'It's the hot weather, perhaps. But I sometimes think he's pining for
Dan. Dogs do, you know, and the poor fellow has been low in his mind
ever since the boys went. Maybe something has happened to Dan. Don
howled last night and can't rest. I've heard of such things,' answered
Rob thoughtfully.

'Pooh! he can't know. He's cross. I'll stir him up and take him for a
run. Always makes me feel better. Hi, boy! wake up and be jolly'; and
Ted snapped his fingers at the dog, who only looked at him with grim
indifference.

'Better let him alone. If he isn't right tomorrow, we'll take him to Dr
Watkins and see what he says.' And Rob went on watching the swallows as
he lay in the hay polishing up some Latin verses he had made.

The spirit of perversity entered into Ted, and merely because he was
told not to tease Don he went on doing it, pretending that it was for
the dog's good. Don took no heed of his pats, commands, reproaches, or
insults, till Ted's patience gave out; and seeing a convenient switch
near by he could not resist the temptation to conquer the great hound
by force, since gentleness failed to win obedience. He had the wisdom to
chain Don up first; for a blow from any hand but his master's made him
savage, and Ted had more than once tried the experiment, as the dog
remembered. This indignity roused Don and he sat up with a growl. Rob
heard it, and seeing Ted raise the switch, ran to interfere, exclaiming:

'Don't touch him! Dan forbade it! Leave the poor thing in peace; I won't
allow it.'

Rob seldom commanded, but when he did Master Ted had to give in. His
temper was up, and Rob's masterful tone made it impossible to resist one
cut at the rebellious dog before he submitted. Only a single blow, but
it was a costly one; for as it fell, the dog sprang at Ted with a snarl,
and Rob, rushing between the two, felt the sharp teeth pierce his leg.
A word made Don let go and drop remorsefully at Rob's feet, for he loved
him and was evidently sorry to have hurt his friend by mistake. With a
forgiving pat Rob left him, to limp to the barn followed by Ted, whose
wrath was changed to shame and sorrow when he saw the red drops on Rob's
sock and the little wounds in his leg.

'I'm awfully sorry. Why did you get in the way? Here, wash it up, and
I'll get a rag to tie on it,' he said quickly filling a sponge with
water and pulling out a very demoralized handkerchief. Rob usually made
light of his own mishaps and was over ready to forgive if others were to
blame; but now he sat quite still, looking at the purple marks with such
a strange expression on his white face that Ted was troubled, though he
added with a laugh: 'Why, you're not afraid of a little dig like that,
are you, Bobby?'

'I am afraid of hydrophobia. But if Don is mad I'd rather be the one to
have it,' answered Rob, with a smile and a shiver.

At that dreadful word Ted turned whiter than his brother, and,
dropping sponge and handkerchief, stared at him with a frightened face,
whispering in a tone of despair:

'Oh, Rob, don't say it! What shall we do, what shall we do?'

'Call Nan; she will know. Don't scare Aunty, or tell a soul but Nan;
she's on the back piazza; get her out here as quick as you can. I'll
wash it till she comes. Maybe it's nothing; don't look so staggered,
Ted. I only thought it might be, as Don is queer.'

Rob tried to speak bravely; but Ted's long legs felt strangely weak as
he hurried away, and it was lucky he met no one, for his face would have
betrayed him. Nan was swinging luxuriously in a hammock, amusing herself
with a lively treatise on croup, when an agitated boy suddenly clutched
her, whispering, as he nearly pulled her overboard:

'Come to Rob in the barn! Don's mad and he's bitten him, and we don't
know what to do; it's all my fault; no one must know. Oh, do be quick!'

Nan was on her feet at once, startled, but with her wits about her, and
both were off without more words as they dodged round the house where
unconscious Daisy chatted with her friends in the parlour and Aunt Meg
peacefully took her afternoon nap upstairs.

Rob was braced up, and was as calm and steady as ever when they found
him in the harness-room, whither he had wisely retired, to escape
observation. The story was soon told, and after a look at Don, now in
his kennel, sad and surly, Nan said slowly, with her eye on the full
water-pan:

'Rob, there is one thing to do for the sake of safety, and it must
be done at once. We can't wait to see if Don is--sick--or to go for a
doctor. I can do it, and I will; but it is very painful, and I hate to
hurt you, dear.'

A most unprofessional quiver got into Nan's voice as she spoke, and her
keen eyes dimmed as she looked at the two anxious young faces turned so
confidingly to her for help.

'I know, burn it; well, do it, please; I can bear it. But Ted better
go away,' said Rob, with a firm setting of his lips, and a nod at his
afflicted brother.

'I won't stir; I can stand it if he can, only it ought to be me!' cried
Ted, with a desperate effort not to cry, so full of grief and fear and
shame was he that it seemed as if he couldn't bear it like a man.

'He'd better stay and help; do him good,' answered

Nan sternly, because, her heart was faint within her, knowing as she did
all that might be in store for both poor boys. 'Keep quiet; I'll be back
in a minute,' she added, going towards the house, while her quick mind
hastily planned what was best to be done.

It was ironing day, and a hot fire still burned in the empty kitchen,
for the maids were upstairs resting. Nan put a slender poker to heat,
and as she sat waiting for it, covered her face with her hands, asking
help in this sudden need for strength, courage, and wisdom; for there
was no one else to call upon, and young as she was, she knew what was to
be done if she only had the nerve to do it. Any other patient would have
been calmly interesting, but dear, good Robin, his father's pride, his
mother's comfort, everyone's favourite and friend, that he should be
in danger was very terrible; and a few hot tears dropped on the
well-scoured table as Nan tried to calm her trouble by remembering how
very likely it was to be all a mistake, a natural but vain alarm.

'I must make light of it, or the boys will break down, and then there
will be a panic. Why afflict and frighten everyone when all is in doubt?
I won't. I'll take Rob to Dr Morrison at once, and have the dog man see
Don. Then, having done all we can, we will either laugh at our scare--if
it is one--or be ready for whatever comes. Now for my poor boy.'

Armed with the red-hot poker, a pitcher of ice-water, and several
handkerchiefs from the clotheshorse, Nan went back to the barn ready to
do her best in this her most serious 'emergency case'. The boys sat like
statues, one of despair, the other of resignation; and it took all Nan's
boasted nerve to do her work quickly and well.

'Now, Rob, only a minute, then we are safe. Stand by, Ted; he may be a
bit faintish.'

Rob shut his eyes, clinched his hands, and sat like a hero. Ted knelt
beside him, white as a sheet, and as weak as a girl; for the pangs of
remorse were rending him, and his heart failed at the thought of all
this pain because of his wilfulness. It was all over in a moment, with
only one little groan; but when Nan looked to her assistant to hand the
water, poor Ted needed it the most, for he had fainted away, and lay on
the floor in a pathetic heap of arms and legs.

Rob laughed, and, cheered by that unexpected sound, Nan bound up the
wound with hands that never trembled, though great drops stood on her
forehead; and she shared the water with patient number one before she
turned to patient number two. Ted was much ashamed, and quite broken
in spirit, when he found how he had failed at the critical moment, and
begged them not to tell, as he really could not help it; then by way of
finishing his utter humiliation, a burst of hysterical tears disgraced
his manly soul, and did him a world of good.

'Never mind, never mind, we are all right now, and no one need be the
wiser,' said Nan briskly, as poor Ted hiccoughed on Rob's shoulder,
laughing and crying in the most tempestuous manner, while his brother
soothed him, and the young doctor fanned both with Silas's old straw
hat.

'Now, boys, listen to me and remember what I say. We won't alarm anyone
yet, for I've made up my mind our scare is all nonsense. Don was out
lapping the water as I came by, and I don't believe he's mad any more
than I am. Still, to ease our minds and compose our spirits, and get our
guilty faces out of sight for a while, I think we had better drive into
town to my old friend Dr Morrison, and let him just take a look at
my work, and give us some quieting little dose; for we are all rather
shaken by this flurry. Sit still, Rob; and Ted, you harness up while I
run and get my hat and tell Aunty to excuse me to Daisy. I don't know
those Penniman girls, and she will be glad of our room at tea, and we'll
have a cosy bite at my house, and come home as gay as larks.'

Nan talked on as a vent for the hidden emotions which professional pride
would not allow her to show, and the boys approved her plan at once; for
action is always easier than quiet waiting. Ted went staggering away to
wash his face at the pump, and rub some colour into his cheeks before
he harnessed the horse. Rob lay tranquilly on the hay, looking up at the
swallows again as he lived through some very memorable moments. Boy as
he was, the thought of death coming suddenly to him, and in this way,
might well make him sober; for it is a very solemn thing to be arrested
in the midst of busy life by the possibility of the great change. There
were no sins to be repented of, few faults, and many happy, dutiful
years to remember with infinite comfort. So Rob had no fears to daunt
him, no regrets to sadden, and best of all, a very strong and simple
piety to sustain and cheer him.

'Mein Vater,' was his first thought; for Rob was very near the
Professor's heart, and the loss of his eldest would have been a bitter
blow. These words, whispered with a tremble of the lips that had been so
firm when the hot iron burned, recalled that other Father who is always
near, always tender and helpful; and, folding his hands, Rob said the
heartiest little prayer he ever prayed, there on the hay, to the soft
twitter of the brooding birds. It did him good; and wisely laying all
his fear and doubt and trouble in God's hand, the boy felt ready for
whatever was to come, and from that hour kept steadily before him the
one duty that was plain--to be brave and cheerful, keep silent, and hope
for the best.

Nan stole her hat, and left a note on Daisy's pincushion, saying she had
taken the boys to drive, and all would be out of the way till after tea.
Then she hurried back and found her patients much better, the one for
work, the other for rest. In they got, and, putting Rob on the back seat
with his leg up drove away, looking as gay and care-free as if nothing
had happened.

Dr Morrison made light of the affair, but told Nan she had done right;
and as the much-relieved lads went downstairs, he added in a whisper:
'Send the dog off for a while, and keep your eye on the boy. Don't let
him know it, and report to me if anything seems wrong. One never knows
in these cases. No harm to be careful.'

Nan nodded, and feeling much relieved now that the responsibility was
off her shoulders, took the lads to Dr Watkins, who promised to come out
later and examine Don. A merry tea at Nan's house, which was kept open
for her all summer, did them good, and by the time they got home in the
cool of the evening no sign of the panic remained but Ted's heavy eyes,
and a slight limp when Rob walked. As the guests were still chattering
on the front piazza they retired to the back, and Ted soothed his
remorseful soul by swinging Rob in the hammock, while Nan told stories
till the dog man arrived.

He said Don was a little under the weather, but no more mad than the
grey kitten that purred round his legs while the examination went on.

'He wants his master, and feels the heat. Fed too well, perhaps. I'll
keep him a few weeks and send him home all right,' said Dr Watkins, as
Don laid his great head in his hand, and kept his intelligent eyes on
his face, evidently feeling that this man understood his trials, and
knew what to do for him.

So Don departed without a murmur, and our three conspirators took
counsel together how to spare the family all anxiety, and give Rob the
rest his leg demanded. Fortunately, he always spent many hours in his
little study, so he could lie on the sofa with a book in his hand
as long as he liked, without exciting any remark. Being of a quiet
temperament, he did not worry himself or Nan with useless fears, but
believed what was told him, and dismissing all dark possibilities, went
cheerfully on his way, soon recovering from the shock of what he called
'our scare'.

But excitable Ted was harder to manage, and it took all Nan's wit and
wisdom to keep him from betraying the secret; for it was best to say
nothing and spare all discussion of the subject for Rob's sake. Ted's
remorse preyed upon him, and having no 'Mum' to confide in, he was very
miserable. By day he devoted himself to Rob, waiting on him, talking to
him, gazing anxiously at him, and worrying the good fellow very much;
though he wouldn't own it, since Ted found comfort in it. But at night,
when all was quiet, Ted's lively imagination and heavy heart got the
better of him, and kept him awake, or set him walking in his sleep. Nan
had her eye on him, and more than once administered a little dose to
give him a rest, read to him, scolded him, and when she caught him
haunting the house in the watches of the night, threatened to lock him
up if he did not stay in his bed. This wore off after a while; but a
change came over the freakish boy, and everyone observed it, even before
his mother returned to ask what they had done to quench the Lion's
spirits. He was gay, but not so heedless; and often when the old
wilfulness beset him, he would check it sharply, look at Rob, and give
up, or stalk away to have his sulk out alone. He no longer made fun of
his brother's old-fashioned ways and bookish tastes, but treated him
with a new and very marked respect, which touched and pleased modest
Rob, and much amazed all observers. It seemed as if he felt that he owed
him reparation for the foolish act that might have cost him his life;
and love being stronger than will, Ted forgot his pride, and paid his
debt like an honest boy.

'I don't understand it,' said Mrs Jo, after a week of home life, much
impressed by the good behaviour of her younger son. 'Ted is such a
saint, I'm afraid we are going to lose him. Is it Meg's sweet influence,
or Daisy's fine cooking, or the pellets I catch Nan giving him on
the sly? Some witchcraft has been at work during my absence, and this
will-o'-the-wisp is so amiable, quiet, and obedient, I don't know him.'

'He is growing up, heart's-dearest, and being a precocious plant, he
begins to bloom early. I also see a change in my Robchen. He is more
manly and serious than ever, and is seldom far from me, as if his
love for the old papa was growing with his growth. Our boys will often
surprise us in this way, Jo, and we can only rejoice over them and leave
them to become what Gott pleases.'

As the Professor spoke, his eyes rested proudly on the brothers, who
came walking up the steps together, Ted's arm over Rob's shoulder as
he listened attentively to some geological remarks Rob was making on a
stone he held. Usually, Ted made fun of such tastes, and loved to lay
boulders in the student's path, put brickbats under his pillow, gravel
in his shoes, or send parcels of dirt by express to 'Prof. R. M. Bhaer'.
Lately, he had treated Rob's hobbies respectfully, and had begun to
appreciate the good qualities of this quiet brother whom he had always
loved but rather undervalued, till his courage under fire won Ted's
admiration, and made it impossible to forget a fault, the consequences
of which might have been so terrible. The leg was still lame, though
doing well, and Ted was always offering an arm as support, gazing
anxiously at his brother, and trying to guess his wants; for regret was
still keen in Ted's soul, and Rob's forgiveness only made it deeper. A
fortunate slip on the stairs gave Rob an excuse for limping, and no one
but Nan and Ted saw the wound; so the secret was safe up to this time.

'We are talking about you, my lads. Come in and tell us what good fairy
has been at work while we were gone. Or is it because absence sharpens
our eyes, that we find such pleasant changes when we come back?' said
Mrs Jo, patting the sofa on either side, while the Professor forgot his
piles of letters to admire the pleasing prospect of his wife in a bower
of arms, as the boys sat down beside her, smiling affectionately, but
feeling a little guilty; for till now 'Mum' and 'Vater' knew every event
in their boyish lives.

'Oh, it's only because Bobby and I have been alone so much; we are sort
of twins. I stir him up a bit, and he steadies me a great deal. You and
father do the same, you know. Nice plan. I like it'; and Ted felt that
he had settled the matter capitally.

'Mother won't thank you for comparing yourself to her, Ted. I'm
flattered at being like father in any way. I try to be,' answered Rob,
as they laughed at Ted's compliment.

'I do thank him, for it's true; and if you, Robin, do half as much for
your brother as Papa has for me, your life won't be a failure,' said
Mrs Jo heartily. 'I'm very glad to see you helping one another. It's the
right way, and we can't begin too soon to try to understand the needs,
virtues, and failings of those nearest us. Love should not make us blind
to faults, nor familiarity make us too ready to blame the shortcomings
we see. So work away, my sonnies, and give us more surprises of this
sort as often as you like.'

'The liebe Mutter has said all. I too am well pleased at the friendly
brother-warmth I find. It is good for everyone; long may it last!' and
Professor Bhaer nodded at the boys, who looked gratified, but rather at
a loss how to respond to these flattering remarks.

Rob wisely kept silent, fearing to say too much; but Ted burst out,
finding it impossible to help telling something:

'The fact is I've been finding out what a brave good chap Bobby is, and
I'm trying to make up for all the bother I've been to him. I knew he
was awfully wise, but I thought him rather soft, because he liked books
better than larks, and was always fussing about his conscience. But I
begin to see that it isn't the fellows who talk the loudest and show
off best that are the manliest. No, sir! quiet old Bob is a hero and a
trump, and I'm proud of him; so would you be if you knew all about it.'

Here a look from Rob brought Ted up with a round turn; he stopped short,
grew red, and clapped his hand on his mouth in dismay.

'Well, are we not to "know all about it"?' asked Mrs Jo quickly; for her
sharp eye saw signs of danger and her maternal heart felt that something
had come between her and her sons. 'Boys,' she went on solemnly, 'I
suspect that the change we talk about is not altogether the effect of
growing up, as we say. It strikes me that Ted has been in mischief and
Rob has got him out of some scrape; hence the lovely mood of my bad boy
and the sober one of my conscientious son, who never hides anything from
his mother.'

Rob was as red as Ted now, but after a moment's hesitation he looked up
and answered with an air of relief:

'Yes, mother, that's it; but it's all over and no harm done, and I think
we'd better let it be, for a while at least. I did feel guilty to keep
anything from you, but now you know so much I shall not worry and you
needn't either. Ted's sorry, I don't mind, and it has done us both
good.'

Mrs Jo looked at Ted, who winked hard but bore the look like a man;
then she turned to Rob, who smiled at her so cheerfully that she felt
reassured; but something in his face struck her, and she saw what it was
that made him seem older, graver, yet more lovable than ever. It was the
look pain of mind, as well as body, brings, and the patience of a sweet
submission to some inevitable trial. Like a flash she guessed that some
danger had been near her boy, and the glances she had caught between the
two lads and Nan confirmed her fears.

'Rob, dear, you have been ill, hurt, or seriously troubled by Ted? Tell
me at once; I will not have any secrets now. Boys sometimes suffer all
their lives from neglected accidents or carelessness. Fritz, make them
speak out!'

Mr Bhaer put down his papers and came to stand before them, saying in a
tone that quieted Mrs Jo, and gave the boys courage:

'My sons, give us the truth. We can bear it; do not hold it back to
spare us. Ted knows we forgive much because we love him, so be frank,
all two.'

Ted instantly dived among the sofa pillows and kept there, with only a
pair of scarlet ears visible, while Rob in a few words told the little
story, truthfully, but as gently as he could, hastening to add the
comfortable assurance that Don was not mad, the wound nearly well, and
no danger would ever come of it.

But Mrs Jo grew so pale he had to put his arms about her, and his father
turned and walked away, exclaiming: 'Ach Himmel!' in a tone of such
mingled pain, relief, and gratitude, that Ted pulled an extra pillow
over his head to smother the sound. They were all right in a minute;
but such news is always a shock, even if the peril is past, and Mrs Jo
hugged her boy close till his father came and took him away, saying with
a strong shake of both hands and a quiver in his voice:

'To be in danger of one's life tries a man's mettle, and you bear it
well; but I cannot spare my good boy yet; thank Gott, we keep him safe!'

A smothered sound, between a choke and a groan, came from under the
pillows, and the writhing of Ted's long legs so plainly expressed
despair that his mother relented towards him, and burrowing till she
found a tousled yellow head, pulled it out and smoothed it, exclaiming
with an irrepressible laugh, though her cheeks were wet with tears:

'Come and be forgiven, poor sinner! I know you have suffered enough, and
I won't say a word; only if harm had come to Rob you would have made
me more miserable than yourself. Oh, Teddy, Teddy, do try to cure that
wilful spirit of yours before it is too late!'

'Oh, Mum, I do try! I never can forget this--I hope it's cured me; if it
hasn't, I am afraid I ain't worth saving,' answered Ted, pulling his own
hair as the only way of expressing his deep remorse.

'Yes, you are, my dear; I felt just so at fifteen when Amy was nearly
drowned, and Marmee helped me as I'll help you. Come to me, Teddy, when
the evil one gets hold of you, and together we'll rout him. Ah, me! I've
had many a tussle with that old Apollyon, and often got worsted, but not
always. Come under my shield, and we'll fight till we win.'

No one spoke for a minute as Ted and his mother laughed and cried in
one handkerchief, and Rob stood with his father's arm round him so happy
that all was told and forgiven, though never to be forgotten; for
such experiences do one good, and knit hearts that love more closely
together.

Presently Ted rose straight up and going to his father, said bravely and
humbly:

'I ought to be punished. Please do it; but first say you forgive me, as
Rob does.'

'Always that, mein Sohn, seventy time seven, if needs be, else I am
not worthy the name you give me. The punishment has come; I can give no
greater. Let it not be in vain. It will not with the help of the mother
and the All Father. Room here for both, always!'

The good Professor opened his arms and embraced his boys like a true
German, not ashamed to express by gesture or by word the fatherly
emotions an American would have compressed into a slap on the shoulder
and a brief 'All right'.

Mrs Jo sat and enjoyed the prospect like a romantic soul as she was, and
then they had a quiet talk together, saying freely all that was in their
hearts, and finding much comfort in the confidence which comes when love
casts out fear. It was agreed that nothing be said except to Nan,
who was to be thanked and rewarded for her courage, discretion, and
fidelity.

'I always knew that girl had the making of a fine woman in her, and this
proves it. No panics and shrieks and faintings and fuss, but calm
sense and energetic skill. Dear child, what can I give or do to show my
gratitude?' said Mrs Jo enthusiastically.

'Make Tom clear out and leave her in peace,' suggested Ted, almost
himself again, though a pensive haze still partially obscured his native
gaiety.

'Yes, do! he frets her like a mosquito. She forbade him to come out here
while she stayed, and packed him off with Demi. I like old Tom, but he
is a regular noodle about Nan,' added Rob, as he went away to help his
father with the accumulated letters.

'I'll do it!' said Mrs Jo decidedly. 'That girl's career shall not be
hampered by a foolish boy's fancy. In a moment of weariness she may give
in, and then it's all over. Wiser women have done so and regretted it
all their lives. Nan shall earn her place first, and prove that she can
fill it; then she may marry if she likes, and can find a man worthy of
her.'

But Mrs Jo's help was not needed; for love and gratitude can work
miracles, and when youth, beauty, accident, and photography are added,
success is sure; as was proved in the case of the unsuspecting but too
susceptible Thomas.



Chapter 8. JOSIE PLAYS MERMAID

While the young Bhaers were having serious experiences at home, Josie
was enjoying herself immensely at Rocky Nook; for the Laurences knew how
to make summer idleness both charming and wholesome. Bess was very fond
of her little cousin; Mrs Amy felt that whether her niece was an actress
or not she must be a gentlewoman, and gave her the social training
which marks the well-bred woman everywhere; while Uncle Laurie was never
happier than when rowing, riding, playing, or lounging with two gay
girls beside him. Josie bloomed like a wild flower in this free life,
Bess grew rosy, brisk, and merry, and both were great favourites with
the neighbours, whose villas were by the shore or perched on the cliffs
along the pretty bay.

One crumpled rose-leaf disturbed Josie's peace, one baffled wish filled
her with a longing which became a mania, and kept her as restless and
watchful as a detective with a case to 'work up'. Miss Cameron, the
great actress, had hired one of the villas and retired thither to rest
and 'create' a new part for next season. She saw no one but a friend
or two, had a private beach, and was invisible except during her daily
drive, or when the opera-glasses of curious gazers were fixed on a
blue figure disporting itself in the sea. The Laurences knew her, but
respected her privacy, and after a call left her in peace till she
expressed a wish for society--a courtesy which she remembered and repaid
later, as we shall see.

But Josie was like a thirsty fly buzzing about a sealed honey-pot, for
this nearness to her idol was both delightful and maddening. She pined
to see, hear, talk with, and study this great and happy woman who could
thrill thousands by her art, and win friends by her virtue, benevolence,
and beauty. This was the sort of actress the girl meant to be, and few
could object if the gift was really hers; for the stage needs just such
women to purify and elevate the profession which should teach as well as
amuse. If kindly Miss Cameron had known what passionate love and longing
burned in the bosom of the little girl whom she idly observed skipping
over the rocks, splashing about the beach, or galloping past her gate on
a Shetland pony, she would have made her happy by a look or a word. But
being tired with her winter's work and busy with her new part, the lady
took no more notice of this young neighbour than of the sea-gulls in the
bay or the daisies dancing in the fields. Nosegays left on her doorstep,
serenades under her garden-wall, and the fixed stare of admiring eyes
were such familiar things that she scarcely minded them; and Josie grew
desperate when all her little attempts failed.

'I might climb that pine-tree and tumble off on her piazza roof, or get
Sheltie to throw me just at her gate and be taken in fainting. It's no
use to try to drown myself when she is bathing. I can't sink, and she'd
only send a man to pull me out. What can I do? I will see her and tell
her my hopes and make her say I can act some day. Mamma would believe
her; and if--oh, if she only would let me study with her, what perfect
joy that would be!'

Josie made these remarks one afternoon as she and Bess prepared for a
swim, a fishing party having prevented their morning bathe.

'You must bide your time, dear, and not be so impatient. Papa promised
to give you a chance before the season is over, and he always manages
things nicely. That will be better than any queer prank of yours,'
answered Bess, tying her pretty hair in a white net to match her suit,
while Josie made a little lobster of herself in scarlet.

'I hate to wait; but I suppose I must. Hope she will bathe this
afternoon, though it is low tide. She told Uncle she should have to go
in then because in the morning people stared so and went on her beach.
Come and have a good dive from the big rock. No one round but nurses and
babies, so we can romp and splash as much as we like.'

Away they went to have a fine time; for the little bay was free from
other bathers, and the babies greatly admired their aquatic gymnastics,
both being expert swimmers.

As they sat dripping on the big rock Josie suddenly gave a clutch that
nearly sent Bess overboard, as she cried excitedly:

'There she is! Look! coming to bathe. How splendid! Oh, if she only
would drown a little and let me save her! or even get her toe nipped by
a crab; anything so I could go and speak!'

'Don't seem to look; she comes to be quiet and enjoy herself. Pretend
we don't see her, that's only civil,' answered Bess, affecting to be
absorbed in a white-winged yacht going by.

'Let's carelessly float that way as if going for seaweed on the rocks.
She can't mind if we are flat on our backs, with only our noses out.
Then when we can't help seeing her, we'll swim back as if anxious to
retire. That will impress her, and she may call to thank the very polite
young ladies who respect her wishes,' proposed Josie, whose lively fancy
was always planning dramatic situations.

Just as they were going to slip from their rock, as if Fate relented at
last, Miss Cameron was seen to beckon wildly as she stood waist-deep in
the water, looking down. She called to her maid, who seemed searching
along the beach for something, and not finding what she sought, waved a
towel towards the girls as if summoning them to help her.

'Run, fly! she wants us, she wants us!' cried Josie, tumbling into the
water like a very energetic turtle, and swimming away in her best style
towards this long desired haven of joy. Bess followed more slowly, and
both came panting and smiling up to Miss Cameron, who never lifted her
eyes, but said in that wonderful voice of hers:

'I've dropped a bracelet. I see it, but can't get it. Will the little
boy find me a long stick? I'll keep my eye on it, so the water shall not
wash it away.'

'I'll dive for it with pleasure; but I'm not a boy,' answered Josie,
laughing as she shook the curly head which at a distance had deceived
the lady.

'I beg your pardon. Dive away, child; the sand is covering it fast. I
value it very much. Never forgot to take it off before.'

'I'll get it!' and down went Josie, to come up with a handful of
pebbles, but no bracelet.

'It's gone; never mind--my fault,' said Miss Cameron, disappointed, but
amused at the girl's dismay as she shook the water out of her eyes and
gasped bravely:

'No, it isn't. I'll have it, if I stay down all night!' and with one
long breath Josie dived again, leaving nothing but a pair of agitated
feet to be seen.

'I'm afraid she will hurt herself,' said Miss Cameron, looking at Bess,
whom she recognized by her likeness to her mother.

'Oh, no; Josie is a little fish. She likes it'; and Bess smiled happily
at this wonderful granting of her cousin's desire.

'You are Mr Laurence's daughter, I think? How d'ye do, dear? Tell papa
I'm coming to see him soon. Too tired before. Quite savage. Better now.
Ah! here's our pearl of divers. What luck?' she asked, as the heels went
down and a dripping head came up.

Josie could only choke and splutter at first, being half strangled;
but though her hands had failed again, her courage had not; and with a
resolute shake of her wet hair, a bright look at the tall lady, and a
series of puffs to fill her lungs, she said calmly:

'"Never give up" is my motto. I'm going to get it, if I go to Liverpool
for it! Now, then!' and down went the mermaid quite out of sight this
time, groping like a real lobster at the bottom of the sea.

'Plucky little girl! I like that. Who is she?' asked the lady, sitting
down on a half-covered stone to watch her diver, since the bracelet was
lost sight of.

Bess told her, adding, with the persuasive smile of her father: 'Josie
longs to be an actress, and has waited for a month to see you. This is a
great happiness for her.'

'Bless the child! why didn't she come and call? I'd have let her in;
though usually I avoid stage-struck girls as I do reporters,' laughed
Miss Cameron.

There was no time for more; a brown hand, grasping the bracelet, rose
out of the sea, followed by a purple face as Josie came up so blind and
dizzy she could only cling to Bess, half drowned but triumphant.

Miss Cameron drew her to the rock where she sat, and pushing the hair
out of her eyes, revived her with a hearty 'Bravo! bravo!' which assured
the girl that her first act was a hit. Josie had often imagined her
meeting with the great actress--the dignity and grace with which she
would enter and tell her ambitious hopes, the effective dress she would
wear, the witty things she would say, the deep impression her budding
genius would make. But never in her wildest moments had she imagined
an interview like this; scarlet, sandy, streaming, and speechless she
leaned against the illustrious shoulder, looking like a beautiful seal
as she blinked and wheezed till she could smile joyfully and exclaim
proudly:

'I did get it! I'm so glad!'

'Now get your breath, my dear; then I shall be glad also. It was very
nice of you to take all that trouble for me. How shall I thank you?'
asked the lady, looking at her with the beautiful eyes that could say so
many things without words.

Josie clasped her hands with a wet spat which rather destroyed the
effect of the gesture, and answered in a beseeching tone that would have
softened a far harder heart than Miss Cameron's:

'Let me come and see you once--only once! I want you to tell me if I
can act; you will know. I'll abide by what you say; and if you think
I can--by and by, when I've studied very hard--I shall be the happiest
girl in the world. May I?'

'Yes; come tomorrow at eleven. We'll have a good talk; you shall show me
what you can do, and I'll give you my opinion. But you won't like it.'

'I will, no matter if you tell me I'm a fool. I want it settled; so
does mamma. I'll take it bravely if you say no; and if you say yes, I'll
never give up till I've done my best--as you did.'

'Ah, my child, it's a weary road, and there are plenty of thorns among
the roses when you've won them. I think you have the courage, and this
proves that you have perseverance. Perhaps you'll do. Come, and we'll
see.'

Miss Cameron touched the bracelet as she spoke, and smiled so kindly
that impetuous Josie wanted to kiss her; but wisely refrained, though
her eyes were wet with softer water than any in the sea as she thanked
her.

'We are keeping Miss Cameron from her bath, and the tide is going out.
Come, Josie,' said thoughtful Bess, fearing to outstay their welcome.

'Run over the beach and get warm. Thank you very much, little mermaid.
Tell papa to bring his daughter to see me any time. Good-bye'; and with
a wave of her hand the tragedy queen dismissed her court, but remained
on her weedy throne watching the two lithe figures race over the sand
with twinkling feet till they were out of sight. Then, as she calmly
bobbed up and down in the water, she said to herself: 'The child has a
good stage face, vivid, mobile; fine eyes, abandon, pluck, will. Perhaps
she'll do. Good stock--talent in the family. We shall see.'

Of course Josie never slept a wink, and was in a fever of joyful
excitement next day. Uncle Laurie enjoyed the episode very much,
and Aunt Amy looked out her most becoming white dress for the grand
occasion; Bess lent her most artistic hat, and Josie ranged the wood
and marsh for a bouquet of wild roses, sweet white azalea, ferns, and
graceful grasses, as the offering of a very grateful heart.

At ten she solemnly arrayed herself, and then sat looking at her neat
gloves and buckled shoes till it was time to go, growing pale and sober
with the thought that her fate was soon to be decided; for, like all
young people she was sure that her whole life could be settled by one
human creature, quite forgetting how wonderfully Providence trains us
by disappointment, surprises us with unexpected success, and turns our
seeming trials into blessings.

'I will go alone: we shall be freer so. Oh, Bess, pray that she may tell
me rightly! So much depends on that! Don't laugh, uncle! It is a very
serious moment for me. Miss Cameron knows that, and will tell you so.
Kiss me, Aunt Amy, since mamma isn't here. If you say I look nice, I'm
quite satisfied. Good-bye.' And with a wave of the hand as much like her
model's as she could make it, Josie departed, looking very pretty and
feeling very tragical.

Sure now of admittance, she boldly rang at the door which excluded so
many, and being ushered into a shady parlour, feasted her eyes upon
several fine portraits of great actors while she waited. She had read
about most of them, and knew their trials and triumphs so well that she
soon forgot herself, and tried to imitate Mrs Siddons as Lady Macbeth,
looking up at the engraving as she held her nosegay like the candle in
the sleep-walking scene, and knit her youthful brows distressfully while
murmuring the speech of the haunted queen. So busy was she that Miss
Cameron watched her for several minutes unseen, then startled her by
suddenly sweeping in with the words upon her lips, the look upon her
face, which made that one of her greatest scenes.

'I never can do it like that; but I'll keep trying, if you say I may,'
cried Josie, forgetting her manners in the intense interest of the
moment.

'Show me what you can do,' answered the actress, wisely plunging into
the middle of things at once, well knowing that no common chat would
satisfy this very earnest little person.

'First let me give you these. I thought you'd like wild things better
than hot-house flowers; and I loved to bring them, as I'd no other way
to thank you for your great kindness to me,' said Josie, offering her
nosegay with a simple warmth that was very sweet.

'I do love them best, and keep my room full of the posies some good
fairy hangs on my gate. Upon my word, I think I've found the fairy
out--these are so like,' she added quickly, as her eye went from the
flowers in her hand to others that stood near by, arranged with the same
taste.

Josie's blush and smile betrayed her before she said, with a look full
of girlish adoration and humility: 'I couldn't help it; I admire you so
much. I know it was a liberty; but as I couldn't get in myself, I loved
to think my posies pleased you.'

Something about the child and her little offering touched the woman,
and, drawing Josie to her, she said, with no trace of actress in face or
voice:

'They did please me, dear, and so do you. I'm tired of praise; and love
is very sweet, when it is simple and sincere like this.'

Josie remembered to have heard, among many other stories, that Miss
Cameron lost her lover years ago, and since had lived only for art.
Now she felt that this might have been true; and pity for the splendid,
lonely life made her face very eloquent, as well as grateful. Then, as
if anxious to forget the past, her new friend said, in the commanding
way that seemed natural to her:

'Let me see what you can do. Juliet, of course. All begin with that.
Poor soul, how she is murdered!'

Now, Josie had intended to begin with Romeo's much-enduring sweetheart,
and follow her up with Bianca, Pauline, and several of the favourite
idols of stage-struck girls; but being a shrewd little person, she
suddenly saw the wisdom of Uncle Laurie's advice, and resolved to
follow it. So instead of the rant Miss Cameron expected, Josie gave poor
Ophelia's mad scene, and gave it very well, having been trained by
the college professor of elocution and done it many times. She was too
young, of course, but the white gown, the loose hair, the real flowers
she scattered over the imaginary grave, added to the illusion; and she
sung the songs sweetly, dropped her pathetic curtsies, and vanished
behind the curtain that divided the rooms with a backward look that
surprised her critical auditor into a quick gesture of applause. Cheered
by that welcome sound, Josie ran back as a little hoyden in one of the
farces she had often acted, telling a story full of fun and naughtiness
at first, but ending with a sob of repentance and an earnest prayer for
pardon.

'Very good! Try again. Better than I expected,' called the voice of the
oracle.

Josie tried Portia's speech, and recited very well, giving due emphasis
to each fine sentence. Then, unable to refrain from what she considered
her greatest effort, she burst into Juliet's balcony scene, ending with
the poison and the tomb. She felt sure that she surpassed herself, and
waited for applause. A ringing laugh made her tingle with indignation
and disappointment, as she went to stand before Miss Cameron, saying in
a tone of polite surprise:

'I have been told that I did it very well. I'm sorry you don't think
so.'

'My dear, it's very bad. How can it help being so? What can a child like
you know of love and fear and death? Don't try it yet. Leave tragedy
alone till you are ready for it.'

'But you clapped Ophelia.'

'Yes, that was very pretty. Any clever girl can do it effectively. But
the real meaning of Shakespeare is far above you yet, child. The comedy
bit was best. There you showed real talent. It was both comic and
pathetic. That's art. Don't lose it. The Portia was good declamation.
Go on with that sort of thing; it trains the voice--teaches shades of
expression. You've a good voice and natural grace--great helps both,
hard to acquire.'

'Well, I'm glad I've got something,' sighed Josie, sitting meekly on a
stool, much crestfallen, but not daunted yet, and bound to have her say
out.

'My dear little girl, I told you that you would not like what I should
say to you; yet I must be honest if I would really help you. I've had to
do it for many like you; and most of them have never forgiven me, though
my words have proved true, and they are what I advised them to be--good
wives and happy mothers in quiet homes. A few have kept on, and done
fairly well. One you will hear of soon, I think; for she has talent,
indomitable patience, and mind as well as beauty. You are too young
to show to which class you belong. Geniuses are very rare, and even at
fifteen seldom give much promise of future power.'

'Oh, I don't think I'm a genius!' cried Josie, growing calm and sober as
she listened to the melodious voice and looked into the expressive face
that filled her with confidence, so strong, sincere, and kindly was it.
'I only want to find out if I have talent enough to go on, and after
years of study to be able to act well in any of the good plays people
never tire of seeing. I don't expect to be a Mrs Siddons or a Miss
Cameron, much as I long to be; but it does seem as if I had something
in me which can't come out in any way but this. When I act I'm perfectly
happy. I seem to live, to be in my own world, and each new part is a new
friend. I love Shakespeare, and am never tired of his splendid people.
Of course, I don't understand it all; but it's like being alone at night
with the mountains and the stars, solemn and grand, and I try to imagine
how it will look when the sun comes up, and all is glorious and clear to
me. I can't see, but I feel the beauty, and long to express it.'

As she spoke with the most perfect self-forgetfulness Josie was pale
with excitement, her eyes shone, her lips trembled, and all her little
soul seemed trying to put into words the emotions that filled it to
overflowing. Miss Cameron understood, felt that this was something
more than a girlish whim; and when she answered there was a new tone
of sympathy in her voice, a new interest in her face, though she wisely
refrained from saying all she thought, well knowing what splendid dreams
young people build upon a word, and how bitter is the pain when the
bright bubbles burst.

'If you feel this, I can give you no better advice than to go on loving
and studying our great master,' she said slowly; but Josie caught the
changed tone, and felt, with a thrill of joy, that her new friend was
speaking to her now as to a comrade. 'It is an education in itself, and
a lifetime is not long enough to teach you all his secret. But there is
much to do before you can hope to echo his words. Have you the patience,
courage, strength, to begin at the beginning, and slowly, painfully, lay
the foundation for future work? Fame is a pearl many dive for and only
a few bring up. Even when they do, it is not perfect, and they sigh for
more, and lose better things in struggling for them.'

The last words seemed spoken more to herself than to her hearer, but
Josie answered quickly, with a smile and an expressive gesture:

'I got the bracelet in spite of all the bitter water in my eyes.'

'You did! I don't forget it. A good omen. We will accept it.'

Miss Cameron answered the smile with one that was like sunshine to the
girl, and stretched her white hands as if taking some invisible gift.
Then added in a different tone, watching the effect of her words on the
expressive face before her:

'Now you will be disappointed, for instead of telling you to come and
study with me, or go and act in some second-rate theatre at once, I
advise you to go back to school and finish your education. That is the
first step, for all accomplishments are needed, and a single talent
makes a very imperfect character. Cultivate mind and body, heart and
soul, and make yourself an intelligent, graceful, beautiful, and healthy
girl. Then, at eighteen or twenty, go into training and try your powers.
Better start for the battle with your arms in order, and save the hard
lesson which comes when we rush on too soon. Now and then genius carries
all before it, but not often. We have to climb slowly, with many slips
and falls. Can you wait as well as work?'

'I will!'

'We shall see. It would be pleasant to me to know that when I quit the
stage I leave behind me a well-trained, faithful, gifted comrade to
more than fill my place, and carry on what I have much at heart--the
purification of the stage. Perhaps you are she; but remember, mere
beauty and rich costumes do not make an actress, nor are the efforts of
a clever little girl to play great characters real art. It is all dazzle
and sham, and a disgrace and disappointment now. Why will the public be
satisfied with opera bouffe, or the trash called society plays when
a world of truth and beauty, poetry and pathos lies waiting to be
interpreted and enjoyed?'

Miss Cameron had forgotten to whom she spoke, and walked to and fro,
full of the noble regret all cultivated people feel at the low state of
the stage nowadays.

'That's what Uncle Laurie says; and he and Aunt Jo try to plan plays
about true and lovely things--simple domestic scenes that touch people's
hearts, and make them laugh and cry and feel better. Uncle says that
sort is my style, and I must not think of tragedy. But it's so much
nicer to sweep about in crowns and velvet trains than to wear everyday
clothes, and just be myself, though it is so easy.'

'Yet that is high art, child, and what we need for a time till we are
ready for the masters. Cultivate that talent of yours. It is a special
gift, this power to bring tears and smiles, and a sweeter task to touch
the heart than to freeze the blood or fire the imagination. Tell your
uncle he is right, and ask your aunt to try a play for you. I'll come
and see it when you are ready.'

'Will you? Oh! will you? We are going to have some at Christmas, with a
nice part for me. A simple little thing, but I can do it, and should be
so proud, so happy to have you there.'

Josie rose as she spoke, for a glance at the clock showed her that her
call was a long one; and hard as it was to end this momentous interview,
she felt that she must go. Catching up her hat she went to Miss Cameron,
who stood looking at her so keenly that she felt as transparent as a
pane of glass, and coloured prettily as she looked up, saying, with a
grateful little tremor in her voice:

'I can never thank you for this hour and all you have told me. I shall
do just what you advise, and mamma will be very glad to see me settled
at my books again. I can study now with all my heart, because it is to
help me on; and I won't hope too much, but work and wait, and try to
please you, as the only way to pay my debt.'

'That reminds me that I have not paid mine. Little friend, wear this
for my sake. It is fit for a mermaid, and will remind you of your first
dive. May the next bring up a better jewel, and leave no bitter water on
your lips!'

As she spoke, Miss Cameron took from the lace at her throat a pretty
pin of aquamarine, and fastened it like an order on Josie's proud bosom;
then lifting the happy little face, she kissed it very tenderly, and
watched it go smiling away with eyes that seemed to see into a future
full of the trials and the triumphs which she knew so well.

Bess expected to see Josie come flying in, all raptures and excitement,
or drowned in tears of disappointment, but was surprised at the
expression of calm content and resolution which she wore. Pride and
satisfaction, and a new feeling of responsibility both sobered and
sustained her, and she felt that any amount of dry study and long
waiting would be bearable, if in the glorious future she could be
an honour to her profession and a comrade to the new friend whom she
already adored with girlish ardour.

She told her little story to a deeply interested audience, and all
felt that Miss Cameron's advice was good. Mrs Amy was relieved at the
prospect of delay; for she did not want her niece to be an actress and
hoped the fancy would die out.

Uncle Laurie was full of charming plans and prophecies and wrote one
of his most delightful notes to thank their neighbour for her kindness;
while Bess, who loved art of all kinds, fully sympathized with her
cousin's ambitious hopes, only wondering why she preferred to act out
her visions rather than embody them in marble.

That first interview was not the last; for Miss Cameron was really
interested, and had several memorable conversations with the Laurences,
while the girls sat by, drinking in every word with the delight all
artists feel in their own beautiful world, and learning to see how
sacred good gifts are, how powerful, and how faithfully they should be
used for high ends, each in its own place helping to educate, refine,
and refresh.

Josie wrote reams to her mother; and when the visit ended rejoiced her
heart by bringing her a somewhat changed little daughter, who fell to
work at the once-detested books with a patient energy which surprised
and pleased everyone. The right string had been touched, and even French
exercises and piano practice became endurable, since accomplishments
would be useful by and by; dress, manners, and habits were all
interesting now, because 'mind and body, heart and soul, must be
cultivated', and while training to become an 'intelligent, graceful,
healthy girl', little Josie was unconsciously fitting herself to play
her part well on whatever stage the great Manager might prepare for her.



Chapter 9. THE WORM TURNS

Two very superior bicycles went twinkling up the road to Plumfield
one September afternoon, bearing two brown and dusty riders evidently
returning from a successful run, for though their legs might be a trifle
weary, their faces beamed as they surveyed the world from their lofty
perches with the air of calm content all wheelmen wear after they have
learned to ride; before that happy period anguish of mind and body is
the chief expression of the manly countenance.

'Go ahead and report, Tom; I'm due here. See you later,' said Demi,
swinging himself down at the door of the Dovecote.

'Don't peach, there's a good fellow. Let me have it out with Mother
Bhaer first,' returned Tom, wheeling in at the gate with a heavy sigh.

Demi laughed, and his comrade went slowly up the avenue, devoutly hoping
that the coast was clear; for he was the bearer of tidings which would,
he thought, convulse the entire family with astonishment and dismay.

To his great joy Mrs Jo was discovered alone in a grove of proof-sheets,
which she dropped, to greet the returning wanderer cordially. But after
the first glance she saw that something was the matter, recent events
having made her unusually sharp-eyed and suspicious.

'What is it now, Tom?' she asked, as he subsided into an easy-chair with
a curious expression of mingled fear, shame, amusement, and distress in
his brick-red countenance.

'I'm in an awful scrape, ma'am.'

'Of course; I'm always prepared for scrapes when you appear. What is
it? Run over some old lady who is going to law about it?' asked Mrs Jo
cheerfully.

'Worse than that,' groaned Tom.

'Not poisoned some trusting soul who asked you to prescribe, I hope?'

'Worse than that.'

'You haven't let Demi catch any horrid thing and left him behind, have
you?'

'Worse even than that.'

'I give it up. Tell me quick; I hate to wait for bad news.'

Having got his listener sufficiently excited, Tom launched his
thunderbolt in one brief sentence, and fell back to watch the effect.

'I'm engaged!'

Mrs Jo's proof-sheets flew wildly about as she clasped her hands,
exclaiming in dismay:

'If Nan has yielded, I'll never forgive her!'

'She hasn't; it's another girl.'

Tom's face was so funny as he said the words, that it was impossible
to help laughing; for he looked both sheepish and pleased, besides very
much perplexed and worried.

'I'm glad, very glad indeed! Don't care who it is; and I hope you'll
be married soon. Now tell me all about it,' commanded Mrs Jo, so much
relieved that she felt ready for anything.

'What will Nan say?' demanded Tom, rather taken aback at this view of
his predicament.

'She will be rejoiced to get rid of the mosquito who has plagued her so
long. Don't worry about Nan. Who is this "other girl"?'

'Demi hasn't written about her?'

'Only something about your upsetting a Miss West down at Quitno; I
thought that was scrape enough.'

'That was only the beginning of a series of scrapes. Just my luck! Of
course after sousing the poor girl I had to be attentive to her, hadn't
I? Everyone seemed to think so, and I couldn't get away, and so I was
lost before I knew it. It's all Demi's fault, he would stay there and
fuss with his old photos, because the views were good and all the girls
wanted to be taken. Look at these, will you, ma'am? That's the way we
spent our time when we weren't playing tennis'; and Tom pulled a
handful of pictures from his pocket, displaying several in which he was
conspicuous, either holding a sun-umbrella over a very pretty young lady
on the rocks, reposing at her feet in the grass, or perched on a piazza
railing with other couples in seaside costumes and effective attitudes.

'This is she of course?' asked Mrs Jo, pointing to the much-ruffled
damsel with the jaunty hat, coquettish shoes, and racquet in her hand.

'That's Dora. Isn't she lovely?' cried Tom, forgetting his tribulations
for a moment and speaking with lover-like ardour.

'Very nice little person to look at. Hope she is not a Dickens Dora?
That curly crop looks like it.'

'Not a bit; she's very smart; can keep house, and sew, and do lots
of things, I assure you, ma'am. All the girls like her, and she's
sweet-tempered and jolly, and sings like a bird, and dances beautifully,
and loves books. Thinks yours are splendid, and made me talk about you
no end.'

'That last sentence is to flatter me and win my help to get you out of
the scrape. Tell me first how you got in'; and Mrs Jo settled herself to
listen with interest, never tired of boys' affairs.

Tom gave his head a rousing rub all over to clear his wits, and plunged
into his story with a will.

'Well, we've met her before, but I didn't know she was there. Demi
wanted to see a fellow, so we went, and finding it nice and cool rested
over Sunday. Found some pleasant people and went out rowing; I had Dora,
and came to grief on a confounded rock. She could swim, no harm done,
only the scare and the spoilt gown. She took it well, and we got
friendly at once--couldn't help it, scrambling into that beast of a boat
while the rest laughed at us. Of course we had to stay another day to
see that Dora was all right. Demi wanted to. Alice Heath is down there
and two other girls from our college, so we sort of lingered along,
and Demi kept taking pictures, and we danced, and got into a tennis
tournament; and that was as good exercise as wheeling, we thought. Fact
is, tennis is a dangerous game, ma'am. A great deal of courting goes
on in those courts, and we fellows find that sort of "serving" mighty
agreeable, don't you know?'

'Not much tennis in my day, but I understand perfectly,' said Mrs Jo,
enjoying it all as much as Tom did.

'Upon my word, I hadn't the least idea of being serious,' he continued
slowly, as if this part of his tale was hard to tell; 'but everyone else
spooned, so I did. Dora seemed to like it and expect it, and of course
I was glad to be agreeable. She thought I amounted to something, though
Nan does not, and it was pleasant to be appreciated after years of
snubbing. Yes, it was right down jolly to have a sweet girl smile at you
all day, and blush prettily when you said a neat thing to her, and look
glad when you came, sorry when you left, and admire all you did, and
make you feel like a man and act your best. That's the sort of treatment
a fellow enjoys and ought to get if he behaves himself; not frowns and
cold shoulders year in and year out, and made to look like a fool when
he means well, and is faithful, and has loved a girl ever since he was a
boy. No, by Jove, it's not fair, and I won't stand it!'

Tom waxed warm and eloquent as he thought over his wrongs, and bounced
up to march about the room, wagging his head and trying to feel
aggrieved as usual, but surprised to find that his heart did not ache a
bit.

'I wouldn't. Drop the old fancy, for it was nothing more, and take up
the new one, if it is genuine. But how came you to propose, Tom, as you
must have done to be engaged?' asked Mrs Jo, impatient for the crisis of
the tale.

'Oh, that was an accident. I didn't mean it at all; the donkey did it,
and I couldn't get out of the scrape without hurting Dora's feelings,
you see,' began Tom, seeing that the fatal moment had come.

'So there were two donkeys in it, were there?' said Mrs Jo, foreseeing
fun of some sort.

'Don't laugh! It sounds funny, I know; but it might have been awful,'
answered Tom darkly, though a twinkle of the eye showed that his love
trials did not quite blind him to the comic side of the adventure.

'The girls admired our new wheels, and of course we liked to show off.
Took 'em to ride, and had larks generally. Well, one day, Dora was
on behind, and we were going nicely along a good bit of road, when a
ridiculous old donkey got right across the way. I thought he'd move, but
he didn't, so I gave him a kick; he kicked back, and over we went in a
heap, donkey and all. Such a mess! I thought only of Dora, and she had
hysterics; at least, she laughed till she cried, and that beast brayed,
and I lost my head. Any fellow would, with a poor girl gasping in the
road, and he wiping her tears and begging pardon, not knowing whether
her bones were broken or not. I called her my darling, and went on like
a fool in my flurry, till she grew calmer, and said, with such a look:
"I forgive you, Tom. Pick me up, and let us go on again."

'Wasn't that sweet now, after I'd upset her for the second time? It
touched me to the heart; and I said I'd like to go on for ever with such
an angel to steer for, and--well I don't know what I did say; but you
might have knocked me down with a feather when she put her arm round my
neck and whispered: "Tom, dear, with you I'm not afraid of any lions in
the path." She might have said donkeys; but she was in earnest, and she
spared my feelings. Very nice of the dear girl; but there I am with two
sweethearts on my hands, and in a deuce of a scrape.'

Finding it impossible to contain herself another moment, Mrs Jo laughed
till the tears ran down her cheeks at this characteristic episode; and
after one reproachful look, which only added to her merriment, Tom burst
into a jolly roar that made the room ring.

'Tommy Bangs! Tommy Bangs! who but you could ever get into such a
catastrophe?' said Mrs Jo, when she recovered her breath.

'Isn't it a muddle all round, and won't everyone chaff me to death about
it? I shall have to quit old Plum for a while,' answered Tom, as he
mopped his face, trying to realize the full danger of his position.

'No, indeed; I'll stand by you, for I think it the best joke of the
season. But tell me how things ended. Is it really serious, or only a
summer flirtation? I don't approve of them, but boys and girls will play
with edged tools and cut their fingers.'

'Well, Dora considers herself engaged, and wrote to her people at once.
I couldn't say a word when she took it all in solemn earnest and seemed
so happy. She's only seventeen, never liked anyone before, and is sure
all will be all right; as her father knows mine, and we are both well
off. I was so staggered that I said:

'"Why, you can't love me really when we know so little of one another?"
But she answered right out of her tender little heart: "Yes, I do,
dearly, Tom; you are so gay and kind and honest, I couldn't help it."
Now, after that what could I do but go ahead and make her happy while I
stayed, and trust to luck to straighten the snarl out afterwards?'

'A truly Tomian way of taking things easy. I hope you told your father
at once.'

'Oh yes, I wrote off and broke it to him in three lines. I said: "Dear
Father, I'm engaged to Dora West, and I hope she will suit the family.
She suits me tip-top. Yours ever, Tom." He was all right, never liked
Nan, you know; but Dora will suit him down to the ground.' And Tom
looked entirely satisfied with his own tact and taste.

'What did Demi say to this rapid and funny lovemaking? Wasn't he
scandalized?' asked Mrs Jo, trying not to laugh again as she thought of
the unromantic spectacle of donkey, bicycle, boy, and girl all in the
dust together.

'Not a bit. He was immensely interested and very kind; talked to me like
a father; said it was a good thing to steady a fellow, only I must be
honest with her and myself and not trifle a moment. Demi is a regular
Solomon, especially when he is in the same boat,' answered Tom, looking
wise.

'You don't mean--?' gasped Mrs Jo, in sudden alarm at the bare idea of
more love-affairs just yet.

'Yes, I do, please, ma'am; it's a regular sell all the way through, and
I owe Demi one for taking me into temptation blindfold. He said he went
to Quitno to see Fred Wallace, but he never saw the fellow. How could
he, when Wallace was off in his yacht all the time we were there? Alice
was the real attraction, and I was left to my fate, while they were
maundering round with that old camera. There were three donkeys in
this affair, and I'm not the worst one, though I shall have to bear the
laugh. Demi will look innocent and sober, and no one will say a word to
him.'

'The midsummer madness has broken out, and no one knows who will be
stricken next. Well, leave Demi to his mother, and let us see what you
are going to do, Tom.'

'I don't know exactly; it's awkward to be in love with two girls at
once. What do you advise?'

'A common-sense view of the case, by all means. Dora loves you and
thinks you love her. Nan does not care for you, and you only care for
her as a friend, though you have tried to do more. It is my opinion,
Tom, that you love Dora, or are on the way to it; for in all these
years I've never seen you look or speak about Nan as you do about Dora.
Opposition has made you obstinately cling to her till accident has shown
you a more attractive girl. Now, I think you had better take the old
love for a friend, the new one for a sweetheart, and in due time, if the
sentiment is genuine, marry her.'

If Mrs Jo had any doubts about the matter, Tom's face would have proved
the truth of her opinion; for his eyes shone, his lips smiled, and in
spite of dust and sunburn a new expression of happiness quite glorified
him as he stood silent for a moment, trying to understand the beautiful
miracle which real love works when it comes to a young man's heart.

'The fact is I meant to make Nan jealous, for she knows Dora, and I was
sure would hear of our doings. I was tired of being walked on, and I
thought I'd try to break away and not be a bore and a laughing-stock any
more,' he said slowly, as if it relieved him to pour out his doubts and
woes and hopes and joys to his old friend. 'I was regularly astonished
to find it so easy and so pleasant. I didn't mean to do any harm,
but drifted along beautifully, and told Demi to mention things in his
letters to Daisy, so Nan might know. Then I forgot Nan altogether, and
saw, heard, felt, cared for no one but Dora, till the donkey--bless his
old heart!--pitched her into my arms and I found she loved me. Upon my
soul, I don't see why she should! I'm not half good enough.'

'Every honest man feels that when an innocent girl puts her hand in his.
Make yourself worthy of her, for she isn't an angel, but a woman with
faults of her own for you to bear, and forgive, and you must help one
another,' said Mrs Jo, trying to realize that this sober youth was her
scapegrace Tommy.

'What troubles me is that I didn't mean it when I began, and was going
to use the dear girl as an instrument of torture for Nan. It wasn't
right, and I don't deserve to be so happy. If all my scrapes ended as
well as this, what a state of bliss I should be in!' and Tom beamed
again at the rapturous prospect.

'My dear boy, it is not a scrape, but a very sweet experience suddenly
dawning upon you,' answered Mrs Jo, speaking very soberly; for she saw
he was in earnest. 'Enjoy it wisely and be worthy of it, for it is a
serious thing to accept a girl's love and trust, and let her look up to
you for tenderness and truth in return. Don't let little Dora look in
vain, but be a man in all things for her sake, and make this affection a
blessing to you both.'

'I'll try. Yes, I do love her, only I can't believe it just yet. Wish
you knew her. Dear little soul, I long to see her already! She cried
when we parted last night and I hated to go.' Tom's hand went to his
cheek as if he still felt the rosy little seal Dora had set upon his
promise not to forget her, and for the first time in his happy-go-lucky
life Tommy Bangs understood the difference between sentiment and
sentimentality. The feeling recalled Nan, for he had never known that
tender thrill when thinking of her, and the old friendship seemed rather
a prosaic affair beside this delightful mingling of romance, surprise,
love, and fun. 'I declare, I feel as if a weight was off me, but
what the dickens will Nan say when she knows it!' he exclaimed with a
chuckle.

'Knows what?' asked a clear voice that made both start and turn, for
there was Nan calmly surveying them from the doorway.

Anxious to put Tom out of suspense and see how Nan would take the news,
Mrs Jo answered quickly:

'Tom's engagement to Dora West.'

'Really?' and Nan looked so surprised that Mrs Jo was afraid she might
be fonder of her old playmate than she knew; but her next words set the
fear at rest, and made everything comfortable and merry at once.

'I knew my prescription would work wonders if he only took it long
enough. Dear old Tom, I'm so glad. Bless you! bless you!' And she shook
both his hands with hearty affection.

'It was an accident, Nan. I didn't mean to, but I'm always getting into
messes, and I couldn't seem to get out of this any other way. Mother
Bhaer will tell you all about it. I must go and make myself tidy. Going
to tea with Demi. See you later.'

Stammering, blushing, and looking both sheepish and gratified, Tom
suddenly bolted, leaving the elder lady to enlighten the younger at
length, and have another laugh over this new sort of courtship, which
might well be called accidental. Nan was deeply interested, for she knew
Dora, thought her a nice little thing, and predicted that in time she
would make Tom an excellent wife, since she admired and 'appreciated'
him so much.

'I shall miss him of course, but it will be a relief to me and better
for him; dangling is so bad for a boy. Now he will go into business
with his father and do well, and everyone be happy. I shall give Dora an
elegant family medicine-chest for a wedding-present, and teach her how
to use it. Tom can't be trusted, and is no more fit for the profession
than Silas.'

The latter part of this speech relieved Mrs Jo's mind, for Nan had
looked about her as if she had lost something valuable when she began;
but the medicine-chest seemed to cheer her, and the thought of Tom in a
safe profession was evidently a great comfort.

'The worm has turned at last, Nan, and your bond-man is free. Let him
go, and give your whole mind to your work; for you are fitted for
the profession, and will be an honour to it by and by,' she said
approvingly.

'I hope so. That reminds me--measles are in the village, and you had
better tell the girls not to call where there are children. It would
be bad to have a run of them just as term begins. Now I'm off to Daisy.
Wonder what she will say to Tom. Isn't he great fun?' And Nan departed,
laughing over the joke with such genuine satisfaction that it was
evident no sentimental regrets disturbed her 'maiden meditation,
fancy-free'.

'I shall have my eye on Demi, but won't say a word. Meg likes to manage
her children in her own way, and a very good way it is. But the dear
Pelican will be somewhat ruffled if her boy has caught the epidemic
which seems to have broken out among us this summer.'

Mrs Jo did not mean the measles, but that more serious malady called
love, which is apt to ravage communities, spring and autumn, when winter
gaiety and summer idleness produce whole bouquets of engagements, and
set young people to pairing off like the birds. Franz began it, Nat was
a chronic and Tom a sudden case; Demi seemed to have the symptoms; and
worst of all, her own Ted had only the day before calmly said to her:
'Mum, I think I should be happier if I had a sweetheart, like the other
boys.' If her cherished son had asked her for dynamite to play with, she
would hardly have been more startled, or have more decidedly refused the
absurd request.

'Well, Barry Morgan said I ought to have one and offered to pick me out
a nice one among our set. I asked Josie first, and she hooted at the
idea, so I thought I'd let Barry look round. You say it steadies a
fellow, and I want to be steady,' explained Ted in a serious tone, which
would have convulsed his parent at any other time.

'Good lack! What are we coming to in this fast age when babes and boys
make such demands and want to play with one of the most sacred things in
life?' exclaimed Mrs Jo, and having in a few words set the matter in its
true light, sent her son away to wholesome baseball and Octoo for a safe
sweetheart.

Now, here was Tom's bomb-shell to explode in their midst, carrying
widespread destruction, perhaps; for though one swallow does not make a
summer, one engagement is apt to make several, and her boys were, most
of them, at the inflammable age when a spark ignites the flame, which
soon flickers and dies out, or burns warm and clear for life. Nothing
could be done about it but to help them make wise choices, and be worthy
of good mates. But of all the lessons Mrs Jo had tried to teach her
boys, this great one was the hardest; for love is apt to make lunatics
of even saints and sages, so young people cannot be expected to escape
the delusions, disappointments, and mistakes, as well as the delights,
of this sweet madness.

'I suppose it is inevitable, since we live in America, so I won't borrow
trouble, but hope that some of the new ideas of education will produce a
few hearty, happy, capable, and intelligent girls for my lads. Lucky for
me that I haven't the whole twelve on my hands, I should lose my wits if
I had, for I foresee complications and troubles ahead worse than Tom's
boats, bicycles, donkeys, and Doras,' meditated Mrs Jo, as she went back
to her neglected proof-sheets.

Tom was quite satisfied with the tremendous effect his engagement
produced in the little community at Plumfield.

'It was paralysing,' as Demi said; and astonishment left most of Tom's
mates little breath for chaff. That he, the faithful one, should turn
from the idol to strange goddesses, was a shock to the romantic and a
warning to the susceptible. It was comical to see the airs our Thomas
put on; for the most ludicrous parts of the affair were kindly buried in
oblivion by the few who knew them, and Tom burst forth as a full-blown
hero who had rescued the maiden from a watery grave, and won her
gratitude and love by his daring deed. Dora kept the secret, and enjoyed
the fun when she came to see Mother Bhaer and pay her respects to the
family generally. Everyone liked her at once, for she was a gay and
winning little soul; fresh, frank, and so happy, it was beautiful to see
her innocent pride in Tom, who was a new boy, or man rather; for with
this change in his life a great change took place in him. Jolly he would
always be, and impulsive, but he tried to become all that Dora believed
him, and his best side came uppermost for everyday wear. It was
surprising to see how many good traits Tom had; and his efforts to
preserve the manly dignity belonging to his proud position as an engaged
man was very comical. So was the entire change from his former abasement
and devotion to Nan to a somewhat lordly air with his little betrothed;
for Dora made an idol of him, and resented the idea of a fault or a flaw
in her Tom. This new state of things suited both, and the once blighted
being bloomed finely in the warm atmosphere of appreciation, love, and
confidence. He was very fond of the dear girl, but meant to be a slave
no longer, and enjoyed his freedom immensely, quite unconscious that the
great tyrant of the world had got hold of him for life.

To his father's satisfaction he gave up his medical studies, and
prepared to go into business with the old gentleman, who was a
flourishing merchant, ready now to make the way smooth and smile upon
his marriage with Mr West's well-endowed daughter. The only thorn in
Tom's bed of roses was Nan's placid interest in his affairs, and evident
relief at his disloyalty. He did not want her to suffer, but a decent
amount of regret at the loss of such a lover would have gratified him;
a slight melancholy, a word of reproach, a glance of envy as he passed
with adoring Dora on his arm, seemed but the fitting tribute to such
years of faithful service and sincere affection. But Nan regarded him
with a maternal sort of air that nettled him very much, and patted
Dora's curly head with a worldlywise air worthy of the withered
spinster, Julia Mills, in David Copperfield.

It took some time to get the old and the new emotions comfortably
adjusted, but Mrs Jo helped him, and Mr Laurie gave him some wise advice
upon the astonishing gymnastic feats the human heart can perform, and
be all the better for it if it only held fast to the balancing-pole
of truth and common sense. At last our Tommy got his bearings, and as
autumn came on Plumfield saw but little of him; for his new lode star
was in the city, and business kept him hard at work. He was evidently
in his right place now, and soon throve finely, to his father's great
contentment; for his jovial presence pervaded the once quiet office like
a gale of fresh wind, and his lively wits found managing men and
affairs much more congenial employment than studying disease, or playing
unseemly pranks with skeletons.

Here we will leave him for a time and turn to the more serious
adventures of his mates, though this engagement, so merrily made, was
the anchor which kept our mercurial Tom happy, and made a man of him.



Chapter 10. DEMI SETTLES

'Mother, can I have a little serious conversation with you?' asked Demi
one evening, as they sat together enjoying the first fire of the season,
while Daisy wrote letters upstairs and Josie was studying in the little
library close by.

'Certainly, dear. No bad news, I hope?' and Mrs Meg looked up from her
sewing with a mixture of pleasure and anxiety on her motherly face; for
she dearly loved a good talk with her son, and knew that he always had
something worth telling.

'It will be good news for you, I think,' answered Demi, smiling as he
threw away his paper and went to sit beside her on the little sofa which
just held two.

'Let me hear it, then, at once.'

'I know you don't like the reporting, and will be glad to hear that I
have given it up.'

'I am very glad! It is too uncertain a business, and there is no
prospect of getting on for a long time. I want you settled in some good
place where you can stay, and in time make money. I wish you liked a
profession; but as you don't, any clean, well-established business will
do.'

'What do you say to a railroad office?'

'I don't like it. A noisy, hurried kind of place, I know, with all sorts
of rough men about. I hope it isn't that, dear?'

'I could have it; but does book-keeping in a wholesale leather business
please you better?'

'No; you'll get round-shouldered writing at a tall desk; and they say,
once a book-keeper always a book-keeper.'

'How does a travelling agent suit your views?'

'Not at all; with all those dreadful accidents, and the exposure and bad
food as you go from place to place, you are sure to get killed or lose
your health.'

'I could be private secretary to a literary man; but the salary is
small, and may end any time.'

'That would be better, and more what I want. It isn't that I object to
honest work of any kind; but I don't want my son to spend his best years
grubbing for a little money in a dark office, or be knocked about in a
rough-and-tumble scramble to get on. I want to see you in some business
where your tastes and talents can be developed and made useful; where
you can go on rising, and in time put in your little fortune and be a
partner; so that your years of apprenticeship will not be wasted, but
fit you to take your place among the honourable men who make their
lives and work useful and respected. I talked it all over with your dear
father when you were a child; and if he had lived he would have shown
you what I mean, and helped you to be what he was.'

Mrs Meg wiped away a quiet tear as she spoke; for the memory of her
husband was a very tender one, and the education of his children had
been a sacred task to which she gave all her heart and life, and so
far she had done wonderfully well--as her good son and loving daughters
tried to prove. Demi's arm was round her now, as he said, in a voice so
like his father's that it was the sweetest music to her ear:

'Mother dear, I think I have got just what you want for me; and it shall
not be my fault if I don't become the man you hope to see me. Let me
tell you all about it. I didn't say anything till it was sure because it
would only worry you; but Aunt Jo and I have been on the look-out for it
some time, and now it has come. You know her publisher, Mr Tiber, is one
of the most successful men in the business; also generous, kind, and
the soul of honour--as his treatment of Aunty proves. Well, I've rather
hankered for that place; for I love books, and as I can't make them I'd
like to publish them. That needs some literary taste and judgement, it
brings you in contact with fine people, and is an education in itself.
Whenever I go into that large, handsome room to see Mr Tiber for Aunt
Jo, I always want to stay; for it's lined with books and pictures,
famous men and women come and go, and Mr Tiber sits at his desk like
a sort of king, receiving his subjects; for the greatest authors are
humble to him, and wait his Yes or No with anxiety. Of course I've
nothing to do with all that, and may never have; but I like to see it,
and the atmosphere is so different from the dark offices and hurly-burly
of many other trades, where nothing but money is talked about, that it
seems another world, and I feel at home in it. Yes, I'd rather beat the
door-mats and make fires there than be head clerk in the great hide and
leather store at a big salary.' Here Demi paused for breath; and Mrs
Meg, whose face had been growing brighter and brighter, exclaimed
eagerly:

'Just what I should like! Have you got it? Oh, my dear boy! your fortune
is made if you go to that well-established and flourishing place, with
those good men to help you along!'

'I think I have, but we mustn't be too sure of anything yet. I may not
suit; I'm only on trial, and must begin at the beginning and work my way
up faithfully. Mr Tiber was very kind, and will push me on as fast as
is fair to the other fellows, and as I prove myself fit to go up. I'm to
begin the first of next month in the book-room, filling orders; and I
go round and get orders, and do various other things of the sort. I like
it. I am ready to do anything about books, if it's only to dust them,'
laughed Demi, well pleased with his prospects, for, after trying various
things, he seemed at last to have found the sort of work he liked, and a
prospect that was very inviting to him.

'You inherit that love of books from grandpa; he can't live without
them. I'm glad of it. Tastes of that kind show a refined nature, and are
both a comfort and a help all one's life. I am truly glad and grateful,
John, that at last you want to settle, and have got such an entirely
satisfactory place. Most boys begin much earlier; but I don't believe
in sending them out to face the world so young, just when body and soul
need home care and watchfulness. Now you are a man, and must begin your
life for yourself. Do your best, and be as honest, useful, and happy as
your father, and I won't care about making a fortune.'

'I'll try, mother. Couldn't have a better chance; for Tiber & Co. treat
their people like gentlemen, and pay generously for faithful work.
Things are done in a businesslike way there, and that suits me. I hate
promises that are not kept, and shiftless or tyrannical ways anywhere.
Mr Tiber said: "This is only to teach you the ropes, Brooke; I shall
have other work for you by and by." Aunty told him I had done book
notices, and had rather a fancy for literature; so though I can't
produce any "works of Shakespeare", as she says, I may get up some
little things later. If I don't, I think it a very honourable and noble
profession to select and give good books to the world; and I'm satisfied
to be a humble helper in the work.'

'I'm glad you feel so. It adds so much to one's happiness to love the
task one does. I used to hate teaching; but housekeeping for my own
family was always sweet, though much harder in many ways. Isn't Aunt Jo
pleased about all this?' asked Mrs Meg, already seeing in her mind's
eye a splendid sign with 'Tiber, Brooke & Co.' over the door of a famous
publishing house.

'So pleased that I could hardly keep her from letting the cat out of the
bag too soon. I've had so many plans, and disappointed you so often, I
wanted to be very sure this time. I had to bribe Rob and Ted to keep her
at home tonight till I'd told my news, she was eager to rush down and
tell you herself. The castles that dear woman has built for me would
fill all Spain, and have kept us jolly while we waited to know our fate.
Mr Tiber doesn't do things in a hurry; but when he makes up his mind,
you are all right; and I feel that I am fairly launched.'

'Bless you, dear, I hope so! It is a happy day for me, because I've been
so anxious lest, with all my care, I have been too easy and indulgent,
and my boy, with his many good gifts, might fritter his time away in
harmless but unsatisfactory things. Now I am at ease about you. If
only Daisy can be happy, and Josie give up her dream, I shall be quite
contented.'

Demi let his mother enjoy herself for a few minutes, while he smiled
over a certain little dream of his own, not ready yet for the telling;
then he said, in the paternal tone which he unconsciously used when
speaking of his sisters:

'I'll see to the girls; but I begin to think grandpa is right in
saying we must each be what God and nature makes us. We can't change it
much--only help to develop the good and control the bad elements in us.
I have fumbled my way into my right place at last, I hope. Let Daisy be
happy in her way, since it is a good and womanly one. If Nat comes home
all right, I'd say: "Bless you, my children," and give them a nest of
their own. Then you and I will help little Jo to find out if it is to be
"All the world's a stage" or "Home, sweet home", for her.'

'I suppose we must, John; but I can't help making plans, and hoping they
will come to pass. I see that Daisy is bound up in Nat; and if he is
worthy of her I shall let them be happy in their own way, as my parents
let me. But Josie will be a trial, I foresee; and much as I love the
stage, and always did, I don't see how I can ever let my little girl be
an actress, though she certainly has great talent for it.'

'Whose fault is that?' asked Demi, smiling, as he remembered his
mother's early triumphs and unquenchable interest in the dramatic
efforts of the young people round her.

'Mine, I know. How could it be otherwise when I acted Babes in the Wood
with you and Daisy before you could speak, and taught Josie to declaim
Mother Goose in her cradle. Ah, me! the tastes of the mother come out in
her children, and she must atone for them by letting them have their own
way, I suppose.' And Mrs Meg laughed, even while she shook her head over
the undeniable fact that the Marches were a theatrical family.

'Why not have a great actress of our name, as well as an authoress, a
minister, and an eminent publisher? We don't choose our talents, but we
needn't hide them in a napkin because they are not just what we want. I
say, let Jo have her way, and do what she can. Here am I to take care of
her; and you can't deny you'd enjoy fixing her furbelows, and seeing her
shine before the footlights, where you used to long to be. Come, mother,
better face the music and march gaily, since your wilful children will
"gang their ain gait".'

'I don't see but I must, and "leave the consequences to the Lord", as
Marmee used to say when she had to decide, and only saw a step of the
road. I should enjoy it immensely, if I could only feel that the life
would not hurt my girl, and leave her unsatisfied when it was too late
to change; for nothing is harder to give up than the excitements of that
profession. I know something of it; and if your blessed father had not
come along, I'm afraid I should have been an actress in spite of Aunt
March and all our honoured ancestors.'

'Let Josie add new honour to the name, and work out the family talent
in its proper place. I'll play dragon to her, and you play nurse, and
no harm can come to our little Juliet, no matter how many Romeos spoon
under her balcony. Really, ma'am, opposition comes badly from an old
lady who is going to wring the hearts of our audience in the heroine's
part in Aunty's play next Christmas. It's the most pathetic thing I
ever saw, mother; and I'm sorry you didn't become an actress, though we
should be nowhere if you had.'

Demi was on his legs now, with his back to the fire, in the lordly
attitude men like to assume when things go well with them, or they want
to lay down the law on any subject.

Mrs Meg actually blushed at her son's hearty praise, and could not
deny that the sound of applause was as sweet now as when she played the
Witch's Curse and The Moorish Maiden's Vow long years ago.

'It's perfectly absurd for me to do it, but I couldn't resist when Jo
and Laurie made the part for me, and you children were to act in it. The
minute I get on the old mother's dress I forget myself and feel the same
thrill at the sound of the bell that I used to feel when we got up plays
in the garret. If Daisy would only take the daughter's part it would
be so complete; for with you and Josie I am hardly acting, it is all so
real.'

'Especially the hospital scene, where you find the wounded son. Why,
mother, do you know when we did that at last rehearsal my face was wet
with real tears as you cried over me. It will bring down the house; but
don't forget to wipe 'em off, or I shall sneeze,' said Demi, laughing at
the recollection of his mother's hit.

'I won't; but it almost broke my heart to see you so pale and dreadful.
I hope there will never be another war in my time, for I should have to
let you go; and I never want to live through the same experience we had
with father.'

'Don't you think Alice does the part better than Daisy would? Daisy
hasn't a bit of the actress in her, and Alice puts life into the dullest
words she speaks. I think the Marquise is just perfect in our piece,'
said Demi, strolling about the room as if the warmth of the fire sent a
sudden colour to his face.

'So do I. She is a dear girl, and I'm proud and fond of her. Where is
she tonight?'

'Pegging away at her Greek, I suppose. She usually is in the evening.
More's the pity,' added Demi, in a low tone, as he stared intently at
the book-case, though he couldn't read a title.

'Now, there is a girl after my own heart. Pretty, well-bred,
well-educated, and yet domestic, a real companion as well as help-meet
for some good and intelligent man. I hope she will find one.'

'So do I,' muttered Demi.

Mrs Meg had taken up her work again, and was surveying a half-finished
buttonhole with so much interest that her son's face escaped her eye. He
shed a beaming smile upon the rows of poets, as if even in their glass
prison they could sympathize and rejoice with him at the first rosy dawn
of the great passion which they knew so well. But Demi was a wise youth,
and never leaped before looking carefully. He hardly knew his own heart
yet, and was contented to wait till the sentiment, the fluttering of
those folded wings he began to feel, should escape from the chrysalis
and be ready to soar away in the sunshine to seek and claim its lovely
mate. He had said nothing; but the brown eyes were eloquent, and there
was an unconscious underplot to all the little plays he and Alice Heath
acted so well together. She was busy with her books, bound to graduate
with high honours, and he was trying to do the same in that larger
college open to all, and where each man has his own prize to win or
lose. Demi had nothing but himself to offer and, being a modest youth,
considered that a poor gift till he had proved his power to earn his
living, and the right to take a woman's happiness into his keeping.

No one guessed that he had caught the fever except sharp-eyed Josie, and
she, having a wholesome fear of her brother--who could be rather awful
when she went too far--wisely contented herself with watching him like a
little cat, ready to pounce on the first visible sign of weakness. Demi
had taken to playing pensively upon his flute after he was in his
room for the night, making this melodious friend his confidante, and
breathing into it all the tender hopes and fears that filled his heart.
Mrs Meg, absorbed in domestic affairs, and Daisy, who cared for no music
but Nat's violin, paid no heed to these chamber concerts, but Josie
always murmured to herself, with a naughty chuckle, 'Dick Swiveller is
thinking of his Sophy Wackles,' and bided her time to revenge certain
wrongs inflicted upon her by Demi, who always took Daisy's side when she
tried to curb the spirits of her unruly little sister.

This evening she got her chance, and made the most of it. Mrs Meg was
just rounding off her buttonhole, and Demi still strolling restlessly
about the room, when a book was heard to slam in the study, followed by
an audible yawn and the appearance of the student looking as if sleep
and a desire for mischief were struggling which should be master.

'I heard my name; have you been saying anything bad about me?' she
demanded, perching on the arm of an easychair.

Her mother told the good news, over which Josie duly rejoiced, and Demi
received her congratulations with a benignant air which made her feel
that too much satisfaction was not good for him, and incited her to put
a thorn into his bed of roses at once.

'I caught something about the play just now, and I want to tell you that
I'm going to introduce a song into my part to liven it up a bit. How
would this do?' and seating herself at the piano she began to sing to
these words the air of 'Kathleen Mavourneen':

    'Sweetest of maidens, oh, how can I tell
     The love that transfigures the whole earth to me?
     The longing that causes my bosom to swell,
     When I dream of a life all devoted to thee?'

She got no further, for Demi, red with wrath, made a rush at her, and
the next moment a very agile young person was seen dodging round tables
and chairs with the future partner of Tiber & Co. in hot pursuit. 'You
monkey, how dare you meddle with my papers?' cried the irate poet,
making futile grabs at the saucy girl, who skipped to and fro, waving a
bit of paper tantalizingly before him.

'Didn't; found it in the big "Dic". Serves you right if you leave your
rubbish about. Don't you like my song? It's very pretty.'

'I'll teach you one that you won't like if you don't give me my
property.'

'Come and get it if you can'; and Josie vanished into the study to have
out her squabble in peace, for Mrs Meg was already saying:

'Children, children! don't quarrel.'

The paper was in the fire by the time Demi arrived and he at once calmed
down, seeing that the bone of contention was out of the way.

'I'm glad it's burnt; I don't care for it, only some verse I was trying
to set to music for one of the girls. But I'll trouble you to let my
papers alone, or I shall take back the advice I gave mother tonight
about allowing you to act as much as you like.'

Josie was sobered at once by this dire threat, and in her most wheedling
tone begged to know what he had said. By way of heaping coals of fire
on her head he told her, and this diplomatic performance secured him an
ally on the spot.

'You dear old boy! I'll never tease you again though you moon and spoon
both day and night. If you stand by me, I'll stand by you and never say
a word. See here! I've got a note for you from Alice. Won't that be a
peace-offering and soothe your little feelings?'

Demi's eyes sparkled as Josie held up a paper cocked hat, but as he
knew what was probably in it, he took the wind out of Josie's sails, and
filled her with blank astonishment by saying carelessly:

'That's nothing; it's only to say whether she will go to the concert
with us tomorrow night. You can read it if you like.'

With the natural perversity of her sex Josie ceased to be curious the
moment she was told to read it, and meekly handed it over; but she
watched Demi as he calmly read the two lines it contained and then threw
it into the fire. 'Why, Jack, I thought you'd treasure every scrap the
"sweetest maid" touched. Don't you care for her?'

'Very much; we all do; but "mooning and spooning", as you elegantly
express it, is not in my line. My dear little girl, your plays make you
romantic, and because Alice and I act lovers sometimes you take it into
your silly head that we are really so. Don't waste time hunting mares
nests, but attend to your own affairs and leave me to mine. I forgive
you, but don't do it again; it's bad taste, and tragedy queens don't
romp.'

The last cut finished Josie; she humbly begged pardon and went off to
bed, while Demi soon followed, feeling that he had not only settled
himself but his too inquisitive little sister also. But if he had seen
her face as she listened to the soft wailing of his flute he would not
have been so sure, for she looked as cunning as a magpie as she said,
with a scornful sniff: 'Pooh, you can't deceive me; I know Dick is
serenading Sophy Wackles.'



Chapter 11. EMIL'S THANKSGIVING

The Brenda was scudding along with all sail set to catch the rising
wind, and everyone on board was rejoicing, for the long voyage was
drawing towards an end.

'Four weeks more, Mrs Hardy, and we'll give you a cup of tea such as you
never had before,' said second mate Hoffmann, as he paused beside two
ladies sitting in a sheltered corner of the deck.

'I shall be glad to get it, and still gladder to put my feet on solid
ground,' answered the elder lady, smiling; for our friend Emil was
a favourite, as well he might be, since he devoted himself to the
captain's wife and daughter, who were the only passengers on board.

'So shall I, even if I have to wear a pair of shoes like Chinese junks.
I've tramped up and down the deck so much, I shall be barefooted if
we don't arrive soon,' laughed Mary, the daughter, showing two shabby
little boots as she glanced up at the companion of these tramps,
remembering gratefully how pleasant he had made them.

'Don't think there are any small enough in China,' answered Emil, with a
sailor's ready gallantry, privately resolving to hunt up the handsomest
shoes he could find the moment he landed.

'I don't know what you would have done for exercise, dear, if Mr
Hoffmann had not made you walk every day. This lazy life is bad for
young people, though it suits an old body like me well enough in calm
weather. Is this likely to be a gale, think ye?' added Mrs Hardy, with
an anxious glance at the west, where the sun was setting redly.

'Only a capful of wind, ma'am, just enough to send us along lively,'
answered Emil, with a comprehensive glance aloft and alow.

'Please sing, Mr Hoffmann, it's so pleasant to have music at this
time. We shall miss it very much when we get ashore,' said Mary, in
a persuasive tone which would have won melody from a shark, if such a
thing were possible.

Emil had often blessed his one accomplishment during these months, for
it cheered the long days, and made the twilight hour his happiest
time, wind and weather permitting. So now he gladly tuned his pipe, and
leaning on the taffrail near the girl, watched the brown locks blowing
in the wind as he sang her favourite song:

    'Give me freshening breeze, my boys,
     A white and swelling sail,
     A ship that cuts the dashing waves,
     And weathers every gale.
     What life is like a sailor's life,
     So free, so bold, so brave?
     His home the ocean's wide expanse,
     A coral bed his grave.'

Just as the last notes of the clear, strong voice died away, Mrs Hardy
suddenly exclaimed: 'What's that?' Emil's quick eye saw at once the
little puff of smoke coming up a hatchway where no smoke should be, and
his heart seemed to stand still for an instant as the dread word 'Fire!'
flashed through his mind. Then he was quite steady, and strolled away
saying quietly:

'Smoking not allowed there, I'll go and stop it.' But the instant he
was out of sight his face changed, and he leaped down the hatchway,
thinking, with a queer smile on his lips: 'If we are afire, shouldn't
wonder if I did make a coral bed my grave!'

He was gone a few minutes, and when he came up, half stifled with smoke,
he was as white as a very brown man could be, but calm and cool as he
went to report to the captain.

'Fire in the hold, sir.'

'Don't frighten the women,' was Captain Hardy's first order; then both
be stirred themselves to discover how strong the treacherous enemy was,
and to rout it if possible.

The Brenda's cargo was a very combustible one, and in spite of the
streams of water poured into the hold it was soon evident that the ship
was doomed. Smoke began to ooze up between the planks everywhere, and
the rising gale soon fanned the smouldering fire to flames that began
to break out here and there, telling the dreadful truth too plainly for
anyone to hide. Mrs Hardy and Mary bore the shock bravely when told to
be ready to quit the ship at a minute's notice; the boats were hastily
prepared, and the men worked with a will to batten down every loophole
whence the fire might escape. Soon the poor Brenda was a floating
furnace, and the order to 'Take to the boats!' came for all. The women
first, of course, and it was fortunate that, being a merchantman, there
were no more passengers on board, so there was no panic, and one after
the other the boats pushed off. That in which the women were lingered
near, for the brave captain would be the last to leave his ship.

Emil stayed by him till ordered away, and reluctantly obeyed; but it was
well for him he went, for just as he had regained the boat, rocking far
below, half hidden by a cloud of smoke, a mast, undermined by the
fire now raging in the bowels of the ship, fell with a crash, knocking
Captain Hardy overboard. The boat soon reached him as he floated out
from the wreck, and Emil sprung into the sea to rescue him, for he was
wounded and senseless. This accident made it necessary for the young man
to take command, and he at once ordered the men to pull for their lives,
as an explosion might occur at any moment.

The other boats were out of danger and all lingered to watch the
splendid yet awesome spectacle of the burning ship alone on the wide
sea, reddening the night and casting a lurid glare upon the water, where
floated the frail boats filled with pale faces, all turned for a last
look at the fated Brenda, slowly settling to her watery grave. No one
saw the end, however, for the gale soon swept the watchers far away and
separated them, some never to meet again till the sea gives up its dead.

The boat whose fortunes we must follow was alone when dawn came up,
showing these survivors all the dangers of their situation. Food and
water had been put in, and such provision for comfort and safety as time
allowed; but it was evident that with a badly wounded man, two women,
and seven sailors, their supply would not last long, and help was sorely
needed. Their only hope was in meeting a ship, although the gale, which
had raged all night, had blown them out of their course. To this hope
all clung, and wiled away the weary hours, watching the horizon and
cheering one another with prophecies of speedy rescue.

Second mate Hoffmann was very brave and helpful, though his unexpected
responsibility weighed heavily on his shoulders; for the captain's state
seemed desperate, the poor wife's grief wrung his heart, and the blind
confidence of the young girl in his power to save them made him feel
that no sign of doubt or fear must lessen it. The men did their part
readily now, but Emil knew that if starvation and despair made brutes of
them, his task might be a terrible one. So he clutched his courage with
both hands, kept up a manly front, and spoke so cheerily of their good
chances, that all instinctively turned to him for guidance and support.

The first day and night passed in comparative comfort, but when the
third came, things looked dark and hope began to fail. The wounded man
was delirious, the wife worn out with anxiety and suspense, the girl
weak for want of food, having put away half her biscuit for her mother,
and given her share of water to wet her father's feverish lips. The
sailors ceased rowing and sat grimly waiting, openly reproaching their
leader for not following their advice, others demanding more food, all
waxing dangerous as privation and pain brought out the animal instincts
lurking in them. Emil did his best, but mortal man was helpless there,
and he could only turn his haggard face from the pitiless sky, that
dropped no rain for their thirst, to the boundless sea where no sail
appeared to gladden their longing eyes. All day he tried to cheer and
comfort them, while hunger gnawed, thirst parched, and growing fear lay
heavy at his heart. He told stories to the men, implored them to bear up
for the helpless women's sake, and promised rewards if they would pull
while they had strength to regain the lost route, as nearly as he could
make it out, and increase their chance of rescue. He rigged an awning
of sailcloth over the suffering man and tended him like a son, comforted
the wife, and tried to make the pale girl forget herself, by singing
every song he knew or recounting his adventures by land and sea, till
she smiled and took heart; for all ended well.

The fourth day came and the supply of food and water was nearly gone.
Emil proposed to keep it for the sick man and the women, but two of the
men rebelled, demanding their share. Emil gave up his as an example, and
several of the good fellows followed it, with the quiet heroism which so
often crops up in rough but manly natures. This shamed the others,
and for another day an ominous peace reigned in that little world of
suffering and suspense. But during the night, while Emil, worn out with
fatigue, left the watch to the most trustworthy sailor, that he might
snatch an hour's rest, these two men got at the stores and stole the
last of the bread and water, and the one bottle of brandy, which was
carefully hoarded to keep up their strength and make the brackish water
drinkable. Half mad with thirst, they drank greedily and by morning one
was in a stupor, from which he never woke; the other so crazed by
the strong stimulant, that when Emil tried to control him, he leaped
overboard and was lost. Horror-stricken by this terrible scene, the
other men were submissive henceforth, and the boat floated on and on
with its sad freight of suffering souls and bodies.

Another trial came to them that left all more despairing than before. A
sail appeared, and for a time a frenzy of joy prevailed, to be turned
to bitterest disappointment when it passed by, too far away to see
the signals waved to them or hear the frantic cries for help that rang
across the sea. Emil's heart sank then, for the captain seemed dying,
and the women could not hold out much longer. He kept up till night
came; then in the darkness, broken only by the feeble murmuring of the
sick man, the whispered prayers of the poor wife, the ceaseless swash of
waves, Emil hid his face, and had an hour of silent agony that aged him
more than years of happy life could have done. It was not the physical
hardship that daunted him, though want and weakness tortured him; it was
his dreadful powerlessness to conquer the cruel fate that seemed hanging
over them. The men he cared little for, since these perils were but a
part of the life they chose; but the master he loved, the good woman who
had been so kind to him, the sweet girl whose winsome presence had made
the long voyage so pleasant for them all--if he could only save these
dear and innocent creatures from a cruel death, he felt that he could
willingly give his life for them.

As he sat there with his head in his hands, bowed down by the first
great trial of his young life, the starless sky overhead, the restless
sea beneath, and all around him suffering, for which he had no help, a
soft sound broke the silence, and he listened like one in a dream. It
was Mary singing to her mother, who lay sobbing in her arms, spent with
this long anguish. A very faint and broken voice it was, for the poor
girl's lips were parched with thirst; but the loving heart turned
instinctively to the great Helper in this hour of despair, and He heard
her feeble cry. It was a sweet old hymn often sung at Plumfield; and as
he listened, all the happy past came back so clearly that Emil forgot
the bitter present, and was at home again. His talk on the housetop
with Aunt Jo seemed but yesterday, and, with a pang of self-reproach, he
thought:

'The scarlet strand! I must remember it, and do my duty to the end.
Steer straight, old boy; and if you can't come into port, go down with
all sail set.'

Then, as the soft voice crooned on to lull the weary woman to a
fitful sleep, Emil for a little while forgot his burden in a dream of
Plumfield. He saw them all, heard the familiar voices, felt the grip of
welcoming hands, and seemed to say to himself: 'Well, they shall not be
ashamed of me if I never see them any more.'

A sudden shout startled him from that brief rest, and a drop on his
forehead told him that the blessed rain had come at last, bringing
salvation with it; for thirst is harder to bear than hunger, heat, or
cold. Welcomed by cries of joy, all lifted up their parched lips, held
out their hands, and spread their garments to catch the great drops that
soon came pouring down to cool the sick man's fever, quench the agony of
thirst, and bring refreshment to every weary body in the boat. All night
it fell, all night the castaways revelled in the saving shower, and took
heart again, like dying plants revived by heaven's dew. The clouds broke
away at dawn, and Emil sprung up, wonderfully braced and cheered by
those hours of silent gratitude for this answer to their cry for help.
But this was not all; as his eye swept the horizon, clear against the
rosy sky shone the white sails of a ship, so near that they could see
the pennon at her mast-head and black figures moving on the deck.

One cry broke from all those eager throats, and rang across the sea, as
every man waved hat or handkerchief and the women stretched imploring
hands towards this great white angel of deliverance coming down upon
them as if the fresh wind filled every sail to help her on.

No disappointment now; answering signals assured them of help; and in
the rapture of that moment the happy women fell on Emil's neck,
giving him his reward in tears and blessings as their grateful hearts
overflowed. He always said that was the proudest moment of his life,
as he stood there holding Mary in his arms; for the brave girl, who had
kept up so long, broke down then, and clung to him half fainting; while
her mother busied herself about the invalid, who seemed to feel the
joyful stir, and gave an order, as if again on the deck of his lost
ship.

It was soon over; and then all were safely aboard the good Urania,
homeward bound. Emil saw his friends in tender hands, his men among
their mates, and told the story of the wreck before he thought of
himself. The savoury odour of the soup, carried by to the cabin for the
ladies, reminded him that he was starving, and a sudden stagger
betrayed his weakness. He was instantly borne away, to be half killed by
kindness, and being fed, clothed, and comforted, was left to rest. Just
as the surgeon left the state-room, he asked in his broken voice: 'What
day is this? My head is so confused, I've lost my reckoning.'

'Thanksgiving Day, man! And we'll give you a regular New England dinner,
if you'll eat it,' answered the surgeon heartily.

But Emil was too spent to do anything, except lie still and give thanks,
more fervently and gratefully than ever before, for the blessed gift of
life, which was the sweeter for a sense of duty faithfully performed.



Chapter 12. DAN'S CHRISTMAS

Where was Dan? In prison. Alas for Mrs Jo! how her heart would have
ached if she had known that while old Plum shone with Christmas cheer
her boy sat alone in his cell, trying to read the little book she
gave him, with eyes dimmed now and then by the hot tears no physical
suffering had ever wrung from him, and longing with a homesick heart for
all that he had lost.

Yes, Dan was in prison; but no cry for help from him as he faced the
terrible strait he was in with the dumb despair of an Indian at the
stake; for his own bosom sin had brought him there, and this was to
be the bitter lesson that tamed the lawless spirit and taught him
self-control.

The story of his downfall is soon told; for it came, as so often
happens, just when he felt unusually full of high hopes, good
resolutions, and dreams of a better life. On his journey he met a
pleasant young fellow, and naturally felt an interest in him, as
Blair was on his way to join his elder brothers on a ranch in Kansas.
Card-playing was going on in the smoking-car, and the lad--for he was
barely twenty--tired with the long journey, beguiled the way with such
partners as appeared, being full of spirits, and a little intoxicated
with the freedom of the West. Dan, true to his promise, would not join,
but watched with intense interest the games that went on, and soon made
up his mind that two of the men were sharpers anxious to fleece the boy,
who had imprudently displayed a well-filled pocket-book. Dan always had
a soft spot in his heart for any younger, weaker creature whom he met,
and something about the lad reminded him of Teddy; so he kept an eye on
Blair, and warned him against his new friends.

Vainly, of course; for when all stopped overnight in one of the great
cities, Dan missed the boy from the hotel whither he had taken him
for safe-keeping; and learning who had come for him, went to find him,
calling himself a fool for his pains, yet unable to leave the confiding
boy to the dangers that surrounded him.

He found him gambling in a low place with the men, who were bound to
have his money; and by the look of relief on Blair's anxious face when
he saw him Dan knew without words that things were going badly with him,
and he saw the peril too late.

'I can't come yet--I've lost; it's not my money; I must get it back, or
I dare not face my brothers,' whispered the poor lad, when Dan begged
him to get away without further loss. Shame and fear made him desperate;
and he played on, sure that he could recover the money confided to
his care. Seeing Dan's resolute face, keen eye, and travelled air, the
sharpers were wary, played fair, and let the boy win a little; but they
had no mind to give up their prey, and finding that Dan stood sentinel
at the boy's back, an ominous glance was exchanged between them, which
meant:

'We must get this fellow out of the way.'

Dan saw it, and was on his guard; for he and Blair were strangers, evil
deeds are easily done in such places, and no tales told. But he would
not desert the boy, and still kept watch of every card till he plainly
detected false play, and boldly said so. High words passed, Dan's
indignation overcame his prudence; and when the cheat refused to restore
his plunder with insulting words and drawn pistol, Dan's hot temper
flashed out, and he knocked the man down with a blow that sent him
crashing head first against a stove, to roll senseless and bleeding to
the floor. A wild scene followed, but in the midst of it Dan whispered
to the boy: 'Get away, and hold your tongue. Don't mind me.'

Frightened and bewildered, Blair quitted the city at once, leaving Dan
to pass the night in the lock-up, and a few days later to stand in court
charged with manslaughter; for the man was dead. Dan had no friends, and
having once briefly told the story, held his peace, anxious to keep all
knowledge of this sad affair from those at home. He even concealed his
name--giving that of David Kent, as he had done several times before in
emergencies. It was all over very soon; but as there were extenuating
circumstances his sentence was a year in prison, with hard labour.

Dazed by the rapidity with which this horrible change in his life came
upon him, Dan did not fully realize it till the iron door clanged behind
him and he sat alone in a cell as narrow, cold, and silent as a tomb. He
knew that a word would bring Mr Laurie to help and comfort him; but he
could not bear to tell of this disgrace, or see the sorrow and the shame
it would cause the friends who hoped so much for him.

'No,' he said, clenching his fist, 'I'll let them think me dead first.
I shall be if I am kept here long'; and he sprang up to pace the stone
floor like a caged lion, with a turmoil of wrath and grief, rebellion
and remorse, seething in heart and brain, till he felt as if he should
go mad and beat upon the walls that shut him away from the liberty which
was his life. For days he suffered terribly, then worn out, sank into a
black melancholy sadder to see than his excitement.

The warden of this prison was a rough man who had won the ill will of
all by unnecessary harshness, but the chaplain was full of sympathy, and
did his hard duty faithfully and tenderly. He laboured with poor Dan,
but seemed to make no impression, and was forced to wait till work had
soothed the excited nerves and captivity tamed the proud spirit that
would suffer but not complain.

Dan was put in the brush-shop, and feeling that activity was his only
salvation, worked with a feverish energy that soon won the approval of
the master and the envy of less skilful mates. Day after day he sat in
his place, watched by an armed overseer, forbidden any but necessary
words, no intercourse with the men beside him, no change but from cell
to shop, no exercise but the dreary marches to and fro, each man's hand
on the other's shoulder keeping step with the dreary tramp so different
from the ringing tread of soldiers. Silent, gaunt, and grim, Dan did his
daily task, ate his bitter bread, and obeyed commands with a rebellious
flash of the eye, that made the warden say:

'That's a dangerous man. Watch him. He'll break out some day.'

There were others more dangerous than he, because older in crime
and ready for any desperate outbreak to change the monotony of long
sentences. These men soon divined Dan's mood, and in the mysterious way
convicts invent, managed to convey to him before a month was over
that plans were being made for a mutiny at the first opportunity.
Thanksgiving Day was one of the few chances for them to speak together
as they enjoyed an hour of freedom in the prison yard. Then all would
be settled and the rash attempt made if possible, probably to end in
bloodshed and defeat for most, but liberty for a few. Dan had already
planned his own escape and bided his time, growing more and more moody,
fierce, and rebellious, as loss of liberty wore upon soul and body; for
this sudden change from his free, healthy life to such a narrow, gloomy,
and miserable one, could not but have a terrible effect upon one of
Dan's temperament and age.

He brooded over his ruined life, gave up all his happy hopes and plans,
felt that he could never face dear old Plumfield again, or touch those
friendly hands, with the stain of blood upon his own. He did not care
for the wretched man whom he had killed, for such a life was better
ended, he thought; but the disgrace of prison would never be wiped out
of his memory, though the cropped hair would grow again, the grey suit
easily be replaced, and the bolts and bars left far behind.

'It's all over with me; I've spoilt my life, now let it go. I'll give up
the fight and get what pleasure I can anywhere, anyhow. They shall think
me dead and so still care for me, but never know what I am. Poor Mother
Bhaer! she tried to help me, but it's no use; the firebrand can't be
saved.'

And dropping his head in his hands as he sat on his low bed, Dan would
mourn over all he had lost in tearless misery, till merciful sleep would
comfort him with dreams of the happy days when the boys played together,
or those still later and happier ones when all smiled on him, and
Plumfield seemed to have gained a new and curious charm.

There was one poor fellow in Dan's shop whose fate was harder than his,
for his sentence expired in the spring, but there was little hope of his
living till that time; and the coldest-hearted man pitied poor Mason as
he sat coughing his life away in that close place and counting the weary
days yet to pass before he could see his wife and little child again.
There was some hope that he might be pardoned out, but he had no friends
to bestir themselves in the matter, and it was evident that the great
Judge's pardon would soon end his patient pain for ever.

Dan pitied him more than he dared to show, and this one tender emotion
in that dark time was like the little flower that sprung up between the
stones of the prison yard and saved the captive from despair, in the
beautiful old story. Dan helped Mason with his work when he was too
feeble to finish his task, and the grateful look that thanked him was
a ray of sunshine to cheer his cell when he was alone. Mason envied the
splendid health of his neighbour, and mourned to see it wasting there.
He was a peaceful soul and tried, as far as a whispered word or warning
glance could do it, to deter Dan from joining the 'bad lot', as the
rebels were called. But having turned his face from the light, Dan found
the downward way easy, and took a grim satisfaction in the prospect of
a general outbreak during which he might revenge himself upon the
tyrannical warden, and strike a blow for his own liberty, feeling that
an hour of insurrection would be a welcome vent for the pent-up passions
that tormented him. He had tamed many a wild animal, but his own lawless
spirit was too much for him, till he found the curb that made him master
of himself.

The Sunday before Thanksgiving, as he sat in chapel, Dan observed
several guests in the seats reserved for them, and looked anxiously
to see if any familiar face was there; for he had a mortal fear that
someone from home would suddenly confront him. No, all were strangers,
and he soon forgot them in listening to the chaplain's cheerful words,
and the sad singing of many heavy hearts. People often spoke to the
convicts, so it caused no surprise when, on being invited to address
them, one of the ladies rose and said she would tell them a little
story; which announcement caused the younger listeners to pack up their
ears, and even the older ones to look interested; for any change in
their monotonous life was welcome.

The speaker was a middle-aged woman in black, with a sympathetic face,
eyes full of compassion, and a voice that seemed to warm the heart,
because of certain motherly tones in it. She reminded Dan of Mrs Jo, and
he listened intently to every word, feeling that each was meant for him,
because by chance, they came at the moment when he needed a softening
memory to break up the ice of despair which was blighting all the good
impulses of his nature.

It was a very simple little story, but it caught the men's attention at
once, being about two soldiers in a hospital during the late war,
both badly wounded in the right arm, and both anxious to save these
breadwinners and go home unmaimed. One was patient, docile, and
cheerfully obeyed orders, even when told that the arm must go. He
submitted and after much suffering recovered, grateful for life, though
he could fight no more. The other rebelled, would listen to no advice,
and having delayed too long, died a lingering death, bitterly regretting
his folly when it was too late. 'Now, as all stories should have a
little moral, let me tell you mine,' added the lady, with a smile, as
she looked at the row of young men before her, sadly wondering what
brought them there.

'This is a hospital for soldiers wounded in life's battle; here are sick
souls, weak wills, insane passions, blind consciences, all the ills that
come from broken laws, bringing their inevitable pain and punishment
with them, There is hope and help for every one, for God's mercy is
infinite and man's charity is great; but penitence and submission must
come before the cure is possible. Pay the forfeit manfully, for it is
just; but from the suffering and shame wring new strength for a nobler
life. The scar will remain, but it is better for a man to lose both arms
than his soul; and these hard years, instead of being lost, may be made
the most precious of your lives, if they teach you to rule yourselves. O
friends, try to outlive the bitter past, to wash the sin away, and begin
anew. If not for your own sakes, for that of the dear mothers, wives,
and children, who wait and hope so patiently for you. Remember them,
and do not let them love and long in vain. And if there be any here
so forlorn that they have no friend to care for them, never forget the
Father whose arms are always open to receive, forgive, and comfort
His prodigal sons, even at the eleventh hour.' There the little sermon
ended; but the preacher of it felt that her few hearty words had not
been uttered in vain, for one boy's head was down, and several faces
wore the softened look which told that a tender memory was touched. Dan
was forced to set his lips to keep them steady, and drop his eyes to
hide the sudden dew that dimmed them when waiting, hoping friends were
spoken of. He was glad to be alone in his cell again, and sat thinking
deeply, instead of trying to forget himself in sleep. It seemed as if
those words were just what he needed to show him where he stood and how
fateful the next few days might be to him. Should he join the 'bad lot',
and perhaps add another crime to the one already committed, lengthen the
sentence already so terrible to bear, deliberately turn his back on all
that was good, and mar the future that might yet be redeemed? Or should
he, like the wiser man in the story, submit, bear the just punishment,
try to be better for it; and though the scar would remain, it might
serve as a reminder of a battle not wholly lost, since he had saved his
soul though innocence was gone? Then he would dare go home, perhaps,
confess, and find fresh strength in the pity and consolation of those
who never gave him up.

Good and evil fought for Dan that night as did the angel and the devil
for Sintram, and it was hard to tell whether lawless nature or loving
heart would conquer. Remorse and resentment, shame and sorrow, pride and
passion, made a battle-field of that narrow cell, and the poor fellow
felt as if he had fiercer enemies to fight now than any he had met in
all his wanderings. A little thing turned the scale, as it so often does
in these mysterious hearts of ours, and a touch of sympathy helped Dan
decide the course which would bless or ban his life.

In the dark hour before the dawn, as he lay wakeful on his bed, a ray
of light shone through the bars, the bolts turned softly, and a man came
in. It was the good chaplain, led by the same instinct that brings a
mother to her sick child's pillow; for long experience as nurse of souls
had taught him to see the signs of hope in the hard faces about him,
and to know when the moment came for a helpful word and the cordial
of sincere prayer that brings such comfort and healing to tried and
troubled hearts. He had been to Dan before at unexpected hours, but
always found him sullen, indifferent, or rebellious, and had gone away
to patiently bide his time. Now it had come; a look of relief was in the
prisoner's face as the light shone on it, and the sound of a human
voice was strangely comfortable after listening to the whispers of
the passions, doubts, and fears which had haunted the cell for hours,
dismaying Dan by their power, and showing him how much he needed help to
fight the good fight, since he had no armour of his own.

'Kent, poor Mason has gone. He left a message for you, and I felt
impelled to come and give it now, because I think you were touched by
what we heard today, and in need of the help Mason tried to give you,'
said the chaplain, taking the one seat and fixing his kind eyes on the
grim figure in the bed.

'Thank you, sir, I'd like to hear it,' was all Dan's answer; but he
forgot himself in pity for the poor fellow dead in prison, with no last
look at wife or child.

He went suddenly, but remembered you, and begged me to say these words:
"Tell him not to do it, but to hold on, do his best, and when his time
is out go right to Mary, and she'll make him welcome for my sake. He's
got no friends in these parts and will feel lonesome, but a woman's
always safe and comfortable when a fellow's down on his luck. Give him
my love and good-bye for he was kind to me, and God will bless him for
it." Then he died quietly, and tomorrow will go home with God's pardon,
since man's came too late.'

Dan said nothing, but laid his arm across his face and lay quite still.
Seeing that the pathetic little message had done its work even better
than he hoped, the chaplain went on, unconscious how soothing his
paternal voice was to the poor prisoner who longed to 'go home', but
felt he had forfeited the right.

'I hope you won't disappoint this humble friend whose last thought was
for you. I know that there is trouble brewing, and fear that you may be
tempted to lend a hand on the wrong side. Don't do it, for the plot will
not succeed--it never does--and it would be a pity to spoil your record
which is fair so far. Keep up your courage, my son, and go out at the
year's end better, not worse, for this hard experience. Remember a
grateful woman waits to welcome and thank you if you have no friends of
your own; if you have, do your best for their sake, and let us ask God
to help you as He only can.'

Then waiting for no answer the good man prayed heartily, and Dan
listened as he never had before; for the lonely hour, the dying message,
the sudden uprising of his better self, made it seem as if some kind
angel had come to save and comfort him. After that night there was a
change in Dan, though no one knew it but the chaplain; for to all the
rest he was the same silent, stern, unsocial fellow as before, and
turning his back on the bad and the good alike, found his only pleasure
in the books his friend brought him. Slowly, as the steadfast drop wears
away the rock, the patient kindness of this man won Dan's confidence,
and led by him he began to climb out of the Valley of Humiliation
towards the mountains, whence, through the clouds, one can catch
glimpses of the Celestial City whither all true pilgrims sooner or
later turn their wistful eyes and stumbling feet. There were many
back-slidings, many struggles with Giant Despair and fiery Apollyon,
many heavy hours when life did not seem worth living and Mason's escape
the only hope. But through all, the grasp of a friendly hand, the sound
of a brother's voice, the unquenchable desire to atone for the past by a
better future, and win the right to see home again, kept poor Dan to his
great task as the old year drew to its end, and the new waited to turn
another leaf in the book whose hardest lesson he was learning now.

At Christmas he yearned so for Plumfield that he devised a way to send a
word of greeting to cheer their anxious hearts, and comfort his own. He
wrote to Mary Mason, who lived in another State, asking her to mail the
letter he enclosed. In it he merely said he was well and busy, had given
up the farm, and had other plans which he would tell later; would not
be home before autumn probably, nor write often, but was all right, and
sent love and merry Christmas to everyone.

Then he took up his solitary life again, and tried to pay his forfeit
manfully.



Chapter 13. NAT'S NEW YEAR

'I don't expect to hear from Emil yet, and Nat writes regularly, but
where is Dan? Only two or three postals since he went. Such an energetic
fellow as he is could buy up all the farms in Kansas by this time,' said
Mrs Jo one morning when the mail came in and no card or envelope bore
Dan's dashing hand.

'He never writes often, you know, but does his work and then comes
home. Months and years seem to mean little to him, and he is probably
prospecting in the wilderness, forgetful of time,' answered Mr Bhaer,
deep in one of Nat's long letters from Leipzig.

'But he promised he would let me know how he got on, and Dan keeps his
word if he can. I'm afraid something has happened to him'; and Mrs Jo
comforted herself by patting Don's head, as he came at the sound of his
master's name to look at her with eyes almost human in their wistful
intelligence.

'Don't worry, Mum dear, nothing ever happens to the old fellow. He'll
turn up all right, and come stalking in some day with a gold-mine in one
pocket and a prairie in the other, as jolly as a grig,' said Ted, who
was in no haste to deliver Octoo to her rightful owner.

'Perhaps he has gone to Montana and given up the farm plan. He seemed to
like Indians best, I thought'; and Rob went to help his mother with her
pile of letters and his cheerful suggestions.

'I hope so, it would suit him best. But I am sure he would have told us
his change of plan and sent for some money to work with. No, I feel in
my prophetic bones that something is wrong,' said Mrs Jo, looking as
solemn as Fate in a breakfast-cap.

'Then we shall hear; ill news always travels fast. Don't borrow trouble,
Jo, but hear how well Nat is getting on. I'd no idea the boy would care
for anything but music. My good friend Baumgarten has launched him well,
and it will do him good if he lose not his head. A good lad, but new to
the world, and Leipzig is full of snares for the unwary. Gott be with
him!'

The Professor read Nat's enthusiastic account of certain literary
and musical parties he had been to, the splendours of the opera, the
kindness of his new friends, the delight of studying under such a master
as Bergmann, his hopes of rapid gain, and his great gratitude to those
who had opened this enchanted world to him.

'That, now, is satisfactory and comfortable. I felt that Nat had
unsuspected power in him before he went away; he was so manly and full
of excellent plans,' said Mrs Jo, in a satisfied tone.

'We shall see. He will doubtless get his lesson and be the better for
it. That comes to us all in our young days. I hope it will not be too
hard for our good Jungling,' answered the Professor, with a wise smile,
remembering his own student life in Germany.

He was right; and Nat was already getting his lesson in life with a
rapidity which would have astonished his friends at home. The manliness
over which Mrs Jo rejoiced was developing in unexpected ways, and quiet
Nat had plunged into the more harmless dissipations of the gay city
with all the ardour of an inexperienced youth taking his first sip of
pleasure. The entire freedom and sense of independence was delicious,
for many benefits began to burden him, and he longed to stand on his
own legs and make his own way. No one knew his past here; and with a
well-stocked wardrobe, a handsome sum at his banker's, and the best
teacher in Leipzig, he made his debut as a musical young gentleman,
presented by the much-respected Professor Bhaer and the wealthy Mr
Laurence, who had many friends glad to throw open their houses to
his protege. Thanks to these introductions, his fluent German, modest
manners, and undeniable talent, the stranger was cordially welcomed, and
launched at once into a circle which many an ambitious young man strove
in vain to enter.

All this rather turned Nat's head; and as he sat in the brilliant
opera-house, chatted among the ladies at some select coffee-party, or
whisked an eminent professor's amiable daughter down the room, trying to
imagine she was Daisy, he often asked himself if this gay fellow could
be the poor homeless little Street musician who once stood waiting in
the rain at the gates of Plumfield. His heart was true, his impulses
good, and his ambitions high; but the weak side of his nature came
uppermost here; vanity led him astray, pleasure intoxicated him, and for
a time he forgot everything but the delights of this new and charming
life. Without meaning to deceive, he allowed people to imagine him a
youth of good family and prospects; he boasted a little of Mr Laurie's
wealth and influence, of Professor Bhaer's eminence, and the flourishing
college at which he himself had been educated. Mrs Jo was introduced to
the sentimental Frauleins who read her books, and the charms and virtues
of his own dear Madchen confided to sympathetic mammas. All these boyish
boastings and innocent vanities were duly circulated among the
gossips, and his importance much increased thereby, to his surprise and
gratification, as well as some shame.

But they bore fruit that was bitter in the end; for, finding that he was
considered one of the upper class, it very soon became impossible
for him to live in the humble quarters he had chosen, or to lead the
studious, quiet life planned for him. He met other students, young
officers, and gay fellows of all sorts, and was flattered at being
welcomed among them; though it was a costly pleasure, and often left
a thorn of regret to vex his honest conscience. He was tempted to take
better rooms in a more fashionable street, leaving good Frau Tetzel to
lament his loss, and his artist neighbour, Fraulein Vogelstein, to shake
her grey ringlets and predict his return, a sadder and a wiser man.

The sum placed at his disposal for expenses and such simple pleasures
as his busy life could command seemed a fortune to Nat, though it was
smaller than generous Mr Laurie first proposed. Professor Bhaer wisely
counselled prudence, as Nat was unused to the care of money, and the
good man knew the temptations that a well-filled purse makes possible at
this pleasure-loving age. So Nat enjoyed his handsome little apartment
immensely, and insensibly let many unaccustomed luxuries creep in. He
loved his music and never missed a lesson; but the hours he should
have spent in patient practice were too often wasted at theatre, ball,
beer-garden, or club--doing no harm beyond that waste of precious time,
and money not his own; for he had no vices, and took his recreation like
a gentleman, so far. But slowly a change for the worse was beginning to
show itself, and he felt it. These first steps along the flowery road
were downward, not upward; and the constant sense of disloyalty which
soon began to haunt him made Nat feel, in the few quiet hours he gave
himself, that all was not well with him, spite of the happy whirl in
which he lived.

'Another month, and then I will be steady,' he said more than once,
trying to excuse the delay by the fact that all was new to him, that his
friends at home wished him to be happy, and that society was giving him
the polish he needed. But as each month slipped away it grew harder to
escape; he was inevitably drawn on, and it was so easy to drift with
the tide that he deferred the evil day as long as possible. Winter
festivities followed the more wholesome summer pleasures, and Nat found
them more costly; for the hospitable ladies expected some return from
the stranger; and carriages, bouquets, theatre tickets, and all the
little expenses a young man cannot escape at such times, told heavily
on the purse which seemed bottomless at first. Taking Mr Laurie for
his model, Nat became quite a gallant, and was universally liked; for
through all the newly acquired airs and graces the genuine honesty
and simplicity of his character plainly shone, winning confidence and
affection from all who knew him.

Among these was a certain amiable old lady with a musical
daughter--well-born but poor, and very anxious to marry the aforesaid
daughter to some wealthy man. Nat's little fictions concerning his
prospects and friends charmed the gnadige Frau as much as his music and
devoted manners did the sentimental Minna. Their quiet parlour seemed
homelike and restful to Nat, when tired of gayer scenes; and the
motherly interest of the elder lady was sweet and comfortable to him;
while the tender blue eyes of the pretty girl were always so full of
welcome when he came, of regret when he left, and of admiration when
he played to her, that he found it impossible to keep away from this
attractive spot. He meant no harm, and feared no danger, having confided
to the Frau Mamma that he was betrothed; so he continued to call, little
dreaming what ambitious hopes the old lady cherished, nor the peril
there was in receiving the adoration of a romantic German girl, till it
was too late to spare her pain and himself great regret.

Of course some inkling of these new and agreeable experiences got into
the voluminous letters he never was too gay, too busy, or too tired
to write each week; and while Daisy rejoiced over his happiness and
success, and the boys laughed at the idea of 'old Chirper coming out as
a society man', the elders looked sober, and said among themselves:

'He is going too fast; he must have a word of warning, or trouble may
come.'

But Mr Laurie said: 'Oh, let him have his fling; he's been dependent and
repressed long enough. He can't go far with the money he has, and I've
no fear of his getting into debt. He's too timid and too honest to be
reckless. It is his first taste of freedom; let him enjoy it, and he'll
work the better by and by; I know--and I'm sure I'm right.'

So the warnings were very gentle, and the good people waited anxiously
to hear more of hard study, and less of 'splendid times'. Daisy
sometimes wondered, with a pang of her faithful heart, if one of the
charming Minnas, Hildegardes, and Lottchens mentioned were not stealing
her Nat away from her; but she never asked, always wrote calmly and
cheerfully, and looked in vain for any hint of change in the letters
that were worn out with much reading.

Month after month slipped away, till the holidays came with gifts, good
wishes, and brilliant festivities. Nat expected to enjoy himself very
much, and did at first; for a German Christmas is a spectacle worth
seeing. But he paid dearly for the abandon with which he threw himself
into the gaieties of that memorable week; and on New Year's Day the
reckoning came. It seemed as if some malicious fairy had prepared the
surprises that arrived, so unwelcome were they, so magical the change
they wrought, turning his happy world into a scene of desolation and
despair as suddenly as a transformation at the pantomime.

The first came in the morning when, duly armed with costly bouquets
and bon-bons, he went to thank Minna and her mother for the braces
embroidered with forget-me-nots and the silk socks knit by the old
lady's nimble fingers, which he had found upon his table that day. The
Frau Mamma received him graciously; but when he asked for the daughter
the good lady frankly demanded what his intentions were, adding that
certain gossip which had reached her ear made it necessary for him
to declare himself or come no more, as Minna's peace must not be
compromised.

A more panic-stricken youth was seldom seen than Nat as he received this
unexpected demand. He saw too late that his American style of gallantry
had deceived the artless girl, and might be used with terrible effect
by the artful mother, if she chose to do it. Nothing but the truth could
save him, and he had the honour and honesty to tell it faithfully. A
sad scene followed; for Nat was obliged to strip off his fictitious
splendour, confess himself only a poor student, and humbly ask pardon
for the thoughtless freedom with which he had enjoyed their too
confiding hospitality. If he had any doubts of Frau Schomburg's motives
and desires, they were speedily set at rest by the frankness with which
she showed her disappointment, the vigour with which she scolded him,
and the scorn with which she cast him off when her splendid castles in
the air collapsed.

The sincerity of Nat's penitence softened her a little and she consented
to a farewell word with Minna, who had listened at the keyhole, and was
produced drenched in tears, to fall on Nat's bosom, crying: 'Ah, thou
dear one, never can I forget thee, though my heart is broken!'

This was worse than the scolding; for the stout lady also wept, and it
was only after much German gush and twaddle that he escaped, feeling
like another Werther; while the deserted Lotte consoled herself with the
bonbons, her mother with the more valuable gifts.

The second surprise arrived as he dined with Professor Baumgarten. His
appetite had been effectually taken away by the scene of the morning,
and his spirits received another damper when a fellow student cheerfully
informed him that he was about to go to America, and should make it his
agreeable duty to call on the 'lieber Herr Professor Bhaer', to tell
him how gaily his protege was disporting himself at Leipzig. Nat's heart
died within him as he imagined the effect these glowing tales would have
at Plumfield--not that he had wilfully deceived them, but in his letters
many things were left untold; and when Carlsen added, with a friendly
wink, that he would merely hint at the coming betrothal of the fair
Minna and his 'heart's friend', Nat found himself devoutly hoping that
this other inconvenient heart's friend might go to the bottom of the sea
before he reached Plumfield to blast all his hopes by these tales of a
mis-spent winter. Collecting his wits, he cautioned Carlsen with what
he flattered himself was Mephistophelian art, and gave him such confused
directions that it would be a miracle if he ever found Professor Bhaer.
But the dinner was spoilt for Nat, and he got away as soon as possible,
to wander disconsolately about the streets, with no heart for the
theatre or the supper he was to share with some gay comrades afterwards.
He comforted himself a little by giving alms to sundry beggars, making
two children happy with gilded gingerbread, and drinking a lonely glass
of beer, in which he toasted his Daisy and wished himself a better year
than the last had been.

Going home at length, he found a third surprise awaiting him in the
shower of bills which had descended upon him like a snowstorm, burying
him in an avalanche of remorse, despair, and self-disgust. These bills
were so many and so large that he was startled and dismayed; for, as
Mr Bhaer wisely predicted, he knew little about the value of money.
It would take every dollar at the bankers to pay them all at once, and
leave him penniless for the next six months, unless he wrote home for
more. He would rather starve than do that; and his first impulse was to
seek help at the gaming-table, whither his new friends had often tempted
him. But he had promised Mr Bhaer to resist what then had seemed an
impossible temptation; and now he would not add another fault to the
list already so long. Borrow he would not, nor beg. What could he do?
For these appalling bills must be paid, and the lessons go on; or his
journey was an ignominious failure. But he must live meantime. And how?
Bowed down with remorse for the folly of these months, he saw too late
whither he was drifting, and for hours paced up and down his pretty
rooms, floundering in a Slough of Despond, with no helping hand to pull
him out--at least he thought so till letters were brought in, and among
fresh bills lay one well-worn envelope with an American stamp in the
corner.

Ah, how welcome it was! how eagerly he read the long pages full of
affectionate wishes from all at home! For everyone had sent a line, and
as each familiar name appeared, his eyes grew dimmer and dimmer till, as
he read the last--'God bless my boy! Mother Bhaer'--he broke down; and
laying his head on his arms, blistered the paper with a rain of tears
that eased his heart and washed away the boyish sins that now lay so
heavy on his conscience.

'Dear people, how they love and trust me! And how bitterly they would
be disappointed if they knew what a fool I've been! I'll fiddle in the
streets again before I'll ask for help from them!' cried Nat, brushing
away the tears of which he was ashamed, although he felt the good they
had done.

Now he seemed to see more clearly what to do; for the helping hand had
been stretched across the sea, and Love, the dear Evangelist, had
lifted him out of the slough and shown him the narrow gate, beyond which
deliverance lay. When the letter had been reread, and one corner where
a daisy was painted, passionately kissed, Nat felt strong enough to face
the worst and conquer it. Every bill should be paid, every salable thing
of his own sold, these costly rooms given up; and once back with
thrifty Frau Tetzel, he would find work of some sort by which to support
himself, as many another student did. He must give up the new friends,
turn his back on the gay life, cease to be a butterfly, and take his
place among the grubs. It was the only honest thing to do, but very hard
for the poor fellow to crush his little vanities, renounce the delights
so dear to the young, own his folly, and step down from his pedestal to
be pitied, laughed at, and forgotten.

It took all Nat's pride and courage to do this, for his was a sensitive
nature; esteem was very precious to him, failure very bitter, and
nothing but the inborn contempt for meanness and deceit kept him from
asking help or trying to hide his need by some dishonest device. As he
sat alone that night, Mr Bhaer's words came back to him with curious
clearness, and he saw himself a boy again at Plumfield, punishing his
teacher as a lesson to himself, when timidity had made him lie.

'He shall not suffer for me again, and I won't be a sneak if I am a
fool. I'll go and tell Professor Baumgarten all about it and ask his
advice. I'd rather face a loaded cannon; but it must be done. Then I'll
sell out, pay my debts, and go back where I belong. Better be an honest
pauper than a jackdaw among peacocks'; and Nat smiled in the midst of
his trouble, as he looked about him at the little elegancies of his
room, remembering what he came from.

He kept his word manfully, and was much comforted to find that his
experience was an old story to the professor, who approved his plan,
thinking wisely that the discipline would be good for him, and was very
kind in offering help and promising to keep the secret of his folly from
his friend Bhaer till Nat had redeemed himself.

The first week of the new year was spent by our prodigal in carrying out
his plan with penitent dispatch, and his birthday found him alone in
the little room high up at Frau Tetzel's, with nothing of his former
splendour, but sundry unsalable keepsakes from the buxom maidens, who
mourned his absence deeply. His male friends had ridiculed, pitied,
and soon left him alone, with one or two exceptions, who offered their
purses generously and promised to stand by him. He was lonely and
heavy-hearted, and sat brooding over his small fire as he remembered the
last New Year's Day at Plumfield, when at this hour he was dancing with
his Daisy.

A tap at the door roused him, and with a careless 'Herein', he waited
to see who had climbed so far for his sake. It was the good Frau proudly
bearing a tray, on which stood a bottle of wine and an astonishing
cake bedecked with sugar-plums of every hue, and crowned with candles.
Fraulein Vogelstein followed, embracing a blooming rose-tree, above
which her grey curls waved and her friendly face beamed joyfully as she
cried:

'Dear Herr Blak, we bring you greetings and a little gift or two in
honour of this ever-to-be-remembered day. Best wishes! and may the new
year bloom for you as beautifully as we your heart-warm friends desire.'

'Yes, yes, in truth we do, dear Herr,' added Frau Tetzel. 'Eat of this
with-joy-made Kuchen, and drink to the health of the far-away beloved
ones in the good wine.'

Amused, yet touched by the kindness of the good souls, Nat thanked them
both, and made them stay to enjoy the humble feast with him. This they
gladly did, being motherly women full of pity for the dear youth, whose
straits they knew, and having substantial help to offer, as well as kind
words and creature comforts.

Frau Tetzel, with some hesitation, mentioned a friend of hers who,
forced by illness to leave his place in the orchestra of a second-rate
theatre, would gladly offer it to Nat, if he could accept so humble a
position. Blushing and toying with the roses like a shy girl, good old
Vogelstein asked if in his leisure moments he could give English lessons
in the young ladies' school where she taught painting, adding that a
small but certain salary would be paid him.

Gratefully Nat accepted both offers, finding it less humiliating to be
helped by women than by friends of his own sex. This work would support
him in a frugal way, and certain musical drudgery promised by his master
assured his own teaching. Delighted with the success of their little
plot, these friendly neighbours left him with cheery words, warm
hand-grasps, and faces beaming with feminine satisfaction at the hearty
kiss Nat put on each faded cheek, as the only return he could make for
all their helpful kindness.

It was strange how much brighter the world looked after that; for hope
was a better cordial than the wine, and good resolutions bloomed as
freshly as the little rose-tree that filled the room with fragrance, as
Nat woke the echoes with the dear old airs, finding now as always his
best comforter in music, to whom henceforth he swore to be a more loyal
subject.



Chapter 14. PLAYS AT PLUMFIELD

As it is as impossible for the humble historian of the March family to
write a story without theatricals in it as for our dear Miss Yonge to
get on with less than twelve or fourteen children in her interesting
tales, we will accept the fact, and at once cheer ourselves after
the last afflicting events, by proceeding to the Christmas plays at
Plumfield; for they influence the fate of several of our characters, and
cannot well be skipped.

When the college was built Mr Laurie added a charming little theatre
which not only served for plays, but declamations, lectures, and
concerts. The drop-curtain displayed Apollo with the Muses grouped about
him; and as a compliment to the donor of the hall the artist had given
the god a decided resemblance to our friend, which was considered
a superb joke by everyone else. Home talent furnished stars, stock
company, orchestra, and scene painter; and astonishing performances were
given on this pretty little stage.

Mrs Jo had been trying for some time to produce a play which should
be an improvement upon the adaptations from the French then in vogue,
curious mixtures of fine toilettes, false sentiment, and feeble wit,
with no touch of nature to redeem them. It was easy to plan plays full
of noble speeches and thrilling situations, but very hard to write them;
so she contented herself with a few scenes of humble life in which the
comic and pathetic were mingled; and as she fitted her characters to
her actors, she hoped the little venture would prove that truth and
simplicity had not entirely lost their power to charm. Mr Laurie helped
her, and they called themselves Beaumont and Fletcher, enjoying their
joint labour very much; for Beaumont's knowledge of dramatic art was
of great use in curbing Fletcher's too-aspiring pen, and they flattered
themselves that they had produced a neat and effective bit of work as an
experiment.

All was ready now; and Christmas Day was much enlivened by last
rehearsals, the panics of timid actors, the scramble for forgotten
properties, and the decoration of the theatre. Evergreen and holly from
the woods, blooming plants from the hothouse on Parnassus, and flags of
all nations made it very gay that night in honour of the guests who were
coming, chief among them, Miss Cameron, who kept her promise
faithfully. The orchestra tuned their instruments with unusual care,
the scene-shifters set their stage with lavish elegance, the prompter
heroically took his seat in the stifling nook provided for him, and
the actors dressed with trembling hands that dropped the pins, and
perspiring brows whereon the powder wouldn't stick. Beaumont and
Fletcher were everywhere, feeling that their literary reputation was
at stake; for sundry friendly critics were invited, and reporters, like
mosquitoes, cannot be excluded from any earthly scene, be it a great
man's death-bed or a dime museum.

'Has she come?' was the question asked by every tongue behind the
curtain; and when Tom, who played an old man, endangered his respectable
legs among the footlights to peep, announced that he saw Miss Cameron's
handsome head in the place of honour, a thrill pervaded the entire
company, and Josie declared with an excited gasp that she was going to
have stage fright for the first time in her life.

'I'll shake you if you do,' said Mrs Jo, who was in such a wild state
of dishevelment with her varied labours that she might have gone on as
Madge Wildlife, without an additional rag or crazy elf-lock.

'You'll have time to get your wits together while we do our piece. We
are old stagers and calm as clocks,' answered Demi, with a nod towards
Alice, ready in her pretty dress and all her properties at hand.

But both clocks were going rather faster than usual, as heightened
colour, brilliant eyes, and a certain flutter under the laces and velvet
coat betrayed. They were to open the entertainment with a gay little
piece which they had played before and did remarkably well. Alice was
a tall girl, with dark hair and eyes, and a face which intelligence,
health, and a happy heart made beautiful. She was looking her best now,
for the brocades, plumes, and powder of the Marquise became her stately
figure; and Demi in his court suit, with sword, three-cornered hat, and
white wig, made as gallant a Baron as one would wish to see. Josie was
the maid, and looked her part to the life, being as pretty, pert,
and inquisitive as any French soubrette. These three were all the
characters; and the success of the piece depended on the spirit and
skill with which the quickly changing moods of the quarrelsome lovers
were given, their witty speeches made to tell, and by-play suited to the
courtly period in which the scene was laid.

Few would have recognized sober John and studious Alice in the dashing
gentleman and coquettish lady, who kept the audience laughing at their
caprices; while they enjoyed the brilliant costumes, and admired the
ease and grace of the young actors. Josie was a prominent figure in the
plot, as she listened at keyholes, peeped into notes, and popped in and
out at all the most inopportune moments, with her nose in the air, her
hands in her apron-pockets, and curiosity pervading her little figure
from the topmost bow of her jaunty cap to the red heels of her slippers.
All went smoothly; and the capricious Marquise, after tormenting the
devoted Baron to her heart's content, owned herself conquered in the war
of wits, and was just offering the hand he had fairly won, when a crash
startled them, and a heavily decorated side-scene swayed forward, ready
to fall upon Alice. Demi saw it and sprung before her to catch and hold
it up, standing like a modern Samson with the wall of a house on his
back. The danger was over in a moment, and he was about to utter his
last speech, when the excited young scene-shifter, who had flown up a
ladder to repair the damage, leaned over to whisper 'All right', and
release Demi from his spread-eagle attitude: as he did so, a hammer
slipped out of his pocket, to fall upon the upturned face below,
inflicting a smart blow and literally knocking the Baron's part out of
his head.

'A quick curtain,' robbed the audience of a pretty little scene not down
on the bill; for the Marquise flew to staunch the blood with a cry of
alarm: 'Oh! John, you are hurt! Lean on me'--which John gladly did for a
moment, being a trifle dazed yet quite able to enjoy the tender touch of
the hands busied about him and the anxiety of the face so near his own;
for both told him something which he would have considered cheaply won
by a rain of hammers and the fall of the whole college on his head.

Nan was on the spot in a moment with the case that never left her
pocket; and the wound was neatly plastered up by the time Mrs Jo
arrived, demanding tragically:

'Is he too much hurt to go on again? If he is, my play is lost!'

'I'm all the fitter for it, Aunty; for here's a real instead of a
painted wound. I'll be ready; don't worry about me.' And catching up
his wig, Demi was off, with only a very eloquent look of thanks to the
Marquise, who had spoilt her gloves for his sake, but did not seem to
mind it at all, though they reached above her elbows, and were most
expensive.

'How are your nerves, Fletcher?' asked Mr Laurie as they stood together
during the breathless minute before the last bell rings.

'About as calm as yours, Beaumont,' answered Mrs Jo, gesticulating
wildly to Mrs Meg to set her cap straight.

'Bear up, partner! I'll stand by you whatever comes!'

'I feel that it ought to go; for, though it's a mere trifle, a good deal
of honest work and truth have gone into it. Doesn't Meg look the picture
of a dear old country woman?'

She certainly did, as she sat in the farmhouse kitchen by a cheery fire,
rocking a cradle and darning stockings, as if she had done nothing else
all her life. Grey hair, skilfully drawn lines on the forehead, and a
plain gown, with cap, little shawl, and check apron, changed her into a
comfortable, motherly creature who found favour the moment the curtain
went up and discovered her rocking, darning, and crooning an old song.
In a short soliloquy about Sam, her boy, who wanted to enlist;
Dolly, her discontented little daughter, who longed for city ease and
pleasures; and poor 'Elizy', who had married badly, and came home to
die, bequeathing her baby to her mother, lest its bad father should
claim it, the little story was very simply opened, and made effective
by the real boiling of the kettle on the crane, the ticking of a tall
clock, and the appearance of a pair of blue worsted shoes which
waved fitfully in the air to the soft babble of a baby's voice. Those
shapeless little shoes won the first applause; and Mr Laurie, forgetting
elegance in satisfaction, whispered to his coadjutor:

'I thought the baby would fetch them!'

'If the dear thing won't squall in the wrong place, we are saved. But
it is risky. Be ready to catch it if all Meg's cuddlings prove in vain,'
answered Mrs Jo, adding, with a clutch at Mr Laurie's arm as a haggard
face appeared at the window:

'Here's Demi! I hope no one will recognize him when he comes on as the
son. I'll never forgive you for not doing the villain yourself.'

'Can't run the thing and act too. He's capitally made up, and likes a
bit of melodrama.'

'This scene ought to have come later; but I wanted to show that the
mother was the heroine as soon as possible. I'm tired of love-sick girls
and runaway wives. We'll prove that there's romance in old women also.
Now he's coming!'

And in slouched a degraded-looking man, shabby, unshaven, and evil-eyed,
trying to assume a masterful air as he dismayed the tranquil old woman
by demanding his child. A powerful scene followed; and Mrs Meg surprised
even those who knew her best by the homely dignity with which she at
first met the man she dreaded; then, as he brutally pressed his claim,
she pleaded with trembling voice and hands to keep the little creature
she had promised the dying mother to protect; and when he turned to
take it by force, quite a thrill went through the house as the old woman
sprung to snatch it from the cradle, and holding it close, defied him in
God's name to tear it from that sacred refuge. It was really well done;
and the round of applause that greeted the fine tableau of the indignant
old woman, the rosy, blinking baby clinging to her neck, and the daunted
man who dared not execute his evil purpose with such a defender for
helpless innocence, told the excited authors that their first scene was
a hit.

The second was quieter, and introduced Josie as a bonny country lass
setting the supper-table in a bad humour. The pettish way in which she
slapped down the plates, hustled the cups, and cut the big brown loaf,
as she related her girlish trials and ambitions, was capital. Mrs Jo
kept her eye on Miss Cameron, and saw her nod approval several times at
some natural tone or gesture, some good bit of by-play or a quick change
of expression in the young face, which was as variable as an April day.
Her struggle with the toasting-fork made much merriment; so did her
contempt for the brown sugar, and the relish with which she sweetened
her irksome duties by eating it; and when she sat, like Cinderella, on
the hearth, tearfully watching the flames dance on the homely room, a
girlish voice was heard to exclaim impulsively:

'Poor little thing! she ought to have some fun!'

The old woman enters; and mother and daughter have a pretty scene, in
which the latter coaxes and threatens, kisses and cries, till she wins
the reluctant consent of the former to visit a rich relation in the
city; and from being a little thunder-cloud Dolly becomes bewitchingly
gay and good, as soon as her wilful wish is granted. The poor old soul
has hardly recovered from this trial when the son enters, in army
blue, tells he has enlisted and must go. That is a hard blow; but the
patriotic mother bears it well, and not till the thoughtless young folks
have hastened away to tell their good news elsewhere does she break
down. Then the country kitchen becomes pathetic as the old mother sits
alone mourning over her children, till the grey head is hidden in the
hands as she kneels down by the cradle to weep and pray, with only Baby
to comfort her fond and faithful heart.

Sniffs were audible all through the latter part of this scene; and
when the curtain fell, people were so busy wiping their eyes that for
a moment they forgot to applaud. That silent moment was more flattering
than noise; and as Mrs Jo wiped the real tears off her sister's
face, she said as solemnly as an unconscious dab of rouge on her nose
permitted:

'Meg, you have saved my play! Oh, why aren't you a real actress, and I a
real playwright?'

'Don't gush now, dear, but help me dress Josie; she's in such a quiver
of excitement, I can't manage her, and this is her best scene, you
know.'

So it was; for her aunt had written it especially for her, and little Jo
was happy in a gorgeous dress, with a train long enough to satisfy her
wildest dreams. The rich relation's parlour was in festival array, and
the country cousin sails in, looking back at her sweeping flounces with
such artless rapture that no one had the heart to laugh at the pretty
jay in borrowed plumes. She has confidences with herself in the mirror,
from which it is made evident that she had discovered all is not gold
that glitters, and has found greater temptations than those a girlish
love of pleasure, luxury, and flattery bring her. She is sought by a
rich lover; but her honest heart resists the allurements he offers,
and in its innocent perplexity wishes 'mother' was there to comfort and
counsel.

A gay little dance, in which Dora, Nan, Bess, and several of the boys
took part, made a good background for the humble figure of the old woman
in her widow's bonnet, rusty shawl, big umbrella, and basket. Her naive
astonishment, as she surveys the spectacle, feels the curtains, and
smooths her old gloves during the moment she remains unseen, was very
good; but Josie's unaffected start when she sees her, and the cry:
'Why, there's mother!' was such a hearty little bit of nature, it hardly
needed the impatient tripping over her train as she ran into the arms
that seemed now to be her nearest refuge.

The lover plays his part; and ripples of merriment greeted the old
woman's searching questions and blunt answers during the interview which
shows the girl how shallow his love is, and how near she had been to
ruining her life as bitterly as poor 'Elizy' did. She gives her answer
frankly, and when they are alone, looks from her own bedizened self
to the shabby dress, work-worn hands, and tender face, crying with a
repentant sob and kiss: 'Take me home, mother, and keep me safe. I've
had enough of this!'

'That will do you good, Maria; don't forget it,' said one lady to her
daughter as the curtain went down; and the girl answered: 'Well, I'm
sure I don't see why it's touching; but it is,' as she spread her lace
handkerchief to dry.

Tom and Nan came out strong in the next scene; for it was a ward in
an army hospital, and surgeon and nurse went from bed to bed, feeling
pulses, administering doses, and hearing complaints with an energy and
gravity which convulsed the audience. The tragic element, never far from
the comic at such times and places, came in when, while they bandaged
an arm, the doctor told the nurse about an old woman who was searching
through the hospital for her son, after days and nights on battlefields,
through ambulances, and among scenes which would have killed most women.

'She will be here directly, and I dread her coming, for I'm afraid the
poor lad who has just gone is her boy. I'd rather face a cannon than
these brave women, with their hope and courage and great sorrow,' says
the surgeon.

'Ah, these poor mothers break my heart!' adds the nurse, wiping her eyes
on her big apron; and with the words Mrs Meg came in.

There was the same dress, the basket and umbrella, the rustic speech,
the simple manners; but all were made pathetic by the terrible
experience which had changed the tranquil old woman to that haggard
figure with wild eyes, dusty feet, trembling hands, and an expression of
mingled anguish, resolution, and despair which gave the homely figure
a tragic dignity and power that touched all hearts. A few broken words
told the story of her vain search, and then the sad quest began again.
People held their breath as, led by the nurse, she went from bed to
bed, showing in her face the alternations of hope, dread, and bitter
disappointment as each was passed. On a narrow cot was a long figure
covered with a sheet, and here she paused to lay one hand on her heart
and one on her eyes, as if to gather courage to look at the nameless
dead. Then she drew down the sheet, gave a long shivering sigh of
relief, saying softly:

'Not my son, thank God! but some mother's boy.' And stooping down, she
kissed the cold forehead tenderly.

Somebody sobbed there, and Miss Cameron shook two tears out of her eyes,
anxious to lose no look or gesture as the poor soul, nearly spent with
the long strain, struggled on down the long line. But her search was
happily ended for, as if her voice had roused him from his feverish
sleep, a gaunt, wild-eyed man sat up in his bed, and stretching his arms
to her, cried in a voice that echoed through the room:

'Mother, mother! I knew you'd come to me!'

She did go to him, with a cry of love and joy that thrilled every
listener, as she gathered him in her arms with the tears and prayers and
blessing such as only a fond and faithful old mother could give.

The last scene was a cheerful contrast to this; for the country kitchen
was bright with Christmas cheer, the wounded hero, with black patch and
crutches well displayed, sat by the fire in the old chair whose familiar
creak was soothing to his ear; pretty Dolly was stirring about, gaily
trimming dresser, settle, high chimney-piece, and old-fashioned cradle
with mistletoe and holly; while the mother rested beside her son, with
that blessed baby on her knee. Refreshed by a nap and nourishment, this
young actor now covered himself with glory by his ecstatic prancings,
incoherent remarks to the audience, and vain attempts to get to the
footlights, as he blinked approvingly at these brilliant toys. It was
good to see Mrs Meg pat him on the back, cuddle the fat legs out of
sight, and appease his vain longings with a lump of sugar, till Baby
embraced her with a grateful ardour that brought him a round of applause
all for his little self.

A sound of singing outside disturbs the happy family, and, after a carol
in the snowy moonlight, a flock of neighbours troop in with Christmas
gifts and greetings. Much by-play made this a lively picture; for Sam's
sweetheart hovered round him with a tenderness the Marquise did not
show the Baron; and Dolly had a pretty bit under the mistletoe with her
rustic adorer, who looked so like Ham Peggotty in his cowhide boots,
rough jacket, and dark beard and wig, that no one would have recognized
Ted but for the long legs, which no extent of leather could disguise. It
ended with a homely feast, brought by the guests; and as they sat round
the table covered with doughnuts and cheese, pumpkin-pie, and other
delicacies, Sam rises on his crutches to propose the first toast, and
holding up his mug of cider, says, with a salute, and a choke in his
voice: 'Mother, God bless her!' All drink it standing, Dolly with her
arm round the old woman's neck, as she hides her happy tears on her
daughter's breast; while the irrepressible baby beat rapturously on the
table with a spoon, and crowed audibly as the curtain went down.

They had it up again in a jiffy to get a last look at the group about
that central figure, which was showered with bouquets, to the great
delight of the infant Roscius; till a fat rosebud hit him on the nose,
and produced the much-dreaded squall, which, fortunately, only added to
the fun at that moment.

'Well, that will do for a beginning,' said Beaumont, with a sigh of
relief, as the curtain descended for the last time, and the actors
scattered to dress for the closing piece.

'As an experiment, it is a success. Now we can venture to begin our
great American drama,' answered Mrs Jo, full of satisfaction and grand
ideas for the famous play--which, we may add, she did not write that
year, owing to various dramatic events in her own family.

The Owlsdark Marbles closed the entertainment, and, being something new,
proved amusing to this very indulgent audience. The gods and goddesses
on Parnassus were displayed in full conclave; and, thanks to Mrs Amy's
skill in draping and posing, the white wigs and cotton-flannel robes
were classically correct and graceful, though sundry modern additions
somewhat marred the effect, while adding point to the showman's learned
remarks. Mr Laurie was Professor Owlsdark in cap and gown; and, after
a high-flown introduction, he proceeded to exhibit and explain his
marbles. The first figure was a stately Minerva; but a second glance
produced a laugh, for the words 'Women's Rights' adorned her shield, a
scroll bearing the motto 'Vote early and often' hung from the beak of
the owl perched on her lance, and a tiny pestle and mortar ornamented
her helmet. Attention was drawn to the firm mouth, the piercing eye, the
awe-inspiring brow, of the strong-minded woman of antiquity, and some
scathing remarks made upon the degeneracy of her modern sisters who
failed to do their duty. Mercury came next, and was very fine in his
airy attitude, though the winged legs quivered as if it was difficult to
keep the lively god in his place. His restless nature was dilated upon,
his mischievous freaks alluded to, and a very bad character given to
the immortal messenger-boy; which delighted his friends and caused
the marble nose of the victim to curl visibly with scorn when derisive
applause greeted a particularly hard hit. A charming little Hebe stood
next, pouring nectar from a silver teapot into a blue china tea-cup. She
also pointed a moral; for the Professor explained that the nectar of old
was the beverage which cheers but does not inebriate, and regretted that
the excessive devotion of American women to this classic brew proved so
harmful, owing to the great development of brain their culture produced.
A touch at modern servants, in contrast to this accomplished table-girl,
made the statue's cheeks glow under the chalk, and brought her a hearty
round as the audience recognized Dolly and the smart soubrette.

Jove in all his majesty followed, as he and his wife occupied the
central pedestals in the half-circle of immortals. A splendid Jupiter,
with hair well set up off the fine brow, ambrosial beard, silver
thunderbolts in one hand, and a well-worn ferule in the other. A
large stuffed eagle from the museum stood at his feet; and the benign
expression of his august countenance showed that he was in a good
humour--as well he might be, for he was paid some handsome compliments
upon his wise rule, the peaceful state of his kingdom, and the brood
of all-accomplished Pallases that yearly issued from his mighty brain.
Cheers greeted this and other pleasant words, and caused the thunderer
to bow his thanks; for 'Jove nods', as everyone knows, and flattery wins
the heart of gods and men.

Mrs Juno, with her peacocks, darning-needle, pen, and cooking-spoon, did
not get off so easily; for the Professor was down on her with all manner
of mirth-provoking accusations, criticisms, and insults even. He alluded
to her domestic infelicity, her meddlesome disposition, sharp tongue,
bad temper, and jealousy, closing, however, with a tribute to her
skill in caring for the wounds and settling the quarrels of belligerent
heroes, as well as her love for youths in Olympus and on earth. Gales of
laughter greeted these hits, varied by hisses from some indignant boys,
who would not bear, even in joke, any disrespect to dear Mother Bhaer,
who, however, enjoyed it all immensely, as the twinkle in her eye and
the irrepressible pucker of her lips betrayed.

A jolly Bacchus astride of his cask took Vulcan's place, and appeared to
be very comfortable with a beer-mug in one hand, a champagne bottle in
the other, and a garland of grapes on his curly head. He was the text
of a short temperance lecture, aimed directly at a row of smart young
gentlemen who lined the walls of the auditorium. George Cole was seen
to dodge behind a pillar at one point, Dolly nudged his neighbour at
another, and there was laughter all along the line as the Professor
glared at them through his big glasses, and dragged their bacchanalian
orgies to the light and held them up to scorn.

Seeing the execution he had done, the learned man turned to the lovely
Diana, who stood as white and still as the plaster stag beside her, with
sandals, bow, and crescent; quite perfect, and altogether the best piece
of statuary in the show. She was very tenderly treated by the paternal
critic who, merely alluding to her confirmed spinsterhood, fondness for
athletic sports, and oracular powers, gave a graceful little exposition
of true art and passed on to the last figure.

This was Apollo in full fig, his curls skilfully arranged to hide a
well-whitened patch over the eye, his handsome legs correctly poised,
and his gifted fingers about to draw divine music from the silvered
gridiron which was his lyre. His divine attributes were described, as
well as his little follies and failings, among which were his weakness
for photography and flute-playing, his attempts to run a newspaper, and
his fondness for the society of the Muses; which latter slap produced
giggles and blushes among the girl-graduates, and much mirth among the
stricken youths; for misery loves company, and after this they began to
rally.

Then, with a ridiculous conclusion, the Professor bowed his thanks;
and after several recalls the curtain fell, but not quickly enough to
conceal Mercury, wildly waving his liberated legs, Hebe dropping her
teapot, Bacchus taking a lovely roll on his barrel, and Mrs Juno rapping
the impertinent Owlsdark on the head with Jove's ruler.

While the audience filed out to supper in the hall, the stage was a
scene of dire confusion as gods and goddesses, farmers and barons,
maids and carpenters, congratulated one another on the success of their
labours. Assuming various costumes, actors and actresses soon joined
their guests, to sip bounteous draughts of praise with their coffee, and
cool their modest blushes with ice-cream. Mrs Meg was a proud and happy
woman when Miss Cameron came to her as she sat by Josie, with Demi
serving both, and said, so cordially that it was impossible to doubt the
sincerity of her welcome words:

'Mrs Brooke, I no longer wonder where your children get their talent.
I make my compliments to the Baron and next summer you must let me have
little "Dolly" as a pupil when we are at the beach.'

One can easily imagine how this offer was received, as well as the
friendly commendation bestowed by the same kind critic on the work of
Beaumont and Fletcher, who hastened to explain that this trifle was only
an attempt to make nature and art go hand in hand, with little help from
fine writing or imposing scenery. Everybody was in the happiest mood,
especially 'little Dolly', who danced like a will-o'-the-wisp with
light-footed Mercury and Apollo as he promenaded with the Marquise on
his arm, who seemed to have left her coquetry in the green room with her
rouge.

When all was over, Mrs Juno said to Jove, to whose arm she clung as they
trudged home along the snowy paths: 'Fritz dear, Christmas is a good
time for new resolutions, and I've made one never to be impatient or
fretful with my beloved husband again. I know I am, though you won't own
it; but Laurie's fun had some truth in it, and I felt hit in a tender
spot. Henceforth I am a model wife, else I don't deserve the dearest,
best man ever born'; and being in a dramatic mood, Mrs Juno tenderly
embraced her excellent Jove in the moonlight, to the great amusement of
sundry lingerers behind them.

So all three plays might be considered successes, and that merry
Christmas night a memorable one in the March family; for Demi got an
unspoken question answered, Josie's fondest wish was granted, and,
thanks to Professor Owlsdark's jest, Mrs Jo made Professor Bhaer's busy
life quite a bed of roses by the keeping of her resolution. A few days
later she had her reward for this burst of virtue in Dan's letter, which
set her fears at rest and made her very happy, though she was unable to
tell him so, because he sent her no address.



Chapter 15. WAITING

'My wife, I have bad news for thee,' said Professor Bhaer, coming in one
day early in January.

'Please tell it at once. I can't bear to wait, Fritz,' cried Mrs Jo,
dropping her work and standing up as if to take the shot bravely.

'But we must wait and hope, heart's-dearest. Come and let us bear it
together. Emil's ship is lost, and as yet no news of him.'

It was well Mr Bhaer had taken his wife into his strong arms, for she
looked ready to drop, but bore up after a moment, and sitting by her
good man, heard all that there was to tell. Tidings had been sent to the
shipowners at Hamburg by some of the survivors, and telegraphed at once
by Franz to his uncle. As one boat-load was safe, there was hope that
others might also escape, though the gale had sent two to the bottom.
A swift-sailing steamer had brought these scanty news, and happier ones
might come at any hour; but kind Franz had not added that the sailors
reported the captain's boat as undoubtedly wrecked by the falling mast,
since the smoke hid its escape, and the gale soon drove all far asunder.
But this sad rumour reached Plumfield in time; and deep was the mourning
for the happyhearted Commodore, never to come singing home again. Mrs
Jo refused to believe it, stoutly insisting that Emil would outlive
any storm and yet turn up safe and gay. It was well she clung to this
hopeful view, for poor Mr Bhaer was much afflicted by the loss of his
boy, because his sister's sons had been his so long he scarcely knew a
different love for his very own. Now was a chance for Mrs Juno to keep
her word; and she did, speaking cheerily of Emil, even when hope waxed
faint and her heart was heavy. If anything could comfort the Bhaers for
the loss of one boy, it would have been the affection and sorrow shown
by all the rest. Franz kept the cable busy with his varying messages,
Nat sent loving letters from Leipzig, and Tom harassed the shipping
agents for news. Even busy Jack wrote them with unusual warmth; Dolly
and George came often, bearing the loveliest flowers and the
daintiest bon-bons to cheer Mrs Bhaer and sweeten Josie's grief; while
good-hearted Ned travelled all the way from Chicago to press their hands
and say, with a tear in his eye: 'I was so anxious to hear all about the
dear old boy, I couldn't keep away.'

'That's right comfortable, and shows me that if I didn't teach my boys
anything else, I did give them the brotherly love that will make them
stand by one another all their lives,' said Mrs Jo, when he had gone.

Rob answered reams of sympathizing letters, which showed how many
friends they had; and the kindly praises of the lost man would have
made Emil a hero and a saint, had they all been true. The elders bore
it quietly, having learned submission in life's hard school; but the
younger people rebelled; some hoped against hope and kept up, others
despaired at once, and little Josie, Emil's pet cousin and playmate, was
so broken-hearted nothing could comfort her. Nan dosed in vain, Daisy's
cheerful words went by like the wind, and Bess's devices to amuse her
all failed utterly. To cry in mother's arms and talk about the wreck,
which haunted her even in her sleep, was all she cared to do; and Mrs
Meg was getting anxious when Miss Cameron sent Josie a kind note bidding
her learn bravely her first lesson in real tragedy, and be like the
self-sacrificing heroines she loved to act. That did the little girl
good, and she made an effort in which Teddy and Octoo helped her much;
for the boy was deeply impressed by this sudden eclipse of the firefly
whose light and life all missed when they were gone, and lured her out
every day for long drives behind the black mare, who shook her silvery
bells till they made such merry music Josie could not help listening to
it, and whisked her over the snowy roads at a pace which set the blood
dancing in her veins and sent her home strengthened and comforted by
sunshine, fresh air, and congenial society--three aids young sufferers
seldom can resist.

As Emil was helping nurse Captain Hardy, safe and well, aboard the ship,
all this sorrow would seem wasted; but it was not, for it drew many
hearts more closely together by a common grief, taught some patience,
some sympathy, some regret for faults that lie heavy on the conscience
when the one sinned against is gone, and all of them the solemn lesson
to be ready when the summons comes. A hush lay over Plumfield for weeks,
and the studious faces on the hill reflected the sadness of those in the
valley. Sacred music sounded from Parnassus to comfort all who heard;
the brown cottage was beseiged with gifts for the little mourner, and
Emil's flag hung at half-mast on the roof where he last sat with Mrs Jo.

So the weeks went heavily by till suddenly, like a thunderbolt out of a
clear sky, came the news, 'All safe, letters on the way.' Then up went
the flag, out rang the college bells, bang went Teddy's long-unused
cannon, and a chorus of happy voices cried 'Thank God', as people went
about, laughing, crying, and embracing one another in a rapture of
delight. By and by the longed-for letters came, and all the story of the
wreck was told; briefly by Emil, eloquently by Mrs Hardy, gratefully by
the captain, while Mary added a few tender words that went straight to
their hearts and seemed the sweetest of all. Never were letters so read,
passed round, admired, and cried over as these; for Mrs Jo carried them
in her pocket when Mr Bhaer did not have them in his, and both took a
look at them when they said their prayers at night. Now the Professor
was heard humming like a big bee again as he went to his classes, and
the lines smoothed out of Mother Bhaer's forehead, while she wrote this
real story to anxious friends and let her romances wait. Now messages
of congratulation flowed in, and beaming faces showed everywhere. Rob
amazed his parents by producing a poem which was remarkably good for one
of his years, and Demi set it to music that it might be sung when the
sailor boy returned. Teddy stood on his head literally, and tore about
the neighbourhood on Octoo, like a second Paul Revere--only his tidings
were good. But best of all, little Josie lifted up her head as the
snowdrops did, and began to bloom again, growing tall and quiet, with
the shadow of past sorrow to tone down her former vivacity and show
that she had learned a lesson in trying to act well her part on the real
stage, where all have to take their share in the great drama of life.

Now another sort of waiting began; for the travellers were on their way
to Hamburg, and would stay there awhile before coming home, as Uncle
Hermann owned the Brenda, and the captain must report to him. Emil must
remain to Franz's wedding, deferred till now because of the season of
mourning, so happily ended. These plans were doubly welcome and pleasant
after the troublous times which went before, and no spring ever seemed
so beautiful as this one; for, as Teddy put it:

    'Now is the winter of our discontent
     Made glorious by these sons of Bhaer!'

Franz and Emil being regarded in the light of elder brothers by the real
'sons of Bhaer'.

There was great scrubbing and dusting among the matrons as they set
their houses in order not only for Class Day, but to receive the bride
and groom, who were to come to them for the honeymoon trip. Great plans
were made, gifts prepared, and much joy felt at the prospect of seeing
Franz again; though Emil, who was to accompany them, would be the
greater hero. Little did the dear souls dream what a surprise was in
store for them, as they innocently laid their plans and wished all the
boys could be there to welcome home their eldest and their Casablanca.

While they wait and work so happily, let us see how our other absent
boys are faring as they too wait and work and hope for better days. Nat
was toiling steadily along the path he had wisely chosen, though it was
by no means strewn with flowers--quite thorny was it, in fact, and hard
to travel, after the taste of ease and pleasure he had got when nibbling
at forbidden fruit. But his crop of wild oats was a light one, and he
resolutely reaped what he had sowed, finding some good wheat among
the tares. He taught by day; he fiddled night after night in the dingy
little theatre, and he studied so diligently that his master was well
pleased, and kept him in mind as one to whom preferment was due, if any
chance occurred. Gay friends forgot him; but the old ones stood fast,
and cheered him up when Heimweh and weariness made him sad. As spring
came on things mended--expenses grew less, work pleasanter, and life
more bearable than when wintry storms beat on his thinly clad back, and
frost pinched the toes that patiently trudged in old boots. No debts
burdened him; the year of absence was nearly over; and if he chose to
stay, Herr Bergmann had hopes for him that would bring independence for
a time at least. So he walked under the lindens with a lighter heart,
and in the May evenings went about the city with a band of strolling
students, making music before houses where he used to sit as guest. No
one recognized him in the darkness, though old friends often listened
to the band; and once Minna threw him money, which he humbly received as
part of his penance, being morbid on the subject of his sins.

His reward came sooner than he expected, and was greater than he
deserved, he thought, though his heart leaped with joy when his master
one day informed him that he was chosen, with several other of his most
promising pupils, to join the musical society which was to take part in
the great festival in London the next July. Here was not only honour for
the violinist but happiness for the man, as it brought him nearer home,
and would open a chance of further promotion and profit in his chosen
profession.

'Make thyself useful to Bachmeister there in London with thy English,
and if all goes well with him, he will be glad to take thee to America,
whither he goes in the early autumn for winter concerts. Thou hast done
well these last months, and I have hopes of thee.'

As the great Bergmann seldom praised his pupils, these words filled
Nat's soul with pride and joy, and he worked yet more diligently than
before to fulfil his master's prophecy. He thought the trip to England
happiness enough, but found room for more when, early in June, Franz
and Emil paid him a flying visit, bringing all sorts of good news, kind
wishes, and comfortable gifts for the lonely fellow, who could have
fallen on their necks and cried like a girl at seeing his old mates
again. How glad he was to be found in his little room busy at his proper
work, not living like an idle gentleman on borrowed money! How proud
he was to tell his plans, assure them that he had no debts, and receive
their praises for his improvement in music, their respect for his
economy and steadfastness in well-doing! How relieved when, having
honestly confessed his shortcomings, they only laughed, and owned that
they also had known like experiences, and were the wiser for them. He
was to go to the wedding late in June, and join his comrades in London.
As best man, he could not refuse the new suit Franz insisted on ordering
for him; and a cheque from home about that time made him feel like a
millionaire--and a happy one; for this was accompanied by such kind
letters full of delight in his success, he felt that he had earned it,
and waited for his joyful holiday with the impatience of a boy.

Dan meantime was also counting the weeks till August, when he would
be free. But neither marriage-bells nor festival music awaited him; no
friends would greet him as he left the prison; no hopeful prospect lay
before him; no happy home-going was to be his. Yet his success was far
greater than Nat's, though only God and one good man saw it. It was
a hard-won battle; but he would never have to fight so terrible a
one again; for though enemies would still assail from within and from
without, he had found the little guide-book that Christian carried in
his bosom, and Love, Penitence, and Prayer, the three sweet sisters, had
given him the armour which would keep him safe. He had not learned to
wear it yet, and chafed against it, though he felt its value, thanks to
the faithful friend who had stood by him all that bitter year.

Soon he was to be free again, worn and scarred in the fray, but out
among men in the blessed sun and air. When he thought of it Dan felt as
if he could not wait, but must burst that narrow cell and fly away,
as the caddis-worms he used to watch by the brookside shed their stony
coffins, to climb the ferns and soar into the sky. Night after night he
lulled himself to sleep with planning how, when he had seen Mary Mason
according to his promise, he would steer straight for his old friends,
the Indians, and in the wilderness hide his disgrace and heal his
wounds. Working to save the many would atone for the sin of killing
one, he thought; and the old free life would keep him safe from the
temptations that beset him in cities.

'By and by, when I'm all right again, and have something to tell that
I'm not ashamed of, I'll go home,' he said, with a quicker beat of the
impetuous heart that longed to be there so intensely, he found it as
hard to curb as one of his unbroken horses on the plains. 'Not yet. I
must get over this first. They'd see and smell and feel the prison taint
on me, if I went now, and I couldn't look them in the face and hide
the truth. I can't lose Ted's love, Mother Bhaer's confidence, and the
respect of the girls, for they did respect my strength, anyway; but now
they wouldn't touch me.' And poor Dan looked with a shudder at the brown
fist he clenched involuntarily as he remembered what it had done since
a certain little white hand had laid in it confidingly. 'I'll make 'em
proud of me yet; and no one shall ever know of this awful year. I can
wipe it out, and I will, so help me God!' And the clenched hand was held
up as if to take a solemn oath that this lost year should yet be made
good, if resolution and repentance could work the miracle.



Chapter 16. IN THE TENNIS-COURT

Athletic sports were in high favour at Plumfield; and the river where
the old punt used to wabble about with a cargo of small boys, or echo to
the shrill screams of little girls trying to get lilies, now was
alive with boats of all kinds, from the slender wherry to the trim
pleasure-craft, gay with cushions, awnings, and fluttering pennons.
Everyone rowed, and the girls as well as the youths had their races, and
developed their muscles in the most scientific manner. The large, level
meadow near the old willow was now the college playground, and here
baseball battles raged with fury, varied by football, leaping, and
kindred sports fitted to split the fingers, break the ribs, and strain
the backs of the too ambitious participants. The gentler pastimes of the
damsels were at a safe distance from this Champ de Mars; croquet mallets
clicked under the elms that fringed the field, rackets rose and fell
energetically in several tennis-courts, and gates of different heights
were handy to practise the graceful bound by which every girl expected
to save her life some day when the mad bull, which was always coming but
never seemed to arrive, should be bellowing at her heels.

One of these tennis grounds was called 'Jo's Court', and here the little
lady ruled like a queen; for she was fond of the game, and being bent on
developing her small self to the highest degree of perfection, she was
to be found at every leisure moment with some victim hard at it. On a
certain pleasant Saturday afternoon she had been playing with Bess and
beating her; for, though more graceful, the Princess was less active
than her cousin, and cultivated her roses by quieter methods.

'Oh dear! you are tired, and every blessed boy is at that stupid
baseball match. 'What shall I do?' sighed Josie, pushing back the great
red hat she wore, and gazing sadly round her for more worlds to conquer.

'I'll play presently, when I'm a little cooler. But it is dull work for
me, as I never win,' answered Bess, fanning herself with a large leaf.

Josie was about to sit down beside her on the rustic seat and wait, when
her quick eye saw afar off two manly forms arrayed in white flannel;
their blue legs seemed bearing them towards the battle going on in the
distance; but they never reached the fray; for with a cry of joy,
Jo raced away to meet them, bent on securing this heaven-sent
reinforcement. Both paused as she came flying up, and both raised their
hats; but oh, the difference there was in the salutes! The stout youth
pulled his off lazily and put it on again at once, as if glad to get the
duty over; the slender being, with the crimson tie, lifted his with a
graceful bend, and held it aloft while he accosted the rosy, breathless
maid, thus permitting her to see his raven locks smoothly parted, with
one little curl upon the brow. Dolly prided himself upon that bow, and
practised it before his glass, but did not bestow it upon all alike,
regarding it as a work of art, fit only for the fairest and most
favoured of his female admirers; for he was a pretty youth, and fancied
himself an Adonis.

Eager Josie evidently did not appreciate the honour he did her, for with
a nod she begged them both to 'come along and play tennis, not go and
get all hot and dirty with the boys'. These two adjectives won the day;
for Stuffy was already warmer than he liked to be, and Dolly had on
a new suit which he desired to keep immaculate as long as possible,
conscious that it was very becoming.

'Charmed to oblige,' answered the polite one, with another bend.

'You play, I'll rest,' added the fat boy, yearning for repose and gentle
converse with the Princess in the cooling shade.

'Well, you can comfort Bess, for I've beaten her all to bits and she
needs amusing. I know you've got something nice in your pocket, George;
give her some, and 'Dolphus can have her racket. Now then, fly round';
and driving her prey before her, Josie returned in triumph to the court.

Casting himself ponderously upon the bench, which creaked under his
weight, Stuffy--as we will continue to call him, though no one
else dared to use the old name now--promptly produced the box of
confectionery, without which he never travelled far, and regaled Bess
with candied violets and other dainties, while Dolly worked hard to hold
his own against a most accomplished antagonist. He would have beaten her
if an unlucky stumble, which produced an unsightly stain upon the knee
of those new shorts, had not distracted his mind and made him careless.
Much elated at her victory, Josie permitted him to rest, and offered
ironical consolation for the mishap which evidently weighed upon his
mind.

'Don't be an old Betty; it can be cleaned. You must have been a cat
in some former state, you are so troubled about dirt; or a tailor, and
lived for clothes.'

'Come now, don't hit a fellow when he is down,' responded Dolly from
the grass where he and Stuffy now lay to make room for both girls on the
seat. One handkerchief was spread under him, and his elbow leaned upon
another, while his eyes were sadly fixed upon the green and brown spot
which afflicted him. 'I like to be neat; don't think it civil to cut
about in old shoes and grey flannel shirts before ladies. Our fellows
are gentlemen, and dress as such,' he added, rather nettled at the
word 'tailor'; for he owed one of those too attractive persons an
uncomfortably big bill.

'So are ours; but good clothes alone don't make a gentleman here. We
require a good deal more,' flashed Josie, in arms at once to defend
her college. 'You will hear of some of the men in "old boots and grey
flannel" when you and your fine gentlemen are twiddling your ties and
scenting your hair in obscurity. I like old boots and wear them, and I
hate dandies; don't you, Bess?'

'Not when they are kind to me, and belong to our old set,' answered
Bess, with a nod of thanks to Dolly, who was carefully removing an
inquisitive caterpillar from one of her little russet shoes.

'I like a lady who is always polite, and doesn't snap a man's head off
if he has a mind of his own; don't you, George?' asked Dolly, with his
best smile for Bess and a Harvard stare of disapprobation for Josie.

A tranquil snore was Stuffy's sole reply, and a general laugh restored
peace for the moment. But Josie loved to harass the lords of creation
who asserted themselves too much, and bided her time for another attack
till she had secured more tennis. She got another game; for Dolly was
a sworn knight of dames, so he obeyed her call, leaving Bess to sketch
George as he lay upon his back, his stout legs crossed, and his round
red face partially eclipsed by his hat. Josie got beaten this time and
came back rather cross, so she woke the peaceful sleeper by tickling his
nose with a straw till he sneezed himself into a sitting posture, and
looked wrathfully about for 'that confounded fly'.

'Come, sit up and let us have a little elegant conversation; you
"howling swells" ought to improve our minds and manners, for we are
only poor "country girls in dowdy gowns and hats",' began the gad-fly,
opening the battle with a sly quotation from one of Dolly's unfortunate
speeches about certain studious damsels who cared more for books than
finery.

'I didn't mean you! Your gowns are all right, and those hats the latest
thing out,' began poor 'Dolphus, convicting himself by the incautious
exclamation.

'Caught you that time; I thought you fellows were all gentlemen, civil
as well as nice. But you are always sneering at girls who don't dress
well and that is a very unmanly thing to do; my mother said so'; and
Josie felt that she had dealt a shrewd blow at the elegant youth who
bowed at many shrines if they were well-decorated ones.

'Got you there, old boy, and she's right. You never hear me talk about
clothes and such twaddle,' said Stuffy, suppressing a yawn, and feeling
for another bon-bon wherewith to refresh himself.

'You talk about eating, and that is even worse for a man. You will marry
a cook and keep a restaurant some day,' laughed Josie, down on him at
once.

This fearful prediction kept him silent for several moments; but Dolly
rallied, and wisely changing the subject, carried war into the enemy's
camp.

'As you wanted us to improve your manners, allow me to say that young
ladies in good society don't make personal remarks or deliver lectures.
Little girls who are not out do it, and think it witty; but I assure you
it's not good form.'

Josie paused a moment to recover from the shock of being called 'a
little girl', when all the honours of her fourteenth birthday were fresh
upon her; and Bess said, in the lofty tone which was infinitely more
crushing than Jo's impertinence:

'That is true; but we have lived all our lives with superior people, so
we have no society talk like your young ladies. We are so accustomed to
sensible conversation, and helping one another by telling our faults,
that we have no gossip to offer you.'

When the Princess reproved, the boys seldom resented it; so Dolly held
his peace, and Josie burst out, following her cousin's lead, which she
thought a happy one:

'Our boys like to have us talk with them, and take kindly any hints we
give. They don't think they know everything and are quite perfect at
eighteen, as I've observed the Harvard men do, especially the very young
ones.'

Josie took immense satisfaction in that return shot; and Dolly showed
that he was hit, by the nettled tone in which he answered, with a
supercilious glance at the hot, dusty, and noisy crowd on the baseball
ground: 'The class of fellows you have here need all the polish and
culture you can give them; and I'm glad they get it. Our men are largely
from the best families all over the country, so we don't need girls to
teach us anything.'

'It's a pity you don't have more of such "fellows" as ours. They value
and use well what college gives them, and aren't satisfied to slip
through, getting all the fun they can and shirking the work. Oh, I've
heard you "men" talk, and heard your fathers say they wish they hadn't
wasted time and money just that you might say you'd been through
college. As for the girls, you'll be much better off in all ways when
they do get in, and keep you lazy things up to the mark, as we do here.'

'If you have such a poor opinion of us, why do you wear our colour?'
asked Dolly, painfully conscious that he was not improving the
advantages his Alma Mater offered him, but bound to defend her.

'I don't; my hat is scarlet, not crimson. Much you know about a colour,'
scoffed Josie.

'I know that a cross cow would soon set you scampering, if you flaunted
that red tile under her nose,' retorted Dolly.

'I'm ready for her. Can your fine young ladies do this? or you either?'
and burning to display her latest accomplishment, Josie ran to the
nearest gate, put one hand on the top rail, and vaulted over as lightly
as a bird.

Bess shook her head, and Stuffy languidly applauded; but Dolly scorning
to be braved by a girl, took a flying leap and landed on his feet beside
Josie, saying calmly: 'Can you do that?'

'Not yet; but I will by and by.'

As his foe looked a little crestfallen, Dolly relented, and affably
added sundry feats of a like nature, quite unconscious that he had
fallen into a dreadful snare; for the dull red paint on the gate, not
being used to such vigorous handling, came off in streaks upon his
shoulders when he turned a backward swing and came up smiling, to be
rewarded with the aggravating remark:

'If you want to know what crimson is, look at your back; it's nicely
stamped on and won't wash out, I think.'

'The deuce it won't!' cried Dolly, trying to get an impossible view, and
giving it up in great disgust.

'I guess we'd better be going, Dolf,' said peaceable Stuffy, feeling
that it would be wise to retreat before another skirmish took place, as
his side seemed to be getting the worst of it.

'Don't hurry, I beg; stay and rest; you must need it after the
tremendous amount of brain work you've done this week. It is time for
our Greek. Come, Bess. Good afternoon, gentlemen.' And, with a sweeping
courtesy, Josie led the way, with her hat belligerently cocked up, and
her racket borne like a triumphal banner over one shoulder; for having
had the last word, she felt that she could retire with the honours of
war.

Dolly gave Bess his best bow, with the chill on; and Stuffy subsided
luxuriously, with his legs in the air, murmuring in a dreamy tone:

'Little Jo is as cross as two sticks today. I'm going in for another
nap: too hot to play anything.'

'So it is. Wonder if Spitfire was right about these beastly spots?'
And Dolly sat down to try dry cleansing with one of his handkerchiefs.
'Asleep?' he asked, after a few moments of this cheerful occupation,
fearing that his chum might be too comfortable when he was in a fume
himself.

'No. I was thinking that Jo wasn't far wrong about shirking. 'Tis a
shame to get so little done, when we ought to be grinding like Morton
and Torry and that lot. I never wanted to go to college; but my governor
made me. Much good it will do either of us!' answered Stuffy, with a
groan; for he hated work, and saw two more long years of it before him.

'Gives a man prestige, you know. No need to dig. I mean to have a gay
old time, and be a "howling swell", if I choose. Between you and me
though, it would be no end jolly to have the girls along. Study be
hanged! But if we've got to turn the grindstone, it would be mighty nice
to have some of the little dears to lend a hand. Wouldn't it now?'

'I'd like three this minute--one to fan me, one to kiss me, and one
to give me some iced lemonade!' sighed Stuffy, with a yearning glance
towards the house, whence no succour appeared.

'How would root-beer do?' asked a voice behind them, which made Dolly
spring to his feet and Stuffy roll over like a startled porpoise.

Sitting on the stile that crossed the wall near by was Mrs Jo, with two
jugs slung over her shoulder by a strap, several tin mugs in her hand,
and an old-fashioned sun-bonnet on her head.

'I knew the boys would be killing themselves with ice-water; so I
strolled down with some of my good, wholesome beer. They drank like
fishes. But Silas was with me; so my cruse still holds out. Have some?'

'Yes, thanks, very much. Let us pour it.' And Dolly held the cup while
Stuffy joyfully filled it; both very grateful, but rather afraid she had
heard what went before the wish she fulfilled.

She proved that she had by saying, as they stood drinking her health,
while she sat between them, looking like a middle-aged vivandiere, with
her jugs and mugs:

'I was glad to hear you say you would like to have girls at your
college; but I hope you will learn to speak more respectfully of them
before they come; for that will be the first lesson they will teach
you.'

'Really, ma'am, I was only joking,' began Stuffy, gulping down his beer
in a hurry.

'So was I. I'm sure I--I'm devoted to 'em,' stuttered Dolly,
panic-stricken; for he saw that he was in for a lecture of some sort.

'Not in the right way. Frivolous girls may like to be called "little
dears" and things of that sort; but the girls who love study wish to be
treated like reasonable beings, not dolls to flirt with. Yes, I'm going
to preach; that's my business; so stand up and take it like men.'

Mrs Jo laughed; but she was in earnest; for by various hints and signs
during the past winter she knew that the boys were beginning to 'see
life' in the way she especially disapproved. Both were far from home,
had money enough to waste, and were as inexperienced, curious, and
credulous as most lads of their age. Not fond of books, therefore
without the safeguard which keeps many studious fellows out of harm; one
self-indulgent, indolent, and so used to luxury that pampering of the
senses was an easy thing; the other vain, as all comely boys are, full
of conceit, and so eager to find favour in the eyes of his comrades
that he was ready for anything which would secure it. These traits and
foibles made both peculiarly liable to the temptations which assail
pleasure-loving and weak-willed boys. Mrs Jo knew them well, and had
dropped many a warning word since they went to college; but till lately
they seemed not to understand some of her friendly hints; now she was
sure they would, and meant to speak out: for long experience with boys
made her both bold and skilful in handling some of the dangers usually
left to silence, till it is too late for anything but pity and reproach.

'I'm going to talk to you like a mother, because yours are far away; and
there are things that mothers can manage best, if they do their duty,'
she solemnly began from the depths of the sunbonnet.

'Great Scott! We're in for it now!' thought Dolly, in secret dismay;
while Stuffy got the first blow by trying to sustain himself with
another mug of beer.

'That won't hurt you; but I must warn you about drinking other things,
George. Overeating is an old story; and a few more fits of illness will
teach you to be wise. But drinking is a more serious thing, and leads
to worse harm than any that can afflict your body alone. I hear you
talk about wines as if you knew them and cared more for them than a
boy should; and several times I've heard jokes that meant mischief. For
heaven's sake, don't begin to play with this dangerous taste "for fun",
as you say, or because it's the fashion, and the other fellows do. Stop
at once, and learn that temperance in all things is the only safe rule.'

'Upon my honour, I only take wine and iron. I need a tonic, mother
says, to repair the waste of brain-tissue while I'm studying,' protested
Stuffy, putting down the mug as if it burnt his fingers.

'Good beef and oatmeal will repair your tissues much better than any
tonic of that sort. Work and plain fare are what you want; and I wish
I had you here for a few months out of harm's way. I'd Banting you, and
fit you to run without puffing, and get on without four or five meals a
day. What an absurd hand that is for a man! You ought to be ashamed
of it!' And Mrs Jo caught up the plump fist, with deep dimples at each
knuckle, which was fumbling distressfully at the buckle of the belt girt
about a waist far too large for a youth of his age.

'I can't help it--we all grow fat; it's in the family,' said Stuffy in
self-defence.

'All the more reason you should live carefully. Do you want to die
early, or be an invalid all your life?'

'No, ma'am!'

Stuffy looked so scared that Mrs Jo could not be hard upon his budding
sins, for they lay at his overindulgent mother's door line in a great
measure; so she softened the tone of her voice, and added, with a little
slap on the fat hand, as she used to do when it was small enough to
pilfer lumps of sugar from her bowl:

'Then be careful; for a man writes his character in his face; and you
don't want gluttony and intemperance in yours, I know.'

'I'm sure I don't! Please make out a wholesome bill of fare, and I'll
stick to it, if I can. I am getting stout, and I don't like it; and my
liver's torpid, and I have palpitations and headache. Overwork, mother
says; but it may be overeating.' And Stuffy gave a sigh of mingled
regret for the good things he renounced, and relief as he finished
loosening his belt as soon as his hand was free.

'I will; follow it, and in a year you'll be a man and not a meal-bag.
Now, Dolly'; and Mrs Jo turned to the other culprit, who shook in his
shoes and wished he hadn't come.

'Are you studying French as industriously as you were last winter?'

'No ma'am; I don't care for it--that is, I, I'm busy with G-Greek just
now,' answered Dolly, beginning bravely, quite in the dark as to what
that odd question meant till a sudden memory made him stutter and look
at his shoes with deep interest.

'Oh, he doesn't study it; only reads French novels and goes to the
theatre when the opera bouffe is here,' said Stuffy, innocently
confirming Mrs Jo's suspicions.

'So I understood; and that is what I want to speak about. Ted had a
sudden desire to learn French in that way, from something you said,
Dolly; so I went myself, and was quite satisfied that it was no place
for a decent boy. Your men were out in full force; and I was glad to
see that some of the younger ones looked as ashamed as I felt. The older
fellows enjoyed it, and when we came out were waiting to take those
painted girls to supper. Did you ever go with them?'

'Once.'

'Did you like it?'

'No 'm; I--I came away early,' stammered Dolly, with a face as red as
his splendid tie.

'I'm glad you have not lost the grace of blushing yet; but you will
soon, if you keep up this sort of study and forget to be ashamed. The
society of such women will unfit you for that of good ones, and lead you
into trouble and sin and shame. Oh, why don't the city fathers stop that
evil thing, when they know the harm it does? It made my heart ache to
see those boys, who ought to be at home and in their beds, going off for
a night of riot which would help to ruin some of them for ever.'

The youths looked scared at Mrs Jo's energetic protest against one of
the fashionable pleasures of the day, and waited in conscience-stricken
silence--Stuffy glad that he never went to those gay suppers, and
Dolly deeply grateful that he 'came away early'. With a hand on either
shoulder, and all the terrors smoothed from her brow, Mrs Jo went on
in her most motherly tone, anxious to do for them what no other woman
would, and do it kindly:

'My dear boys, if I didn't love you, I would not say these things. I
know they are not pleasant; but my conscience won't let me hold my peace
when a word may keep you from two of the great sins that curse the world
and send so many young men to destruction. You are just beginning to
feel the allurement of them, and soon it will be hard to turn away. Stop
now, I beg of you, and not only save yourselves but help others by
a brave example. Come to me if things worry you; don't be afraid or
ashamed; I have heard many sadder confessions than any you are ever
likely to bring me, and been able to comfort many poor fellows, gone
wrong for want of a word in time. Do this, and you will be able to
kiss your mothers with clean lips, and by and by have the right to ask
innocent girls to love you.'

'Yes'm, thank you. I suppose you're right; but it's pretty hard work
to toe the mark when ladies give you wine and gentlemen take their
daughters to see Aimee,' said Dolly, foreseeing tribulations ahead
though he knew it was time to 'pull up'.

'So it is; but all the more honour to those who are brave and wise
enough to resist public opinion, and the easy-going morals of bad or
careless men and women. Think of the persons whom you respect most, and
in imitating them you will secure the respect of those who look up to
you. I'd rather my boys should be laughed at and cold-shouldered by a
hundred foolish fellows than lose what, once gone, no power can give
them back--innocence and self-respect. I don't wonder you find it
"hard to toe the mark", when books, pictures, ball-rooms, theatres, and
streets offer temptations; yet you can resist, if you try. Last winter
Mrs Brooke used to worry about John's being out so late reporting; but
when she spoke to him about the things he must see and hear on his way
to and fro from the office at midnight, he said in his sober way, "I
know what you mean, mother; but no fellow need to go wrong unless he
wants to."

'That's like the Deacon!' exclaimed Stuffy, with an approving smile on
his fat face.

'I'm glad you told me that. He's right; and it's because he doesn't want
to go wrong we all respect him so,' added Dolly, looking up now with
an expression which assured his Mentor that the right string had been
touched, and a spirit of emulation roused, more helpful, perhaps, than
any words of hers. Seeing this, she was satisfied, and said, as she
prepared to leave the bar before which her culprits had been tried and
found guilty, but recommended to mercy:

'Then be to others what John is to you--a good example. Forgive me for
troubling you, my dear lads, and remember my little preachment. I think
it will do you good, though I may never know it. Chance words spoken
in kindness often help amazingly; and that's what old people are here
for--else their experience is of little use. Now, come and find the
young folk. I hope I shall never have to shut the gates of Plumfield
upon you, as I have on some of your "gentlemen". I mean to keep my
boys and girls safe if I can, and this a wholesome place where the good
old-fashioned virtues are lived and taught.'

Much impressed by that dire threat, Dolly helped her from her perch with
deep respect; and Stuffy relieved her of her empty jugs, solemnly vowing
to abstain from all fermented beverages except root-beer, as long
as feeble flesh could hold out. Of course they made light of 'Mother
Bhaer's lecture' when they were alone--that was to be expected of 'men
of our class' but in their secret souls they thanked her for giving
their boyish consciences a jog, and more than once afterward had cause
to remember gratefully that half-hour in the tennis court.



Chapter 17. AMONG THE MAIDS

Although this story is about Jo's boys, her girls cannot be neglected,
because they held a high place in this little republic, and especial
care was taken to fit them to play their parts worthily in the great
republic which offered them wider opportunities and more serious duties.
To many the social influence was the better part of the training
they received; for education is not confined to books, and the finest
characters often graduate from no college, but make experience their
master, and life their book. Others cared only for the mental culture,
and were in danger of over-studying, under the delusion which pervades
New England that learning must be had at all costs, forgetting that
health and real wisdom are better. A third class of ambitious girls
hardly knew what they wanted, but were hungry for whatever could fit
them to face the world and earn a living, being driven by necessity,
the urgency of some half-conscious talent, or the restlessness of
strong young natures to break away from the narrow life which no longer
satisfied.

At Plumfield all found something to help them; for the growing
institution had not yet made its rules as fixed as the laws of the
Medes and Persians, and believed so heartily in the right of all
sexes, colours, creeds, and ranks to education, that there was room
for everyone who knocked, and a welcome to the shabby youths from up
country, the eager girls from the West, the awkward freedman or woman
from the South, or the well-born student whose poverty made this college
a possibility when other doors were barred. There still was prejudice,
ridicule, neglect in high places, and prophecies of failure to contend
against; but the Faculty was composed of cheerful, hopeful men and women
who had seen greater reforms spring from smaller roots, and after stormy
seasons blossom beautifully, to add prosperity and honour to the nation.
So they worked on steadily and bided their time, full of increasing
faith in their attempt as year after year their numbers grew, their
plans succeeded, and the sense of usefulness in this most vital of all
professions blessed them with its sweet rewards.

Among the various customs which had very naturally sprung up was one
especially useful and interesting to 'the girls', as the young women
liked to be called. It all grew out of the old sewing hour still kept up
by the three sisters long after the little work-boxes had expanded into
big baskets full of household mending. They were busy women, yet on
Saturdays they tried to meet in one of the three sewing-rooms; for
even classic Parnassus had its nook where Mrs Amy often sat among her
servants, teaching them to make and mend, thereby giving them a respect
for economy, since the rich lady did not scorn to darn her hose, and sew
on buttons. In these household retreats, with books and work, and their
daughters by them, they read and sewed and talked in the sweet privacy
that domestic women love, and can make so helpful by a wise mixture of
cooks and chemistry, table linen and theology, prosaic duties and good
poetry.

Mrs Meg was the first to propose enlarging this little circle; for as
she went her motherly rounds among the young women she found a sad lack
of order, skill, and industry in this branch of education. Latin, Greek,
the higher mathematics, and science of all sorts prospered finely; but
the dust gathered on the work-baskets, frayed elbows went unheeded, and
some of the blue stockings sadly needed mending. Anxious lest the usual
sneer at learned women should apply to 'our girls', she gently lured two
or three of the most untidy to her house, and made the hour so pleasant,
the lesson so kindly, that they took the hint, were grateful for the
favour, and asked to come again. Others soon begged to make the detested
weekly duty lighter by joining the party, and soon it was a privilege
so much desired that the old museum was refitted with sewing-machines,
tables, rocking-chair, and a cheerful fireplace, so that, rain or shine,
the needles might go on undisturbed.

Here Mrs Meg was in her glory, and stood wielding her big shears like a
queen as she cut out white work, fitted dresses, and directed Daisy, her
special aide, about the trimming of hats, and completing the lace and
ribbon trifles which add grace to the simplest costume and save poor
or busy girls so much money and time. Mrs Amy contributed taste, and
decided the great question of colours and complexions; for few women,
even the most learned, are without that desire to look well which makes
many a plain face comely, as well as many a pretty one ugly for want of
skill and knowledge of the fitness of things. She also took her turn to
provide books for the readings, and as art was her forte she gave them
selections from Ruskin, Hamerton, and Mrs Jameson, who is never old.
Bess read these aloud as her contribution, and Josie took her turn at
the romances, poetry, and plays her uncles recommended. Mrs Jo gave
little lectures on health, religion, politics, and the various questions
in which all should be interested, with copious extracts from Miss
Cobbe's Duties of Women, Miss Brackett's Education of American Girls,
Mrs Duffy's No Sex in Education, Mrs Woolson's Dress Reform, and many of
the other excellent books wise women write for their sisters, now that
they are waking up and asking: 'What shall we do?'

It was curious to see the prejudices melt away as ignorance was
enlightened, indifference change to interest, and intelligent minds
set thinking, while quick wits and lively tongues added spice to the
discussions which inevitably followed. So the feet that wore the neatly
mended hose carried wiser heads than before, the pretty gowns covered
hearts warmed with higher purposes, and the hands that dropped the
thimbles for pens, lexicons, and celestial globes, were better fitted
for life's work, whether to rock cradles, tend the sick, or help on the
great work of the world.

One day a brisk discussion arose concerning careers for women. Mrs Jo
had read something on the subject and asked each of the dozen girls
sitting about the room, what she intended to do on leaving college.
The answers were as usual: 'I shall teach, help mother, study medicine,
art,' etc.; but nearly all ended with:

'Till I marry.'

'But if you don't marry, what then?' asked Mrs Jo, feeling like a girl
again as she listened to the answers, and watched the thoughtful, gay,
or eager faces.

'Be old maids, I suppose. Horrid, but inevitable, since there are so
many superfluous women,' answered a lively lass, too pretty to fear
single blessedness unless she chose it.

'It is well to consider that fact, and fit yourselves to be useful, not
superfluous women. That class, by the way, is largely made up of widows,
I find; so don't consider it a slur on maidenhood.'

'That's a comfort! Old maids aren't sneered at half as much as they used
to be, since some of them have grown famous and proved that woman isn't
a half but a whole human being, and can stand alone.'

'Don't like it all the same. We can't all be like Miss Nightingale, Miss
Phelps, and the rest.'

So what can we do but sit in a corner and look on?' asked a plain girl
with a dissatisfied expression.

'Cultivate cheerfulness and content, if nothing else. But there are so
many little odd jobs waiting to be done that nobody need "sit idle and
look on", unless she chooses,' said Mrs Meg, with a smile, laying on the
girl's head the new hat she had just trimmed.

'Thank you very much. Yes, Mrs Brooke, I see; it's a little job, but
it makes me neat and happy--and grateful,' she added, looking up with
brighter eyes as she accepted the labour of love and the lesson as
sweetly as they were given.

'One of the best and most beloved women I know has been doing odd jobs
for the Lord for years, and will keep at it till her dear hands are
folded in her coffin. All sorts of things she does--picks up neglected
children and puts them in safe homes, saves lost girls, nurses poor
women in trouble, sews, knits, trots, begs, works for the poor day after
day with no reward but the thanks of the needy, the love and honour
of the rich who make Saint Matilda their almoner. That's a life worth
living; and I think that quiet little woman will get a higher seat in
Heaven than many of those of whom the world has heard.'

'I know it's lovely, Mrs Bhaer; but it's dull for young folks. We do
want a little fun before we buckle to,' said a Western girl with a
wide-awake face.

'Have your fun, my dear; but if you must earn your bread, try to make it
sweet with cheerfulness, not bitter with the daily regret that it isn't
cake. I used to think mine was a very hard fate because I had to amuse
a somewhat fretful old lady; but the books I read in that lonely library
have been of immense use to me since, and the dear old soul bequeathed
me Plumfield for my "cheerful service and affectionate care". I didn't
deserve it, but I did use to try to be jolly and kind, and get as
much honey out of duty as I could, thanks to my dear mother's help and
advice.'

'Gracious! if I could earn a place like this, I'd sing all day and be an
angel; but you have to take your chance, and get nothing for your pains,
perhaps. I never do,' said the Westerner, who had a hard time with small
means and large aspirations.

'Don't do it for the reward; but be sure it will come, though not in the
shape you expect. I worked hard for fame and money one winter; but I
got neither, and was much disappointed. A year afterwards I found I had
earned two prizes: skill with my pen, and Professor Bhaer.'

Mrs Jo's laugh was echoed blithely by the girls, who liked to have these
conversations enlivened by illustrations from life.

'You are a very lucky woman,' began the discontented damsel, whose soul
soared above new hats, welcome as they were, but did not quite know
where to steer.

'Yet her name used to be "Luckless Jo", and she never had what she
wanted till she had given up hoping for it,' said Mrs Meg.

'I'll give up hoping, then, right away, and see if my wishes will come.
I only want to help my folks, and get a good school.'

'Take this proverb for your guide: "Get the distaff ready, and the Lord
will send the flax",' answered Mrs Jo.

'We'd better all do that, if we are to be spinsters,' said the pretty
one, adding gaily, 'I think I should like it, on the whole--they are so
independent. My Aunt Jenny can do just what she likes, and ask no one's
leave; but Ma has to consult Pa about everything. Yes, I'll give you my
chance, Sally, and be a "superfluum", as Mr Plock says.'

'You'll be one of the first to go into bondage, see if you aren't. Much
obliged, all the same.'

'Well, I'll get my distaff ready, and take whatever flax the Fates
send--single, or double-twisted, as the powers please.'

'That is the right spirit, Nelly. Keep it up, and see how happy life
will be with a brave heart, a willing hand, and plenty to do.'

'No one objects to plenty of domestic work or fashionable pleasure, I
find; but the minute we begin to study, people tell us we can't bear it,
and warn us to be very careful. I've tried the other things, and got so
tired I came to college; though my people predict nervous exhaustion and
an early death. Do you think there is any danger?' asked a stately girl,
with an anxious glance at the blooming face reflected in the mirror
opposite.

'Are you stronger or weaker than when you came two years ago, Miss
Winthrop?'

'Stronger in body, and much happier in mind. I think I was dying of
ennui; but the doctors called it inherited delicacy of constitution.
That is why mamma is so anxious, and I wish not to go too fast.'

'Don't worry, my dear; that active brain of yours was starving for good
food; it has plenty now, and plain living suits you better than luxury
and dissipation. It is all nonsense about girls not being able to study
as well as boys. Neither can bear cramming; but with proper care both
are better for it; so enjoy the life your instinct led you to, and we
will prove that wise headwork is a better cure for that sort of delicacy
than tonics, and novels on the sofa, where far too many of our girls
go to wreck nowadays. They burn the candle at both ends; and when they
break down they blame the books, not the balls.'

'Dr Nan was telling me about a patient of hers who thought she had
heart-complaint, till Nan made her take off her corsets, stopped her
coffee and dancing all night, and made her eat, sleep, walk, and live
regularly for a time; and now she's a brilliant cure. Common sense
versus custom, Nan said.'

'I've had no headaches since I came here, and can do twice as much
studying as I did at home. It's the air, I think, and the fun of going
ahead of the boys,' said another girl, tapping her big forehead with
her thimble, as if the lively brain inside was in good working order and
enjoyed the daily gymnastics she gave it.

'Quality, not quantity, wins the day, you know. Our brains may be
smaller, but I don't see that they fall short of what is required of
them; and if I'm not mistaken, the largest-headed man in our class is
the dullest,' said Nelly, with a solemn air which produced a gale of
merriment; for all knew that the young Goliath she mentioned had been
metaphorically slain by this quick-witted David on many a battle-field,
to the great disgust of himself and his mates.

'Mrs Brooke, do I gauge on the right or the wrong side?' asked the
best Greek scholar of her class, eyeing a black silk apron with a lost
expression.

'The right, Miss Pierson; and leave a space between the tucks; it looks
prettier so.'

'I'll never make another; but it will save my dresses from ink-stains,
so I'm glad I've got it'; and the erudite Miss Pierson laboured on,
finding it a harder task than any Greek root she ever dug up.

'We paper-stainers must learn how to make shields, or we are lost.
I'll give you a pattern of the pinafore I used to wear in my
"blood-and-thunder days", as we call them,' said Mrs Jo, trying to
remember what became of the old tin-kitchen which used to hold her
works.

'Speaking of writers reminds me that my ambition is to be a George
Eliot, and thrill the world! It must be so splendid to know that one
has such power, and to hear people own that one possesses a "masculine
intellect"! I don't care for most women's novels, but hers are immense;
don't you think so, Mrs Bhaer?' asked the girl with the big forehead,
and torn braid on her skirt.

'Yes; but they don't thrill me as little Charlotte Bronte's books do.
The brain is there, but the heart seems left out. I admire, but I don't
love, George Eliot; and her life is far sadder to me than Miss Bronte's,
because, in spite of the genius, love, and fame, she missed the light
without which no soul is truly great, good, or happy.'

'Yes'm, I know; but still it's so romantic and sort of new and
mysterious, and she was great in one sense. Her nerves and dyspepsia do
rather destroy the illusion; but I adore famous people and mean to go
and see all I can scare up in London some day.'

'You will find some of the best of them busy about just the work I
recommend to you; and if you want to see a great lady, I'll tell you
that Mrs Laurence means to bring one here today. Lady Abercrombie is
lunching with her, and after seeing the college is to call on us. She
especially wanted to see our sewing-school, as she is interested in
things of this sort, and gets them up at home.'

'Bless me! I always imagined lords and ladies did nothing but ride round
in a coach and six, go to balls, and be presented to the Queen in cocked
hats, and trains and feathers,' exclaimed an artless young person from
the wilds of Maine, whither an illustrated paper occasionally wandered.

'Not at all; Lord Abercrombie is over here studying up our American
prison system, and my lady is busy with the schools--both very
high-born, but the simplest and most sensible people I've met this long
time. They are neither of them young nor handsome, and dress plainly;
so don't expect anything splendid. Mr Laurence was telling me last night
about a friend of his who met my lord in the hall, and owing to a rough
greatcoat and a red face, mistook him for a coachman, and said: "Now,
my man, what do you want here?" Lord Abercrombie mildly mentioned who
he was, and that he had come to dinner. And the poor host was much
afflicted, saying afterward: "Why didn't he wear his stars and garters?
then a fellow would know he was a lord."'

The girls laughed again, and a general rustle betrayed that each was
prinking a bit before the titled guest arrived. Even Mrs Jo settled her
collar, and Mrs Meg felt if her cap was right, while Bess shook out
her curls and Josie boldly consulted the glass; for they were women, in
spite of philosophy and philanthropy.

'Shall we all rise?' asked one girl, deeply impressed by the impending
honour.

'It would be courteous.'

'Shall we shake hands?'

'No, I'll present you en masse, and your pleasant faces will be
introduction enough.'

'I wish I'd worn my best dress. Ought to have told us,' whispered Sally.

'Won't my folks be surprised when I tell them we have had a real lady to
call on us?' said another.

'Don't look as if you'd never seen a gentlewoman before, Milly. We are
not all fresh from the wilderness,' added the stately damsel who, having
Mayflower ancestors, felt that she was the equal of all the crowned
heads of Europe.

'Hush, she's coming! Oh, my heart, what a bonnet!' cried the gay girl in
a stage whisper; and every eye was demurely fixed upon the busy hands as
the door opened to admit Mrs Laurence and her guest.

It was rather a shock to find, after the general introduction was over,
that this daughter of a hundred earls was a stout lady in a plain gown,
and a rather weather-beaten bonnet, with a bag of papers in one hand
and a note-book in the other. But the face was full of benevolence, the
sonorous voice very kind, the genial manners very winning, and about the
whole person an indescribable air of high breeding which made beauty of
no consequence, costume soon forgotten, and the moment memorable to the
keen-eyed girls whom nothing escaped.

A little chat about the rise, growth, and success of this particular
class, and then Mrs Jo led the conversation to the English lady's
work, anxious to show her pupils how rank dignifies labour, and charity
blesses wealth.

It was good for these girls to hear of the evening-schools supported and
taught by women whom they knew and honoured; of Miss Cobbe's eloquent
protest winning the protection of the law for abused wives; Mrs Butler
saving the lost; Mrs Taylor, who devoted one room in her historic house
to a library for the servants; Lord Shaftesbury, busy with his new
tenement-houses in the slums of London; of prison reforms; and all the
brave work being done in God's name by the rich and great for the humble
and the poor. It impressed them more than many quiet home lectures would
have done, and roused an ambition to help when their time should come,
well knowing that even in glorious America there is still plenty to be
done before she is what she should be--truly just, and free, and great.
They were also quick to see that Lady Abercrombie treated all there as
her equals, from stately Mrs Laurence, to little Josie, taking notes
of everything and privately resolving to have some thick-soled English
boots as soon as possible. No one would have guessed that she had a
big house in London, a castle in Wales, and a grand country seat in
Scotland, as she spoke of Parnassus with admiration, Plumfield as a
'dear old home', and the college as an honour to all concerned in it.
At that, of course, every head went up a little, and when my lady left,
every hand was ready for the hearty shake the noble Englishwoman gave
them, with words they long remembered:

'I am very pleased to see this much-neglected branch of a woman's
education so well conducted here, and I have to thank my friend
Mrs Laurence for one of the most charming pictures I've seen in
America--Penelope among her maids.'

A group of smiling faces watched the stout boots trudge away, respectful
glances followed the shabby bonnet till it was out of sight, and the
girls felt a truer respect for their titled guest than if she had come
in the coach and six, with all her diamonds on.

'I feel better about the "odd jobs" now. I only wish I could do them as
well as Lady Abercrombie does,' said one.

'I thanked my stars my buttonholes were nice, for she looked at them and
said: "Quite workmanlike, upon my word," added another, feeling that her
gingham gown had come to honour.

'Her manners were as sweet and kind as Mrs Brooke's. Not a bit stiff or
condescending, as I expected. I see now what you meant, Mrs Bhaer, when
you said once that well-bred people were the same all the world over.'

Mrs Meg bowed her thanks for the compliment, and Mrs Bhaer said:

'I know them when I see them, but never shall be a model of deportment
myself. I'm glad you enjoyed the little visit. Now, if you young people
don't want England to get ahead of us in many ways, you must bestir
yourselves and keep abreast; for our sisters are in earnest, you see,
and don't waste time worrying about their sphere, but make it wherever
duty calls them.'

'We will do our best, ma'am,' answered the girls heartily, and trooped
away with their work-baskets, feeling that though they might never be
Harriet Martineaus, Elizabeth Brownings, or George Eliots, they might
become noble, useful, and independent women, and earn for themselves
some sweet title from the grateful lips of the poor, better than any a
queen could bestow.



Chapter 18. CLASS DAY

The clerk of the weather evidently has a regard for young people, and
sends sunshine for class days as often as he can. An especially lovely
one shone over Plumfield as this interesting anniversary came round,
bringing the usual accompaniments of roses, strawberries, white-gowned
girls, beaming youths, proud friends, and stately dignitaries full of
well-earned satisfaction with the yearly harvest. As Laurence College
was a mixed one, the presence of young women as students gave to the
occasion a grace and animation entirely wanting where the picturesque
half of creation appear merely as spectators. The hands that turned the
pages of wise books also possessed the skill to decorate the hall with
flowers; eyes tired with study shone with hospitable warmth on the
assembling guests; and under the white muslins beat hearts as full of
ambition, hope, and courage as those agitating the broadcloth of the
ruling sex.

College Hill, Parnassus, and old Plum swarmed with cheery faces, as
guests, students, and professors hurried to and fro in the pleasant
excitement of arriving and receiving. Everyone was welcomed cordially,
whether he rolled up in a fine carriage, or trudged afoot to see the
good son or daughter come to honour on the happy day that rewarded
many a mutual sacrifice. Mr Laurie and his wife were on the reception
committee, and their lovely house was overflowing. Mrs Meg, with Daisy
and Jo as aides, was in demand among the girls, helping on belated
toilettes, giving an eye to spreads, and directing the decorations. Mrs
Jo had her hands full as President's lady, and the mother of Ted; for it
took all the power and skill of that energetic woman to get her son into
his Sunday best.

Not that he objected to be well arrayed; far from it; he adored good
clothes, and owing to his great height already revelled in a dress-suit,
bequeathed him by a dandy friend. The effect was very funny; but he
would wear it in spite of the jeers of his mates, and sighed vainly for
a beaver, because his stern parent drew the line there. He pleaded that
English lads of ten wore them and were 'no end nobby'; but his mother
only answered, with a consoling pat of the yellow mane:

'My child, you are absurd enough now; if I let you add a tall hat,
Plumfield wouldn't hold either of us, such would be the scorn and
derision of all beholders. Content yourself with looking like the ghost
of a waiter, and don't ask for the most ridiculous head-gear in the
known world.'

Denied this noble badge of manhood, Ted soothed his wounded soul by
appearing in collars of an amazing height and stiffness, and ties which
were the wonder of all female eyes. This freak was a sort of vengeance
on his hard-hearted mother; for the collars drove the laundress to
despair, never being just right, and the ties required such art in
the tying that three women sometimes laboured long before--like Beau
Brummel--he turned from a heap of 'failures' with the welcome words:
'That will do.' Rob was devoted on these trying occasions, his own
toilet being distinguished only by its speed, simplicity, and neatness.
Ted was usually in a frenzy before he was suited, and roars, whistles,
commands, and groans were heard from the den wherein the Lion raged and
the Lamb patiently toiled. Mrs Jo bore it till boots were hurled and a
rain of hair-brushes set in, then, fearing for the safety of her eldest,
she would go to the rescue, and by a wise mixture of fun and authority
finally succeed in persuading Ted that he was 'a thing of beauty',
if not 'a joy for ever'. At last he would stalk majestically forth,
imprisoned in collars compared to which those worn by Dickens's
afflicted Biler were trifles not worth mentioning. The dresscoat was
a little loose in the shoulders, but allowed a noble expanse of glossy
bosom to be seen, and with a delicate handkerchief negligently drooping
at the proper angle, had a truly fine effect. Boots that shone,
and likewise pinched, appeared at one end of the 'long, black
clothes-pin'--as Josie called him---and a youthful but solemn face at
the other, carried at an angle which, if long continued, would have
resulted in spinal curvature. Light gloves, a cane, and--oh, bitter drop
in the cup of joy!--an ignominious straw hat, not to mention a choice
floweret in the buttonhole, and a festoon of watchguard below, finished
off this impressive boy.

'How's that for style?' he asked, appearing to his mother and cousins
whom he was to escort to the hall on this particular occasion.

A shout of laughter greeted him, followed by exclamations of horror;
for he had artfully added the little blond moustache he often wore when
acting. It was very becoming, and seemed the only balm to heal the wound
made by the loss of the beloved hat.

'Take it off this moment, you audacious boy! What would your father say
to such a prank on this day when we must all behave our best?' said Mrs
Jo, trying to frown, but privately thinking that among the many youths
about her none were so beautiful and original as her long son.

'Let him wear it, Aunty; it's so becoming. No one will ever guess he
isn't eighteen at least,' cried Josie, to whom disguise of any sort was
always charming.

'Father won't observe it; he'll be absorbed in his big-wigs and the
girls. No matter if he does, he'll enjoy the joke and introduce me as
his oldest son. Rob is nowhere when I'm in full fig'; and Ted took the
stage with a tragic stalk, like Hamlet in a tail-coat and choker.

'My son, obey me!' and when Mrs Jo spoke in that tone her word was
law. Later, however, the moustache appeared, and many strangers firmly
believed that there were three young Bhaers. So Ted found one ray of joy
to light his gloom.

Mr Bhaer was a proud and happy man when, at the appointed hour, he
looked down upon the parterre of youthful faces before him, thinking of
the 'little gardens' in which he had hopefully and faithfully sowed good
seed years ago, and from which this beautiful harvest seemed to have
sprung. Mr March's fine old face shone with the serenest satisfaction,
for this was the dream of his life fulfilled after patient waiting; and
the love and reverence in the countenances of the eager young men and
women looking up at him plainly showed that the reward he coveted was
his in fullest measure. Laurie always effaced himself on these occasions
as much as courtesy would permit; for everyone spoke gratefully in ode,
poem, and oration of the founder of the college and noble dispenser of
his beneficence. The three sisters beamed with pride as they sat among
the ladies, enjoying, as only women can, the honour done the men
they loved; while 'the original Plums', as the younger ones called
themselves, regarded the whole affair as their work, receiving the
curious, admiring, or envious glances of strangers with a mixture of
dignity and delight rather comical to behold.

The music was excellent, and well it might be when Apollo waved the
baton. The poems were--as usual on such occasions--of varied excellence,
as the youthful speakers tried to put old truths into new words, and
made them forceful by the enthusiasm of their earnest faces and fresh
voices. It was beautiful to see the eager interest with which the girls
listened to some brilliant brother-student, and applauded him with a
rustle as of wind over a bed of flowers. It was still more significant
and pleasant to watch the young men's faces when a slender white figure
stood out against the background of black-coated dignitaries, and with
cheeks that flushed and paled, and lips that trembled till earnest
purpose conquered maiden fear, spoke to them straight out of a woman's
heart and brain concerning the hopes and doubts, the aspirations and
rewards all must know, desire, and labour for. This clear, sweet voice
seemed to reach and rouse all that was noblest in the souls of these
youths, and to set a seal upon the years of comradeship which made them
sacred and memorable for ever.

Alice Heath's oration was unanimously pronounced the success of the day;
for without being flowery or sentimental, as is too apt to be the case
with these first efforts of youthful orators, it was earnest, sensible,
and so inspiring that she left the stage in a storm of applause, the
good fellows being as much fired by her stirring appeal to 'march
shoulder to shoulder', as if she had chanted the 'Marseillaise' then
and there. One young man was so excited that he nearly rushed out of his
seat to receive her as she hastened to hide herself among her mates, who
welcomed her with faces full of tender pride and tearful eye. A prudent
sister detained him, however, and in a moment he was able to listen with
composure to the President's remarks.

They were worth listening to, for Mr Bhaer spoke like a father to the
children whom he was dismissing to the battle of life; and his tender,
wise, and helpful words lingered in their hearts long after the praise
was forgotten. Then came other exercises peculiar to Plumfield, and the
end. Why the roof did not fly off when the sturdy lungs of the excited
young men pealed out the closing hymn will for ever be a mystery; but
it remained firm, and only the fading garlands vibrated as the waves of
music rolled up and died away, leaving sweet echoes to haunt the place
for another year.

Dinners and spreads consumed the afternoon, and at sunset came a slight
lull as everyone sought some brief repose before the festivities of the
evening began. The President's reception was one of the enjoyable things
in store, also dancing on Parnassus, and as much strolling, singing, and
flirting, as could be compressed into a few hours by youths and maidens
just out of school.

Carriages were rolling about, and gay groups on piazzas, lawns, and
window-seats idly speculated as to who the distinguished guests might
be. The appearance of a very dusty vehicle loaded with trunks at Mr
Bhaer's hospitably open door caused much curious comment among the
loungers, especially as two rather foreign-looking gentlemen sprang out,
followed by two young ladies, all four being greeted with cries of joy
and much embracing by the Bhaers. Then they all disappeared into the
house, the luggage followed, and the watchers were left to wonder who
the mysterious strangers were, till a fair collegian declared that they
must be the Professor's nephews, one of whom was expected on his wedding
journey.

She was right; Franz proudly presented his blonde and buxom bride, and
she was hardly kissed and blessed when Emil led up his bonny English
Mary, with the rapturous announcement:

'Uncle, Aunt Jo, here's another daughter! Have you room for my wife,
too?'

There could be no doubt of that; and Mary was with difficulty rescued
from the glad embraces of her new relatives, who, remembering all the
young pair had suffered together, felt that this was the natural and
happy ending of the long voyage so perilously begun.

'But why not tell us, and let us be ready for two brides instead of
one?' asked Mrs Jo, looking as usual rather demoralizing in a wrapper
and crimping-pins, having rushed down from her chamber, where she was
preparing for the labours of the evening.

'Well, I remembered what a good joke you all considered Uncle Laurie's
marriage, and I thought I'd give you another nice little surprise,'
laughed Emil. 'I'm off duty, and it seemed best to take advantage of
wind and tide, and come along as convoy to the old boy here. We hoped to
get in last night, but couldn't fetch it, so here we are in time for the
end of the jollification, anyway.'

'Ah, my sons, it is too feeling-full to see you both so happy and again
in the old home. I haf no words to outpour my gratitude, and can
only ask of the dear Gott in Himmel to bless and keep you all,' cried
Professor Bhaer, trying to gather all four into his arms at once, while
tears rolled down his cheeks, and his English failed him.

An April shower cleared the air and relieved the full hearts of the
happy family; then of course everyone began to talk--Franz and Ludmilla
in German with uncle, Emil and Mary with the aunts; and round this group
gathered the young folk, clamouring to hear all about the wreck, and the
rescue, and the homeward voyage. It was a very different story from the
written one; and as they listened to Emil's graphic words, with Mary's
soft voice breaking in now and then to add some fact that brought out
the courage, patience, and self-sacrifice he so lightly touched upon, it
became a solemn and pathetic thing to see and hear these happy creatures
tell of that great danger and deliverance.

'I never hear the patter of rain now that I don't want to say my
prayers; and as for women, I'd like to take my hat off to every one of
'em, for they are braver than any man I ever saw,' said Emil, with the
new gravity that was as becoming to him as the new gentleness with which
he treated everyone.

'If women are brave, some men are as tender and self-sacrificing as
women. I know one who in the night slipped his share of food into a
girl's pocket, though starving himself, and sat for hours rocking a sick
man in his arms that he might get a little sleep. No, love, I will tell,
and you must let me!' cried Mary, holding in both her own the hand he
laid on her lips to silence her.

'Only did my duty. If that torment had lasted much longer I might
have been as bad as poor Barry and the boatswain. Wasn't that an awful
night?' And Emil shuddered as he recalled it.

'Don't think of it, dear. Tell about the happy days on the Urania, when
papa grew better and we were all safe and homeward bound,' said Mary,
with the trusting look and comforting touch which seemed to banish the
dark and recall the bright side of that terrible experience.

Emil cheered up at once, and sitting with his arm about his 'dear lass',
in true sailor fashion told the happy ending of the tale.

'Such a jolly old time as we had at Hamburg! Uncle Hermann couldn't do
enough for the captain, and while mamma took care of him, Mary looked
after me. I had to go into dock for repairs; fire hurt my eyes, and
watching for a sail and want of sleep made 'em as hazy as a London fog.
She was pilot and brought me in all right, you see, only I couldn't part
company, so she came aboard as first mate, and I'm bound straight for
glory now.'

'Hush! that's silly, dear,' whispered Mary, trying in her turn to stop
him, with English shyness about tender topics. But he took the soft hand
in his, and proudly surveying the one ring it wore, went on with the air
of an admiral aboard his flagship.

'The captain proposed waiting a spell; but I told him we weren't like
to see any rougher weather than we'd pulled through together, and if we
didn't know one another after such a year as this, we never should. I
was sure I shouldn't be worth my pay without this hand on the wheel; so
I had my way, and my brave little woman has shipped for the long voyage.
God bless her!'

'Shall you really sail with him?' asked Daisy, admiring her courage, but
shrinking with cat-like horror from the water.

'I'm not afraid,' answered Mary, with a loyal smile. 'I've proved my
captain in fair weather and in foul, and if he is ever wrecked again,
I'd rather be with him than waiting and watching ashore.'

'A true woman, and a born sailor's wife! You are a happy man, Emil, and
I'm sure this trip will be a prosperous one,' cried Mrs Jo, delighted
with the briny flavour of this courtship. 'Oh, my dear boy, I always
felt you'd come back, and when everyone else despaired I never gave up,
but insisted that you were clinging to the main-top jib somewhere on
that dreadful sea'; and Mrs Jo illustrated her faith by grasping Emil
with a truly Pillycoddian gesture.

'Of course I was!' answered Emil heartily; 'and my "main-top jib" in
this case was the thought of what you and Uncle said to me. That kept
me up; and among the million thoughts that came to me during those
long nights none was clearer than the idea of the red strand, you
remember--English navy, and all that. I liked the notion, and resolved
that if a bit of my cable was left afloat, the red stripe should be
there.'

'And it was, my dear, it was! Captain Hardy testifies to that, and here
is your reward'; and Mrs Jo kissed Mary with a maternal tenderness
which betrayed that she liked the English rose better than the blue-eyed
German Kornblumen, sweet and modest though it was.

Emil surveyed the little ceremony with complacency, saying, as he looked
about the room which he never thought to see again: 'Odd, isn't it,
how clearly trifles come back to one in times of danger? As we floated
there, half-starved, and in despair, I used to think I heard the bells
ringing here, and Ted tramping downstairs, and you calling, "Boys, boys,
it's time to get up!" I actually smelt the coffee we used to have,
and one night I nearly cried when I woke from a dream of Asia's ginger
cookies. I declare, it was one of the bitterest disappointments of my
life to face hunger with that spicy smell in my nostrils. If you've got
any, do give me one!'

A pitiful murmur broke from all the aunts and cousins, and Emil was at
once borne away to feast on the desired cookies, a supply always being
on hand. Mrs Jo and her sister joined the other group, glad to hear what
Franz was saying about Nat.

'The minute I saw how thin and shabby he was, I knew that something was
wrong; but he made light of it, and was so happy over our visit and
news that I let him off with a brief confession, and went to Professor
Baumgarten and Bergmann. From them I learned the whole story of
his spending more money than he ought and trying to atone for it by
unnecessary work and sacrifice. Baumgarten thought it would do him good,
so kept his secret till I came. It did him good, and he's paid his debts
and earned his bread by the sweat of his brow, like an honest fellow.'

'I like that much in Nat. It is, as I said, a lesson, and he learns
it well. He proves himself a man, and has deserved the place Bergmann
offers him,' said Mr Bhaer, looking well pleased as Franz added some
facts already recorded.

'I told you, Meg, that he had good stuff in him, and love for Daisy
would keep him straight. Dear lad, I wish I had him here this moment!'
cried Mrs Jo, forgetting in delight the doubts and anxieties which had
troubled her for months past.

'I am very glad, and suppose I shall give in as I always do, especially
now that the epidemic rages so among us. You and Emil have set all their
heads in a ferment, and Josie will be demanding a lover before I can
turn round,' answered Mrs Meg, in a tone of despair.

But her sister saw that she was touched by Nat's trials, and hastened
to add the triumphs, that the victory might be complete, for success is
always charming.

'This offer of Herr Bergmann is a good one, isn't it?' she asked, though
Mr Laurie had already satisfied her on that point when Nat's letter
brought the news.

'Very fine in every way. Nat will get capital drill in Bachmeister's
orchestra, see London in a delightful way, and if he suits come home
with them, well started among the violins. No great honour, but a sure
thing and a step up. I congratulated him, and he was very jolly over it,
saying, like the true lover he is: "Tell Daisy; be sure and tell her all
about it." I'll leave that to you, Aunt Meg, and you can also break it
gently to her that the old boy had a fine blond beard. Very becoming;
hides his weak mouth, and gives a noble air to his big eyes and
"Mendelssohnian brow", as a gushing girl called it. Ludmilla has a photo
of it for you.'

This amused them; and they listened to many other interesting bits of
news which kind Franz, even in his own happiness, had not forgotten to
remember for his friend's sake. He talked so well, and painted Nat's
patient and pathetic shifts so vividly, that Mrs Meg was half won;
though if she had learned of the Minna episode and the fiddling in
beer-gardens and streets, she might not have relented so soon. She
stored up all she heard, however, and, womanlike, promised herself a
delicious talk with Daisy, in which she would allow herself to melt by
degrees, and perhaps change the doubtful 'We shall see' to a cordial 'He
has done well; be happy, dear'.

In the midst of this agreeable chat the sudden striking of a clock
recalled Mrs Jo from romance to reality, and she exclaimed, with a
clutch at her crimping-pins:

'My blessed people, you must eat and rest; and I must dress, or receive
in this disgraceful rig. Meg, will you take Ludmilla and Mary upstairs
and see to them? Franz knows the way to the dining-room. Fritz, come
with me and be made tidy, for what with heat and emotion, we are both
perfect wrecks.'



Chapter 19. WHITE ROSES

While the travellers refreshed, and Mrs President struggled into her
best gown, Josie ran into the garden to gather flowers for the brides.
The sudden arrival of these interesting beings had quite enchanted
the romantic girl, and her head was full of heroic rescues, tender
admiration, dramatic situations, and feminine wonder as to whether the
lovely creatures would wear their veils or not. She was standing before
a great bush of white roses, culling the most perfect for the bouquets
which she meant to tie with the ribbon festooned over her arm, and lay
on the toilette tables of the new cousins, as a delicate attention. A
step startled her, and looking up she saw her brother coming down the
path with folded arms, bent head, and the absent air of one absorbed in
deep thought.

'Sophy Wackles,' said the sharp child, with a superior smile, as
she sucked her thumb just pricked by a too eager pull at the thorny
branches.

'What are you at here, Mischief?' asked Demi, with an Irvingesque start,
as he felt rather than saw a disturbing influence in his day-dream.

'Getting flowers for "our brides". Don't you wish you had one?' answered
Josie, to whom the word 'mischief' suggested her favourite amusement.

'A bride or a flower?' asked Demi calmly, though he eyed the blooming
bush as if it had a sudden and unusual interest for him.

'Both; you get the one, and I'll give you the other.'

'Wish I could!' and Demi picked a little bud, with a sigh that went to
Josie's warm heart.

'Why don't you, then? It's lovely to see people so happy. Now's a good
time to do it if you ever mean to. She will be going away for ever
soon.'

'Who?' and Demi pulled a half-opened bud, with a sudden colour in his
own face; which sign of confusion delighted little Jo.

'Don't be a hypocrite. You know I mean Alice. Now, Jack, I'm fond
of you, and want to help; it's so interesting--all these lovers and
weddings and things, and we ought to have our share. So you take my
advice and speak up like a man, and make sure of Alice before she goes.'

Demi laughed at the seriousness of the small girl's advice; but he liked
it, and showed that it suited him by saying blandly, instead of snubbing
her as usual:

'You are very kind, child. Since you are so wise, could you give me a
hint how I'd better 'speak up', as you elegantly express it?'

'Oh, well, there are various ways, you know. In plays the lovers go down
on their knees; but that's awkward when they have long legs. Ted never
does it well, though I drill him for hours. You could say, "Be mine,
be mine!" like the old man who threw cucumbers over the wall to Mrs
Nickleby, if you want to be gay and easy; or you could write a poetical
pop. You've tried it, I dare say.'

'But seriously, Jo, I do love Alice, and I think she knows it. I want
to tell her so; but I lose my head when I try, and don't care to make a
fool of myself. Thought you might suggest some pretty way; you read so
much poetry and are so romantic.'

Demi tried to express himself clearly, but forgot his dignity and his
usual reserve in the sweet perplexity of his love, and asked his little
sister to teach him how to put the question which a single word can
answer. The arrival of his happy cousins had scattered all his wise
plans and brave resolutions to wait still longer. The Christmas play
had given him courage to hope, and the oration today had filled him with
tender pride; but the sight of those blooming brides and beaming grooms
was too much for him, and he panted to secure his Alice without an
hour's delay. Daisy was his confidante in all things but this; a
brotherly feeling of sympathy had kept him from telling her his hopes,
because her own were forbidden. His mother was rather jealous of any
girl he admired; but knowing that she liked Alice, he loved on and
enjoyed his secret alone, meaning soon to tell her all about it.

Now suddenly Josie and the rose-bush seemed to suggest a speedy end
to his tender perplexities; and he was moved to accept her aid as the
netted lion did that of the mouse.

'I think I'll write,' he was slowly beginning, after a pause during
which both were trying to strike out a new and brilliant idea.

'I've got it! perfectly lovely! just suit her, and you too, being a
poet!' cried Josie, with a skip.

'What is it? Don't be ridiculous, please,' begged the bashful lover,
eager, but afraid of this sharp-tongued bit of womanhood.

'I read in one of Miss Edgeworth's stories about a man who offers three
roses to his lady--a bud, a half-blown, and a full-blown rose. I don't
remember which she took; but it's a pretty way; and Alice knows about
it because she was there when we read it. Here are all kinds; you've got
the two buds, pick the sweetest rose you can find, and I'll tie them up
and put them in her room. She is coming to dress with Daisy, so I can do
it nicely.'

Demi mused a moment with his eyes on the bridal bush, and a smile came
over his face so unlike any it had ever worn before, that Josie was
touched, and looked away as if she had no right to see the dawn of the
great passion which, while it lasts, makes a young man as happy as a
god.

'Do it,' was all he said, and gathered a full-blown rose to finish his
floral love-message.

Charmed to have a finger in this romantic pie, Josie tied a graceful
bow of ribbon about the stems, and finished her last nosegay with much
content, while Demi wrote upon a card:

DEAR ALICE, You know what the flowers mean. Will you wear one, or all
tonight, and make me still prouder, fonder, and happier than I am?

Yours entirely,

JOHN


Offering this to his sister, he said in a tone that made her feel the
deep importance of her mission:

'I trust you, Jo. This means everything to me. No jokes, dear, if you
love me.'

Josie's answer was a kiss that promised all things; and then she ran
away to do her 'gentle spiriting', like Ariel, leaving Demi to dream
among the roses like Ferdinand.

Mary and Ludmilla were charmed with their bouquets; and the giver had
the delight of putting some of the flowers into the dark hair and
the light as she played maid at the toilettes of 'our brides', which
consoled her for a disappointment in the matter of veils.

No one helped Alice dress; for Daisy was in the next room with her
mother; and not even their loving eyes saw the welcome which the little
posy received, nor the tears and smiles and blushes that came and went
as she read the note and pondered what answer she should give. There was
no doubt about the one she wished to give; but duty held her back; for
at home there was an invalid mother and an old father. She was needed
there, with all the help she could now bring by the acquirements four
years of faithful study had given her. Love looked very sweet, and a
home of her own with John a little heaven on earth; but not yet. And
she slowly laid away the full-blown rose as she sat before the mirror,
thinking over the great question of her life.

Was it wise and kind to ask him to wait, to bind him by any promise,
or even to put into words the love and honour she felt for him? No; it
would be more generous to make the sacrifice alone, and spare him the
pain of hope deferred. He was young; he would forget; and she would do
her duty better, perhaps, if no impatient lover waited for her. With
eyes that saw but dimly, and a hand that lingered on the stem he had
stripped of thorns, she laid the half-blown flower by the rose, and
asked herself if even the little bud might be worn. It looked very poor
and pale beside the others; yet being in the self-sacrificing mood which
real love brings, she felt that even a small hope was too much to give,
if she could not follow it up with more.

As she sat looking sadly down on the symbols of an affection that grew
dearer every moment, she listened half unconsciously to the murmur of
voices in the adjoining room. Open windows, thin partitions, and the
stillness of summer twilight made it impossible to help hearing, and in
a few moments more she could not refrain; for they were talking of John.

'So nice of Ludmilla to bring us all bottles of real German cologne!
Just what we need after this tiring day! Be sure John has his! He likes
it so!'

'Yes, mother. Did you see him jump up when Alice ended her oration?
He'd have gone to her if I hadn't held him back. I don't wonder he was
pleased and proud. I spoilt my gloves clapping, and quite forgot my
dislike of seeing women on platforms, she was so earnest and unconscious
and sweet after the first moment.'

'Has he said anything to you, dear?'

'No; and I guess why. The kind boy thinks it would make me unhappy. It
wouldn't. But I know his ways; so I wait, and hope all will go well with
him.'

'It must. No girl in her senses would refuse our John, though he isn't
rich, and never will be. Daisy, I've been longing to tell you what he
did with his money. He told me last night, and I've had no time since to
tell you. He sent poor young Barton to the hospital, and kept him there
till his eyes were saved--a costly thing to do. But the man can work now
and care for his old parents. He was in despair, sick and poor, and too
proud to beg; and our dear boy found it out, and took every penny he
had, and never told even his mother till she made him.'

Alice did not hear what Daisy answered, for she was busy with her own
emotions--happy ones now, to judge from the smile that shone in her eyes
and the decided gesture with which she put the little bud in her bosom,
as if she said: 'He deserves some reward for that good deed, and he
shall have it.'

Mrs Meg was speaking, and still of John, when she could hear again:

'Some people would call it unwise and reckless, when John has so little;
but I think his first investment a safe and good one, for "he who giveth
to the poor lendeth to the Lord"; and I was so pleased and proud, I
wouldn't spoil it by offering him a penny.'

'It is his having nothing to offer that keeps him silent, I think. He
is so honest, he won't ask till he has much to give. But he forgets that
love is everything. I know he's rich in that; I see and feel it; and any
woman should be glad to get it.'

'Right, dear. I felt just so, and was willing to work and wait with and
for my John.'

'So she will be, and I hope they will find it out. But she is so dutiful
and good, I'm afraid she won't let herself be happy. You would like it,
mother?'

'Heartily; for a better, nobler girl doesn't live. She is all I want for
my son; and I don't mean to lose the dear, brave creature if I can help
it. Her heart is big enough for both love and duty; and they can wait
more happily if they do it together--for wait they must, of course.'

'I'm so glad his choice suits you, mother, and he is spared the saddest
sort of disappointment.'

Daisy's voice broke there; and a sudden rustle, followed by a soft
murmur, seemed to tell that she was in her mother's arms, seeking and
finding comfort there.

Alice heard no more, and shut her window with a guilty feeling but a
shining face; for the proverb about listeners failed here, and she had
learned more than she dared to hope. Things seemed to change suddenly;
she felt that her heart was large enough for both love and duty; she
knew now that she would be welcomed by mother and sister; and the memory
of Daisy's less happy fate, Nat's weary probation, the long delay,
and possible separation for ever--all came before her so vividly that
prudence seemed cruelty; self-sacrifice, sentimental folly; and anything
but the whole truth, disloyalty to her lover. As she thought thus,
the half-blown rose went to join the bud; and then, after a pause, she
slowly kissed the perfect rose, and added it to the tell-tale group,
saying to herself with a sort of sweet solemnity, as if the words were a
vow:

'I'll love and work and wait with and for my John.'

It was well for her that Demi was absent when she stole down to join the
guests who soon began to flow through the house in a steady stream.
The new brightness which touched her usually thoughtful face was easily
explained by the congratulations she received as orator, and the slight
agitation observable, when a fresh batch of gentlemen approached soon
passed, as none of them noticed the flowers she wore over a very happy
heart. Demi meantime was escorting certain venerable personages about
the college, and helping his grandfather entertain them with discussion
of the Socratic method of instruction, Pythagoras, Pestalozzi, Froebel,
and the rest, whom he devoutly wished at the bottom of the Red Sea, and
no wonder, for his head and his heart were full of love and roses, hopes
and fears. He piloted the 'potent, grave, and reverend seigniors' safely
down to Plumfield at last, and landed them before his uncle and aunt
Bhaer, who were receiving in state, the one full of genuine delight in
all men and things, the other suffering martyrdom with a smile, as she
stood shaking hand after hand, and affecting utter unconsciousness of
the sad fact that ponderous Professor Plock had camped upon the train of
her state and festival velvet gown.

With a long sigh of relief Demi glanced about him for the beloved girl.
Most persons would have looked some time before any particular angel
could be discovered among the white-robed throng in parlours, hall,
and study; but his eye went--like the needle to the pole--to the corner
where a smooth dark head, with its braided crown, rose like a queen's,
he thought, above the crowd which surrounded her. Yes, she has a flower
at her throat; one, two, oh, blessed sight! he saw it all across the
room, and gave a rapturous sigh which caused Miss Perry's frizzled crop
to wave with a sudden gust. He did not see the rose, for it was
hidden by a fold of lace; and it was well, perhaps, that bliss came by
instalments, or he might have electrified the assembled multitude by
flying to his idol, there being no Daisy to clutch him by the coat-tail.
A stout lady, thirsting for information, seized him at that thrilling
moment, and he was forced to point out celebrities with a saintly
patience which deserved a better reward than it received; for a certain
absence of mind and incoherence of speech at times caused the ungrateful
dowager to whisper to the first friend she met after he had escaped:

'I saw no wine at any of the spreads; but it is plain that young Brooke
has had too much. Quite gentlemanly, but evidently a trifle intoxicated,
my dear.'

Ah, so he was! but with a diviner wine than any that ever sparkled at a
class-day lunch, though many collegians know the taste of it; and when
the old lady was disposed of, he gladly turned to find the young one,
bent on having a single word. He saw her standing by the piano now,
idly turning over music as she talked with several gentlemen. Hiding his
impatience under an air of scholastic repose, Demi hovered near, ready
to advance when the happy moment came, wondering meantime why elderly
persons persisted in absorbing young ones instead of sensibly sitting
in corners with their contemporaries. The elderly persons in question
retired at length, but only to be replaced by two impetuous youths who
begged Miss Heath to accompany them to Parnassus and join the dance.
Demi thirsted for their blood, but was appeased by hearing George and
Dolly say, as they lingered a moment after her refusal:

'Really, you know, I'm quite converted to co-education and almost wish
I'd remained here. It gives a grace to study, a sort of relish even to
Greek to see charming girls at it,' said Stuffy, who found the feast
of learning so dry, any sauce was welcome; and he felt as if he had
discovered a new one.

'Yes, by Jove! we fellows will have to look out or you'll carry off all
the honours. You were superb today, and held us all like magic, though
it was so hot there, I really think I couldn't have stood it for anyone
else,' added Dolly, labouring to be gallant and really offering a
touching proof of devotion; for the heat melted his collar, took the
curl out of his hair, and ruined his gloves.

'There is room for all; and if you will leave us the books, we will
cheerfully yield the baseball, boating, dancing, and flirting, which
seem to be the branches you prefer,' answered Alice sweetly.

'Ah, now you are too hard upon us! We can't grind all the time and you
ladies don't seem to mind taking a turn at the two latter "branches" you
mention,' returned Dolly, with a glance at George which plainly said, 'I
had her there.'

'Some of us do in our first years. Later we give up childish things, you
see. Don't let me keep you from Parnassus'; and a smiling nod dismissed
them, smarting under the bitter consciousness of youth.

'You got it there, Doll. Better not try to fence with these superior
girls. Sure to be routed, horse, foot, and dragoons,' said Stuffy,
lumbering away, somewhat cross with too many spreads.

'So deuced sarcastic! Don't believe she's much older than we are.
Girls grow up quicker, so she needn't put on airs and talk like a
grandmother,' muttered Dolly, feeling that he had sacrificed his kids
upon the altar of an ungrateful Pallas.

'Come along and let's find something to eat. I'm faint with so much
talking. Old Plock cornered me and made my head spin with Kant and Hegel
and that lot.'

'I promised Dora West I'd give her a turn. Must look her up; she's a
jolly little thing, and doesn't bother about anything but keeping in
step.'

And arm in arm the boys strolled away, leaving Alice to read music as
diligently as if society had indeed no charms for her. As she bent to
turn a page, the eager young man behind the piano saw the rose and was
struck speechless with delight. A moment he gazed, then hastened to
seize the coveted place before a new detachment of bores arrived.

'Alice, I can't believe it--did you understand--how shall I ever thank
you?' murmured Demi, bending as if he, too, read the song, not a note or
word of which did he see, however.

'Hush! not now. I understood--I don't deserve it--we are too young, we
must wait, but--I'm very proud and happy, John!'

What would have happened after that tender whisper I tremble to think,
if Tom Bangs had not come bustling up, with the cheerful remark:

'Music? just the thing. People are thinning out, and we all want a
little refreshment. My brain fairly reels with the 'ologies and 'isms
I've heard discussed tonight. Yes, give us this; sweet thing! Scotch
songs are always charming.'

Demi glowered; but the obtuse boy never saw it, and Alice, feeling that
this would be a safe vent for sundry unruly emotions, sat down at once,
and sang the song which gave her answer better than she could have done:

                BIDE A WEE

    'The puir auld folk at home, ye mind,
    Are frail and failing sair;
    And weel I ken they'd miss me, lad,
    Gin I come hame nae mair.
    The grist is out, the times are hard,
    The kine are only three;
    I canna leave the auld folk now.
    We'd better bide a wee.

    'I fear me sair they're failing baith;
    For when I sit apart,
    They talk o' Heaven so earnestly,
    It well nigh breaks my heart.
    So, laddie, dinna urge me now,
    It surely winna be;
    I canna leave the auld folk yet.
    We'd better bide a wee.'

The room was very still before the first verse ended; and Alice skipped
the next, fearing she could not get through; for John's eyes were on
her, showing that he knew she sang for him and let the plaintive little
ballad tell what her reply must be. He took it as she meant it, and
smiled at her so happily that her heart got the better of her voice, and
she rose abruptly, saying something about the heat.

'Yes, you are tired; come out and rest, my dearest'; and with a
masterful air Demi took her into the starlight, leaving Tom to stare
after them winking as if a sky-rocket had suddenly gone off under his
nose.

'Bless my soul! the Deacon really meant business last summer and never
told me. Won't Dora laugh?' And Tom departed in hot haste to impart and
exult over his discovery.

What was said in the garden was never exactly known; but the Brooke
family sat up very late that night, and any curious eye at the window
would have seen Demi receiving the homage of his womankind as he told
his little romance. Josie took great credit to herself in the matter,
insisting that she had made the match; Daisy was full of the sweetest
sympathy and joy, and Mrs Meg so happy that when Jo had gone to dream
of bridal veils, and Demi sat in his room blissfully playing the air of
'Bide a Wee', she had her talk about Nat, ending with her arms round her
dutiful daughter and these welcome words as her reward:

'Wait till Nat comes home, and then my good girl shall wear white roses
too.'



Chapter 20. LIFE FOR LIFE

The summer days that followed were full of rest and pleasure for young
and old, as they did the honours of Plumfield to their happy guests.
While Franz and Emil were busy with the affairs of Uncle Hermann and
Captain Hardy, Mary and Ludmilla made friends everywhere; for, though
very unlike, both were excellent and charming girls. Mrs Meg and Daisy
found the German bride a Hausfrau after their own hearts, and had
delightful times learning new dishes, hearing about the semi-yearly
washes and the splendid linen-room at Hamburg, or discussing domestic
life in all its branches. Ludmilla not only taught, but learned, many
things, and went home with many new and useful ideas in her blonde head.

Mary had seen so much of the world that she was unusually lively for
an English girl; while her various accomplishments made her a most
agreeable companion. Much good sense gave her ballast; and the late
experiences of danger and happiness added a sweet gravity at times,
which contrasted well with her natural gaiety. Mrs Jo was quite
satisfied with Emil's choice, and felt sure this true and tender pilot
would bring him safe to port through fair or stormy weather. She had
feared that Franz would settle down into a comfortable, moneymaking
burgher, and be content with that; but she soon saw that his love of
music and his placid Ludmilla put much poetry into his busy life, and
kept it from being too prosaic. So she felt at rest about these boys,
and enjoyed their visit with real, maternal satisfaction; parting with
them in September most regretfully, yet hopefully, as they sailed away
to the new life that lay before them.

Demi's engagement was confided to the immediate family only, as both
were pronounced too young to do anything but love and wait. They were
so happy that time seemed to stand still for them, and after a blissful
week they parted bravely--Alice to home duties, with a hope that
sustained and cheered her through many trials; and John to his business,
full of a new ardour which made all things possible when such a reward
was offered.

Daisy rejoiced over them, and was never tired of hearing her brother's
plans for the future. Her own hope soon made her what she used to be--a
cheery, busy creature, with a smile, kind word, and helping hand for
all; and as she went singing about the house again, her mother felt that
the right remedy for past sadness had been found. The dear Pelican still
had doubts and fears, but kept them wisely to herself, preparing sundry
searching tests to be applied when Nat came home, and keeping a sharp
eye on the letters from London; for some mysterious hint had flown
across the sea, and Daisy's content seemed reflected in Nat's present
cheerful state of mind.

Having passed through the Werther period, and tried a little Faust--of
which experience he spoke to his Marguerite as if it had included
an acquaintance with Mephistopheles, Blocksburg, and Auerbach's
wine-cellar--he now felt that he was a Wilhelm Meister, serving his
apprenticeship to the great masters of life. As she knew the truth of
his small sins and honest repentance, Daisy only smiled at the mixture
of love and philosophy he sent her, knowing that it was impossible for a
young man to live in Germany without catching the German spirit.

'His heart is all right; and his head will soon grow clear when he gets
out of the fog of tobacco, beer, and metaphysics he's been living in.
England will wake up his common sense, and good salt air blow his little
follies all away,' said Mrs Jo, much pleased with the good prospects
of her violinist--whose return was delayed till spring, to his private
regret, but professional advancement.

Josie had a month with Miss Cameron at the seaside, and threw herself
so heartily into the lesson given her that her energy, promise, and
patience laid the foundation of a friendship which was of infinite value
to her in the busy, brilliant years to come; for little Jo's instincts
were right; and the dramatic talent of the Marches was to blossom by and
by into an actress, virtuous, and beloved.

Tom and his Dora were peacefully ambling altar-ward; for Bangs senior
was so afraid his son would change his mind again and try a third
profession, that he gladly consented to an early marriage, as a sort
of anchor to hold the mercurial Thomas fast. Aforesaid Thomas could not
complain of cold shoulders now; for Dora was a most devoted and adoring
little mate, and made life so pleasant to him that his gift for getting
into scrapes seemed lost, and he bade fair to become a thriving man,
with undeniable talent for the business he had chosen.

'We shall be married in the autumn, and live with my father for a while.
The governor is getting on, you know, and my wife and I must look after
him. Later we shall have an establishment of our own,' was a favourite
speech of his about this time, and usually received with smiles; for the
idea of Tommy Bangs at the head of an 'establishment' was irresistibly
funny to all who knew him.

Things were in this flourishing condition, and Mrs Jo was beginning to
think her trials were over for that year, when a new excitement came.
Several postal cards had arrived at long intervals from Dan, who gave
them 'Care of M. Mason, etc.', as his address. By this means he was
able to gratify his longing for home news, and to send brief messages to
quiet their surprise at his delay in settling. The last one, which came
in September, was dated 'Montana', and simply said:

Here at last, trying mining again; but not going to stay long. All sorts
of luck. Gave up the farm idea. Tell plans soon. Well, busy, and very
happy. D. K.

If they had known what the heavy dash under 'happy' meant, that postal
would have been a very eloquent bit of pasteboard; for Dan was free,
and had gone straight away to the liberty he panted for. Meeting an old
friend by accident, he obliged him at a pinch by acting as overseer
for a time, finding the society even of rough miners very sweet, and
something in the muscular work wonderfully pleasant, after being cooped
up in the brush-shop so long. He loved to take a pick and wrestle with
rock and earth till he was weary--which was very soon; for that year of
captivity had told upon his splendid physique. He longed to go home, but
waited week after week to get the prison taint off him and the haggard
look out of his face. Meanwhile he made friends of masters and men;
and as no one knew his story, he took his place again in the world
gratefully and gladly--with little pride now, and no plans but to do
some good somewhere, and efface the past.

Mrs Jo was having a grand clearing-out of her desk one October day,
while the rain poured outside, and peace reigned in her mansion. Coming
across the postals, she pondered over them, and then put them carefully
away in the drawer labelled 'Boys' Letters', saying to herself, as she
bundled eleven requests for autographs into the waste-paper basket:

'It is quite time for another card, unless he is coming to tell his
plans. I'm really curious to know what he has been about all this year,
and how he's getting on now.'

That last wish was granted within an hour; for Ted came rushing in, with
a newspaper in one hand, a collapsed umbrella in the other, and a face
full of excitement, announcing, all in one breathless jumble:

'Mine caved in--twenty men shut up--no way out--wives crying--water
rising--Dan knew the old shaft--risked his life--got 'em out--most
killed--papers full of it--I knew he'd be a hero--hurray for old Dan!'

'What? Where? When? Who? Stop roaring, and let me read!' commanded his
mother, entirely bewildered.

Relinquishing the paper, Ted allowed her to read for herself, with
frequent interruptions from him--and Rob, who soon followed, eager
for the tale. It was nothing new; but courage and devotion always stir
generous hearts, and win admiration; so the account was both graphic and
enthusiastic; and the name of Daniel Kean, the brave man who saved the
lives of others at the risk of his own, was on many lips that day. Very
proud were the faces of these friends as they read how their Dan was
the only one who, in the first panic of the accident, remembered the old
shaft that led into the mine--walled up, but the only hope of escape,
if the men could be got out before the rising water drowned them; how he
was lowered down alone, telling the others to keep back till he saw if
it was safe; how he heard the poor fellows picking desperately for their
lives on the other side, and by knocks and calls guided them to the
right spot; then headed the rescue party, and working like a hero, got
the men out in time. On being drawn up last of all, the worn rope broke,
and he had a terrible fall, being much hurt, but was still alive. How
the grateful women kissed his blackened face and bloody hands, as the
men bore him away in triumph, and the owners of the mine promised a
handsome reward, if he lived to receive it!

'He must live; he shall, and come home to be nursed as soon as he can
stir, if I go and bring him myself! I always knew he'd do something fine
and brave, if he didn't get shot or hung for some wild prank instead,'
cried Mrs Jo, much excited.

'Do go, and take me with you, Mum. I ought to be the one, Dan's so fond
of me and I of him,' began Ted, feeling that this would be an expedition
after his own heart.

Before his mother could reply, Mr Laurie came in, with almost as much
noise and flurry as Teddy the second, exclaiming as he waved the evening
paper:

'Seen the news, Jo? What do you think? Shall I go off at once, and see
after that brave boy?'

'I wish you would. But the thing may not be all true--rumour lies so.
Perhaps a few hours will bring an entirely new version of the story.'

'I've telephoned to Demi for all he can find out; and if it's true, I'll
go at once. Should like the trip. If he's able, I'll bring him home; if
not, I'll stay and see to him. He'll pull through. Dan will never die of
a fall on his head. He's got nine lives, and not lost half of them yet.'

'If you go, uncle, mayn't I go with you? I'm just spoiling for a
journey; and it would be such larks to go out there with you, and see
the mines and Dan, and hear all about it, and help. I can nurse. Can't
I, Rob?' cried Teddy, in his most wheedlesome tones.

'Pretty well. But if mother can't spare you, I'm ready if uncle needs
anyone,' answered Rob, in his quiet way, looking much fitter for the
trip than excitable Ted.

'I can't spare either of you. My boys get into trouble, unless I keep
them close at home. I've no right to hold the others; but I won't let
you out of my sight, or something will happen. Never saw such a year,
with wrecks and weddings and floods and engagements, and every sort of
catastrophe!' exclaimed Mrs Jo.

'If you deal in girls and boys, you must expect this sort of thing,
ma'am. The worst is over, I hope, till these lads begin to go off. Then
I'll stand by you; for you'll need every kind of support and comfort,
specially if Ted bolts early,' laughed Mr Laurie, enjoying her
lamentations.

'I don't think anything can surprise me now; but I am anxious about
Dan, and feel that someone had better go to him. It's a rough place out
there, and he may need careful nursing. Poor lad, he seems to get a good
many hard knocks! But perhaps he needs them as "a mellerin' process", as
Hannah used to say.'

'We shall hear from Demi before long, and then I'll be off.' With which
cheerful promise Mr Laurie departed; and Ted, finding his mother firm,
soon followed, to coax his uncle to take him.

Further inquiry confirmed and added interest to the news. Mr Laurie was
off at once; and Ted went into town with him, still vainly imploring to
be taken to his Dan. He was absent all day; but his mother said, calmly:

'Only a fit of the sulks because he is thwarted. He's safe with Tom or
Demi, and will come home hungry and meek at night. I know him.'

But she soon found that she could still be surprised; for evening
brought no Ted, and no one had seen him. Mr Bhaer was just setting
off to find his lost son, when a telegram arrived, dated at one of the
way-stations on Mr Laurie's route:

    Found Ted in the cars. Take him along. Write tomorrow.

        T.  LAURENCE

'Ted bolted sooner than you expected, mother. Never mind--uncle will
take good care of him, and Dan be very glad to see him,' said Rob, as
Mrs Jo sat, trying to realize that her youngest was actually on his way
to the wild West.

'Disobedient boy! He shall be severely punished, if I ever get him
again. Laurie winked at this prank; I know he did. Just like him.
Won't the two rascals have a splendid time? Wish I was with them! Don't
believe that crazy boy took even a night-gown with him, or an overcoat.
Well, there will be two patients for us to nurse when they get back, if
they ever do. Those reckless express trains always go down precipices,
and burn up, or telescope. Oh! my Ted, my precious boy, how can I let
him go so far away from me?'

And mother-like, Mrs Jo forgot the threatened chastisement in tender
lamentations over the happy scapegrace, now whizzing across the
continent in high feather at the success of his first revolt. Mr Laurie
was much amused at his insisting that those words, 'when Ted bolts', put
the idea into his head; and therefore the responsibility rested upon his
shoulders. He assumed it kindly from the moment he came upon the runaway
asleep in a car, with no visible luggage but a bottle of wine for Dan
and a blacking-brush for himself; and as Mrs Jo suspected, the 'two
rascals' did have a splendid time. Penitent letters arrived in due
season, and the irate parents soon forgot to chide in their anxiety
about Dan, who was very ill, and did not know his friends for several
days. Then he began to mend; and everyone forgave the bad boy when he
proudly reported that the first conscious words Dan said were: 'Hallo,
Ted!' with a smile of pleasure at seeing a familiar face bent over him.

'Glad he went, and I won't scold any more. Now, what shall we put in the
box for Dan?' And Mrs Jo worked off her impatience to get hold of the
invalid by sending comforts enough for a hospital.

Cheering accounts soon began to come, and at length Dan was pronounced
able to travel, but seemed in no haste to go home, though never tired of
hearing his nurses talk of it.

'Dan is strangely altered,' wrote Laurie to Jo; 'not by this illness
alone, but by something which has evidently gone before. I don't know
what, and leave you to ask; but from his ravings when delirious I fear
he has been in some serious trouble the past year. He seems ten years
older, but improved, quieter, and so grateful to us. It is pathetic to
see the hunger in his eyes as they rest on Ted, as if he couldn't see
enough of him. He says Kansas was a failure, but can't talk much; so I
bide my time. The people here love him very much, and he cares for that
sort of thing now; used to scorn any show of emotion, you know; now
he wants everyone to think well of him, and can't do enough to win
affection and respect. I may be all wrong. You will soon find out. Ted
is in clover, and the trip has done him a world of good. Let me take him
to Europe when we go? Apron-strings don't agree with him any better than
they did with me when I proposed to run away to Washington with you some
century ago. Aren't you sorry you didn't?'

This private letter set Mrs Jo's lively fancy in a ferment, and she
imagined every known crime, affliction, and complication which could
possibly have befallen Dan. He was too feeble to be worried with
questions now, but she promised herself most interesting revelations
when she got him safe at home; for the 'firebrand' was her most
interesting boy. She begged him to come, and spent more time in
composing a letter that should bring him, than she did over the most
thrilling episodes in her 'works'.

No one but Dan saw the letter; but it did bring him, and one November
day Mr Laurie helped a feeble man out of a carriage at the door of
Plumfield, and Mother Bhaer received the wanderer like a recovered son;
while Ted, in a disreputable-looking hat and an astonishing pair of
boots, performed a sort of war-dance round the interesting group.

'Right upstairs and rest; I'm nurse now, and this ghost must eat before
he talks to anyone,' commanded Mrs Jo, trying not to show how shocked
she was at this shorn and shaven, gaunt and pallid shadow of the
stalwart man she parted with.

He was quite content to obey, and lay on the long lounge in the room
prepared for him, looking about as tranquilly as a sick child restored
to its own nursery and mother's arms, while his new nurse fed and
refreshed him, bravely controlling the questions that burned upon her
tongue. Being weak and weary, he soon fell asleep; and then she stole
away to enjoy the society of the 'rascals', whom she scolded and petted,
pumped and praised, to her heart's content.

'Jo, I think Dan has committed some crime and suffered for it,' said Mr
Laurie, when Ted had departed to show his boots and tell glowing tales
of the dangers and delights of the miners' life to his mates. 'Some
terrible experience has come to the lad, and broken his spirit. He was
quite out of his head when we arrived, and I took the watching, so I
heard more of those sad wanderings than anyone else. He talked of the
"warden", some trail, a dead man, and Blair and Mason, and would keep
offering me his hand, asking me if I would take it and forgive him.
Once, when he was very wild, I held his arms, and he quieted in a
moment, imploring me not to "put the handcuffs on". I declare, it was
quite awful sometimes to hear him in the night talk of old Plum and you,
and beg to be let out and go home to die.'

'He isn't going to die, but live to repent of anything he may have done;
so don't harrow me up with these dark hints, Teddy. I don't care if he's
broken the Ten Commandments, I'll stand by him, and so will you, and
we'll set him on his feet and make a good man of him yet. I know he's
not spoilt, by the look in his poor face. Don't say a word to anyone,
and I'll have the truth before long,' answered Mrs Jo, still loyal to
her bad boy, though much afflicted by what she had heard.

For some days Dan rested, and saw few people; then good care, cheerful
surroundings, and the comfort of being at home began to tell, and
he seemed more like himself, though still very silent as to his late
experiences, pleading the doctor's orders not to talk much. Everyone
wanted to see him; but he shrank from any but old friends, and 'wouldn't
lionize worth a cent', Ted said, much disappointed that he could not
show off his brave Dan.

'Wasn't a man there who wouldn't have done the same, so why make a row
over me?' asked the hero, feeling more ashamed than proud of the broken
arm, which looked so interesting in a sling.

'But isn't it pleasant to think that you saved twenty lives, Dan, and
gave husbands, sons, and fathers back to the women who loved them?'
asked Mrs Jo one evening as they were alone together after several
callers had been sent away.

'Pleasant! it's all that kept me alive, I do believe; yes, I'd rather
have done it than be made president or any other big bug in the world.
No one knows what a comfort it is to think I've saved twenty men to more
than pay for--' There Dan stopped short, having evidently spoken out of
some strong emotion to which his hearer had no key.

'I thought you'd feel so. It is a splendid thing to save life at the
risk of one's own, as you did, and nearly lose it,' began Mrs Jo,
wishing he had gone on with that impulsive speech which was so like his
old manner.

'"He that loseth his life shall gain it",' muttered Dan, staring at the
cheerful fire which lighted the room, and shone on his thin face with a
ruddy glow.

Mrs Jo was so startled at hearing such words from his lips that she
exclaimed joyfully:

'Then you did read the little book I gave you, and kept your promise?'

'I read it a good deal after a while. I don't know much yet, but I'm
ready to learn; and that's something.'

'It's everything. Oh, my dear, tell me about it! I know something lies
heavy on your heart; let me help you bear it, and so make the burden
lighter.'

'I know it would; I want to tell; but some things even you couldn't
forgive; and if you let go of me, I'm afraid I can't keep afloat.'

'Mothers can forgive anything! Tell me all, and be sure that I will
never let you go, though the whole world should turn from you.'

Mrs Jo took one of the big wasted hands in both of hers and held it
fast, waiting silently till that sustaining touch warmed poor Dan's
heart, and gave him courage to speak. Sitting in his old attitude, with
his head in his hands, he slowly told it all, never once looking up till
the last words left his lips.

'Now you know; can you forgive a murderer, and keep a jail-bird in your
house?'

Her only answer was to put her arms about him, and lay the shorn head on
her breast, with eyes so full of tears they could but dimly see the hope
and fear that made his own so tragical.

That was better than any words; and poor Dan clung to her in speechless
gratitude, feeling the blessedness of mother love--that divine gift
which comforts, purifies, and strengthens all who seek it. Two or three
great, bitter drops were hidden in the little woollen shawl where Dan's
cheek rested, and no one ever knew how soft and comfortable it felt to
him after the hard pillows he had known so long. Suffering of both mind
and body had broken will and pride, and the lifted burden brought such a
sense of relief that he paused a moment to enjoy it in dumb delight.

'My poor boy, how you have suffered all this year, when we thought you
free as air! Why didn't you tell us, Dan, and let us help you? Did you
doubt your friends?' asked Mrs Jo, forgetting all other emotions in
sympathy, as she lifted up the hidden face, and looked reproachfully
into the great hollow eyes that met her own frankly now.

'I was ashamed. I tried to bear it alone rather than shock and
disappoint you, as I know I have, though you try not to show it. Don't
mind; I must get used to it'; and Dan's eyes dropped again as if they
could not bear to see the trouble and dismay his confession painted on
his best friend's face.

'I am shocked and disappointed by the sin, but I am also very glad and
proud and grateful that my sinner has repented, atoned, and is ready to
profit by the bitter lesson. No one but Fritz and Laurie need ever know
the truth; we owe it to them, and they will feel as I do,' answered Mrs
Jo, wisely thinking that entire frankness would be a better tonic than
too much sympathy.

'No, they won't; men never forgive like women. But it's right. Please
tell 'em for me, and get it over. Mr Laurence knows it, I guess. I
blabbed when my wits were gone; but he was very kind all the same. I can
bear their knowing; but oh, not Ted and the girls!' Dan clutched her
arm with such an imploring face that she hastened to assure him no one
should know except the two old friends, and he calmed down as if ashamed
of his sudden panic.

'It wasn't murder, mind you, it was in self-defence; he drew first, and
I had to hit him. Didn't mean to kill him; but it doesn't worry me as
much as it ought, I'm afraid. I've more than paid for it, and such a
rascal is better out of the world than in it, showing boys the way to
hell. Yes, I know you think that's awful in me; but I can't help it. I
hate a scamp as I do a skulking coyote, and always want to get a shot at
'em. Perhaps it would have been better if he had killed me; my life is
spoilt.'

All the old prison gloom seemed to settle like a black cloud on Dan's
face as he spoke, and Mrs Jo was frightened at the glimpse it gave her
of the fire through which he had passed to come out alive, but
scarred for life. Hoping to turn his mind to happier things, she said
cheerfully:

'No, it isn't; you have learned to value it more and use it better
for this trial. It is not a lost year, but one that may prove the most
helpful of any you ever know. Try to think so, and begin again; we will
help, and have all the more confidence in you for this failure. We all
do the same and struggle on.'

'I never can be what I was. I feel about sixty, and don't care for
anything now I've got here. Let me stay till I'm on my legs, then I'll
clear out and never trouble you any more,' said Dan despondently.

'You are weak and low in your mind; that will pass, and by and by you
will go to your missionary work among the Indians with all the old
energy and the new patience, self-control, and knowledge you have
gained. Tell me more about that good chaplain and Mary Mason and the
lady whose chance word helped you so much. I want to know all about the
trials of my poor boy.'

Won by her tender interest, Dan brightened up and talked on till he had
poured out all the story of that bitter year, and felt better for the
load he lifted off.

If he had known how it weighed upon his hearer's heart, he would have
held his peace; but she hid her sorrow till she had sent him to bed,
comforted and calm; then she cried her heart out, to the great dismay
of Fritz and Laurie, till they heard the tale and could mourn with her;
after which they all cheered up and took counsel together how best to
help this worst of all the 'catastrophes' the year had brought them.



Chapter 21. ASLAUGA'S KNIGHT

It was curious to see the change which came over Dan after that talk. A
weight seemed off his mind; and though the old impetuous spirit flashed
out at times, he seemed intent on trying to show his gratitude and love
and honour to these true friends by a new humility and confidence very
sweet to them, very helpful to him. After hearing the story from Mrs
Jo, the Professor and Mr Laurie made no allusion to it beyond the hearty
hand-grasp, the look of compassion, the brief word of good cheer in
which men convey sympathy, and a redoubled kindness which left no doubt
of pardon. Mr Laurie began at once to interest influential persons
in Dan's mission, and set in motion the machinery which needs so much
oiling before anything can be done where Government is concerned.
Mr Bhaer, with the skill of a true teacher, gave Dan's hungry mind
something to do, and helped him understand himself by carrying on the
good chaplain's task so paternally that the poor fellow often said he
felt as if he had found a father. The boys took him to drive, and amused
him with their pranks and plans; while the women, old and young, nursed
and petted him till he felt like a sultan with a crowd of devoted
slaves, obedient to his lightest wish. A very little of this was enough
for Dan, who had a masculine horror of 'molly-coddling', and so brief an
acquaintance with illness that he rebelled against the doctor's orders
to keep quiet; and it took all Mrs Jo's authority and the girls'
ingenuity to keep him from leaving his sofa long before strained back
and wounded head were well. Daisy cooked for him; Nan attended to his
medicines; Josie read aloud to while away the long hours of inaction
that hung so heavily on his hands; while Bess brought all her
pictures and casts to amuse him, and, at his special desire, set up a
modelling-stand in his parlour and began to mould the buffalo head he
gave her. Those afternoons seemed the pleasantest part of his day; and
Mrs Jo, busy in her study close by, could see the friendly trio and
enjoy the pretty pictures they made. The girls were much flattered
by the success of their efforts, and exerted themselves to be very
entertaining, consulting Dan's moods with the feminine tact most women
creatures learn before they are out of pinafores. When he was gay, the
room rang with laughter; when gloomy, they read or worked in respectful
silence till their sweet patience cheered him up again; and when in pain
they hovered over him like 'a couple of angels', as he said. He often
called Josie 'little mother', but Bess was always 'Princess'; and his
manner to the two cousins was quite different. Josie sometimes fretted
him with her fussy ways, the long plays she liked to read, and the
maternal scoldings she administered when he broke the rules; for having
a lord of creation in her power was so delightful to her that she would
have ruled him with a rod of iron if he had submitted. To Bess, in her
gentler ministrations, he never showed either impatience or weariness,
but obeyed her least word, exerted himself to seem well in her presence,
and took such interest in her work that he lay looking at her with
unwearied eyes; while Josie read to him in her best style unheeded.

Mrs Jo observed this, and called them 'Una and the Lion', which suited
them very well, though the lion's mane was shorn, and Una never tried to
bridle him. The elder ladies did their part in providing delicacies and
supplying all his wants; but Mrs Meg was busy at home, Mrs Amy preparing
for the trip to Europe in the spring, and Mrs Jo hovering on the brink
of a 'vortex'--for the forthcoming book had been sadly delayed by
the late domestic events. As she sat at her desk, settling papers or
meditatively nibbling her pen while waiting for the divine afflatus to
descend upon her, she often forgot her fictitious heroes and heroines
in studying the live models before her, and thus by chance looks, words,
and gestures discovered a little romance unsuspected by anyone else.

The portiere between the rooms was usually drawn aside, giving a view of
the group in the large bay-window--Bess at one side, in her grey blouse,
busy with her tools; Josie at the other side with her book; and between,
on the long couch, propped with many cushions, lay Dan in a many-hued
eastern dressing-gown presented by Mr Laurie and worn to please
the girls, though the invalid much preferred an old jacket 'with no
confounded tail to bother over'. He faced Mrs Jo's room, but never
seemed to see her, for his eyes were on the slender figure before him,
with the pale winter sunshine touching her golden head, and the delicate
hands that shaped the clay so deftly. Josie was just visible, rocking
violently in a little chair at the head of the couch, and the steady
murmur of her girlish voice was usually the only sound that broke the
quiet of the room, unless a sudden discussion arose about the book or
the buffalo.

Something in the big eyes, bigger and blacker than ever in the thin
white face, fixed, so steadily on one object, had a sort of fascination
for Mrs Jo after a time, and she watched the changes in them curiously;
for Dan's mind was evidently not on the story, and he often forgot to
laugh or exclaim at the comic or exciting crises. Sometimes they were
soft and wistful, and the watcher was very glad that neither damsel
caught that dangerous look for when they spoke it vanished; sometimes
it was full of eager fire, and the colour came and went rebelliously,
in spite of his attempt to hide it with an impatient gesture of hand or
head; but oftenest it was dark, and sad, and stern, as if those gloomy
eyes looked out of captivity at some forbidden light or joy. This
expression came so often that it worried Mrs Jo, and she longed to go
and ask him what bitter memory overshadowed those quiet hours. She knew
that his crime and its punishment must lie heavy on his mind; but youth,
and time, and new hopes would bring comfort, and help to wear away
the first sharpness of the prison brand. It lifted at other times, and
seemed almost forgotten when he joked with the boys, talked with old
friends, or enjoyed the first snows as he drove out every fair day. Why
should the shadow always fall so darkly on him in the society of these
innocent and friendly girls? They never seemed to see it, and if either
looked or spoke, a quick smile came like a sunburst through the clouds
to answer them. So Mrs Jo went on watching, wondering, and discovering,
till accident confirmed her fears.

Josie was called away one day, and Bess, tired of working, offered to
take her place if he cared for more reading.

'I do; your reading suits me better than Jo's. She goes so fast my
stupid head gets in a muddle and soon begins to ache. Don't tell her;
she's a dear little soul, and so good to sit here with a bear like me.'

The smile was ready as Bess went to the table for a new book, the last
story being finished.

'You are not a bear, but very good and patient, we think. It is always
hard for a man to be shut up, mamma says, and must be terrible for you,
who have always been so free.'

If Bess had not been reading titles she would have seen Dan shrink as
if her last words hurt him. He made no answer; but other eyes saw and
understood why he looked as if he would have liked to spring up and rush
away for one of his long races up the hill, as he used to do when the
longing for liberty grew uncontrollable. Moved by a sudden impulse, Mrs
Jo caught up her work-basket and went to join her neighbours, feeling
that a non-conductor might be needed; for Dan looked like a thundercloud
full of electricity.

'What shall we read, Aunty? Dan doesn't seem to care. You know his
taste; tell me something quiet and pleasant and short. Josie will
be back soon,' said Bess, still turning over the books piled on the
centre-table.

Before Mrs Jo could answer, Dan pulled a shabby little volume from under
his pillow, and handing it to her said: 'Please read the third one; it's
short and pretty--I'm fond of it.' The book opened at the right place,
as if the third story had been often read, and Bess smiled as she saw
the name.

'Why, Dan, I shouldn't think you'd care for this romantic German tale.
There is fighting in it; but it is very sentimental, if I remember
rightly.'

'I know it; but I've read so few stories, I like the simple ones best.
Had nothing else to read sometimes; I guess I know it all by heart, and
never seem to be tired of those fighting fellows, and the fiends and
angels and lovely ladies. You read "Aslauga's Knight", and see if you
don't like it. Edwald was rather too soft for my fancy; but Froda was
first-rate and the spirit with the golden hair always reminded me of
you.'

As Dan spoke Mrs Jo settled herself where she could watch him in the
glass, and Bess took a large chair facing him, saying, as she put up her
hands to retie the ribbon that held the cluster of thick, soft curls at
the back of her head:

'I hope Aslauga's hair wasn't as troublesome as mine, for it's always
tumbling down. I'll be ready in a minute.'

'Don't tie it up; please let it hang. I love to see it shine that way.
It will rest your head, and be just right for the story, Goldilocks,'
pleaded Dan, using the childish name and looking more like his boyish
self than he had done for many a day.

Bess laughed, shook down her pretty hair, and began to read, glad to
hide her face a little; for compliments made her shy, no matter who paid
them. Dan listened intently on; and Mrs Jo, with eyes that went often
from her needle to the glass, could see, without turning, how he
enjoyed every word as if it had more meaning for him than for the other
listeners. His face brightened wonderfully, and soon wore the look that
came when anything brave or beautiful inspired and touched his better
self. It was Fouque's charming story of the knight Froda, and the fair
daughter of Sigurd, who was a sort of spirit, appearing to her lover in
hours of danger and trial, as well as triumph and joy, till she became
his guide and guard, inspiring him with courage, nobleness, and truth,
leading him to great deeds in the field, sacrifices for those he loved,
and victories over himself by the gleaming of her golden hair, which
shone on him in battle, dreams, and perils by day and night, till after
death he finds the lovely spirit waiting to receive and to reward him.

Of all the stories in the book this was the last one would have supposed
Dan would like best, and even Mrs Jo was surprised at his perceiving the
moral of the tale through the delicate imagery and romantic language by
which it was illustrated. But as she looked and listened she remembered
the streak of sentiment and refinement which lay concealed in Dan like
the gold vein in a rock, making him quick to feel and to enjoy fine
colour in a flower, grace in an animal, sweetness in women, heroism in
men, and all the tender ties that bind heart to heart; though he was
slow to show it, having no words to express the tastes and instincts
which he inherited from his mother. Suffering of soul and body had
tamed his stronger passions, and the atmosphere of love and pity now
surrounding him purified and warmed his heart till it began to hunger
for the food neglected or denied so long. This was plainly written in
his too expressive face, as, fancying it unseen, he let it tell the
longing after beauty, peace, and happiness embodied for him in the
innocent fair girl before him.

The conviction of this sad yet natural fact came to Mrs Jo with a pang,
for she felt how utterly hopeless such a longing was; since light and
darkness were not farther apart than snow-white Bess and sin-stained
Dan. No dream of such a thing disturbed the young girl, as her entire
unconsciousness plainly showed. But how long would it be before the
eloquent eyes betrayed the truth? And then what disappointment for
Dan, what dismay for Bess, who was as cool and high and pure as her own
marbles, and shunned all thought of love with maidenly reserve.

'How hard everything is made for my poor boy! How can I spoil his little
dream, and take away the spirit of good he is beginning to love and long
for? When my own dear lads are safely settled I'll never try another,
for these things are heart-breaking, and I can't manage any more,'
thought Mrs Jo, as she put the lining into Teddy's coat-sleeve upside
down, so perplexed and grieved was she at this new catastrophe.

The story was soon done, and as Bess shook back her hair, Dan asked as
eagerly as a boy:

'Don't you like it?'

'Yes, it's very pretty, and I see the meaning of it; but Undine was
always my favourite.'

'Of course, that's like you--lilies and pearls and souls and pure
water. Sintram used to be mine; but I took a fancy to this when I
was--ahem--rather down on my luck one time, and it did me good, it was
so cheerful and sort of spiritual in its meaning, you know.'

Bess opened her blue eyes in wonder at this fancy of Dan's for anything
'spiritual'; but she only nodded, saying: 'Some of the little songs are
sweet and might be set to music.'

Dan laughed; 'I used to sing the last one to a tune of my own sometimes
at sunset:

    '"Listening to celestial lays,
      Bending thy unclouded gaze
      On the pure and living light,
      Thou art blest, Aslauga's Knight!"

'And I was,' he added, under his breath, as he glanced towards the
sunshine dancing on the wall.

'This one suits you better now'; and glad to please him by her interest,
Bess read in her soft voice:

    '"Healfast, healfast, ye hero wounds;
      O knight, be quickly strong!
      Beloved strife
      For fame and life,
      Oh, tarry not too long!"'

'I'm no hero, never can be, and "fame and life" can't do much for me.
Never mind, read me that paper, please. This knock on the head has made
a regular fool of me.'

Dan's voice was gentle; but the light was gone out of his face now, and
he moved restlessly as if the silken pillows were full of thorns. Seeing
that his mood had changed, Bess quietly put down the book, took up the
paper, and glanced along the columns for something to suit him.

'You don't care for the money market, I know, nor musical news. Here's
a murder; you used to like those; shall I read it? One man kills
another--,'

'No!'

Only a word, but it gave Mrs Jo a thrill, and for a moment she dared not
glance at the tell-tale mirror. When she did Dan lay motionless with one
hand over his eyes, and Bess was happily reading the art news to ears
that never heard a word. Feeling like a thief who has stolen something
very precious, Mrs Jo slipped away to her study, and before long Bess
followed to report that Dan was fast asleep.

Sending her home, with the firm resolve to keep her there as much as
possible, Mother Bhaer had an hour of serious thought all alone in the
red sunset; and when a sound in the next room led her there, she found
that the feigned sleep had become real repose; for Dan lay breathing
heavily, with a scarlet spot on either cheek, and one hand clinched on
his broad breast. Yearning over him with a deeper pity than ever before,
she sat in the little chair beside him, trying to see her way out of
this tangle, till his hand slipped down, and in doing so snapped a cord
he wore about his neck and let a small case drop to the floor.

Mrs Jo picked it up, and as he did not wake, sat looking at it, idly
wondering what charm it held; for the case was of Indian workmanship and
the broken cord, of closely woven grass, sweet scented and pale yellow.

'I won't pry into any more of the poor fellow's secrets. I'll mend and
put it back, and never let him know I've seen his talisman.'

As she spoke she turned the little wallet to examine the fracture, and
a card fell into her lap. It was a photograph, cut to fit its covering,
and two words were written underneath the face, 'My Aslauga'. For an
instant Mrs Jo fancied that it might be one of herself, for all the boys
had them; but as the thin paper fell away, she saw the picture Demi took
of Bess that happy summer day. There was no doubt now, and with a sigh
she put it back, and was about to slip it into Dan's bosom so that not
even a stitch should betray her knowledge, when as she leaned towards
him, she saw that he was looking straight at her with an expression that
surprised her more than any of the strange ones she had ever seen in
that changeful face before.

'Your hand slipped down; it fell; I was putting it back,' explained Mrs
Jo, feeling like a naughty child caught in mischief.

'You saw the picture?'

'Yes.'

'And know what a fool I am?'

'Yes, Dan, and am so grieved--'

'Don't worry about me. I'm all right--glad you know, though I never
meant to tell you. Of course it is only a crazy fancy of mine, and
nothing can ever come of it. Never thought there would. Good Lord! what
could that little angel ever be to me but what she is--a sort of dream
of all that's sweet and good?'

More afflicted by the quiet resignation of his look and tone than by
the most passionate ardour, Mrs Jo could only say, with a face full of
sympathy:

'It is very hard, dear, but there is no other way to look at it. You are
wise and brave enough to see that, and to let the secret be ours alone.'

'I swear I will! not a word nor a look if I can help it. No one guesses,
and if it troubles no one, is there any harm in my keeping this, and
taking comfort in the pretty fancy that kept me sane in that cursed
place?'

Dan's face was eager now, and he hid away the little worn case as if
defying any hand to take it from him. Anxious to know everything before
giving counsel or comfort, Mrs Jo said quietly:

'Keep it, and tell me all about the "fancy". Since I have stumbled on
your secret, let me know how it came, and how I can help to make it
lighter to bear.'

'You'll laugh; but I don't mind. You always did find out our secrets and
give us a lift. Well, I never cared much for books, you know; but down
yonder when the devil tormented me I had to do something or go stark
mad, so I read both the books you gave me. One was beyond me, till that
good old man showed me how to read it; but the other, this one, was a
comfort, I tell you. It amused me, and was as pretty as poetry. I liked
'em all, and most wore out Sintram. See how used up he is! Then I came
to this, and it sort of fitted that other happy part of my life, last
summer--here.'

Dan stopped a moment as the words lingered on his lips; then, with a
long breath, went on, as if it was hard to lay bare the foolish little
romance he had woven about a girl, a picture, and a child's story there
in the darkness of the place which was as terrible to him as Dante's
Inferno, till he found his Beatrice.

'I couldn't sleep, and had to think about something, so I used to fancy
I was Folko, and see the shining of Aslauga's hair in the sunset on
the wall, the gum of the watchman's lamp, and the light that came in at
dawn. My cell was high. I could see a bit of sky; sometimes there was
a star in it, and that was most as good as a face. I set great store by
that patch of blue, and when a white cloud went by, I thought it was the
prettiest thing in all this world. I guess I was pretty near a fool; but
those thoughts and things helped me through, so they are all solemn true
to me, and I can't let them go. The dear shiny head, the white gown, the
eyes like stars, and sweet, calm ways that set her as high above me as
the moon in heaven. Don't take it away! it's only a fancy, but a man
must love something, and I'd better love a spirit like her than any of
the poor common girls who would care for me.'

The quiet despair in Dan's voice pierced Mrs Jo to the heart; but there
was no hope and she gave none. Yet she felt that he was right, and that
his hapless affection might do more to uplift and purify him than any
other he might know. Few women would care to marry Dan now, except such
as would hinder, not help, him in the struggle which life would always
be to him; and it was better to go solitary to his grave than become
what she suspected his father had been--a handsome, unprincipled, and
dangerous man, with more than one broken heart to answer for.

'Yes, Dan, it is wise to keep this innocent fancy, if it helps and
comforts you, till something more real and possible comes to make you
happier. I wish I could give you any hope; but we both know that the
dear child is the apple of her father's eye, the pride of her mother's
heart, and that the most perfect lover they can find will hardly seem to
them worthy of their precious daughter. Let her remain for you the high,
bright star that leads you up and makes you believe in heaven.' Mrs Jo
broke down there; it seemed so cruel to destroy the faint hope Dan's
eyes betrayed, that she could not moralize when she thought of his hard
life and lonely future. Perhaps it was the wisest thing she could have
done, for in her hearty sympathy he found comfort for his own loss, and
very soon was able to speak again in the manly tone of resignation
to the inevitable that showed how honest was his effort to give up
everything but the pale shadow of what, for another, might have been a
happy possibility.

They talked long and earnestly in the twilight; and this second secret
bound them closer than the first; for in it there was neither sin nor
shame--only the tender pain and patience which has made saints and
heroes of far worse men than our poor Dan. When at length they rose at
the summons of a bell, all the sunset glory had departed, and in the
wintry sky there hung one star, large, soft, and clear, above a snowy
world. Pausing at the window before she dropped the curtains, Mrs Jo
said cheerfully:

'Come and see how beautiful the evening star is, since you love it so.'
And as he stood behind her, tall and pale, like the ghost of his former
self, she added softly: 'And remember, dear, if the sweet girl is denied
you, the old friend is always here--to love and trust and pray for you.'

This time she was not disappointed; and had she asked any reward for
many anxieties and cares, she received it when Dan's strong arm came
round her, as he said, in a voice which showed her that she had not
laboured in vain to pluck her firebrand from the burning:

'I never can forget that; for she's helped to save my soul, and make me
dare to look up there and say:

"God bless her!"'



Chapter 22. POSITIVELY LAST APPEARANCE

'Upon my word, I feel as if I lived in a powder-magazine, and don't
know which barrel will explode next, and send me flying,' said Mrs Jo
to herself next day, as she trudged up to Parnassus to suggest to her
sister that perhaps the most charming of the young nurses had better
return to her marble gods before she unconsciously added another wound
to those already won by the human hero. She told no secrets; but a hint
was sufficient; for Mrs Amy guarded her daughter as a pearl of great
price, and at once devised a very simple means of escape from danger.
Mr Laurie was going to Washington on Dan's behalf, and was delighted to
take his family with him when the idea was carelessly suggested. So the
conspiracy succeeded finely; and Mrs Jo went home, feeling more like a
traitor than ever. She expected an explosion; but Dan took the news so
quietly, it was plain that he cherished no hope; and Mrs Amy was sure
her romantic sister had been mistaken. If she had seen Dan's face when
Bess went to say good-bye, her maternal eye would have discovered far
more than the unconscious girl did. Mrs Jo trembled lest he should
betray himself; but he had learned self-control in a stern school, and
would have got through the hard moment bravely, only, when he took both
hands, saying heartily:

'Good-bye, Princess. If we don't meet again, remember your old friend
Dan sometimes,' she, touched by his late danger and the wistful look he
wore, answered with unusual warmth: 'How can I help it, when you make us
all so proud of you? God bless your mission, and bring you safely home
to us again!'

As she looked up at him with a face full of frank affection and sweet
regret, all that he was losing rose so vividly before him that Dan could
not resist the impulse to take the 'dear goldy head' between his hands
and kiss it, with a broken 'Good-bye'; then hurried back to his room,
feeling as if it were the prison-cell again, with no glimpse of heaven's
blue to comfort him.

This abrupt caress and departure rather startled Bess; for she felt with
a girl's quick instinct that there was something in that kiss unknown
before, and looked after him with sudden colour in her cheeks and new
trouble in her eyes. Mrs Jo saw it, and fearing a very natural question
answered it before it was put.

'Forgive him, Bess. He has had a great trouble, and it makes him tender
at parting with old friends; for you know he may never come back from
the wild world he is going to.'

'You mean the fall and danger of death?' asked Bess, innocently.

'No, dear; a greater trouble than that. But I cannot tell you any
more--except that he has come through it bravely; so you may trust and
respect him, as I do.'

'He has lost someone he loved. Poor Dan! We must be very kind to him.'

Bess did not ask the question, but seemed content with her solution of
the mystery--which was so true that Mrs Jo confirmed it by a nod, and
let her go away believing that some tender loss and sorrow wrought the
great change all saw in Dan, and made him so slow to speak concerning
the past year.

But Ted was less easily satisfied, and this unusual reticence goaded
him to desperation. His mother had warned him not to trouble Dan with
questions till he was quite well; but this prospect of approaching
departure made him resolve to have a full, clear, and satisfactory
account of the adventures which he felt sure must have been thrilling,
from stray words Dan let fall in his fever. So one day when the coast
was clear, Master Ted volunteered to amuse the invalid, and did so in
the following manner:

'Look here, old boy, if you don't want me to read, you've got to talk,
and tell me all about Kansas, and the farms, and that part. The Montana
business I know, but you seem to forget what went before. Brace up, and
let's have it,' he began, with an abruptness which roused Dan from a
brown study most effectually.

'No, I don't forget; it isn't interesting to anyone but myself. I didn't
see any farms--gave it up,' he said slowly.

'Why?'

'Other things to do.'

'What?'

'Well, brush-making for one thing.'

'Don't chaff a fellow. Tell true.'

'I truly did.'

'What for?'

'To keep out of mischief, as much as anything.'

'Well, of all the queer things--and you've done a lot--that's the
queerest,' cried Ted, taken aback at this disappointing discovery. But
he didn't mean to give up yet, and began again.

'What mischief, Dan?'

'Never you mind. Boys shouldn't bother.'

'But I do want to know, awfully, because I'm your pal, and care for you
no end. Always did. Come, now, tell me a good yarn. I love scrapes. I'll
be mum as an oyster if you don't want it known.'

'Will you?' and Dan looked at him, wondering how the boyish face would
change if the truth were suddenly told him.

'I'll swear it on locked fists, if you like. I know it was jolly, and
I'm aching to hear.'

'You are as curious as a girl. More than some--Josie and--and Bess never
asked a question.'

'They don't care about rows and things; they liked the mine business,
heroes, and that sort. So do I, and I'm as proud as Punch over it; but
I see by your eyes that there was something else before that, and I'm
bound to find out who Blair and Mason are, and who was hit and who ran
away, and all the rest of it.'

'What!' cried Dan, in a tone that made Ted jump.

'Well, you used to mutter about 'em in your sleep, and Uncle Laurie
wondered. So did I; but don't mind, if you can't remember, or would
rather not.'

'What else did I say? Queer, what stuff a man will talk when his wits
are gone.'

'That's all I heard; but it seemed interesting, and I just mentioned it,
thinking it might refresh your memory a bit,' said Teddy, very politely;
for Dan's frown was heavy at that moment.

It cleared off at this reply, and after a look at the boy squirming with
suppressed impatience in his chair, Dan made up his mind to amuse him
with a game of cross-purposes and half-truths, hoping to quench his
curiosity, and so get peace.

'Let me see; Blair was a lad I met in the cars, and Mason a poor fellow
who was in a--well, a sort of hospital where I happened to be. Blair ran
off to his brothers, and I suppose I might say Mason was hit, because he
died there. Does that suit you?'

'No, it doesn't. Why did Blair run? and who hit the other fellow? I'm
sure there was a fight somewhere, wasn't there?'

'Yes!

'I guess I know what it was about.'

'The devil, you do! Let's hear you guess. Must be amusing,' said Dan,
affecting an ease he did not feel.

Charmed to be allowed to free his mind, Ted at once unfolded the boyish
solution of the mystery which he had been cherishing, for he felt that
there was one somewhere.

'You needn't say yes, if I guess right and you are under oath to keep
silent. I shall know by your face, and never tell. Now see if I'm not
right. Out there they have wild doings, and it's my belief you were in
some of 'em. I don't mean robbing mails, and KluKluxing, and that sort
of thing; but defending the settlers, or hanging some scamp, or even
shooting a few, as a fellow must sometimes, in self-defence. Ah, ha!
I've hit it, I see. Needn't speak; I know the flash of your old eye, and
the clench of your big fist.' And Ted pranced with satisfaction.

'Drive on, smart boy, and don't lose the trail,' said Dan, finding a
curious sense of comfort in some of these random words, and longing, but
not daring, to confirm the true ones. He might have confessed the crime,
but not the punishment that followed, the sense of its disgrace was
still so strong upon him.

'I knew I should get it; can't deceive me long,' began Ted, with such an
air of pride Dan could not help a short laugh.

'It's a relief, isn't it, to have it off your mind? Now, just confide in
me and it's all safe, unless you've sworn not to tell.'

'I have.'

'Oh, well, then don't'; and Ted's face fell, but he was himself again
in a moment and said, with the air of a man of the world: 'It's all
right--I understand--honour binds--silence to death, etc. Glad you stood
by your mate in the hospital. How many did you kill?'

'Only one.'

'Bad lot, of course?'

'A damned rascal.'

'Well, don't look so fierce; I've no objection. Wouldn't mind popping
at some of those bloodthirsty blackguards myself. Had to dodge and keep
quiet after it, I suppose.'

'Pretty quiet for a long spell.'

'Got off all right in the end, and headed for your mines and did that
jolly brave thing. Now, I call that decidedly interesting and capital.
I'm glad to know it; but I won't blab.'

'Mind you don't. Look here. Ted, if you'd killed a man, would it trouble
you--a bad one, I mean?'

The lad opened his mouth to say, 'Not a bit,' but checked that answer as
if something in Dan's face made him change his mind. 'Well, if it was my
duty in war or self-defence, I suppose I shouldn't; but if I'd pitched
into him in a rage, I guess I should be very sorry. Shouldn't wonder if
he sort of haunted me, and remorse gnawed me as it did Aram and those
fellows. You don't mind, do you? It was a fair fight, wasn't it?'

'Yes, I was in the right; but I wish I'd been out of it. Women don't see
it that way, and look horrified at such things. Makes it hard; but it
don't matter.'

'Don't tell 'em; then they can't worry,' said Ted, with the nod of one
versed in the management of the sex.

'Don't intend to. Mind you keep your notions to yourself, for some of
'em are wide of the mark. Now you may read if you like'; and there the
talk ended; but Ted took great comfort in it, and looked as wise as an
owl afterwards.

A few quiet weeks followed, during which Dan chafed at the delay; and
when at length word came that his credentials were ready, he was eager
to be off, to forget a vain love in hard work, and live for others,
since he might not for himself.

So one wild March morning our Sintram rode away, with horse and hound,
to face again the enemies who would have conquered him, but for Heaven's
help and human pity.

'Ah, me! it does seem as if life was made of partings, and they get
harder as we go on,' sighed Mrs Jo, a week later, as she sat in the long
parlour at Parnassus one evening, whither the family had gone to welcome
the travellers back.

'And meetings too, dear; for here we are, and Nat is on his way at last.
Look for the silver lining, as Marmee used to say, and be comforted,'
answered Mrs Amy, glad to be at home and find no wolves prowling near
her sheepfold.

'I've been so worried lately, I can't help croaking. I wonder what Dan
thought at not seeing you again? It was wise; but he would have enjoyed
another look at home faces before he went into the wilderness,' said Mrs
Jo regretfully.

'Much better so. We left notes and all we could think of that he might
need, and slipped away before he came. Bess really seemed relieved;
I'm sure I was'; and Mrs Amy smoothed an anxious line out of her white
forehead, as she smiled at her daughter, laughing happily among her
cousins.

Mrs Jo shook her head as if the silver lining of that cloud was hard to
find; but she had no time to croak again, for just then Mr Laurie came
in looking well pleased at something.

'A new picture has arrived; face towards the music-room, good people,
and tell me how you like it. I call it "Only a fiddler", after
Andersen's story. What name will you give it?'

As he spoke he threw open the wide doors, and just beyond they saw a
young man standing, with a beaming face, and a violin in his hand. There
was no doubt about the name to this picture, and with the cry 'Nat!
Nat!' there was a general uprising. But Daisy reached him first, and
seemed to have lost her usual composure somewhere on the way, for she
clung to him, sobbing with the shock of a surprise and joy too great for
her to bear quietly. Everything was settled by that tearful and tender
embrace, for, though Mrs Meg speedily detached her daughter, it was only
to take her place; while Demi shook Nat's hand with brotherly warmth,
and Josie danced round them like Macbeth's three witches in one,
chanting in her most tragic tones:

'Chirper thou wast; second violin thou art; first thou shalt be. Hail,
all hail!'

This caused a laugh, and made things gay and comfortable at once. Then
the usual fire of questions and answers began, to be kept up briskly
while the boys admired Nat's blond beard and foreign clothes, the girls
his improved appearance--for he was ruddy with good English beef
and beer, and fresh with the sea-breezes which had blown him swiftly
home--and the older folk rejoiced over his prospects. Of course all
wanted to hear him play; and when tongues tired, he gladly did his best
for them, surprising the most critical by his progress in music even
more than by the energy and self-possession which made a new man
of bashful Nat. By and by when the violin--that most human of all
instruments--had sung to them the loveliest songs without words, he
said, looking about him at these old friends with what Mr Bhaer called a
'feeling-full' expression of happiness and content:

'Now let me play something that you will all remember though you won't
love it as I do'; and standing in the attitude which Ole Bull has
immortalized, he played the street melody he gave them the first night
he came to Plumfield. They remembered it, and joined in the plaintive
chorus, which fitly expressed his own emotions:

    'Oh my heart is sad and weary
     Everywhere I roam,
     Longing for the old plantation
     And for the old folks at home.'

'Now I feel better,' said Mrs Jo, as they all trooped down the hill soon
after. 'Some of our boys are failures, but I think this one is going to
be a success, and patient Daisy a happy girl at last. Nat is your work,
Fritz, and I congratulate you heartily.'

'Ach, we can but sow the seed and trust that it falls on good ground.
I planted, perhaps, but you watched that the fowls of the air did not
devour it, and brother Laurie watered generously; so we will share the
harvest among us, and be glad even for a small one, heart's-dearest.'

'I thought the seed had fallen on very stony ground with my poor Dan;
but I shall not be surprised if he surpasses all the rest in the real
success of life, since there is more rejoicing over one repentant sinner
than many saints,' answered Mrs Jo, still clinging fast to her black
sheep although a whole flock of white ones trotted happily before her.

It is a strong temptation to the weary historian to close the present
tale with an earthquake which should engulf Plumfield and its environs
so deeply in the bowels of the earth that no youthful Schliemann could
ever find a vestige of it. But as that somewhat melodramatic conclusion
might shock my gentle readers, I will refrain, and forestall the usual
question, 'How did they end?' by briefly stating that all the marriages
turned out well. The boys prospered in their various callings; so did
the girls, for Bess and Josie won honours in their artistic careers, and
in the course of time found worthy mates. Nan remained a busy, cheerful,
independent spinster, and dedicated her life to her suffering sisters
and their children, in which true woman's work she found abiding
happiness. Dan never married, but lived, bravely and usefully, among his
chosen people till he was shot defending them, and at last lay quietly
asleep in the green wilderness he loved so well, with a lock of golden
hair upon his breast, and a smile on his face which seemed to say that
Aslauga's Knight had fought his last fight and was at peace. Stuffy
became an alderman, and died suddenly of apoplexy after a public dinner.
Dolly was a society man of mark till he lost his money, when he found
congenial employment in a fashionable tailoring establishment. Demi
became a partner, and lived to see his name above the door, and Rob was
a professor at Laurence College; but Teddy eclipsed them all by becoming
an eloquent and famous clergyman, to the great delight of his astonished
mother. And now, having endeavoured to suit everyone by many weddings,
few deaths, and as much prosperity as the eternal fitness of things will
permit, let the music stop, the lights die out, and the curtain fall for
ever on the March family.





KITTY'S CLASS DAY AND OTHER STORIES

By

Louisa M. Alcott

Author of "Little Women," etc.

Originally published under the title

"PROVERB STORIES"

1882






[Illustration: Deeper in the wood sounded the measured ring of axes]



PREFACE


Being forbidden to write anything at present I have collected various
waifs and strays to appease the young people who clamor for more,
forgetting that mortal brains need rest.

As many girls have asked to see what sort of tales Jo March wrote at
the beginning of her career, I have added "The Baron's Gloves," as a
sample of the romantic rubbish which paid so well once upon a time. If
it shows them what _not_ to write it will not have been rescued from
oblivion in vain.

L. M. ALCOTT.




CONTENTS

  KITTY'S CLASS DAY
  AUNT KIPP
  PSYCHE'S ART
  A COUNTRY CHRISTMAS
  ON PICKET DUTY
  THE BARON'S GLOVES
  MY RED CAP
  WHAT THE BELLS SAW AND SAID




PROVERB STORIES




KITTY'S CLASS DAY

"A stitch in time saves nine."


"O Pris, Pris, I'm really going! Here's the invitation--rough
paper--Chapel--spreads--Lyceum Hall--everything splendid; and Jack to
take care of me!"

As Kitty burst into the room and performed a rapturous _pas seul_,
waving the cards over her head, sister Priscilla looked up from her
work with a smile of satisfaction on her quiet face.

"Who invites you, dear?"

"Why, Jack, of course,--dear old cousin Jack. Nobody else ever thinks
of me, or cares whether I have a bit of pleasure now and then. Isn't
he kind? Mayn't I go? and, O Pris, what _shall_ I wear?"

Kitty paused suddenly, as if the last all-important question had a
solemnizing effect upon both mind and body.

"Why, your white muslin, silk sacque, and new hat, of course," began
Pris with an air of surprise. But Kitty broke in impetuously,--

"I'll never wear that old muslin again; it's full of darns, up to my
knees, and all out of fashion. So is my sacque; and as for my hat,
though it does well enough here, it would be absurd for Class Day."

"You don't expect an entirely new suit for this occasion,--do you?"
asked Pris, anxiously.

"Yes, I do, and I'll tell you how I mean to get it. I've planned
everything; for, though I hardly dreamed of going, I amused myself by
thinking how I could manage if I _did_ get invited."

"Let us hear." And Pris took up her work with an air of resignation.

"First, my dress," began Kitty, perching herself on the arm of the
sofa, and entering into the subject with enthusiasm. "I've got the ten
dollars grandpa sent me, and with eight of it I'm going to buy
Lizzie King's organdie muslin. She got it in Paris; but her aunt
providentially--no, unfortunately--died; so she can't wear it, and
wants to get rid of it. She is bigger than I am, you know; so there is
enough for a little mantle or sacque, for it isn't made up. The skirt
is cut off and gored, with a splendid train--"

"My dear, you don't mean you are going to wear one of those absurd,
new-fashioned dresses?" exclaimed Pris, lifting hands and eyes.

"I do! Nothing would induce me to go to Class Day without a train.
It's been the desire of my heart to have one, and now I _will_, if
I never have another gown to my back!" returned Kitty, with immense
decision.

Pris shook her head, and said, "Go on!" as if prepared for any
extravagance after that.

"We can make it ourselves," continued Kitty, "and trim it with the
same. It's white with blue stripes and daisies in the stripes; the
loveliest thing you ever saw, and can't be got here. So simple,
yet distingu, I know you'll like it. Next, my bonnet,"--here the
solemnity of Kitty's face and manner was charming to behold. "I shall
make it out of one of my new illusion undersleeves. I've never worn
them; and the puffed part will be a plenty for a little fly-away
bonnet of the latest style. I've got blue ribbons to tie it with, and
have only to look up some daisies for the inside. With my extra two
dollars I shall buy my gloves, and pay my fares,--and there I am, all
complete."

She looked so happy, so pretty, and full of girlish satisfaction, that
sister Pris couldn't bear to disturb the little plan, much as she
disapproved of it. They were poor, and every penny had to be counted.
There were plenty of neighbors to gossip and criticise, and plenty of
friends to make disagreeable remarks on any unusual extravagance.
Pris saw things with the prudent eyes of thirty, but Kitty with the
romantic eyes of seventeen; and the elder sister, in the kindness of
her heart, had no wish to sadden life to those bright young eyes,
or deny the child a harmless pleasure. She sewed thoughtfully for a
minute, then looked up, saying, with the smile that always assured
Kitty the day was won,--

"Get your things together, and we will see what can be done. But
remember, dear, that it is both bad taste and bad economy for poor
people to try to ape the rich."

"You're a perfect angel, Pris; so don't moralize. I'll run and get the
dress, and we'll begin at once, for there is much to do, and only
two days to do it in." And Kitty skipped away, singing "Lauriger
Horatius," at the top of her voice.

Priscilla soon found that the girl's head was completely turned by the
advice and example of certain fashionable young neighbors. It was in
vain for Pris to remonstrate and warn.

"Just this once let me do as others do, and thoroughly enjoy myself."
pleaded Kitty; and Pris yielded, saying to herself, "She shall have
her wish, and if she learns a lesson, neither time nor money will be
lost."

So they snipped and sewed, and planned and pieced, going through all
the alternations of despair and triumph, worry and satisfaction, which
women undergo when a new suit is under way. Company kept coming, for
news of Kitty's expedition had flown abroad, and her young friends
must just run in to hear about it, and ask what she was going to wear;
while Kitty was so glad and proud to tell, and show, and enjoy her
little triumph that many half hours were wasted, and the second day
found much still to do.

The lovely muslin didn't hold out, and Kitty sacrificed the waist to
the train, for a train she must have or the whole thing would be an
utter failure. A little sacque was eked out, however, and when the
frills were on, it was "ravishing," as Kitty said, with a sigh of
mingled delight and fatigue. The gored skirt was a fearful job, as any
one who has ever plunged into the mysteries will testify; and before
the facing, even experienced Pris quailed.

The bonnet also was a trial, for when the lace was on, it was
discovered that the ribbons didn't match the dress. Here was a
catastrophe! Kitty frantically rummaged the house, the shops, the
stores of her friends, and rummaged in vain. There was no time to send
to the city, and despair was about to fall on Kitty, when Pris rescued
her by quietly making one of the small sacrifices which were easy to
her because her life was spent for others. Some one suggested a strip
of blue illusion,--and that could be got; but, alas! Kitty had
no money, for the gloves were already bought. Pris heard the
lamentations, and giving up fresh ribbons for herself, pulled her
sister out of a slough of despond with two yards of "heavenly tulle."

"Now the daisies; and oh, dear me, not one can I find in this
poverty-stricken town," sighed Kitty, prinking at the glass, and
fervently hoping that nothing would happen to her complexion over
night.

"I see plenty just like those on your dress," answered Pris, nodding
toward the meadow full of young whiteweed.

"Pris, you're a treasure! I'll wear real ones; they keep well, I know,
and are so common I can refresh my bonnet anywhere. It's a splendid
idea."

Away rushed Kitty to return with an apron full of American daisies. A
pretty cluster was soon fastened just over the left-hand frizzle of
bright hair, and the little bonnet was complete.

"Now, Pris, tell me how I look," cried Kitty, as she swept into the
room late that afternoon in full gala costume.

It would have been impossible for the primmest, the sourest, or the
most sensible creature in the world to say that it wasn't a pretty
sight. The long train, the big chignon, the apology for a bonnet, were
all ridiculous,--no one could deny that,--but youth, beauty, and a
happy heart made even those absurdities charming. The erect young
figure gave an air to the crisp folds of the delicate dress; the
bright eyes and fresh cheeks under the lace rosette made one forget
its size; and the rippling brown hair won admiration in spite of the
ugly bunch which disfigured the girl's head. The little jacket set
"divinely," the new gloves were as immaculate as white kids could be,
and to crown all, Lizzie King, in a burst of generosity, lent Kitty
the blue and white Paris sunshade which she couldn't use herself.

"Now I could die content; I'm perfect in all respects, and I know Jack
won't be ashamed of me. I really owe it to him to look my best, you
know, and that's why I'm so particular," said Kitty, in an apologetic
tone, as she began to lay away her finery.

"I hope you will enjoy every minute of the time, deary. Don't forget
to finish running up the facing; I've basted it carefully, and would
do it if my head didn't ache so, I really can't hold it up any
longer," answered Pris, who had worked like a disinterested bee, while
Kitty had flown about like a distracted butterfly.

"Go and lie down, you dear, kind soul, and don't think of my nonsense
again," said Kitty, feeling remorseful, till Pris was comfortably
asleep, when she went to her room and revelled in her finery till
bedtime. So absorbed was she in learning to manage her train
gracefully, that she forgot the facing till very late. Then, being
worn out with work and worry, she did, what girls are too apt to do,
stuck a pin here and there, and, trusting to Priscilla's careful
bastings, left it as it was, retiring to dream of a certain Horace
Fletcher, whose aristocratic elegance had made a deep impression upon
her during the few evenings she had seen him.

Nothing could have been lovelier than the morning, and few hearts
happier than Kitty's, as she arrayed herself with the utmost care, and
waited in solemn state for the carriage; for muslin trains and dewy
roads were incompatible, and one luxury brought another.

"My goodness, where did she get that stylish suit?" whispered Miss
Smith to Miss Jones, as Kitty floated into the station with all sail
set, finding it impossible to resist the temptation to astonish
certain young ladies who had snubbed her in times past, which snubs
had rankled, and were now avenged.

"I looked everywhere for a muslin for to-day and couldn't find any I
liked, so I was forced to wear my mauve silk," observed Miss Smith,
complacently settling the silvery folds of her dress.

"It's very pretty, but one ruins a silk at Class Day, you know. I
thought this organdie would be more comfortable and appropriate this
warm day. A friend brought it from Paris, and it's like one the
Princess of Wales wore at the great flower-show this year," returned
Kitty, with the air of a young lady who had all her dresses from
Paris, and was intimately acquainted with the royal family.

"Those girls" were entirely extinguished by this stroke, and hadn't
a word to say for themselves, while Kitty casually mentioned Horace
Fletcher, Lyceum Hall, and Cousin Jack, for _they_ had only a little
Freshman brother to boast of, and were _not_ going to Lyceum Hall.

As she stepped out of the cars at Cambridge, Jack opened his honest
blue eyes and indulged in a low whistle of astonishment: for if there
was anything he especially hated, it was the trains, chignons and tiny
bonnets then in fashion. He was very fond of Kitty, and prided himself
on being able to show his friends a girl who was charming, and yet not
over-dressed.

"She has made a regular guy of herself; I won't tell her so, and the
dear little soul shall have a jolly time in spite of her fuss and
feathers. But I do wish she had let her hair alone and worn that
pretty hat of hers."

As this thought passed through Jack's mind he smiled and bowed and
made his way among the crowd, whispering as he drew his cousin's arm
through his own,--

"Why, Kitty, you're got up regardless of expense, aren't you? I'm so
glad you came, we'll have a rousing good time, and you shall see all
the fun."

"Oh, thank you, Jack! Do I look nice, really? I tried to be a credit
to you and Pris, and I did have such a job of it. I'll make you laugh
over it some time. A carriage for me? Bless us, how fine we are!" and
Kitty stepped in, feeling that only one thing more was needed to make
her cup overflow. That one thing was speedily vouchsafed, for before
her skirts were smoothly settled, Jack called out, in his hearty
way,--

"How are you, Fletcher? If you are bound for Chapel I'll take you up."

"Thanks; good-morning, Miss Heath."

It was all done in an instant, and the next thing Kitty knew she was
rolling away with the elegant Horace sitting opposite. How little
it takes to make a young girl happy! A pretty dress, sunshine, and
somebody opposite, and they are blest. Kitty's face glowed and dimpled
with pleasure as she glanced about her, especially when _she_, sitting
in state with two gentlemen all to herself, passed "those girls"
walking in the dust with a beardless boy; she felt that she could
forgive past slights, and did so with a magnanimous smile and bow.

Both Jack and Fletcher had graduated the year before, but still took
an interest in their old haunts, and patronized the fellows who were
not yet through the mill, at least the Seniors and Juniors; of Sophs
and Freshs they were sublimely unconscious. Greeted by frequent slaps
on the shoulder, and hearty "How are you, old fellows," they piloted
Kitty to a seat in the chapel. An excellent place, but the girl's
satisfaction was marred by Fletcher's desertion, and she could not see
anything attractive about the dashing young lady in the pink bonnet to
whom he devoted himself, "because she was a stranger," Kitty said.

Everybody knows what goes on in the Chapel, after the fight and
scramble are over. The rustle and buzz, the music, the oratory and the
poem, during which the men cheer and the girls simper; the professors
yawn, and the poet's friends pronounce him a second Longfellow. Then
the closing flourishes, the grand crush, and general scattering.

Then the fun really begins, as far as the young folks are concerned.
_They_ don't mind swarming up and down stairs in a solid phalanx; they
can enjoy half a dozen courses of salad, ice and strawberries, with
stout gentlemen crushing their feet, anxious mammas sticking sharp
elbows into their sides, and absent-minded tutors walking over them.
They can flirt vigorously in a torrid atmosphere of dinner, dust,
and din; can smile with hot coffee running down their backs, small
avalanches of ice-cream descending upon their best bonnets, and
sandwiches, butter-side down, reposing on their delicate silks. They
know that it is a costly rapture, but they carefully refrain from
thinking of the morrow, and energetically illustrate the Yankee maxim
which bids us enjoy ourselves in our early bloom.

Kitty did have "a rousing good time;" for Jack was devoted, taking
her everywhere, showing her everything, feeding and fanning her,
and festooning her train with untiring patience. How many forcible
expressions he mentally indulged in as he walked on that unlucky train
we will not record; he smiled and skipped and talked of treading on
flowers in a way that would have charmed Kitty, if some one else had
not been hovering about "The Daisy," as Fletcher called her.

After he returned, she neglected Jack, who took it coolly, and was
never in the way unless she wanted him. For the first time in her
life, Kitty deliberately flirted. The little coquetries, which are as
natural to a gay young girl as her laughter, were all in full play,
and had she gone no further no harm would have been done. But,
excited by the example of those about her, Kitty tried to enact the
fashionable young lady, and, like most novices, she overdid the part.
Quite forgetting her cousin, she tossed her head, twirled her fan,
gave affected little shrieks at college jokes, and talked college
slang in a way that convulsed Fletcher, who enjoyed the fun immensely.

Jack saw it all, shook his head and said nothing; but his face
grew rather sober as he watched Kitty, flushed, dishevelled, and
breathless, whirling round Lyceum Hall, on the arm of Fletcher, who
danced divinely, as all the girls agreed. Jack had proposed going, but
Kitty had frowned, so he fell back, leaving her to listen and laugh,
blush and shrink a little at her partner's flowery compliments and
admiring glances.

"If she stands that long she's not the girl I took her for," thought
Jack, beginning to lose patience. "She doesn't look like my little
Kitty, and somehow I don't feel half so fond and proud of her as
usual. I know one thing, _my_ daughters shall never be seen knocking
about in that style."

As if the thought suggested the act, Jack suddenly assumed an air of
paternal authority, and, arresting his cousin as she was about to
begin again, he said, in a tone she had never heard before,--

"I promised Pris to take care of you, so I shall carry you off to
rest, and put yourself to rights after this game of romps. I advise
you to do the same, Fletcher, or give your friend in the pink bonnet a
turn."

Kitty took Jack's arm pettishly, but glanced over her shoulder with
such an inviting smile that Fletcher followed, feeling very much like
a top, in danger of tumbling down the instant he stopped spinning. As
she came out Kitty's face cleared, and, assuming her sprightliest air,
she spread her plumage and prepared to descend with effect, for a
party of uninvited _peris_ stood at the gate of this Paradise casting
longing glances at the forbidden splendors within. Slowly, that all
might see her, Kitty sailed down, with Horace, the debonair, in her
wake, and was just thinking to herself, "Those girls won't get over
this very soon, I fancy," when all in one moment she heard Fletcher
exclaim, wrathfully, "Hang the flounces!" she saw a very glossy black
hat come skipping down the steps, felt a violent twitch backward, and,
to save herself from a fall, sat down on the lower step with most
undignified haste.

It was impossible for the bystanders to help laughing, for there was
Fletcher hopping wildly about, with one foot nicely caught in a muslin
loop, and there sat Kitty longing to run away and hide herself, yet
perfectly helpless, while every one tittered. Miss Jones and Miss
Smith laughed shrilly, and the despised little Freshman completed her
mortification, by a feeble joke about Kitty Heath's new man-trap. It
was only an instant, but it seemed an hour before Fletcher freed her,
and snatching up the dusty beaver, left her with a flushed countenance
and an abrupt bow.

If it hadn't been for Jack, Kitty would have burst into tears then and
there, so terrible was the sense of humiliation which oppressed her.
For his sake she controlled herself, and, bundling up her torn train,
set her teeth, stared straight before her, and let him lead her in
dead silence to a friend's room near by. There he locked the door, and
began to comfort her by making light of the little mishap. But Kitty
cried so tragically, that he was at his wit's end, till the ludicrous
side of the affair struck her, and she began to laugh hysterically.
With a vague idea that vigorous treatment was best for that feminine
ailment, Jack was about to empty the contents of an ice-pitcher over
her, when she arrested him, by exclaiming, incoherently,--

"Oh, don't!--it was so funny!--how can you laugh, you cruel boy?--I'm
disgraced, forever--take me home to Pris, oh, take me home to Pris!"

"I will, my dear, I will; but first let me right you up a bit; you
look as if you had been hazed, upon my life you do;" and Jack laughed
in spite of himself at the wretched little object before him, for
dust, dancing, and the downfall produced a ruinous spectacle.

That broke Kitty's heart; and, spreading her hands before her face,
she was about to cry again, when the sad sight which met her eyes
dispelled the gathering tears. The new gloves were both split up the
middle and very dirty with clutching at the steps as she went down.

"Never mind, you can wash them," said Jack, soothingly.

"I paid a dollar and a half for them, and they can't be washed,"
groaned Kitty.

"Oh, hang the gloves! I meant your hands," cried Jack, trying to keep
sober.

"No matter for my hands, I mourn my gloves. But I won't cry any more,
for my head aches now so I can hardly see." And Kitty threw off her
bonnet, as if even that airy trifle hurt her.

Seeing how pale she looked, Jack tenderly suggested a rest on the old
sofa, and a wet handkerchief on her hot forehead, while he got the
good landlady to send her up a cup of tea. As Kitty rose to comply
she glanced at her dress, and, clasping her hands, exclaimed,
tragically,--"The facing, the fatal facing! That made all the
mischief, for if I'd sewed it last night it wouldn't have ripped
to-day; if it hadn't ripped Fletcher wouldn't have got his foot in it,
I shouldn't have made an object of myself, he wouldn't have gone off
in a rage, and--who knows what might have happened?"

"Bless the what's-its-name if it has settled him," cried Jack. "He is
a contemptible fellow not to stay and help you out of the scrape he
got you into. Follow his lead and don't trouble yourself about him."

"Well, he _was_ rather absurd to-day, I allow; but he _has_ got
handsome eyes and hands, and he _does_ dance like an angel," sighed
Kitty, as she pinned up the treacherous loop which had brought
destruction to her little castle in the air.

"Handsome eyes, white hands, and angelic feet don't make a man. Wait
till you can do better, Kit."

With an odd, grave look, that rather startled Kitty, Jack vanished, to
return presently with a comfortable cup of tea and a motherly old lady
to help repair damages and soothe her by the foolish little purrings
and pattings so grateful to female nerves after a flurry.

"I'll come back and take you out to see the dance round the tree when
you've had a bit of a rest," said Jack, vibrating between door and
sofa as if it wasn't easy to get away.

"Oh, I couldn't," cried Kitty, with a shudder at the bare idea of
meeting any one. "I can't be seen again to-night; let me stay here
till my train goes."

"I thought it had gone, already," said Jack, with an irrepressible
twinkle of the eye that glanced at the draggled dress sweeping the
floor.

"How _can_ you joke about it!" and the girl's reproachful eyes filled
with tears of shame. "I know I've been very silly, Jack, but I've had
my punishment, and I don't need any more. To feel that you despise me
is worse than all the rest."

She ended with a little sob, and turned her face away to hide the
trembling of her lips. At that, Jack flushed up, his eyes shone,
and he stooped suddenly as if to make some impetuous reply. But,
remembering the old lady (who, by the by, was discreetly looking out
of the window), he put his hands in his pockets and strolled out of
the room.

"I've lost them both by this day's folly," thought Kitty, as Mrs.
Brown departed with the teacup. "I don't care for Fletcher, for I dare
say he didn't mean half he said, and I was only flattered because he
is rich and handsome and the girls glorify him. But I shall miss Jack,
for I've known and loved him all my life. How good he's been to me
to-day! so patient, careful, and kind, though he must have been
ashamed of me. I know he didn't like my dress; but he never said a
word and stood by me through everything. Oh, I wish I'd minded Pris!
then he would have respected me, at least; I wonder if he ever will,
again?"

Following a sudden impulse, Kitty sprang up, locked the door, and then
proceeded to destroy all her little vanities as far as possible. She
smoothed out her crimps with a wet and ruthless hand; fastened up her
pretty hair in the simple way Jack liked; gave her once cherished
bonnet a spiteful shake, as she put it on, and utterly extinguished it
with a big blue veil. She looped up her dress, leaving no vestige of
the now hateful train, and did herself up uncompromisingly in the
Quakerish gray shawl Pris had insisted on her taking for the evening.
Then she surveyed herself with pensive satisfaction, saying, in the
tone of one bent on resolutely mortifying the flesh,--

"Neat but not gaudy; I'm a fright, but I deserve it, and it's better
than being a peacock."

Kitty had time to feel a little friendless and forlorn, sitting there
alone as twilight fell, and amused herself by wondering if Fletcher
would come to inquire about her, or show any further interest in her;
yet when the sound of a manly tramp approached, she trembled lest it
should be the victim of the fatal facing. The door opened, and with a
sigh of relief she saw Jack come in, bearing a pair of new gloves in
one hand and a great bouquet of June roses in the other.

"How good of you to bring me these! They are more refreshing than
oceans of tea. You know what I like, Jack; thank you very much" cried
Kitty, sniffing at her roses with grateful rapture.

"And you know what I like," returned Jack, with an approving glance at
the altered figure before him.

"I'll never do so any more," murmured Kitty, wondering why she felt
bashful all of a sudden, when it was only cousin Jack.

"Now put on your gloves, dear, and come out and hear the music: your
train doesn't go for two hours yet, and you mustn't mope here all that
time," said Jack, offering his second gift.

"How did you know my size?" asked Kitty, putting on the gloves in a
hurry; for though Jack had called her "dear" for years, the little
word had a new sound to-night.

"I guessed,--no, I didn't, I had the old ones with me; they are no
good now, are they?" and too honest to lie, Jack tried to speak
carelessly, though he turned red in the dusk, well knowing that the
dirty little gloves were folded away in his left breast-pocket at that
identical moment.

"Oh, dear, no! these fit nicely. I'm ready, if you don't mind going
with such a fright," said Kitty, forgetting her dread of seeing people
in her desire to get away from that room, because for the first time
in her life she wasn't at ease with Jack.

"I think I like the little gray moth better than the fine butterfly,"
returned Jack, who, in spite of his invitation, seemed to find
"moping" rather pleasant.

"You are a rainy-day friend, and he isn't," said Kitty, softly, as she
drew him away.

Jack's only answer was to lay his hand on the little white glove
resting so confidingly on his arm, and, keeping it there, they roamed
away into the summer twilight.

Something had happened to the evening and the place, for both seemed
suddenly endowed with uncommon beauty and interest. The dingy old
houses might have been fairy palaces, for anything they saw to the
contrary; the dusty walks, the trampled grass, were regular Elysian
fields to them, and the music was the music of the spheres, though
they found themselves "Right in the middle of the boom, jing, jing."
For both had made a little discovery,--no, not a little one, the
greatest and sweetest man and woman can make. In the sharp twinge of
jealousy which the sight of Kitty's flirtation with Fletcher gave him,
and the delight he found in her after conduct, Jack discovered how
much he loved her. In the shame, gratitude, and half sweet, half
bitter emotion that filled her heart, Kitty felt that to her Jack
would never be "only cousin Jack" any more. All the vanity, coquetry,
selfishness, and ill-temper of the day seemed magnified to heinous
sins, for now her only thought was, "seeing these faults, he _can't_
care for me. Oh, I wish I was a better girl!"

She did not say "for his sake," but in the new humility, the ardent
wish to be all that a woman should be, little Kitty proved how true
her love was, and might have said with Portia,--

  "For myself alone, I would not be
  Ambitious in my wish; but, for you,
  I would be trebled twenty times myself;
  A thousand times more fair,
  Ten thousand times more rich."

All about them other pairs were wandering under the patriarchal elms,
enjoying music, starlight, balmy winds, and all the luxuries of the
season. If the band had played

  "Oh, there's nothing half so sweet in life
  As love's young dream--"

it is my private opinion that it would have suited the audience to
a T. Being principally composed of elderly gentlemen with large
families, they had not that fine sense of the fitness of things so
charming to see, and tooted and banged away with waltzes and marches,
quite regardless of the flocks of Romeos and Juliets philandering all
about them.

Under cover of a popular medley, Kitty overheard Fletcher quizzing her
for the amusement of Miss Pinkbonnet, who was evidently making up
for lost time. It was feeble wit, but it put the finishing stroke to
Kitty's vanity, and she dropped a tear in her blue tissue retreat, and
clung to Jack, feeling that she had never valued him half enough. She
hoped he didn't hear the gossip going on at the other side of the tree
near which they stood; but he did, for his hand involuntarily doubled
itself up into a very dangerous-looking fist, and he darted such
fiery glances at the speaker, that, if the thing had been possible.
Fletcher's ambrosial curls would have been scorched off his head.

"Never mind, and don't get angry, Jack. They are right about one
thing,--the daisies in my bonnet _were_ real, and I _couldn't_ afford
any others. I don't care much, only Pris worked so hard to get me
ready I hate to have my things made fun of."

"He isn't worth a thrashing, so we'll let it pass this time," said
Jack, irefully, yet privately resolving to have it out with Fletcher
by and by.

"Why, Kitty, I thought the real daisies the prettiest things about
your dress. Don't throw them away. I'll wear them just to show that
noodle that I prefer nature to art;" and Jack gallantly stuck the
faded posy in his button-hole, while Kitty treasured up the hint so
kindly given for future use.

If a clock with great want of tact hadn't insisted on telling them
that it was getting late, Kitty never would have got home, for both
the young people felt inclined to loiter about arm in arm through the
sweet summer night forever.

Jack had meant to say something before she went, and was immensely
surprised to find the chance lost for the present. He wanted to go
home with her and free his mind; but a neighborly old gentleman having
been engaged as escort, there would have been very little satisfaction
in a travelling trio; so he gave it up. He was very silent as they
walked to the station with Dr. Dodd trudging behind them. Kitty
thought he was tired, perhaps glad to be rid of her, and meekly
accepted her fate. But as the train approached, she gave his hand an
impulsive squeeze, and said very gratefully,--

"Jack, I can't thank you enough for your kindness to your silly little
cousin; but I never shall forget it, and if I ever can return it in
any way, I will with all my heart."

Jack looked down at the young face almost pathetic now with weariness,
humility, and pain, yet very sweet, with that new shyness in the
loving eyes, and, stooping suddenly, he kissed it, whispering in a
tone that made the girl's heart flutter,--

"I'll tell you how you may return it 'with all your heart,' by and by.
Good-night, my Kitty."

"Have you had a good time, dear?" asked Pris, as her sister appeared
an hour later.

"Don't I look as if I had?" and, throwing off her wraps, Kitty
revolved slowly before her that she might behold every portion of the
wreck. "My gown is all dust, crumple, and rags, my bonnet perfectly
limp and flat, and my gloves are ruined; I've broken Lizzie's parasol,
made a spectacle of myself, and wasted money, time, and temper; yet my
Class Day isn't a failure, for Jack is the dearest boy in the world,
and I'm very, very happy!"

Pris looked at her a minute, then opened her arms without a word, and
Kitty forgot all her little troubles in one great joy.

When Miss Smith and Miss Jones called a few days after to tell her
that Mr. Fletcher was going abroad, the amiable creatures were
entirely routed by finding Jack there in a most unmistakable
situation. He blandly wished Horace "bon voyage," and regretted that
he wouldn't be there to the wedding in October. Kitty devoted herself
to blushing beautifully, and darning many rents in a short daisy
muslin skirt, "which I intend to wear a great deal, because Jack likes
it, and so do I," she said, with a demure look at her lover, who
laughed as if that was the best joke of the season.




AUNT KIPP

"Children and fools speak the truth."


I


"What's that sigh for, Polly dear?" "I'm tired, mother, tired of
working and waiting. If I'm ever going to have any fun, I want it
_now_ while I can enjoy it."

"You shouldn't wait another hour if I could have my way; but you
know how helpless I am;" and poor Mrs. Snow sighed dolefully, as she
glanced about the dingy room and pretty Mary turning her faded gown
for the second time.

"If Aunt Kipp would give us the money she is always talking about,
instead of waiting till she dies, we should be _so_ comfortable. She
is a dreadful bore, for she lives in such terror of dropping dead with
her heart-complaint that she doesn't take any pleasure in life herself
or let any one else; so the sooner she goes the better for all of us,"
said Polly, in a desperate tone; for things looked very black to her
just then.

"My dear, don't say that," began her mother, mildly shocked; but a
bluff little voice broke in with the forcible remark,--

"She's everlastingly telling me never to put off till to-morrow what
can be done to-day; next time she comes I'll remind her of that, and
ask her, if she is going to die, why she doesn't do it?"

"Toady! you're a wicked, disrespectful boy; never let me hear you say
such a thing again about your dear Aunt Kipp."

"She isn't dear! You know we all hate her, and you are more afraid of
her than you are of spiders,--so now."

The young personage whose proper name had been corrupted into Toady,
was a small boy of ten or eleven, apple-cheeked, round-eyed, and
curly-headed; arrayed in well-worn, gray knickerbockers, profusely
adorned with paint, glue, and shreds of cotton. Perched on a high
stool, at an isolated table in a state of chaos, he was absorbed in
making a boat, entirely oblivious of the racking tooth-ache which had
been his excuse for staying from school. As cool, saucy, hard-handed,
and soft-hearted a little specimen of young America was Toady as you
would care to see; a tyrant at home, a rebel at school, a sworn foe
to law, order, and Aunt Kipp. This young person was regarded as a
reprobate by all but his mother, sister, and sister's sweetheart, Van
Bahr Lamb. Having been, through much anguish of flesh and spirit,
taught that lying was a deadly sin, Toady rushed to the other extreme,
and bolted out the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth,
at all times and places, with a startling abruptness that brought
wrath and dismay upon his friends and relatives.

"It's wicked to fib; you've whipped that into me and you can't rub it
out," he was wont to say, with vivid recollection of the past tingling
in the chubby portions of his frame.

"Mind your chips, Toady, and take care what you say to Aunt Kipp, or
you'll be as poor as a little rat all the days of your life," said
Polly, warningly.

"I don't want her old money, and I'll tell her so if she bothers me
about it. I shall go into business with Van and take care of the whole
lot; so don't you preach, Polly," returned Toady, with as much dignity
as was compatible with a great dab of glue on the end of his snub
nose.

"Mother, did aunt say anything about coming this week?" asked Polly,
after a pause of intense thought over a breadth with three darns, two
spots, and a burn.

"Yes; she wrote that she was too feeble to come at present, as she had
such dreadful palpitations she didn't dare stir from her room. So we
are quite safe for the next week at least, and--bless my soul, there
she is now!"

Mrs. Snow clasped her hands with a gesture of dismay, and sat as if
transfixed by the spectacle of a ponderous lady, in an awe-inspiring
bonnet, who came walking slowly down the street. Polly gave a groan,
and pulled a bright ribbon from her hair. Toady muttered, "Oh,
bother!" and vainly attempted to polish up his countenance with a
fragmentary pocket-handkerchief.

"Nothing but salt fish for dinner," wailed Mrs. Snow, as the shadow of
the coming event fell upon her.

"Van will make a fool of himself, and ruin everything," sighed Polly,
glancing at the ring on her finger.

"I know she'll kiss me; she never _will_ let a fellow alone," growled
Toady, scowling darkly.

The garden gate clashed, dust flew from the door-mat, a heavy step
echoed in the hall, an imperious voice called "Sophy!" and Aunt Kipp
entered with a flourish of trumpets, for Toady blew a blast through
his fingers which made the bows totter on her bonnet.

"My dear aunt, I'm very glad to see you," murmured Mrs. Snow,
advancing with a smile of welcome; for though as weak as water gruel,
she was as kind-hearted a little woman as ever lived.

"What a fib that was!" said Toady, _sotto voce_.

"We were just saying we were afraid you wouldn't"--began Mary, when a
warning, "Mind now, Polly," caused her to stop short and busy herself
with the newcomer's bag and umbrella.

"I changed my mind. Theodore, come and kiss me," answered Aunt Kipp,
briefly.

"Yes'm," was the plaintive reply, and, closing his eyes, Toady awaited
his fate with fortitude.

But the dreaded salute did not come, for Aunt Kipp exclaimed in
alarm,--

"Mercy on us! has the boy got the plague?"

"No'm, it's paint, and dirt, and glue, and it _won't_ come off," said
Toady, stroking his variegated countenance with grateful admiration
for the stains that saved him.

"Go and wash this moment, sir. Thank Heaven, _I've_ got no boys,"
cried Aunt Kipp. as if boys were some virulent disease which she had
narrowly escaped.

With a hasty peck at the lips of her two elder relatives, the old lady
seated herself, and slowly removed the awful bonnet, which in shape
and hue much resembled a hearse hung with black crape.

"I'm glad you are better," said Mary, reverently receiving the
funereal head-gear.

"I'm _not_ better," cut in Aunt Kipp. "I'm worse, much worse; my days
are numbered; I stand on the brink of the tomb, and may drop at any
moment."

Toady's face was a study, as he glanced up at the old lady's florid
countenance, down at the floor, as if in search of the above-mentioned
"brink," and looked unaffectedly anxious to see her drop. "Why don't
you, then?" was on his lips; but a frown from Polly restrained him,
and he sat himself down on the rug to contemplate the corpulent
victim.

"Have a cup of tea, aunt?" said Mrs. Snow.

"I will."

"Lie down and rest a little," suggested Polly.

"I won't."

"Can we do anything for you?" said both.

"Take my things away, and have dinner early."

Both departed to perform these behests, and, leaning back in her
chair, Aunt Kipp reposed.

"I say, what's a bore?" asked Toady from the rug, where he sat rocking
meditatively to and fro, holding on by his shoe-strings.

"It's a kind of a pig, very fierce, and folks are afraid of 'em," said
Aunt Kipp, whose knowledge of Natural History was limited.

"Good for Polly! so you are!" sung out the boy, with the hearty
child's laugh so pleasant to most ears.

"What do you mean, sir?" demanded the old lady, irefully poking at him
with her umbrella.

"Why, Polly said you were a bore," explained Toady, with artless
frankness. "You _are_ fat, you know, and fierce sometimes, and folks
are afraid of you. Good, wasn't it?"

"Very! Mary is a nice, grateful, respectful, loving niece, and I
shan't forget her, she may depend on that," and Aunt Kipp laughed
grimly.

"May she? well, that's jolly now. She was afraid you wouldn't give her
the money; so I'll tell her it's all right;" and innocent Toady nodded
approvingly.

"Oh, she expects some of my money, does she?"

"Course she does; ain't you always saying you'll remember us in your
will, because father was your favorite nephew, and all that? I'll tell
you a secret, if you won't let Polly know I spoke first. You'll find
it out to-night, for you 'd see Van and she were sweethearts in a
minute."

"Sweethearts?" cried Aunt Kipp, turning red in the face.

"Yes'm. Van settled it last week, and Polly's been so happy ever
since. Mother likes it, and _I_ like it, for I'm fond of Van, though
I do call him Baa-baa, because he looks like a sheep. We all like it,
and we 'd all say so, if we were not afraid of you. Mother and Polly,
I mean; of course we men don't mind, but we don't want a fuss. You
won't make one, will you, now?"

Anything more expressive of brotherly good-will, persuasive frankness,
and a placid consciousness of having "fixed it," than Toady's dirty
little face, it would be hard to find. Aunt Kipp eyed him so fiercely
that even before she spoke a dim suspicion that something was wrong
began to dawn on his too-confiding soul.

"_I_ don't like it, and I'll put a stop to it. I won't have any
ridiculous baa-baas in my family. If Mary counts on my money to begin
housekeeping with, she'll find herself mistaken; for not one penny
shall she have, married or single, and you may tell her so."

Toady was so taken aback by this explosion that he let go his
shoe-strings, fell over with a crash, and lay flat, with shovel and
tongs spread upon him like a pall. In rushed Mrs. Snow and Polly, to
find the boy's spirits quite quenched, for once, and Aunt Kipp in a
towering passion. It all came out in one overwhelming flood of words,
and Toady fled from the storm to wander round the house, a prey to
the deepest remorse. The meekness of that boy at dinner-time was so
angelic that Mrs. Snow would have feared speedy translation for him,
if she had not been very angry. Polly's red eyes, and Aunt Kipp's
griffinesque expression of countenance, weighed upon his soul so
heavily, that even roly-poly pudding failed to assuage his trouble,
and, taking his mother into the china-closet, he anxiously inquired
"if it was all up with Polly?"

"I'm afraid so, for aunt vows she will make a new will to-morrow, and
leave every penny to the Charitable Rag-bag Society," sighed Mrs.
Snow.

"I didn't mean to do it, I truly didn't! I thought I'd just 'give her
a hint,' as you say. She looked all right, and laughed when I told her
about being a bore, and I thought she liked it. If she was a man, I'd
thrash her for making Polly cry;" and Toady shook his fist at Aunt
Kipp's umbrella, which was an immense relief to his perturbed spirit.

"Bless the boy! I do believe he would!" cried Mrs. Snow, watching the
little turkey-cock with maternal pride. "You can't do that: so just be
careful and not make any more mischief, dear."

"I'll try, mother; but I'm always getting into scrapes with Aunt Kipp.
She's worse than measles, any day,--such an old aggrawater! Van's
coming this afternoon, won't he make her pleasant again?"

"Oh, dear, no! He will probably make things ten times worse, he's so
bashful and queer. I'm afraid our last chance is gone, deary, and we
must rub along as we have done."

One sniff of emotion burst from Toady, and for a moment he laid his
head in the knife-tray, overcome with disappointment and regret.
But scorning to yield to unmanly tears, he was soon himself again.
Thrusting his beloved jackknife, with three blades and a file, into
Polly's hand, he whispered, brokenly,--

"Keep it forever 'n' ever; I'm awful sorry!" Then, feeling that the
magnitude of this sacrifice atoned for everything, he went to watch
for Van,--the forlorn hope to which he now clung.


II


"Sophy, I'm surprised at your want of judgment. Do you really mean
to let your girl marry this Lamb? Why, the man's a fool!" began Aunt
Kipp, after dinner, by way of opening a pleasant conversation with her
relatives.

"Dear me, aunt! how can you know that, when you never saw him?" mildly
returned Mrs. Snow.

"I've heard of him, and that's enough for me. I've a deal of
penetration in judging character, and I tell you Van Bahr Lamb is a
fool."

The amiable old lady thought this would rouse Polly, against whom her
anger still burned hotly. But Polly also possessed penetration;
and, well knowing that contradiction would delight Aunt Kipp, she
completely took the wind out of her sails, by coolly remarking,--

"I like fools."

"Bless my heart! what does the girl mean?" ejaculated Aunt Kipp.

"Just what I say. If Van is a fool, I prefer simpletons to wiseacres.
I know he is shy and awkward, and does absurd things now and then. But
I also know that he has the kindest heart that ever was; is unselfish,
faithful and loving; that he took good care of his old parents till
they died, and never thought of himself while they needed him. He
loves me dearly; will wait for me a dozen years, if I say so, and work
all his days to make me happy. He's a help and comfort to mother, a
good friend to Toady, and I love and respect and am proud of him,
though you do say he is a fool," cried Polly heartily.

"And you insist on marrying him?" demanded Aunt Kipp.

"Yes, I do."

"Then I wish a carriage immediately," was the somewhat irrelevant
reply.

"Why, aunt, you don't mean to go so soon?" cried Mrs. Snow, with a
reproachful glance at the rebellious Polly.

"Far from it. I wish to see Judge Banks about altering my will," was
the awful answer.

Polly's face fell; her mother gave a despairing sigh; Toady, who had
hovered about the door, uttered a suppressed whistle of dismay; and
Mrs. Kipp looked about her with vengeful satisfaction.

"Get the big carryall and old Bob, so the boy can drive, and all of
you come; the trip will do you good."

It was like Aunt Kipp to invite her poor relations to go and "nip
their own noses off," as she elegantly expressed it. It was a party of
pleasure that just suited her, for all the fun was on her side. She
grew affable at once, was quite pressing in her invitation, regretted
that Sophy was too busy to go, praised Polly's hat; and professed
herself quite satisfied with "that dear boy" for a driver. The "dear
boy" distorted his young countenance frightfully behind her back, but
found a balm for every wound in the delight of being commander of the
expedition.

The big carryall appeared, and, with much creaking and swaying Mrs.
Kipp was got into the back seat, where the big bonnet gloomed like a
thunder-cloud. Polly, in a high state of indignation, which only made
her look ten times prettier, sat in front with Toady, who was a sight
to see as he drove off with his short legs planted against the boot,
his elbows squared, and the big whip scientifically cracking now
and then. Away they went, leaving poor Mrs. Snow to bewail herself
dismally after she had smiled and nodded them out of sight.

"Don't go over any bridges or railroad crossings or by any saw-mills,"
said the old lady, as if the town could be suddenly remodelled to suit
her taste.

"Yes'm," returned Toady, with a crack which would have done honor to a
French postilion.

It was a fine day, and the young people would have enjoyed the ride in
spite of the breakers ahead, if Aunt Kipp hadn't entertained the
girl with a glowing account of the splendors of her own wedding, and
aggravated the boy by frequent pokes and directions in the art of
driving, of which she was of course, profoundly ignorant. Polly
couldn't restrain a tear or two, in thinking of her own poor little
prospects, and Toady was goaded to desperation.

"I'll give her a regular shaking up; it'll make her hold her tongue
and do her good," he said to himself, as a stony hill sloped
temptingly before him.

A sly chuck, and some mysterious manoeuvre with the reins, and Bob
started off at a brisk trot, as if he objected to the old lady as much
as her mischievous little nephew.

"Hold him in! Keep a taut rein! Lord 'a mercy, he's running away!"
shrieked Aunt Kipp, or tried to shriek, for the bouncing and bumping
jerked the words out of her mouth with ludicrous incoherency.

"I am holding him, but he _will_ go," said Toady, with a wicked
triumph in his eye as he glanced back at Polly.

The next minute the words were quite true; for, as he spoke, two or
three distracted hens flew squalling over the wall and scattered
about, under, over, and before the horse, as only distracted hens
could do. It was too much for Bob's nerves; and, taking matters into
his own hands, or feet, rather, he broke into a run, and rattled the
old lady over the stones with a velocity which left her speechless.

Polly laughed, and Toady chuckled, as they caught glimpses of the
awful bonnet vibrating wildly in the background, and felt the frantic
clutchings of the old lady's hands. But both grew sober as a shrill
car-whistle sounded not far off; and Bob, as if possessed by an
evil spirit, turned suddenly into the road that led to the railroad
crossing.

"That will do, Toady; now pull up, for we can't get over in time,"
said Polly, glancing anxiously toward the rapidly approaching puffs of
white smoke.

"I can't, Polly,--I really can't," cried the boy, tugging with all his
might, and beginning to look scared.

Polly lent her aid; but Bob scarcely seemed to feel it, for he had
been a racer once, and when his blood was up he was hard to handle.
His own good sense might have checked him, if Aunt Kipp hadn't
unfortunately recovered her voice at this crisis, and uttered a
succession of the shrillest screams that ever saluted mortal ears.
With a snort and a bound Bob dashed straight on toward the crossing,
as the train appeared round the bend.

"Let me out! Let me out! Jump! Jump!" shrieked Aunt Kipp, thrusting
her head out of the window, while she fumbled madly for the
door-handle.

"O Toady, save us! save us!" gasped Polly, losing her presence of
mind, and dropping the reins to cling to her brother, with a woman's
instinctive faith in the stronger sex.

But Toady held on manfully, though his arms were nearly pulled off,
for "Never say die," was his motto, and the plucky little lad wouldn't
show fear before the women.

"Don't howl; we'll do it! Hi, Bob!" and with a savage slash of the
whip, an exciting cry, a terrible reeling and rattling, they _did_ do
it; for Bob cleared the track at a breakneck pace, just in time for
the train to sweep swiftly by behind them.

Aunt Kipp dropped in a heap, Polly looked up at her brother, with a
look which he never forgot; and Toady tried to say, stoutly, "It's all
right!" with lips that were white and dry in spite of himself.

"We shall smash up at the bridge," he muttered, as they tore through
the town, where every one obligingly shouted, waved their hats, and
danced about on the sidewalks, doing nothing but add to Bob's fright
and the party's danger. But Toady was wrong,--they did not smash up at
the bridge; for, before they reached the perilous spot, one man had
the sense to fly straight at the horse's head and hold on till the
momentary check enabled others to lend a hand.

The instant they were safe, Polly, like a regular heroine, threw
herself into the arms of her dishevelled preserver, who of course was
Van, and would have refreshed herself with hysterics if the sight of
Toady hadn't steadied her. The boy sat as stiff and rigid as a wooden
figure till they took the reins from him; then all the strength seemed
to go out of him, and he leaned against his sister, as white and
trembling as she, whispering with an irrepressible sob,--

"O Polly, wasn't it horrid? Tell mother I stood by you like a man. Do
tell her that!"

If any one had had time or heart to laugh, they certainly would have
done it when, after much groping, heaving, and hoisting. Mrs. Kipp
was extricated and restored to consciousness; for a more ludicrously
deplorable spectacle was seldom seen. Quite unhurt, though much
shaken, the old lady insisted on believing herself to be dying, and
kept the town in a ferment till three doctors had pronounced her
perfectly well able to go home. Then the perversity of her nature
induced her to comply, that she might have the satisfaction of dying
on the way, and proving herself in the right.

Unfortunately she did not expire, but, having safely arrived, went to
bed in high dudgeon, and led Polly and her mother a sad life of it for
two weary days. Having heard of Toady's gallant behavior, she solemnly
ordered him up to receive her blessing. But the sight of Aunt Kipp's
rubicund visage, surrounded by the stiff frills of an immense
nightcap, caused the irreverent boy to explode with laughter in his
handkerchief, and to be hustled away by his mother before Aunt Kipp
discovered the true cause of his convulsed appearance.

"Ah! poor dear, his feelings are too much for him. He sees my doom
in my face, and is overcome by what you refuse to believe. I shan't
forget that boy's devotion. Now leave me to the meditations befitting
these solemn hours."

Mrs. Snow retired, and Aunt Kipp tried to sleep; but the murmur of
voices, and the sound of stifled laughter in the next room disturbed
her repose.

"They are rejoicing over my approaching end, knowing that I haven't
changed my will. Mercenary creatures, don't exult too soon! there's
time yet," she muttered; and presently, unable to control her
curiosity, she crept out of bed to listen and peep through the
keyhole.

Van Bahr Lamb did look rather like a sheep. He had a blond curly
head, a long face, pale, mild eyes, a plaintive voice, and a general
expression of innocent timidity strongly suggestive of animated
mutton. But Baa-baa was a "trump," as Toady emphatically declared, and
though every one laughed at him, every one liked him, and that is
more than can be said of many saints and sages. He adored Polly, was
dutifully kind to her mother, and had stood by T. Snow, Jr., in many
an hour of tribulation with fraternal fidelity. Though he had long
blushed, sighed, and cast sheep's eyes at the idol of his affections,
only till lately had he dared to bleat forth his passion. Polly loved
him because she couldn't help it; but she was proud, and wouldn't
marry till Aunt Kipp's money was hers, or at least a sure prospect
of it; and now even the prospect of a prospect was destroyed by
that irrepressible Toady. They were talking of this as the old lady
suspected, and of course the following conversation afforded her
intense satisfaction.

"It's a shame to torment us as she does, knowing how poor we are and
how happy a little of her money would make us. I'm tired of being a
slave to a cruel old woman just because she's rich. If it was not for
mother, I declare I'd wash my hands of her entirely, and do the best I
could for myself."

"Hooray for Polly! I always said let her money go and be jolly without
it," cried Toady, who, in his character of wounded hero, reposed with
a lordly air on the sofa, enjoying the fragrance of the opodeldoc with
which his strained wrists were bandaged.

"It's on your account, children, that I bear with aunt's temper as I
do. I don't want anything for myself, but I really think she owes it
to your dear father, who was devoted to her while he lived, to provide
for his children when he couldn't;" after which remarkably spirited
speech for her, Mrs. Snow dropped a tear, and stitched away on a small
trouser-leg which was suffering from a complicated compound fracture.

"Don't you worry about me, mother; I'll take care of myself and you
too," remarked Toady, with the cheery belief in impossibilities which
makes youth so charming.

"Now, Van, tell us what to do, for things have come to such a pass
that we must either break away altogether or be galley-slaves as long
as Aunt Kipp lives," said Polly, who was a good deal excited about the
matter.

"Well, really, my dear, I don't know," hesitated Van, who did know
what _he_ wanted, but thought it might be selfish to urge it. "Have
you tried to soften your aunt's heart?" he asked, after a moment's
meditation.

"Good gracious, Van, she hasn't got any," cried Polly, who firmly
believed it.

"It's hossified," thoughtfully remarked Toady, quite unconscious of
any approach to a joke till every one giggled.

"You've had hossification enough for one while, my lad," laughed Van.
"Well, Polly, if the old lady has no heart you'd better let her go,
for people without hearts are not worth much."

"That's a beautiful remark, Van, and a wise one. I just wish she could
hear you make it, for she called you a fool," said Polly, irefully.

"Did she? Well, I don't mind, I'm used to it," returned Van, placidly;
and so he was, for Polly called him a goose every day of her life, and
he enjoyed it immensely.

"Then you think, dear, if we stopped worrying about aunt and her
money, and worked instead of waiting, that we shouldn't be any poorer
and might be a great deal happier than we are now?" asked Polly,
making a pretty little tableau as she put her hand through Van's arm
and looked up at him with as much love, respect, and reliance as if he
had been six feet tall, with the face of an Apollo and the manners of
a Chesterfield.

"Yes, my dear, I do, for it has troubled me a good deal to see you so
badgered by that very uncomfortable old lady. Independence is a very
nice thing, and poverty isn't half as bad as this sort of slavery. But
you are not going to be poor, nor worry about anything. We'll just be
married and take mother and Toady home and be as jolly as grigs, and
never think of Mrs. K. again,--unless she loses her fortune, or
gets sick, or comes to grief in any way. We'd lend her a hand then,
wouldn't we, Polly?" and Van's mild face was pleasant to behold as he
made the kindly proposition.

"Well, we'd think of it," said Polly, trying not to relent, but
feeling that she was going very fast.

"Let's do it!" cried Toady, fired with the thought of privy conspiracy
and rebellion. "Mother would be so comfortable with Polly, and
I'd help Van in the store, when I've learned that confounded
multiplication table," he added with a groan; "and if Aunt Kipp comes
a visiting, we'll just say 'Not at home,' and let her trot off again."

"It sounds very nice, but aunt will be dreadfully offended and I don't
wish to be ungrateful," said Mrs. Snow, brightening visibly.

"There's no ingratitude about it," cried Van. "She might have done
everything to make you love, and respect, and admire her, and been a
happy, useful, motherly, old soul; but she didn't choose to, and now
she must take the consequences. No one cares for her, because she
cares for nobody; her money's the plague of her life, and not a single
heart will ache when she dies."

"Poor Aunt Kipp!" said Polly, softly.

Mrs. Snow echoed the words, and for a moment all thought pitifully of
the woman whose life had given so little happiness, whose age had won
so little reverence, and whose death would cause so little regret.
Even Toady had a kind thought for her, as he broke the silence, saying
soberly,--

"You'd better put tails on my jackets, mother; then the next time we
get run away with, Aunt Kipp will have something to hold on by."

It was impossible to help laughing at the recollection of the old lady
clutching at the boy till he had hardly a button left, and at the
paternal air with which he now proposed a much-desired change of
costume, as if intent on Aunt Kipp's future accommodation.

Under cover of the laugh, the old lady stole back to bed, wide awake,
and with subjects enough to meditate upon now. The shaking up had
certainly done her good, for somehow the few virtues she possessed
came to the surface, and the mental shower-bath just received had
produced a salutary change. Polly wouldn't have doubted her aunt's
possession of a heart, if she could have known the pain and loneliness
that made it ache, as the old woman crept away; and Toady wouldn't
have laughed if he had seen the tears on the face, between the big
frills, as Aunt Kipp laid it on the pillow, muttering, drearily,--

"I might have been a happy, useful woman, but I didn't choose to, and
now it's too late."

It _was_ too late to be all she might have been, for the work of
seventy selfish years couldn't be undone in a minute. But with regret,
rose the sincere wish to earn a little love before the end came, and
the old perversity gave a relish to the reformation, for even while
she resolved to do the just and generous thing, she said to herself,--

"They say I've got no heart; I'll show 'em that I have: they don't
want my money; I'll _make_ 'em take it: they turn their backs on me;
I'll just render myself so useful and agreeable that they can't do
without me."


III


Aunt Kipp sat bolt upright in the parlor, hemming a small
handkerchief, adorned with a red ship, surrounded by a border of
green monkeys. Toady suspected that this elegant article of dress was
intended for him, and yearned to possess it; so, taking advantage of
his mother's and Polly's absence, he strolled into the room, and,
seating himself on a high, hard chair, folded his hands, crossed his
legs, and asked for a story with the thirsting-for-knowledge air which
little boys wear in the moral story-books.

Now Aunt Kipp had one soft place in her heart, though it _was_
partially ossified, as she very truly declared, and Toady was
enshrined therein. She thought there never was such a child, and loved
him as she had done his father before him, though the rack wouldn't
have forced her to confess it. She scolded, snubbed, and predicted
he'd come to a bad end in public; but she forgave his naughtiest
pranks, always brought him something when she came, and privately
intended to make his future comfortable with half of her fortune.
There was a dash and daring, a generosity and integrity, about the
little fellow, that charmed her. Sophy was weak and low-spirited,
Polly pretty and headstrong, and Aunt Kipp didn't think much of either
of them; but Toady defied, distracted, and delighted her, and to Toady
she clung, as the one sunshiny thing in her sour, selfish old age.

When he made his demure request, she looked at him, and her eyes began
to twinkle, for the child's purpose was plainly seen in the loving
glances cast upon the pictorial pocket-handkerchief.

"A story? Yes, I'll tell you one about a little boy who had a kind
old--ahem!--grandma. She was rich, and hadn't made up her mind who she'd
leave her money to. She was fond of the boy,--a deal fonder than he
deserved,--for he was as mischievous a monkey as any that ever lived
in a tree, with a curly tail. He put pepper in her snuff-box,"--here
Toady turned scarlett,--"he cut up her bestt frisette to make a mane
for his rocking-horse,"--Toady opened his mouth impulsively, but shut
it again without betraying himself--"he repeated rude things to her,
and called her 'an old aggrewater,'"--here Toady wriggled in his
chair, and gave a little gasp.

"If you are tired I won't go on," observed Aunt Kipp, mildly.

"I'm not tired, 'm; it's a very interesting story," replied Toady,
with a gravity that nearly upset the old lady.

"Well, in spite of all this, that kind, good, forgiving grandma left
that bad boy twenty thousand dollars when she died. What do you think
of that?" asked Aunt Kipp, pausing suddenly with her sharp eye on him.

"I--I think she was a regular dear," cried Toady, holding on to the
chair with both hands, as if that climax rather took him off his legs.

"And what did the boy do about it?" continued Aunt Kipp, curiously.

"He bought a velocipede, and gave his sister half, and paid his
mother's rent, and put a splendid marble cherakin over the old lady,
and had a jolly good time, and--"

"What in the world is a cherakin?" laughed Aunt Kipp, as Toady paused
for breath.

"Why, don't you know? It's a angel crying, or pointing up, or flapping
his wings. They have them over graves; and I'll give you the biggest
one I can find when you die. But I'm not in a _very_ great hurry to
have you."

"Thankee, dear; I'm in no hurry, myself. But, Toady, the boy did wrong
in giving his sister half; she didn't deserve _any_; and the grandma
left word she wasn't to have a penny of it."

"Really?" cried the boy, with a troubled face.

"Yes, really. If he gave her any he lost it all; the old lady said so.
Now what do you think?" asked Aunt Kipp, who found it impossible to
pardon Polly,--perhaps because she was young, and pretty, and much
beloved.

Toady's eyes kindled, and his red cheeks grew redder still, as he
cried out defiantly,--

"I think she was a selfish pig,--don't you?"

"No, I don't, sir; and I'm sure that little boy wasn't such a fool as
to lose the money. He minded his grandma's wishes, and kept it all."

"No, he didn't," roared Toady, tumbling off his chair in great
excitement. "He just threw it out a winder, and smashed the old
cherakin all to bits."

Aunt Kipp dropped her work with a shrill squeak, for she thought the
boy was dangerous, as he stood before her, sparring away at nothing as
the only vent for his indignation.

"It isn't an interesting story," he cried; "and I won't hear any more;
and I won't have your money if I mayn't go halves with Polly; and I'll
work to earn more than that, and we'll all be jolly together, and you
may give your twenty thousand to the old rag-bags, and so I tell you,
Aunt Kipp."

"Why, Toady, my boy, what's the matter?" cried a mild voice at the
door, as young Lamb came trotting up to the rescue.

"Never you mind, Baa-baa; I shan't do it; and it's a mean shame Polly
can't have half; then she could marry you and be so happy," blubbered
Toady, running to try to hide his tears of disappointment in the
coat-skirts of his friend.

"Mr. Lamb, I suppose you _are_ that misguided young man?" said Aunt
Kipp, as if it was a personal insult to herself.

"Van Bahr Lamb, ma'am, if you please. Yes, thank you," murmured
Baa-Baa, bowing, blushing, and rumpling his curly fleece in bashful
trepidation.

"Don't thank me," cried the old lady. "I'm not going to give you
anything,--far from it. I object to you altogether. What business have
you to come courting my niece?"

"Because I love her, ma'am," returned Van, with unexpected spirit.

"No, you don't; you want her money, or rather my money. She depends
on it; but you'll both be disappointed, for she won't have a penny of
it," cried Aunt Kipp, who, in spite of her good resolutions, found it
impossible to be amiable all at once.

"I'm glad of it!" burst out Van, indignant at her accusation. "I
didn't want Polly for the money; I always doubted if she got it; and I
never wished her to make herself a slave to anybody. I've got enough
for all, if we're careful; and when my share of the Van Bahr property
comes, we shall live in clover."

"What's that? What property are you talking of?" demanded Aunt Kipp,
pricking up her ears.

"The great Van Bahr estate, ma'am. There has been a long lawsuit about
it, but it's nearly settled, and there isn't much doubt that we shall
get it. I am the last of our branch, and my share will be a large
one."

"Oh, indeed! I wish you joy," said Aunt Kipp, with sudden affability;
for she adored wealth, like a few other persons in the world. "But
suppose you don't get it, how then?"

"Then I shall try to be contented with my salary of two thousand, and
make Polly as happy as I can. Money doesn't _always_ make people happy
or agreeable, I find." And Van looked at Aunt Kipp in a way that would
have made her hair stand erect if she had possessed any. She stared
at him a moment, then, obeying one of the odd whims that made an
irascible weathercock of her, she said, abruptly,--

"If you had capital should you go into business for yourself, Mr.
Lambkin?"

"Yes, ma'am, at once," replied Van, promptly.

"Suppose you lost the Van Bahr money, and some one offered you a tidy
little sum to start with, would you take it?"

"It would depend upon who made the offer, ma'am," said Van, looking
more like a sheep than ever, as he stood staring in blank surprise.

"Suppose it was me, wouldn't you take it?" asked Aunt Kipp, blandly,
for the new fancy pleased her.

"No, thank you, ma'am," said Van, decidedly.

"And why not, pray?" cried the old lady, with a shrillness that made
him jump, and Toady back to the door precipitately.

"Because, if you'll excuse my speaking plainly, I think you owe
anything you may have to spare to your niece, Mrs. Snow;" and, having
freed his mind, Van joined Toady, ready to fly if necessary.

"You're an idiot, sir," began Aunt Kipp, in a rage again.

"Thank you, ma'am." And Van actually laughed and bowed in return for
the compliment.

"Hold your tongue, sir," snapped the old lady. "You're a fool and
Sophy is another. She's no strength of mind, no sense about anything;
and would make ducks and drakes of my money in less than no time if I
gave it to her, as I've thought of doing."

"Mrs. Kipp, you forget who you are speaking to. Mrs. Snow's sons love
and respect her if you don't, and they won't hear anything untrue
or unkind said of a good woman, a devoted mother, and an almost
friendless widow."

Van wasn't a dignified man at all, but as he said that with a sudden
flash of his mild eyes, there was something in his face and manner
that daunted Aunt Kipp more than the small fist belligerently shaken
at her from behind the sofa. The poor old soul was cross, and worried,
and ashamed of herself, and being as feeble-minded as Sophy in many
respects, she suddenly burst into tears, and, covering her face with
the gay handkerchief, cried as if bent on floating the red ship in a
sea of salt water without delay.

"I'm a poor, lonely, abused old woman," she moaned, with a green
monkey at each eye. "No one loves me, or minds me, or thanks me when
I want to help 'em. My money's only a worryment and a burden, and I
don't know what to do with it, for people I don't want to leave it to
ought to have it, and people I do like won't take it. Oh, deary me,
what _shall_ I do! what shall I do!"

"Shall I tell you, ma'am?" asked Van, gently, for, though she was a
very provoking old lady, he pitied and wished to help her.

A nod and a gurgle seemed to give consent, and, boldly advancing, Van
said, with blush and a stammer, but a very hearty voice,--

"I think, ma'am, if you'd do the right thing with your money you'd be
at ease and find it saved a deal of worry all round. Give it to Mrs.
Snow; she deserves it, poor lady, for she's had a hard time, and done
her duty faithfully. Don't wait till you are--that is, till you--well,
till you in point of fact die, ma'am. Give it now, and enjoy the
happiness it will make. Give it kindly, let them see you're glad to
do it, and I am sure you'll find them grateful; I'm sure you won't be
lonely any more, or feel that you are not loved and thanked. Try it,
ma'am, just try it," cried Van, getting excited by the picture he
drew. "And I give you my word I'll do my best to respect and love you
like a son, ma'am."

He knew that he was promising a great deal, but for Polly's sake he
felt that he could make even that Herculean effort. Aunt Kipp was
surprised and touched; but the contrary old lady couldn't make up her
mind to yield so soon, and wouldn't have done it if Toady hadn't taken
her by storm. Having a truly masculine horror of tears, a very tender
heart under his tailless jacket, and being much "tumbled up and down
in his own mind" by the events of the week, the poor little lad felt
nerved to attempt any novel enterprise, even that of voluntarily
embracing Aunt Kipp. First a grimy little hand came on her shoulder,
as she sat sniffing behind the handkerchief; then, peeping out, she
saw an apple-cheeked face very near her own, with eyes full of pity,
penitence, and affection; and then she heard a choky little voice say
earnestly,--

"Don't cry, aunty; I'm sorry I was rude. Please be good to Mother and
Polly, and I'll love and take care of you, and stand by you all my
life. Yes, I'll--I'll _kiss_ you, I will, by George!" And with one
promiscuous plunge the Spartan boy cast himself into her arms.

That finished Aunt Kipp; she hugged him dose, and cried out with a
salute that went off like a pistol-shot,--

"Oh, my dear, my dear! this is better than a dozen cherakins!"

When Toady emerged, somewhat flushed and tumbled, Mrs. Snow, Polly,
and Van were looking on with faces full of wonder, doubt, and
satisfaction. To be an object of interest was agreeable to Aunt
Kipp; and, as her old heart was really softened, she met them with a
gracious smile, and extended the olive-branch generally.

"Sophy, I shall give my money to _you_ at once and entirely, only
asking that you'll let me stay with you when Polly's gone. I'll do my
best to be agreeable, and you'll bear with me because I'm a cranky,
solitary old woman, and I loved your husband."

Mrs. Snow hugged her on the spot, and gushed, of course, murmuring
thanks, welcomes, and promises in one grateful burst.

"Polly, I forgive you; I consent to your marriage, and will provide
your wedding finery. Mr. Lamb, you are not a fool, but a very
excellent young man. I thank you for saving my life, and I wish you
well with all my heart. You needn't say anything. I'm far from strong,
and all this agitation is shortening my life."

Polly and Van shook her hand heartily, and beamed upon each other like
a pair of infatuated turtle-doves with good prospects.

"Toady, you are as near an angel as a boy can be. Put a name to
whatever you most wish for in the world, and it's yours," said Aunt
Kipp, dramatically waving the rest away.

With his short legs wide apart, his hands behind him, and his rosy
face as round and radiant as a rising sun, Toady stood before the fire
surveying the scene with the air of a man who has successfully carried
through a difficult and dangerous undertaking, and wasn't proud. His
face brightened, then fell, as he heaved a sigh, and answered, with a
shake of his curly head,--

"You can't give me what I want most. There are three things, and I've
got to wait for them all."

"Gracious me, what are they?" cried the old lady, good-naturedly, for
she felt better already.

"A mustache, a beaver, _and_ a sweetheart," answered Toady, with his
eyes fixed wistfully on Baa-baa, who possessed all these blessings,
and was particularly enjoying the latter at that moment.

How Aunt Kipp did laugh at this early budding of romance in her
pet! And all the rest joined her, for Toady's sentimental air was
irresistible.

"You precocious chick! I dare say you will have them all before we
know where we are. Never mind, deary; you shall have my little watch,
and the silver-headed cane with a _boar's_ head on it," answered the
old lady, in high good-humor. "You needn't blush, dear; I don't bear
malice; so let's forget and forgive. I shall settle things to-morrow,
and have a free mind. You are welcome to my money, and I hope I shall
live to see you all enjoy it."

So she did; for she lived to see Sophy plump, cheery, and care-free;
Polly surrounded by a flock of Lambkins; Van in possession of a
generous slice of the Van Bahr fortune; Toady revelling in the objects
of his desire; and, best of all, she lived to find that it is never
too late to make oneself useful, happy, and beloved.




PSYCHE'S ART

"Handsome is that handsome does."


I


Once upon a time there raged in a certain city one of those
fashionable epidemics which occasionally attack our youthful
population. It wasn't the music mania, nor gymnastic convulsions, nor
that wide-spread malady, croquet. Neither was it one of the new dances
which, like a tarantula-bite, set every one a twirling, nor stage
madness, nor yet that American lecturing influenza which yearly sweeps
over the land. No, it was a new disease called the Art fever, and it
attacked the young women of the community with great violence.

Nothing but time could cure it, and it ran its course to the dismay,
amusement, or edification of the beholders, for its victims did all
manner of queer things in their delirium. They begged potteries
for clay, drove Italian plaster-corkers out of their wits with
unexecutable orders got neuralgia and rheumatism sketching perched on
fences and trees like artistic hens, and caused a rise in the price of
bread, paper, and charcoal, by their ardor in crayoning. They covered
canvas with the expedition of scene-painters, had classes, lectures,
receptions, and exhibitions, made models of each other, and rendered
their walls hideous with bad likenesses of all their friends. Their
conversation ceased to be intelligible to the uninitiated, and they
prattled prettily of "chiaro oscuro, French sauce, refraction of the
angle of the eye, seventh spinus process, depth and juiciness of
color, tender touch, and a good tone." Even in dress the artistic
disorder was visible; some cast aside crinoline altogether, and
stalked about with a severe simplicity of outline worthy of Flaxman.
Others flushed themselves with scarlet, that no landscape which they
adorned should be without some touch of Turner's favorite tint. Some
were _blue_ in every sense of the word, and the heads of all were
adorned with classic braids, curls tied Hebe-wise, or hair dressed a
la hurricane.

It was found impossible to keep them safe at home, and, as the fever
grew, these harmless maniacs invaded the sacred retreats where artists
of the other sex did congregate, startling those anchorites with
visions of large-eyed damsels bearing portfolios in hands delicately
begrimed with crayon, chalk, and clay, gliding through the corridors
hitherto haunted only by shabby paletots, shadowy hats, and cigar
smoke. This irruption was borne with manly fortitude, not to say
cheerfulness, for studio doors stood hospitably open as the fair
invaders passed, and studies from life were generously offered them in
glimpses of picturesque gentlemen posed before easels, brooding over
master-pieces in "a divine despair," or attitudinizing upon couches as
if exhausted by the soarings of genius.

An atmosphere of romance began to pervade the old buildings when the
girls came, and nature and art took turns. There were peepings and
whisperings, much stifled laughter and whisking in and out; not to
mention the accidental rencontres, small services, and eye telegrams,
which somewhat lightened the severe studies of all parties.

Half a dozen young victims of this malady met daily in one of the
cells of a great art beehive called "Raphael's Rooms," and devoted
their shining hours to modelling fancy heads, gossiping the while; for
the poor things found the road to fame rather dull and dusty without
such verbal sprinklings.

"Psyche Dean, you've had an adventure! I see it in your face; so tell
it at once, for we are stupid as owls here to-day," cried one of the
sisterhood, as a bright-eyed girl entered with some precipitation.

"I dropped my portfolio, and a man picked it up, that's all." replied
Psyche, hurrying on her gray linen pinafore.

"That won't do; I know something interesting happened, for you've been
blushing, and you look brisker than usual this morning," said the
first speaker, polishing off the massive nose of her Homer.

"It wasn't anything," began Psyche a little reluctantly. "I was coming
up in a hurry when I ran against a man coming down in a hurry. My
portfolio slipped, and my papers went flying all about the landing. Of
course we both laughed and begged pardon, and I began to pick them
up, but he wouldn't let me; so I held the book while he collected the
sketches. I saw him glance at them as he did so, and that made me
blush, for they are wretched things, you know."

"Not a bit of it; they are capital, and you are a regular genius, as
we all agree," cut in the Homeric Miss Cutter.

"Never tell people they are geniuses unless you wish to spoil them,"
returned Psyche severely. "Well, when the portfolio was put to rights
I was going on, but he fell to picking up a little bunch of violets
I had dropped; you know I always wear a posy into town to give me
inspiration. I didn't care for the dusty flowers, and told him so, and
hurried away before any one came. At the top of the stairs I peeped
over the railing, and there he was, gathering up every one of those
half-dead violets as carefully as if they had been tea-roses."

"Psyche Dean, you have met your fate this day!" exclaimed a third
damsel, with straw-colored tresses, and a good deal of weedy shrubbery
in her hat, which gave an Ophelia-like expression to her sentimental
countenance.

Psyche frowned and shook her head, as if half sorry she had told her
little story.

"Was he handsome?" asked Miss Larkins, the believer in fate.

"I didn't particularly observe."

"It was the red-headed man, whom we call Titian: he's always on the
stairs."

"No, it wasn't; his hair was brown and curly," cried Psyche,
innocently falling into the trap.

"Like Peerybingle's baby when its cap was taken off," quoted Miss
Dickenson, who pined to drop the last two letters of her name.

"Was it Murillo, the black-eyed one?" asked the fair Cutter, for the
girls had a name for all the attitudinizers and promenaders whom they
oftenest met.

"No, he had gray eyes, and very fine ones they were too," answered
Psyche, adding, as if to herself, "he looked as I imagine Michael
Angelo might have looked when young."

"Had he a broken nose, like the great Mike?" asked an irreverent
damsel.

"If he had, no one would mind it, for his head is splendid; he took
his hat off, so I had a fine view. He isn't handsome, but he'll _do_
something," said Psyche, prophetically, as she recalled the strong,
ambitious face which she had often observed, but never mentioned
before.

"Well, dear, considering that you didn't 'particularly look' at the
man, you've given us a very good idea of his appearance. We'll call
him Michael Angelo, and he shall be your idol. I prefer stout old
Rembrandt myself, and Larkie adores that dandified Raphael," said the
lively Cutter, slapping away at Homer's bald pate energetically, as
she spoke.

"Raphael is a dear, but Rubens is more to my taste now," returned Miss
Larkins. "He was in the hall yesterday talking with Sir Joshua, who
had his inevitable umbrella, like a true Englishman. Just as I came
up, the umbrella fell right before me. I started back; Sir Joshua
laughed, but Rubens said, 'Deuce take it!' and caught up the umbrella,
giving me a never-to-be-forgotten look. It was perfectly thrilling."

"Which,--the umbrella, the speech, or the look?" asked Psyche, who was
not sentimental.

"Ah, you have no soul for art in nature, and nature in art," sighed
the amber-tressed Larkins. "I have, for I feed upon a glance, a tint,
a curve, with exquisite delight. Rubens is adorable (_as a study_);
that lustrous eye, that night of hair, that sumptuous cheek, are
perfect. He only needs a cloak, lace collar, and slouching hat to be
the genuine thing."

"This isn't the genuine thing by any means. What _does_ it need?" said
Psyche, looking with a despondent air at the head on her stand.

Many would have pronounced it a clever thing; the nose was strictly
Greek, the chin curved upward gracefully, the mouth was sweetly
haughty, the brow classically smooth and low, and the breezy hair well
done. But something was wanting; Psyche felt that, and could have
taken her Venus by the dimpled shoulders, and given her a hearty
shake, if that would have put strength and spirit into the lifeless
face.

"Now _I_ am perfectly satisfied with my Apollo, though you all insist
that it is the image of Theodore Smythe. He says so himself, and
assures me it will make a sensation when we exhibit," remarked Miss
Larkins, complacently caressing the ambrosial locks of her Smythified
Phebus.

"What shall you do if it does not?" asked Miss Cutter, with elegance.

"I shall feel that I have mistaken my sphere, shall drop my tools,
veil my bust, and cast myself into the arms of Nature, since Art
rejects me;" replied Miss Larkins, with a tragic gesture and an
expression which strongly suggested that in her eyes nature meant
Theodore.

"She must have capacious arms if she is to receive all Art's rejected
admirers. Shall I be one of them?"

Psyche put the question to herself as she turned to work, but somehow
ambitious aspirations were not in a flourishing condition that
morning; her heart was not in tune, and head and hands sympathized.
Nothing went well, for certain neglected home-duties had dogged
her into town, and now worried her more than dust, or heat, or the
ceaseless clatter of tongues. Tom, Dick, and Harry's unmended hose
persisted in dancing a spectral jig before her mental eye, mother's
querulous complaints spoilt the song she hummed to cheer herself, and
little May's wistful face put the goddess of beauty entirely out of
countenance.

"It's no use; I can't work till the clay is wet again. Where is
Giovanni?" she asked, throwing down her tools with a petulant gesture
and a dejected air.

"He is probably playing truant in the empty upper rooms, as usual. I
can't wait for him any longer, so I'm doing his work myself," answered
Miss Dickenson, who was tenderly winding a wet bandage round her
Juno's face, one side of which was so much plumper than the other that
it looked as if the Queen of Olympus was being hydropathically treated
for a severe fit of ague.

"I'll go and find the little scamp; a run will do me good; so will a
breath of air and a view of the park from the upper windows."

Doffing her apron, Psyche strolled away up an unfrequented staircase
to the empty apartments, which seemed to be too high even for the
lovers of High Art. On the western side they were shady and cool, and,
leaning from one of the windows, Psyche watched the feathery tree-tops
ruffled by the balmy wind, that brought spring odors from the hills,
lying green and sunny far away. Silence and solitude were such
pleasant companions that the girl forgot herself, till a shrill
whistle disturbed her day-dreams, and reminded her what she came for.
Following the sound she found the little Italian errand-boy busily
uncovering a clay model which stood in the middle of a scantily
furnished room near by.

"He is not here; come and look; it is greatly beautiful," cried
Giovanni, beckoning with an air of importance.

Psyche did look and speedily forgot both her errand and herself. It
was the figure of a man, standing erect, and looking straight
before him with a wonderfully lifelike expression. It was neither a
mythological nor a historical character, Psyche thought, and was glad
of it, being tired to death of gods and heroes. She soon ceased to
wonder what it was, feeling only the indescribable charm of something
higher than beauty. Small as her knowledge was, she could see and
enjoy the power visible in every part of it; the accurate anatomy of
the vigorous limbs, the grace of the pose, the strength and spirit in
the countenance, clay though it was. A majestic figure, but the spell
lay in the face, which, while it suggested the divine, was full of
human truth and tenderness, for pain and passion seemed to have passed
over it, and a humility half pathetic, a courage half heroic seemed to
have been born from some great loss or woe.

How long she stood there Psyche did not know. Giovanni went away
unseen, to fill his water-pail, and in the silence she just stood and
looked. Her eyes kindled, her color rose, despondency and discontent
vanished, and her soul was in her face, for she loved beauty
passionately, and all that was best and truest in her did honor to the
genius of the unknown worker.

"If I could do a thing like that, I'd die happy!" she exclaimed
impetuously, as a feeling of despair came over her at the thought of
her own poor attempts.

"Who did it, Giovanni?" she asked, still looking up at the grand face
with unsatisfied eyes.

"Paul Gage."

It was not the boy's voice, and, with a start, Psyche turned to see
her Michael Angelo, standing in the doorway, attentively observing
her. Being too full of artless admiration to think of herself just
yet, she neither blushed nor apologized, but looked straight at him,
saying heartily,--

"You have done a wonderful piece of work, and I envy you more than I
can tell!"

The enthusiasm in her face, the frankness of her manner, seemed to
please him, for there was no affectation about either. He gave her a
keen, kind glance out of the "fine gray eyes," a little bow, and a
grateful smile, saying quietly,--"Then my Adam is not a failure in
spite of his fall?"

Psyche turned from the sculptor to his model with increased admiration
in her face, and earnestness in her voice, as she exclaimed
delighted,--

"Adam! I might have known it was he. O sir, you have indeed succeeded,
for you have given that figure the power and pathos of the first man
who sinned and suffered, and began again."

"Then I am satisfied." That was all he said, but the look he gave his
work was a very eloquent one, for it betrayed that he had paid the
price of success in patience and privation, labor and hope.

"What can one do to learn your secret?" asked the girl wistfully, for
there was nothing in the man's manner to disturb her self-forgetful
mood, but much to foster it, because to the solitary worker this
confiding guest was as welcome as the doves who often hopped in at his
window.

"Work and wait, and meantime feed heart, soul, and imagination with
the best food one can get," he answered slowly, finding it impossible
to give a receipt for genius.

"I can work and wait a long time to gain my end; but I don't know
where to find the food you speak of?" she answered, looking at him
like a hungry child.

"I wish I could tell you, but each needs different fare, and each must
look for it in different places."

The kindly tone and the sympathizing look, as well as the lines in his
forehead, and a few gray hairs among the brown, gave Psyche courage to
say more.

"I love beauty so much that I not only want to possess it myself,
but to gain the power of seeing it in all things, and the art of
reproducing it with truth. I have tried very hard to do it, but
something is wanting; and in spite of my intense desire I never get
on."

As she spoke the girl's eyes filled and fell in spite of herself, and
turning a little with sudden shamefacedness she saw, lying on the
table beside her among other scraps in manuscript and print, the
well-known lines,--

  "I slept, and dreamed that life was beauty;
  I woke, and found that life was duty.
  Was thy dream then a shadowy lie?
  Toil on, sad heart, courageously,
  And thou shall find thy dream to be
  A noonday light and truth to thee."

She knew them at a glance, had read them many times, but now they came
home to her with sudden force, and, seeing that his eye had followed
hers, she said in her impulsive fashion.--

"Is doing one's duty a good way to feed heart, soul, and imagination?"

As if he had caught a glimpse of what was going on in her mind, Paul
answered emphatically,--

"Excellent; for if one is good, one is happy, and if happy, one can
work well. Moulding character is the highest sort of sculpture, and
all of us should learn that art before we touch clay or marble."

He spoke with the energy of a man who believed what he said, and did
his best to be worthy of the rich gift bestowed upon him. The sight
of her violets in a glass of water, and Giovanni staring at her with
round eyes, suddenly recalled Psyche to a sense of the proprieties
which she had been innocently outraging for the last ten minutes. A
sort of panic seized her; she blushed deeply, retreated precipitately
to the door, and vanished, murmuring thanks and apologies as she went.

"Did you find him? I thought you had forgotten," said Miss Dickenson,
now hard at work.

"Yes, I found him. No, I shall not forget," returned Psyche, thinking
of Gage, not Giovanni.

She stood before her work eying it intently for several minutes; then,
with an expression of great contempt for the whole thing, she suddenly
tilted her cherished Venus on to the floor, gave the classical face
a finishing crunch, and put on her hat in a decisive manner, saying
briefly to the dismayed damsels,--

"Good-by, girls; I shan't come any more, for I'm going to work at home
hereafter."


II


The prospect of pursuing artistic studies at home was not brilliant,
as one may imagine when I mention that Psyche's father was a painfully
prosaic man, wrapt in flannel, so to speak; for his woollen mills left
him no time for anything but sleep, food, and newspapers. Mrs. Dean
was one of those exasperating women who pervade their mansions like
a domestic steam-engine one week and take to their sofas the next,
absorbed by fidgets and foot-stoves, shawls and lamentations. There
were three riotous and robust young brothers, whom it is unnecessary
to describe except by stating that they were _boys_ in the broadest
sense of that delightful word. There was a feeble little sister, whose
patient, suffering face demanded constant love and care to mitigate
the weariness of a life of pain. And last, but not least by any means,
there were two Irish ladies, who, with the best intentions imaginable,
produced a universal state of topsy-turviness when left to themselves
for a moment.

But being very much in earnest about doing her duty, not because it
_was_ her duty, but as a means toward an end, Psyche fell to work with
a will, hoping to serve both masters at once. So she might have done,
perhaps, if flesh and blood had been as plastic as clay, but the live
models were so exacting in their demands upon her time and strength,
that the poor statues went to the wall. Sculpture and sewing, calls
and crayons, Ruskin and receipt-books, didn't work well together, and
poor Psyche found duties and desires desperately antagonistic. Take a
day as a sample.

"The washing and ironing are well over, thank goodness, mother quiet,
the boys out of the way, and May comfortable, so I'll indulge myself
in a blissful day after my own heart," Psyche said, as she shut
herself into her little studio, and prepared to enjoy a few hours of
hard study and happy day-dreams.

With a book on her lap, and her own round white arm going through all
manner of queer evolutions, she was placidly repeating, "Deltoides,
Biceps, Triceps, Pronator, Supinator, Palmanis, Flexor carpi
ulnaris--"

"Here's Flexis what-you-call-ums for you," interrupted a voice, which
began in a shrill falsetto and ended in a gruff bass, as a flushed,
dusty, long-legged boy burst in, with a bleeding hand obligingly
extended for inspection.

"Mercy on us, Harry! what have you done to yourself now? Split your
fingers with a cricket-ball again?" cried Psyche, as her arms went up
and her book went down.

"I just thrashed one of the fellows because he got mad and said father
was going to fail."

"O Harry, is he?"

"Of course he isn't! It's hard times for every one, but father will
pull through all right. No use to try and explain it all; girls can't
understand business; so you just tie me up, and don't worry," was the
characteristic reply of the young man, who, being three years her
junior, of course treated the weaker vessel with lordly condescension.

"What a dreadful wound! I hope nothing is broken, for I haven't
studied the hand much yet, and may do mischief doing it up," said
Psyche, examining the great grimy paw with tender solicitude.

"Much good your biceps, and deltoids, and things do you, if you can't
right up a little cut like that," squeaked the ungrateful hero.

"I'm not going to be a surgeon, thank heaven; I intend to make
perfect hands and arms, not mend damaged ones," retorted Psyche, in a
dignified tone, somewhat marred by a great piece of court-plaster on
her tongue.

"I should say a surgeon could improve _that_ perfect thing, if he
didn't die a-laughing before he began," growled Harry, pointing with
a scornful grin at a clay arm humpy with muscles, all carefully
developed in the wrong places.

"Don't sneer, Hal, for you don't know anything about it. Wait a few
years and see if you're not proud of me."

"Sculp away and do something, then I'll hurrah for your mud-pies
like a good one;" with which cheering promise the youth left, having
effectually disturbed his sister's peaceful mood.

Anxious thoughts of her father rendered "biceps, deltoids, and things"
uninteresting, and hoping to compose her mind, she took up The Old
Painters and went on with the story of Claude Lorraine. She had just
reached the tender scene where,--

"Calista gazed with enthusiasm, while she looked like a being of
heaven rather than earth. 'My friend,' she cried, 'I read in thy
picture thy immortality!' As she spoke, her head sunk upon his bosom,
and it was several moments before Claude perceived that he supported a
lifeless form."

"How sweet!" said Psyche, with a romantic sigh.

"Faith, and swate it is, thin!" echoed Katy, whose red head had just
appeared round the half opened door. "It's gingy-bread I'm making the
day, miss, and will I be puttin' purlash or sallyrathis into it, if ye
plase?"

"Purlash, by all means," returned the girl, keeping her countenance,
fearing to enrage Katy by a laugh; for the angry passions of the
red-haired one rose more quickly than her bread.

As she departed with alacrity to add a spoonful of starch and a pinch
of whiting to her cake, Psyche, feeling better for her story and her
smile, put on her bib and paper cap and fell to work on the deformed
arm. An hour of bliss, then came a ring at the door-bell, followed by
Biddy to announce callers, and add that as "the mistress was in her
bed, miss must go and take care of 'em." Whereat "miss" cast down her
tools in despair, threw her cap one way, her bib another, and went in
to her guests with anything but a rapturous welcome.

Dinner being accomplished after much rushing up and down stairs with
trays and messages for Mrs. Dean, Psyche fled again to her studio,
ordering no one to approach under pain of a scolding. All went well
till, going in search of something, she found her little sister
sitting on the floor with her cheek against the studio door.

"I didn't mean to be naughty, Sy, but mother is asleep, and the boys
all gone, so I just came to be near you; it's so lonely everywhere,"
she said, apologetically, as she lifted up the heavy head that always
ached.

"The boys are very thoughtless. Come in and stay with me; you are such
a mouse you won't disturb me. Wouldn't you like to play be a model and
let me draw your arm, and tell you all about the nice little bones and
muscles?" asked Psyche, who had the fever very strong upon her just
then.

May didn't look as if the proposed amusement overwhelmed her with
delight, but meekly consented to be perched upon a high stool with
one arm propped up by a dropsical plaster cherub, while Psyche drew
busily, feeling that duty and pleasure were being delightfully
combined.

"Can't you hold your arm still, child? It shakes so I can't get it
right," she said, rather impatiently.

"No, it will tremble 'cause it's weak. I try hard, Sy, but there
doesn't seem to be much strongness in me lately."

"That's better; keep it so a few minutes and I'll be done," cried the
artist, forgetting that a few minutes may seem ages.

"My arm is so thin you can see the bunches nicely,--can't you?"

"Yes, dear."

Psyche glanced up at the wasted limb, and when she drew again there
was a blur before her eyes for a minute.

"I wish I was as fat as this white boy; but I get thinner every day
somehow, and pretty soon there won't be any of me left but my little
bones," said the child, looking at the winged cherub with sorrowful
envy.

"Don't, my darling; don't say that," cried Psyche, dropping her work
with a sudden pang at her heart. "I'm a sinful, selfish girl to keep
you here! you're weak for want of air; come out and see the chickens,
and pick dandelions, and have a good romp with the boys."

The weak arms were strong enough to clasp Psyche's neck, and the tired
face brightened beautifully as the child exclaimed, with grateful
delight,--

"Oh, I'd like it very much! I wanted to go dreadfully; but everybody
is so busy all the time. I don't want to play, Sy; but just to lie on
the grass with my head in your lap while you tell stories and draw me
pretty things as you used to."

The studio was deserted all that afternoon, for Psyche sat in the
orchard drawing squirrels on the wall, pert robins hopping by,
buttercups and mosses, elves and angels; while May lay contentedly
enjoying sun and air, sisterly care, and the "pretty things" she loved
so well. Psyche did not find the task a hard one; for this time her
heart was in it, and if she needed any reward she surely found it; for
the little face on her knee lost its weary look, and the peace and
beauty of nature soothed her own troubled spirit, cheered her heart,
and did her more good than hours of solitary study.

Finding, much to her own surprise, that her fancy was teeming with
lovely conceits, she did hope for a quiet evening. But mother wanted a
bit of gossip, father must have his papers read to him, the boys had
lessons and rips and grievances to be attended to, May's lullaby could
not be forgotten, and the maids had to be looked after, lest burly
"cousins" should be hidden in the boiler, or lucifer matches among
the shavings. So Psyche's day ended, leaving her very tired, rather
discouraged, and almost heart-sick with the shadow of a coming sorrow.

All summer she did her best, but accomplished very little, as she
thought; yet this was the teaching she most needed, and in time she
came to see it. In the autumn May died, whispering, with her arms
about her sister's neck,--

"You make me so happy, Sy, I wouldn't mind the pain if I could stay a
little longer. But if I can't, good-by, dear, good-by."

Her last look and word and kiss were all for Psyche, who felt then
with grateful tears that her summer had not been wasted; for the smile
upon the little dead face was more to her than any marble perfection
her hands could have carved.

In the solemn pause which death makes in every family, Psyche said,
with the sweet self-forgetfulness of a strong yet tender nature,--

"I must not think of myself, but try to comfort them;" and with this
resolution she gave herself heart and soul to duty, never thinking of
reward.

A busy, anxious, humdrum winter, for, as Harry said, "it was hard
times for every one." Mr. Dean grew gray with the weight of business
cares about which he never spoke; Mrs. Dean, laboring under the
delusion that an invalid was a necessary appendage to the family,
installed herself in the place the child's death left vacant, and the
boys needed much comforting, for the poor lads never knew how much
they loved "the baby" till the little chair stood empty. All turned to
Sy for help and consolation, and her strength seemed to increase with
the demand upon it. Patience and cheerfulness, courage and skill came
at her call like good fairies who had bided their time. Housekeeping
ceased to be hateful, and peace reigned in parlor and kitchen while
Mrs. Dean, shrouded in shawls, read Hahnemann's Lesser Writings on her
sofa. Mr. Dean sometimes forgot his mills when a bright face came
to meet him, a gentle hand smoothed the wrinkles out of his anxious
forehead, and a daughterly heart sympathized with all his cares. The
boys found home very pleasant with Sy always there ready to "lend a
hand," whether it was to make fancy ties, help conjugate "a confounded
verb," pull candy, or sing sweetly in the twilight when all thought of
little May and grew quiet.

The studio door remained locked till her brothers begged Psyche to
open it and make a bust of the child. A flush of joy swept over her
face at the request, and her patient eyes grew bright and eager, as
a thirsty traveller's might at the sight or sound of water. Then it
faded as she shook her head, saying with a regretful sigh, "I'm afraid
I've lost the little skill I ever had."

But she tried, and with great wonder and delight discovered that she
could work as she had never done before. She thought the newly found
power lay in her longing to see the little face again; for it grew
like magic under her loving hands, while every tender memory, sweet
thought, and devout hope she had ever cherished, seemed to lend their
aid. But when it was done and welcomed with tears and smiles, and
praise more precious than any the world could give, then Psyche said
within herself, like one who saw light at last,--

"He was right; doing one's duty _is_ the way to feed heart, soul, and
imagination; for if one is good, one is happy, and if happy, one can
work well."


III


"She broke her head and went home to come no more," was Giovanni's
somewhat startling answer when Paul asked about Psyche, finding that
he no longer met her on the stairs or in the halls. He understood what
the boy meant, and with an approving nod turned to his work again,
saying, "I like that! If there is any power in her, she has taken the
right way to find it out, I suspect."

How she prospered he never asked; for, though he met her more
than once that year, the interviews were brief ones in street,
concert-room, or picture-gallery, and she carefully avoided speaking
of herself. But, possessing the gifted eyes which can look below the
surface of things, he detected in the girl's face something better
than beauty, though each time he saw it, it looked older and more
thoughtful, often anxious and sad.

"She is getting on," he said to himself with a cordial satisfaction
which gave his manner a friendliness as grateful to Psyche as his wise
reticence.

Adam was finished at last, proved a genuine success, and Paul heartily
enjoyed the well-earned reward for years of honest work. One blithe
May morning, he slipped early into the art-gallery, where the statue
now stood, to look at his creation with paternal pride. He was quite
alone with the stately figure that shone white against the purple
draperies and seemed to offer him a voiceless welcome from its marble
lips. He gave it one loving look, and then forgot it, for at the feet
of his Adam lay a handful of wild violets, with the dew still on
them. A sudden smile broke over his face as he took them up, with the
thought, "She has been here and found my work good."

For several moments he stood thoughtfully turning the flowers to and
fro in his hands; then, as if deciding some question within himself,
he said, still smiling,--

"It is just a year since she went home; she must have accomplished
something in that time; I'll take the violets as a sign that I may go
and ask her what."

He knew she lived just out of the city, between the river and the
mills, and as he left the streets behind him, he found more violets
blooming all along the way like flowery guides to lead him right.
Greener grew the road, balmier blew the wind, and blither sang the
birds, as he went on, enjoying his holiday with the zest of a boy,
until he reached a most attractive little path winding away across the
fields. The gate swung invitingly open, and all the ground before it
was blue with violets. Still following their guidance he took the
narrow path, till, coming to a mossy stone beside a brook, he sat down
to listen to the blackbirds singing deliciously in the willows over
head. Close by the stone, half hidden in the grass lay a little book,
and, taking it up he found it was a pocket-diary. No name appeared on
the fly-leaf, and, turning the pages to find some clue to its owner,
he read here and there enough to give him glimpses into an innocent
and earnest heart which seemed to be learning some hard lesson
patiently. Only near the end did he find the clue in words of his own,
spoken long ago, and a name. Then, though longing intensely to know
more, he shut the little book and went on, showing by his altered face
that the simple record of a girl's life had touched him deeply.

Soon an old house appeared nestling to the hillside with the river
shining in the low green meadows just before it.

"She lives there," he said, with as much certainty as if the pansies
by the door-stone spelt her name, and, knocking, he asked for Psyche.

"She's gone to town, but I expect her home every minute. Ask the
gentleman to walk in and wait, Katy," cried a voice from above, where
the whisk of skirts was followed by the appearance of an inquiring eye
over the banisters.

The gentleman did walk in, and while he waited looked about him. The
room, though very simply furnished, had a good deal of beauty in it,
for the pictures were few and well chosen, the books such as never
grow old, the music lying on the well-worn piano of the sort which is
never out of fashion, and standing somewhat apart was one small statue
in a recess full of flowers. Lovely in its simple grace and truth was
the figure of a child looking upward as if watching the airy flight of
some butterfly which had evidently escaped from the chrysalis still
lying in the little hand.

Paul was looking at it with approving eyes when Mrs. Dean appeared
with his card in her hand, three shawls on her shoulders, and in her
face a somewhat startled expression, as if she expected some novel
demonstration from the man whose genius her daughter so much admired.

"I hope Miss Psyche is well," began Paul, with great discrimination if
not originality.

The delightfully commonplace remark tranquillized Mrs. Dean at once,
and, taking off the upper shawl with a fussy gesture, she settled
herself for a chat.

"Yes, thank heaven, Sy is well. I don't know what would become of us
if she wasn't. It has been a hard and sorrowful year for us with Mr.
Dean's business embarrassments, my feeble health, and May's death.
I don't know that you were aware of our loss, sir;" and unaffected
maternal grief gave sudden dignity to the faded, fretful face of the
speaker.

Paul murmured his regrets, understanding better now the pathetic words
on a certain tear-stained page of the little book still in his pocket.

"Poor dear, she suffered everything, and it came very hard upon Sy,
for the child wasn't happy with any one else, and almost lived in
her arms," continued Mrs. Dean, dropping the second shawl to get her
handkerchief.

"Miss Psyche has not had much time for art-studies this year, I
suppose?" said Paul, hoping to arrest the shower, natural as it was.

"How could she with two invalids, the housekeeping, her father and the
boys to attend to? No, she gave that up last spring, and though it was
a great disappointment to her at the time, she has got over it now, I
hope," added her mother, remembering as she spoke that Psyche even now
went about the house sometimes pale and silent, with a hungry look in
her eyes.

"I am glad to hear it," though a little shadow passed over his face
as Paul spoke, for he was too true an artist to believe that any work
could be as happy as that which he loved and lived for. "I thought
there was much promise in Miss Psyche, and I sincerely believe that
time will prove me a true prophet," he said, with mingled regret and
hope in his voice, as he glanced about the room, which betrayed the
tastes still cherished by the girl.

"I'm afraid ambition isn't good for women; I mean the sort that makes
them known by coming before the public in any way. But Sy deserves
some reward, I'm sure, and I know she'll have it, for a better
daughter never lived."

Here the third shawl was cast off, as if the thought of Psyche, or the
presence of a genial guest had touched Mrs. Dean's chilly nature with
a comfortable warmth.

Further conversation was interrupted by the avalanche of boys which
came tumbling down the front stairs, as Tom, Dick, and Harry shouted
in a sort of chorus,--

"Sy, my balloon has got away; lend us a hand at catching him!"

"Sy, I want a lot of paste made, right off."

"Sy, I've split my jacket down the back; come sew me up, there's a
dear!"

On beholding a stranger the young gentlemen suddenly lost their
voices, found their manners, and with nods and grins took themselves
away as quietly as could be expected of six clumping boots and an
unlimited quantity of animal spirits in a high state of effervescence.
As they trooped off, an unmistakable odor of burnt milk pervaded the
air, and the crash of china, followed by an Irish wail, caused Mrs.
Dean to clap on her three shawls again and excuse herself in visible
trepidation.

Paul laughed quietly to himself, then turned sober and said, "Poor
Psyche!" with a sympathetic sigh. He roamed about the room impatiently
till the sound of voices drew him to the window to behold the girl
coming up the walk with her tired old father leaning on one arm, the
other loaded with baskets and bundles, and her hands occupied by a
remarkably ugly turtle.

"Here we are!" cried a cheery voice, as they entered without observing
the new-comer. "I've done all my errands and had a lovely time. There
is Tom's gunpowder, Dick's fishhooks, and one of Professor Gazzy's
famous turtles for Harry. Here are your bundles, mother dear, and,
best of all, here's father home in time for a good rest before dinner.
I went to the mill and got him."

Psyche spoke as if she had brought a treasure; and so she had,
for though Mr. Dean's face usually was about as expressive as the
turtle's, it woke and warmed with the affection which his daughter had
fostered till no amount of flannel could extinguish it. His big hand
patted her cheek very gently as he said, in a tone of fatherly love
and pride,--

"My little Sy never forgets old father, does she?"

"Good gracious me, my dear, there's such a mess in the kitchen! Katy's
burnt up the pudding, put castor-oil instead of olive in the salad,
smashed the best meat-dish, and here's Mr. Gage come to dinner," cried
Mrs. Dean in accents of despair as she tied up her head in a fourth
shawl.

"Oh, I'm so glad; I'll go in and see him a few minutes, and then I'll
come and attend to everything; so don't worry, mother."

"How did you find me out?" asked Psyche as she shook hands with her
guest and stood looking up at him with all the old confiding frankness
in her face and manner.

"The violets showed me the way."

She glanced at the posy in his button-hole and smiled.

"Yes, I gave them to Adam, but I didn't think you would guess. I
enjoyed your work for an hour to-day, and I have no words strong
enough to express my admiration."

"There is no need of any. Tell me about yourself: what have you been
doing all this year?" he asked, watching with genuine satisfaction the
serene and sunny face before him, for discontent, anxiety, and sadness
were no longer visible there.

"I've been working and waiting," she began.

"And succeeding, if I may believe what I see and hear and read," he
said, with an expressive little wave of the book as he laid it down
before her.

"My diary! I didn't know I had lost it. Where did you find it?"

"By the brook where I stopped to rest. The moment I saw your name I
shut it up. Forgive me, but I can't ask pardon for reading a few pages
of that little gospel of patience, love, and self-denial."

She gave him a reproachful look, and hurried the telltale book out of
sight as she said, with a momentary shadow on her face,--

"It has been a hard task; but I think I have learned it, and am just
beginning to find that my dream _is_ 'a noonday light and truth,' to
me."

"Then you do not relinquish your hopes, and lay down your tools?" he
asked, with some eagerness.

"Never! I thought at first that I could not serve two masters, but
in trying to be faithful to one I find I am nearer and dearer to the
other. My cares and duties are growing lighter every day (or I have
learned to bear them better), and when my leisure does come I shall
know how to use it, for my head is full of ambitious plans, and I feel
that I can do something _now_."

All the old enthusiasm shone in her eyes, and a sense of power
betrayed itself in voice and gesture as she spoke.

"I believe it," he said heartily. "You have learned the secret, as
that proves."

Psyche looked at the childish image as he pointed to it, and into her
face there came a motherly expression that made it very sweet.

"That little sister was so dear to me I could not fail to make her
lovely, for I put my heart into my work. The year has gone, but I
don't regret it, though this is all I have done."

"You forget your three wishes; I think the year has granted them."

"What were they?"

"To possess beauty in yourself, the power of seeing it in all things,
and the art of reproducing it with truth."

She colored deeply under the glance which accompanied the threefold
compliment, and answered with grateful humility,--

"You are very kind to say so; I wish I could believe it." Then, as if
anxious to forget herself, she added rather abruptly,--

"I hear you think of giving your Adam a mate,--have you begun yet?"

"Yes, my design is finished, all but the face."

"I should think you could image Eve's beauty, since you have succeeded
so well with Adam's."

"The features perhaps, but not the expression. That is the charm of
feminine faces, a charm so subtile that few can catch and keep it. I
want a truly womanly face, one that shall be sweet and strong without
being either weak or hard. A hopeful, loving, earnest face with a
tender touch of motherliness in it, and perhaps the shadow of a grief
that has softened but not saddened it."

"It will be hard to find a face like that."

"I don't expect to find it in perfection; but one sometimes sees faces
which suggest all this, and in rare moments give glimpses of a lovely
possibility."

"I sincerely hope you will find one then," said Psyche, thinking of
the dinner.

"Thank you; _I_ think I have."

Now, in order that every one may be suited, we will stop here, and
leave our readers to finish the story as they like. Those who prefer
the good old fashion may believe that the hero and heroine fell in
love, were married, and lived happily ever afterward. But those who
can conceive of a world outside of a wedding-ring may believe that the
friends remained faithful friends all their lives, while Paul won fame
and fortune, and Psyche grew beautiful with the beauty of a serene and
sunny nature, happy in duties which became pleasures, rich in the art
which made life lovely to herself and others, and brought rewards in
time.




A COUNTRY CHRISTMAS

"A handful of good life is worth a bushel of learning."


"Dear Emily,--I have a brilliant idea, and at once hasten to share it
with you. Three weeks ago I came up here to the wilds of Vermont to
visit my old aunt, also to get a little quiet and distance in which
to survey certain new prospects which have opened before me, and to
decide whether I will marry a millionnaire and become a queen of
society, or remain 'the charming Miss Vaughan' and wait till the
conquering hero comes.

"Aunt Plumy begs me to stay over Christmas, and I have consented, as I
always dread the formal dinner with which my guardian celebrates the
day.

"My brilliant idea is this. I'm going to make it a real old-fashioned
frolic, and won't you come and help me? You will enjoy it immensely I
am sure, for Aunt is a character. Cousin Saul worth seeing, and Ruth
a far prettier girl than any of the city rose-buds coming out this
season. Bring Leonard Randal along with you to take notes for his new
books; then it will be fresher and truer than the last, clever as it
was.

"The air is delicious up here, society amusing, this old farmhouse
full of treasures, and your bosom friend pining to embrace you. Just
telegraph yes or no, and we will expect you on Tuesday.

"Ever yours,

"SOPHIE VAUGHAN."


"They will both come, for they are as tired of city life and as fond
of change as I am," said the writer of the above, as she folded her
letter and went to get it posted without delay.

Aunt Plumy was in the great kitchen making pies; a jolly old soul,
with a face as ruddy as a winter apple, a cheery voice, and the
kindest heart that ever beat under a gingham gown. Pretty Ruth was
chopping the mince, and singing so gaily as she worked that the
four-and-twenty immortal blackbirds could not have put more music into
a pie than she did. Saul was piling wood into the big oven, and Sophie
paused a moment on the threshold to look at him, for she always
enjoyed the sight of this stalwart cousin, whom she likened to a Norse
viking, with his fair hair and beard, keen blue eyes, and six feet of
manly height, with shoulders that looked broad and strong enough to
bear any burden.

His back was toward her, but he saw her first, and turned his flushed
face to meet her, with the sudden lighting up it always showed when
she approached.

"I've done it, Aunt; and now I want Saul to post the letter, so we can
get a speedy answer."

"Just as soon as I can hitch up, cousin;" and Saul pitched in his last
log, looking ready to put a girdle round the earth in less than forty
minutes.

"Well, dear, I ain't the least mite of objection, as long as it
pleases you. I guess we can stan' it ef your city folks can. I presume
to say things will look kind of sing'lar to 'em, but I s'pose that's
what they come for. Idle folks do dreadful queer things to amuse 'em;"
and Aunt Plumy leaned on the rolling-pin to smile and nod with a
shrewd twinkle of her eye, as if she enjoyed the prospect as much as
Sophie did.

"I shall be afraid of 'em, but I'll try not to make you ashamed of
me," said Ruth, who loved her charming cousin even more than she
admired her.

"No fear of that, dear. They will be the awkward ones, and you must
set them at ease by just being your simple selves, and treating them
as if they were every-day people. Nell is very nice and jolly when she
drops her city ways, as she must here. She will enter into the spirit
of the fun at once, and I know you'll all like her. Mr. Randal is
rather the worse for too much praise and petting, as successful people
are apt to be, so a little plain talk and rough work will do him good.
He is a true gentleman in spite of his airs and elegance, and he will
take it all in good part, if you treat him like a man and not a lion."

"I'll see to him," said Saul, who had listened with great interest to
the latter part of Sophie's speech, evidently suspecting a lover, and
enjoying the idea of supplying him with a liberal amount of "plain
talk and rough work."

"I'll keep 'em busy if that's what they need, for there will be a
sight to do, and we can't get help easy up here. Our darters don't
hire out much. Work to home till they marry, and don't go gaddin'
'round gettin' their heads full of foolish notions, and forgettin' all
the useful things their mothers taught 'em."

Aunt Plumy glanced at Ruth as she spoke, and a sudden color in the
girl's cheeks proved that the words hit certain ambitious fancies of
this pretty daughter of the house of Basset.

"They shall do their parts and not be a trouble; I'll see to that,
for you certainly are the dearest aunt in the world to let me take
possession of you and yours in this way," cried Sophie, embracing the
old lady with warmth.

Saul wished the embrace could be returned by proxy, as his mother's
hands were too floury to do more than hover affectionately round the
delicate face that looked so fresh and young beside her wrinkled one.
As it could not be done, he fled temptation and "hitched up" without
delay.

The three women laid their heads together in his absence, and Sophie's
plan grew apace, for Ruth longed to see a real novelist and a fine
lady, and Aunt Plumy, having plans of her own to further, said "Yes,
dear," to every suggestion.

Great was the arranging and adorning that went on that day in the
old farmhouse, for Sophie wanted her friends to enjoy this taste of
country pleasures, and knew just what additions would be indispensable
to their comfort; what simple ornaments would be in keeping with the
rustic stage on which she meant to play the part of prima donna.

Next day a telegram arrived accepting the invitation, for both the
lady and the lion. They would arrive that afternoon, as little
preparation was needed for this impromptu journey, the novelty of
which was its chief charm to these _blas_ people.

Saul wanted to get out the double sleigh and span, for he prided
himself on his horses, and a fall of snow came most opportunely
to beautify the landscape and add a new pleasure to Christmas
festivities.

But Sophie declared that the old yellow sleigh, with Punch, the
farm-horse, must be used, as she wished everything to be in keeping;
and Saul obeyed, thinking he had never seen anything prettier than his
cousin when she appeared in his mother's old-fashioned camlet cloak
and blue silk pumpkin hood. He looked remarkably well himself in his
fur coat, with hair and beard brushed till they shone like spun gold,
a fresh color in his cheek, and the sparkle of amusement in his eyes,
while excitement gave his usually grave face the animation it needed
to be handsome.

Away they jogged in the creaking old sleigh, leaving Ruth to make
herself pretty, with a fluttering heart, and Aunt Plumy to dish up a
late dinner fit to tempt the most fastidious appetite.

"She has not come for us, and there is not even a stage to take us up.
There must be some mistake," said Emily Herrick, as she looked about
the shabby little station where they were set down.

"That is the never-to-be-forgotten face of our fair friend, but the
bonnet of her grandmother, if my eyes do not deceive me," answered
Randal, turning to survey the couple approaching in the rear.

"Sophie Vaughan, what do you mean by making such a guy of yourself?"
exclaimed Emily, as she kissed the smiling face in the hood and stared
at the quaint cloak.

"I'm dressed for my part, and I intend to keep it up. This is our
host, my cousin, Saul Basset. Come to the sleigh at once, he will see
to your luggage," said Sophie, painfully conscious of the antiquity of
her array as her eyes rested on Emily's pretty hat and mantle, and the
masculine elegance of Randal's wraps.

They were hardly tucked in when Saul appeared with a valise in
one hand and a large trunk on his shoulder, swinging both on to a
wood-sled that stood near by as easily as if they had been hand-bags.

"That is your hero, is it? Well, he looks it, calm and comely,
taciturn and tall," said Emily, in a tone of approbation.

"He should have been named Samson or Goliath; though I believe it was
the small man who slung things about and turned out the hero in the
end," added Randal, surveying the performance with interest and a
touch of envy, for much pen work had made his own hands as delicate as
a woman's.

"Saul doesn't live in a glass house, so stones won't hurt him.
Remember sarcasm is forbidden and sincerity the order of the day. You
are country folks now, and it will do you good to try their simple,
honest ways for a few days."

Sophie had no time to say more, for Saul came up and drove off with
the brief remark that the baggage would "be along right away."

Being hungry, cold and tired, the guests were rather silent during the
short drive, but Aunt Plumy's hospitable welcome, and the savory fumes
of the dinner awaiting them, thawed the ice and won their hearts at
once.

"Isn't it nice? Aren't you glad you came?" asked Sophie, as she led
her friends into the parlor, which she had redeemed from its primness
by putting bright chintz curtains to the windows, hemlock boughs
over the old portraits, a china bowl of flowers on the table, and a
splendid fire on the wide hearth.

"It is perfectly jolly, and this is the way I begin to enjoy myself,"
answered Emily, sitting down upon the home-made rug, whose red flannel
roses bloomed in a blue list basket.

"If I may add a little smoke to your glorious fire, it will be quite
perfect. Won't Samson join me?" asked Randal, waiting for permission,
cigar-case in hand.

"He has no small vices, but you may indulge yours," answered Sophie,
from the depths of a grandmotherly chair.

Emily glanced up at her friend as if she caught a new tone in her
voice, then turned to the fire again with a wise little nod, as if
confiding some secret to the reflection of herself in the bright brass
andiron.

"His Delilah does not take this form. I wait with interest to discover
if he has one. What a daisy the sister is. Does she ever speak?" asked
Randal, trying to lounge on the haircloth sofa, where he was slipping
uncomfortably about.

"Oh yes, and sings like a bird. You shall hear her when she gets over
her shyness. But no trifling, mind you, for it is a jealously guarded
daisy and not to be picked by any idle hand," said Sophie warningly,
as she recalled Ruth's blushes and Randal's compliments at dinner.

"I should expect to be annihilated by the big brother if I attempted
any but the 'sincerest' admiration and respect. Have no fears on that
score, but tell us what is to follow this superb dinner. An apple bee,
spinning match, husking party, or primitive pastime of some sort, I
have no doubt."

"As you are new to our ways I am going to let you rest this evening.
We will sit about the fire and tell stories. Aunt is a master hand
at that, and Saul has reminiscences of the war that are well worth
hearing if we can only get him to tell them."

"Ah, he was there, was he?"

"Yes, all through it, and is Major Basset, though he likes his plain
name best. He fought splendidly and had several wounds, though only a
mere boy when he earned his scars and bars. I'm very proud of him for
that," and Sophie looked so as she glanced at the photograph of
a stripling in uniform set in the place of honor on the high
mantel-piece.

"We must stir him up and hear these martial memories. I want some new
incidents, and shall book all I can get, if I may."

Here Randal was interrupted by Saul himself, who came in with an
armful of wood for the fire.

"Anything more I can do for you, cousin?" he asked, surveying the
scene with a rather wistful look.

"Only come and sit with us and talk over war times with Mr. Randal."

"When I've foddered the cattle and done my chores I'd be pleased to.
What regiment were you in?" asked Saul, looking down from his lofty
height upon the slender gentleman, who answered briefly,--

"In none. I was abroad at the time."

"Sick?"

"No, busy with a novel."

"Took four years to write it?"

"I was obliged to travel and study before I could finish it. These
things take more time to work up than outsiders would believe."

"Seems to me our war was a finer story than any you could find in
Europe, and the best way to study it would be to fight it out. If you
want heroes and heroines you'd have found plenty of 'em there."

"I have no doubt of it, and shall be glad to atone for my seeming
neglect of them by hearing about your own exploits. Major."

Randal hoped to turn the conversation gracefully, but Saul was not
to be caught, and left the room, saying, with a gleam of fun in his
eye,--

"I can't stop now; heroes can wait, pigs can't."

The girls laughed at this sudden descent from the sublime to the
ridiculous, and Randal joined them, feeling his condescension had not
been unobserved.

As if drawn by the merry sound Aunt Plumy appeared, and being
established in the rocking-chair fell to talking as easily as if she
had known her guests for years.

"Laugh away, young folks, that's better for digestion than any of the
messes people use. Are you troubled with dyspepsy, dear? You didn't
seem to take your vittles very hearty, so I mistrusted you was
delicate," she said, looking at Emily, whose pale cheeks and weary
eyes told the story of late hours and a gay life.

"I haven't eaten so much for years, I assure you, Mrs. Basset; but
it was impossible to taste all your good things. I am not dyspeptic,
thank you, but a little seedy and tired, for I've been working rather
hard lately."

"Be you a teacher? or have you a 'perfessun,' as they call a trade
nowadays?" asked the old lady in a tone of kindly interest, which
prevented a laugh at the idea of Emily's being anything but a beauty
and a belle. The others kept their countenances with difficulty, and
she answered demurely,--

"I have no trade as yet, but I dare say I should be happier if I had."

"Not a doubt on't, my dear."

"What would you recommend, ma'am?"

"I should say dressmakin' was rather in your line, ain't it? Your
clothes is dreadful tasty, and do you credit if you made 'em
yourself." and Aunt Plumy surveyed with feminine interest the simple
elegance of the travelling dress which was the masterpiece of a French
modiste.

"No, ma'am, I don't make my own things, I'm too lazy. It takes so much
time and trouble to select them that I have only strength left to wear
them."

"Housekeepin' used to be the favorite perfessun in my day. It ain't
fashionable now, but it needs a sight of trainin' to be perfect in all
that's required, and I've an idee it would be a sight healthier and
usefuller than the paintin' and music and fancy work young women do
nowadays."

"But every one wants some beauty in their lives, and each one has a
different sphere to fill, if one can only find it."

"'Pears to me there's no call for so much art when nater is full of
beauty for them that can see and love it. As for 'spears' and so on,
I've a notion if each of us did up our own little chores smart and
thorough we needn't go wanderin' round to set the world to rights.
That's the Lord's job, and I presume to say He can do it without any
advice of ourn."

Something in the homely but true words seemed to rebuke the three
listeners for wasted lives, and for a moment there was no sound but
the crackle of the fire, the brisk click of the old lady's knitting
needles, and Ruth's voice singing overhead as she made ready to join
the party below.

"To judge by that sweet sound you have done one of your 'chores' very
beautifully, Mrs. Basset, and in spite of the follies of our day,
succeeded in keeping one girl healthy, happy and unspoiled," said
Emily, looking up into the peaceful old face with her own lovely one
full of respect and envy.

"I do hope so, for she's my ewe lamb, the last of four dear little
girls; all the rest are in the burying ground 'side of father. I don't
expect to keep her long, and don't ought to regret when I lose her,
for Saul is the best of sons; but daughters is more to mothers
somehow, and I always yearn over girls that is left without a broodin'
wing to keep 'em safe and warm in this world of tribulation."

Aunt Plumy laid her hand on Sophie's head as she spoke, with such a
motherly look that both girls drew nearer, and Randal resolved to put
her in a book without delay.

Presently Saul returned with little Ruth hanging on his arm and shyly
nestling near him as he took the three-cornered leathern chair in the
chimney nook, while she sat on a stool close by.

"Now the circle is complete and the picture perfect. Don't light the
lamps yet, please, but talk away and let me make a mental study
of you. I seldom find so charming a scene to paint," said Randal,
beginning to enjoy himself immensely, with a true artist's taste for
novelty and effect.

"Tell us about your book, for we have been reading it as it comes out
in the magazine, and are much exercised about how it's going to
end," began Saul, gallantly throwing himself into the breach, for a
momentary embarrassment fell upon the women at the idea of sitting for
their portraits before they were ready.

"Do you really read my poor serial up here, and do me the honor to
like it?" asked the novelist, both flattered and amused, for his work
was of the aesthetic sort, microscopic studies of character, and
careful pictures of modern life.

"Sakes alive, why shouldn't we?" cried Aunt Plumy. "We have some
eddication, though we ain't very genteel. We've got a town libry, kep
up by the women mostly, with fairs and tea parties and so on. We have
all the magazines reg'lar, and Saul reads out the pieces while Ruth
sews and I knit, my eyes bein' poor. Our winter is long and evenins
would be kinder lonesome if we didn't have novils and newspapers to
cheer 'em up."

"I am very glad I can help to beguile them for you. Now tell me what
you honestly think of my work? Criticism is always valuable, and I
should really like yours, Mrs. Basset," said Randal, wondering what
the good woman would make of the delicate analysis and worldly wisdom
on which he prided himself.

Short work, as Aunt Plumy soon showed him, for she rather enjoyed
freeing her mind at all times, and decidedly resented the insinuation
that country folk could not appreciate light literature as well as
city people.

"I ain't no great of a jedge about anything but nat'ralness of books,
and it really does seem as if some of your men and women was dreadful
uncomfortable creaters. 'Pears to me it ain't wise to be always
pickin' ourselves to pieces and pryin' into things that ought to
come gradual by way of experience and the visitations of Providence.
Flowers won't blow worth a cent ef you pull 'em open. Better wait and
see what they can do alone. I do relish the smart sayins, the odd ways
of furrin parts, and the sarcastic slaps at folkses weak spots. But
massy knows, we can't live on spice-cake and Charlotte Ruche, and I
do feel as if books was more sustainin' ef they was full of every-day
people and things, like good bread and butter. Them that goes to the
heart and ain't soon forgotten is the kind I hanker for. Mis Terry's
books now, and Mis Stowe's, and Dickens's Christmas pieces,--them is
real sweet and cheerin', to my mind."

As the blunt old lady paused it was evident she had produced a
sensation, for Saul smiled at the fire, Ruth looked dismayed at
this assault upon one of her idols, and the young ladies were both
astonished and amused at the keenness of the new critic who dared
express what they had often felt. Randal, however, was quite composed
and laughed good-naturedly, though secretly feeling as if a pail of
cold water had been poured over him.

"Many thanks, madam; you have discovered my weak point with surprising
accuracy. But you see I cannot help 'picking folks to pieces,' as you
have expressed it; that is my gift, and it has its attractions, as the
sale of my books will testify. People like the 'spice-bread,' and as
that is the only sort my oven will bake, I must keep on in order to
make my living."

"So rumsellers say, but it ain't a good trade to foller, and I'd chop
wood 'fore I'd earn my livin' harmin' my feller man. 'Pears to me I'd
let my oven cool a spell, and hunt up some homely, happy folks to
write about; folks that don't borrer trouble and go lookin' for holes
in their neighbors' coats, but take their lives brave and cheerful;
and rememberin' we are all human, have pity on the weak, and try to
be as full of mercy, patience and lovin' kindness as Him who made
us. That sort of a book would do a heap of good; be real warmin' and
strengthening and make them that read it love the man that wrote it,
and remember him when he was dead and gone."

"I wish I could!" and Randal meant what he said, for he was as tired
of his own style as a watch-maker might be of the magnifying glass
through which he strains his eyes all day. He knew that the heart was
left out of his work, and that both mind and soul were growing morbid
with dwelling on the faulty, absurd and metaphysical phases of life
and character. He often threw down his pen and vowed he would write no
more; but he loved ease and the books brought money readily; he was
accustomed to the stimulant of praise and missed it as the toper
misses his wine, so that which had once been a pleasure to himself and
others was fast becoming a burden and a disappointment.

The brief pause which followed his involuntary betrayal of discontent
was broken by Ruth, who exclaimed, with a girlish enthusiasm that
overpowered girlish bashfulness,--

"_I_ think all the novels are splendid! I hope you will write hundreds
more, and I shall live to read 'em."

"Bravo, my gentle champion! I promise that I will write one more at
least, and have a heroine in it whom your mother will both admire and
love," answered Randal, surprised to find how grateful he was for the
girl's approval, and how rapidly his trained fancy began to paint the
background on which he hoped to copy this fresh, human daisy.

Abashed by her involuntary outburst, Ruth tried to efface herself
behind Saul's broad shoulder, and he brought the conversation back to
its starting-point by saying in a tone of the most sincere interest,--

"Speaking of the serial, I am very anxious to know how your hero comes
out. He is a fine fellow, and I can't decide whether he is going to
spoil his life marrying that silly woman, or do something grand and
generous, and not be made a fool of."

"Upon my soul, I don't know myself. It is very hard to find new
finales. Can't you suggest something, Major? then I shall not be
obliged to leave my story without an end, as people complain I am
rather fond of doing."

"Well, no, I don't think I've anything to offer. Seems to me it isn't
the sensational exploits that show the hero best, but some great
sacrifice quietly made by a common sort of man who is noble without
knowing it. I saw a good many such during the war, and often wish I
could write them down, for it is surprising how much courage, goodness
and real piety is stowed away in common folks ready to show when the
right time comes."

"Tell us one of them, and I'll bless you for a hint. No one knows the
anguish of an author's spirit when he can't ring down the curtain on
an effective tableau," said Randal, with a glance at his friends to
ask their aid in eliciting an anecdote or reminiscence.

"Tell about the splendid fellow who held the bridge, like Horatius,
till help came up. That was a thrilling story, I assure you," answered
Sophie, with an inviting smile.

But Saul would not be his own hero, and said briefly:

"Any man can be brave when the battle-fever is on him, and it only
takes a little physical courage to dash ahead." He paused a moment,
with his eyes on the snowy landscape without, where twilight was
deepening; then, as if constrained by the memory that winter scene
evoked, he slowly continued,--

"One of the bravest things I ever knew was done by a poor fellow who
has been a hero to me ever since, though I only met him that night.
It was after one of the big battles of that last winter, and I was
knocked over with a broken leg and two or three bullets here and
there. Night was coming on, snow falling, and a sharp wind blew over
the field where a lot of us lay, dead and alive, waiting for the
ambulance to come and pick us up. There was skirmishing going on not
far off, and our prospects were rather poor between frost and fire. I
was calculating how I'd manage, when I found two poor chaps close by
who were worse off, so I braced up and did what I could for them. One
had an arm blown away, and kept up a dreadful groaning. The other
was shot bad, and bleeding to death for want of help, but never
complained. He was nearest, and I liked his pluck, for he spoke
cheerful and made me ashamed to growl. Such times make dreadful brutes
of men if they haven't something to hold on to, and all three of us
were most wild with pain and cold and hunger, for we'd fought all day
fasting, when we heard a rumble in the road below, and saw lanterns
bobbing round. That meant life to us, and we all tried to holler; two
of us were pretty faint, but I managed a good yell, and they heard it.

"'Room for one more. Hard luck, old boys, but we are full and must
save the worst wounded first. Take a drink, and hold on till we come
back,' says one of them with the stretcher.

"'Here's the one to go,' I says, pointin' out my man, for I saw by the
light that he was hard hit.

"'No, that one. He's got more chances than I, or this one; he's young
and got a mother; I'll wait,' said the good feller, touchin' my arm,
for he 'd heard me mutterin' to myself about this dear old lady. We
always want mother when we are down, you know."

Saul's eyes turned to the beloved face with a glance of tenderest
affection, and Aunt Plumy answered with a dismal groan at the
recollection of his need that night, and her absence.

"Well, to be short, the groaning chap was taken, and my man left. I
was mad, but there was no time for talk, and the selfish one went off
and left that poor feller to run his one chance. I had my rifle, and
guessed I could hobble up to use it if need be; so we settled back to
wait without much hope of help, everything being in a muddle. And wait
we did till morning, for that ambulance did not come back till next
day, when most of us were past needing it.

"I'll never forget that night. I dream it all over again as plain as
if it was real. Snow, cold, darkness, hunger, thirst, pain, and all
round us cries and cursing growing less and less, till at last only
the wind went moaning over that meadow. It was awful! so lonesome,
helpless, and seemingly God-forsaken. Hour after hour we lay there
side by side under one coat, waiting to be saved or die, for the wind
grew strong and we grew weak."

Saul drew a long breath, and held his hands to the fire as if he felt
again the sharp suffering of that night.

"And the man?" asked Emily, softly, as if reluctant to break the
silence.

"He _was_ a man! In times like that men talk like brothers and show
what they are. Lying there, slowly freezing, Joe Cummings told
me about his wife and babies, his old folks waiting for him, all
depending on him, yet all ready to give him up when he was needed. A
plain man, but honest and true, and loving as a woman; I soon saw that
as he went on talking, half to me and half to himself, for sometimes
he wandered a little toward the end. I've read books, heard sermons,
and seen good folks, but nothing ever came so close or did me so much
good as seeing this man die. He had one chance and gave it cheerfully.
He longed for those he loved, and let 'em go with a good-by they
couldn't hear. He suffered all the pains we most shrink from without a
murmur, and kept my heart warm while his own was growing cold. It's
no use trying to tell that part of it; but I heard prayers that night
that meant something, and I saw how faith could hold a soul up when
everything was gone but God."

Saul stopped there with a sudden huskiness in his deep voice, and when
he went on it was in the tone of one who speaks of a dear friend.

"Joe grew still by and by, and I thought he was asleep, for I felt his
breath when I tucked him up, and his hand held on to mine. The cold
sort of numbed me, and I dropped off, too weak and stupid to think or
feel. I never should have waked up if it hadn't been for Joe. When I
came to, it was morning, and I thought I was dead, for all I could see
was that great field of white mounds, like graves, and a splendid sky
above. Then I looked for Joe, remembering; but he had put my coat back
over me, and lay stiff and still under the snow that covered him like
a shroud, all except his face. A bit of my cape had blown over it, and
when I took it off and the sun shone on his dead face, I declare to
you it was so full of heavenly peace I felt as if that common man had
been glorified by God's light, and rewarded by God's 'Well done.'
That's all."

No one spoke for a moment, while the women wiped their eyes, and Saul
dropped his as if to hide something softer than tears.

"It was very noble, very touching. And you? how did you get off at
last?" asked Randal, with real admiration and respect in his usually
languid face.

"Crawled off," answered Saul, relapsing into his former brevity of
speech.

"Why not before, and save yourself all that misery?"

"Couldn't leave Joe."

"Ah, I see; there were two heroes that night."

"Dozens, I've no doubt. Those were times that made heroes of men, and
women, too."

"Tell us more;" begged Emily, looking up with an expression none of
her admirers ever brought to her face by their softest compliments or
wiliest gossip.

"I've done my part. It's Mr. Randal's turn now;" and Saul drew himself
out of the ruddy circle of firelight, as if ashamed of the prominent
part he was playing.

Sophie and her friend had often heard Randal talk, for he was an
accomplished _raconteur_, but that night he exerted himself, and was
unusually brilliant and entertaining, as if upon his mettle. The
Bassets were charmed. They sat late and were very merry, for
Aunt Plumy got up a little supper for them, and her cider was as
exhilarating as champagne. When they parted for the night and Sophie
kissed her aunt, Emily did the same, saying heartily,--

"It seems as if I'd known you all my life, and this is certainly the
most enchanting old place that ever was."

"Glad you like it, dear. But it ain't all fun, as you'll find out
to-morrow when you go to work, for Sophie says you must," answered
Mrs. Basset, as her guests trooped away, rashly promising to like
everything.

They found it difficult to keep their word when they were called at
half past six next morning. Their rooms were warm, however, and
they managed to scramble down in time for breakfast, guided by the
fragrance of coffee and Aunt Plumy's shrill voice singing the good old
hymn--

  "Lord, in the morning Thou shalt hear
  My voice ascending high."

An open fire blazed on the hearth, for the cooking was done in
the lean-to, and the spacious, sunny kitchen was kept in all its
old-fashioned perfection, with the wooden settle in a warm nook, the
tall clock behind the door, copper and pewter utensils shining on the
dresser, old china in the corner closet and a little spinning wheel
rescued from the garret by Sophie to adorn the deep window, full of
scarlet geraniums, Christmas roses, and white chrysanthemums.

The young lady, in a checked apron and mob-cap, greeted her friends
with a dish of buckwheats in one hand, and a pair of cheeks that
proved she had been learning to fry these delectable cakes.

"You do 'keep it up' in earnest, upon my word; and very becoming it
is, dear. But won't you ruin your complexion and roughen your hands if
you do so much of this new fancy-work?" asked Emily, much amazed at
this novel freak.

"I like it, and really believe I've found my proper sphere at last.
Domestic life seems so pleasant to me that I feel as if I'd better
keep it up for the rest of my life," answered Sophie, making a pretty
picture of herself as she cut great slices of brown bread, with the
early sunshine touching her happy face.

"The charming Miss Vaughan in the role of a farmer's wife. I find it
difficult to imagine, and shrink from the thought of the wide-spread
dismay such a fate will produce among her adorers," added Randal, as
he basked in the glow of the hospitable fire.

"She might do worse; but come to breakfast and do honor to my
handiwork," said Sophie, thinking of her worn-out millionnaire, and
rather nettled by the satiric smile on Randal's lips.

"What an appetite early rising gives one. I feel equal to almost
anything, so let me help wash cups," said Emily, with unusual energy,
when the hearty meal was over and Sophie began to pick up the dishes
as if it was her usual work.

Ruth went to the window to water the flowers, and Randal followed to
make himself agreeable, remembering her defence of him last night.
He was used to admiration from feminine eyes, and flattery from soft
lips, but found something new and charming in the innocent delight
which showed itself at his approach in blushes more eloquent than
words, and shy glances from eyes full of hero-worship.

"I hope you are going to spare me a posy for to-morrow night, since
I can be fine in no other way to do honor to the dance Miss Sophie
proposes for us," he said, leaning in the bay window to look down
on the little girl, with the devoted air he usually wore for pretty
women.

"Anything you like! I should be so glad to have you wear my flowers.
There will be enough for all, and I've nothing else to give to people
who have made me as happy as cousin Sophie and you," answered Ruth,
half drowning her great calla as she spoke with grateful warmth.

"You must make her happy by accepting the invitation to go home with
her which I heard given last night. A peep at the world would do you
good, and be a pleasant change, I think."

"Oh, very pleasant! but would it do me good?" and Ruth looked up with
sudden seriousness in her blue eyes, as a child questions an elder,
eager, yet wistful.

"Why not?" asked Randal, wondering at the hesitation.

"I might grow discontented with things here if I saw splendid houses
and fine people. I am very happy now, and it would break my heart to
lose that happiness, or ever learn to be ashamed of home."

"But don't you long for more pleasure, new scenes and other friends
than these?" asked the man, touched by the little creature's loyalty
to the things she knew and loved.

"Very often, but mother says when I'm ready they will come, so I wait
and try not to be impatient." But Ruth's eyes looked out over the
green leaves as if the longing was very strong within her to see more
of the unknown world lying beyond the mountains that hemmed her in.

"It is natural for birds to hop out of the nest, so I shall expect to
see you over there before long, and ask you how you enjoy your first
flight," said Randal, in a paternal tone that had a curious effect on
Ruth.

To his surprise, she laughed, then blushed like one of her own roses,
and answered with a demure dignity that was very pretty to see.

"I intend to hop soon, but it won't be a very long flight or very far
from mother. She can't spare me, and nobody in the world can fill her
place to me."

"Bless the child, does she think I'm going to make love to her,"
thought Randal, much amused, but quite mistaken. Wiser women had
thought so when he assumed the caressing air with which he beguiled
them into the little revelations of character he liked to use, as the
south wind makes flowers open their hearts to give up their odor, then
leaves them to carry it elsewhere, the more welcome for the stolen
sweetness.

"Perhaps you are right. The maternal wing is a safe shelter for
confiding little souls like you, Miss Ruth. You will be as comfortable
here as your flowers in this sunny window," he said, carelessly
pinching geranium leaves, and ruffling the roses till the pink petals
of the largest fluttered to the floor.

As if she instinctively felt and resented something in the man which
his act symbolized, the girl answered quietly, as she went on with her
work, "Yes, if the frost does not touch me, or careless people spoil
me too soon."

Before Randal could reply Aunt Plumy approached like a maternal hen
who sees her chicken in danger.

"Saul is goin' to haul wood after he's done his chores, mebbe you'd
like to go along? The view is good, the roads well broke, and the day
uncommon fine."

"Thanks; it will be delightful, I dare say," politely responded the
lion, with a secret shudder at the idea of a rural promenade at 8 A.M.
in the winter.

"Come on, then; we'll feed the stock, and then I'll show you how to
yoke oxen," said Saul, with a twinkle in his eye as he led the way,
when his new aide had muffled himself up as if for a polar voyage.

"Now, that's too bad of Saul! He did it on purpose, just to please
you, Sophie," cried Ruth presently, and the girls ran to the window to
behold Randal bravely following his host with a pail of pigs' food in
each hand, and an expression of resigned disgust upon his aristocratic
face.

"To what base uses may we come," quoted Emily, as they all nodded and
smiled upon the victim as he looked back from the barn-yard, where he
was clamorously welcomed by his new charges.

"It is rather a shock at first, but it will do him good, and Saul
won't be too hard upon him, I'm sure," said Sophie, going back to her
work, while Ruth turned her best buds to the sun that they might be
ready for a peace-offering to-morrow.

There was a merry clatter in the big kitchen for an hour; then Aunt
Plumy and her daughter shut themselves up in the pantry to perform
some culinary rites, and the young ladies went to inspect certain
antique costumes laid forth in Sophie's room.

"You see, Em, I thought it would be appropriate to the house and
season to have an old-fashioned dance. Aunt has quantities of ancient
finery stowed away, for great-grandfather Basset was a fine old
gentleman and his family lived in state. Take your choice of the
crimson, blue or silver-gray damask. Ruth is to wear the worked muslin
and quilted white satin skirt, with that coquettish hat."

"Being dark, I'll take the red and trim it up with this fine lace.
You must wear the blue and primrose, with the distracting high-heeled
shoes. Have you any suits for the men?" asked Emily, throwing herself
at once into the all-absorbing matter of costume.

"A claret velvet coat and vest, silk stockings, cocked hat and
snuff-box for Randal. Nothing large enough for Saul, so he must wear
his uniform. Won't Aunt Plumy be superb in this plum-colored satin and
immense cap?"

A delightful morning was spent in adapting the faded finery of the
past to the blooming beauty of the present, and time and tongues flew
till the toot of a horn called them down to dinner.

The girls were amazed to see Randal come whistling up the road with
his trousers tucked into his boots, blue mittens on his hands, and an
unusual amount of energy in his whole figure, as he drove the oxen,
while Saul laughed at his vain attempts to guide the bewildered
beasts.

"It's immense! The view from the hill is well worth seeing, for the
snow glorifies the landscape and reminds one of Switzerland. I'm going
to make a sketch of it this afternoon; better come and enjoy the
delicious freshness, young ladies."

Randal was eating with such an appetite that he did not see the
glances the girls exchanged as they promised to go.

"Bring home some more winter-green, I want things to be real nice, and
we haven't enough for the kitchen," said Ruth, dimpling with girlish
delight as she imagined herself dancing under the green garlands in
her grandmother's wedding gown.

It was very lovely on the hill, for far as the eye could reach lay the
wintry landscape sparkling with the brief beauty of sunshine on virgin
snow. Pines sighed overhead, hardy birds flitted to and fro, and in
all the trodden spots rose the little spires of evergreen ready for
its Christmas duty. Deeper in the wood sounded the measured ring of
axes, the crash of falling trees, while the red shirts of the men
added color to the scene, and a fresh wind brought the aromatic breath
of newly cloven hemlock and pine.

"How beautiful it is! I never knew before what winter woods were like.
Did you, Sophie?" asked Emily, sitting on a stump to enjoy the novel
pleasure at her ease.

"I've found out lately; Saul lets me come as often as I like, and this
fine air seems to make a new creature of me," answered Sophie, looking
about her with sparkling eyes, as if this was a kingdom where she
reigned supreme.

"Something is making a new creature of you, that is very evident. I
haven't yet discovered whether it is the air or some magic herb among
that green stuff you are gathering so diligently;" and Emily laughed
to see the color deepen beautifully in her friend's half-averted face.

"Scarlet is the only wear just now, I find. If we are lost like babes
in the woods there are plenty of redbreasts to cover us with leaves,"
and Randal joined Emily's laugh, with a glance at Saul, who had just
pulled his coat off.

"You wanted to see this tree go down, so stand from under and I'll
show you how it's done," said the farmer, taking up his axe, not
unwilling to gratify his guests and display his manly accomplishments
at the same time.

It was a fine sight, the stalwart man swinging his axe with
magnificent strength and skill, each blow sending a thrill through the
stately tree, till its heart was reached and it tottered to its fall.
Never pausing for breath Saul shook his yellow mane out of his eyes,
and hewed away, while the drops stood on his forehead and his arm
ached, as bent on distinguishing himself as if he had been a knight
tilting against his rival for his lady's favor.

"I don't know which to admire most, the man or his muscle. One doesn't
often see such vigor, size and comeliness in these degenerate days,"
said Randal, mentally booking the fine figure in the red shirt.

"I think we have discovered a rough diamond. I only wonder if Sophie
is going to try and polish it," answered Emily, glancing at her
friend, who stood a little apart, watching the rise and fall of the
axe as intently as if her fate depended on it.

Down rushed the tree at last, and, leaving them to examine a crow's
nest in its branches, Saul went off to his men, as if he found the
praises of his prowess rather too much for him.

Randal fell to sketching, the girls to their garland-making, and for
a little while the sunny woodland nook was full of lively chat and
pleasant laughter, for the air exhilarated them all like wine.
Suddenly a man came running from the wood, pale and anxious, saying,
as he hastened by for help, "Blasted tree fell on him! Bleed to death
before the doctor comes!"

"Who? who?" cried the startled trio.

But the man ran on, with some breathless reply, in which only a name
was audible--"Basset."

"The deuce it is!" and Randal dropped his pencil, while the girls
sprang up in dismay. Then, with one impulse, they hastened to the
distant group, half visible behind the fallen trees and corded wood.

Sophie was there first, and forcing her way through the little crowd
of men, saw a red-shirted figure on the ground, crushed and bleeding,
and threw herself down beside it with a cry that pierced the hearts of
those who heard it.

In the act she saw it was not Saul, and covered her bewildered face as
if to hide its joy. A strong arm lifted her, and the familiar voice
said cheeringly,--

"I'm all right, dear. Poor Bruce is hurt, but we've sent for help.
Better go right home and forget all about it."

"Yes, I will, if I can do nothing;" and Sophie meekly returned to her
friends who stood outside the circle over which Saul's head towered,
assuring them of his safety.

Hoping they had not seen her agitation, she led Emily away, leaving
Randal to give what aid he could and bring them news of the poor
wood-chopper's state.

Aunt Plumy produced the "camphire" the moment she saw Sophie's pale
face, and made her lie down, while the brave old lady trudged briskly
off with bandages and brandy to the scene of action. On her return she
brought comfortable news of the man, so the little flurry blew over
and was forgotten by all but Sophie, who remained pale and quiet all
the evening, tying evergreen as if her life depended on it.

"A good night's sleep will set her up. She ain't used to such things,
dear child, and needs cossetin'," said Aunt Plumy, purring over her
until she was in her bed, with a hot stone at her feet and a bowl of
herb tea to quiet her nerves.

An hour later when Emily went up, she peeped in to see if Sophie was
sleeping nicely, and was surprised to find the invalid wrapped in a
dressing-gown writing busily.

"Last will and testament, or sudden inspiration, dear? How are you?
faint or feverish, delirious or in the dumps! Saul looks so anxious,
and Mrs. Basset hushes us all up so, I came to bed, leaving Randal to
entertain Ruth."

As she spoke Emily saw the papers disappear in a portfolio, and Sophie
rose with a yawn.

"I was writing letters, but I'm sleepy now. Quite over my foolish
fright, thank you. Go and get your beauty sleep that you may dazzle
the natives to-morrow."

"So glad, good night;" and Emily went away, saying to herself,
"Something is going on, and I must find out what it is before I leave.
Sophie can't blind _me_."

But Sophie did all the next day, being delightfully gay at the dinner,
and devoting herself to the young minister who was invited to meet
the distinguished novelist, and evidently being afraid of him, gladly
basked in the smiles of his charming neighbor. A dashing sleigh-ride
occupied the afternoon, and then great was the fun and excitement over
the costumes.

Aunt Plumy laughed till the tears rolled down her cheeks as the girls
compressed her into the plum-colored gown with its short waist,
leg-of-mutton sleeves, and narrow skirt. But a worked scarf hid all
deficiencies, and the towering cap struck awe into the soul of the
most frivolous observer.

"Keep an eye on me, girls, for I shall certainly split somewheres or
lose my head-piece off when I'm trottin' round. What would my blessed
mother say if she could see me rigged out in her best things?" and
with a smile and a sigh the old lady departed to look after "the
boys," and see that the supper was all right.

Three prettier damsels never tripped down the wide staircase than the
brilliant brunette in crimson brocade, the pensive blonde in blue, or
the rosy little bride in old muslin and white satin.

A gallant court gentleman met them in the hall with a superb bow,
and escorted them to the parlor, where Grandma Basset's ghost was
discovered dancing with a modern major in full uniform.

Mutual admiration and many compliments followed, till other ancient
ladies and gentlemen arrived in all manner of queer costumes, and the
old house seemed to wake from its humdrum quietude to sudden music and
merriment, as if a past generation had returned to keep its Christmas
there.

The village fiddler soon struck up the good old tunes, and then the
strangers saw dancing that filled them with mingled mirth and envy; it
was so droll, yet so hearty. The young men, unusually awkward in their
grandfathers' knee-breeches, flapping vests, and swallow-tail coats,
footed it bravely with the buxom girls who were the prettier for their
quaintness, and danced with such vigor that their high combs stood
awry, their furbelows waved wildly, and their cheeks were as red as
their breast-knots, or hose.

It was impossible to stand still, and one after the other the city
folk yielded to the spell, Randal leading off with Ruth, Sophie swept
away by Saul, and Emily being taken possession of by a young giant of
eighteen, who spun her around with a boyish impetuosity that took her
breath away. Even Aunt Plumy was discovered jigging it alone in the
pantry, as if the music was too much for her, and the plates and
glasses jingled gaily on the shelves in time to Money Musk and
Fishers' Hornpipe.

A pause came at last, however, and fans fluttered, heated brows were
wiped, jokes were made, lovers exchanged confidences, and every nook
and corner held a man and maid carrying on the sweet game which is
never out of fashion. There was a glitter of gold lace in the back
entry, and a train of blue and primrose shone in the dim light. There
was a richer crimson than that of the geraniums in the deep window,
and a dainty shoe tapped the bare floor impatiently as the brilliant
black eyes looked everywhere for the court gentleman, while their
owner listened to the gruff prattle of an enamored boy. But in the
upper hall walked a little white ghost as if waiting for some shadowy
companion, and when a dark form appeared ran to take its arm, saying,
in a tone of soft satisfaction,--

"I was so afraid you wouldn't come!"

"Why did you leave me, Ruth?" answered a manly voice in a tone of
surprise, though the small hand slipping from the velvet coat-sleeve
was replaced as if it was pleasant to feel it there.

A pause, and then the other voice answered demurely,--

"Because I was afraid my head would be turned by the fine things you
were saying."

"It is impossible to help saying what one feels to such an artless
little creature as you are. It does me good to admire anything so
fresh and sweet, and won't harm you."

"It might if--"

"If what, my daisy?"

"I believed it," and a laugh seemed to finish the broken sentence
better than the words.

"You may, Ruth, for I do sincerely admire the most genuine girl I have
seen for a long time. And walking here with you in your bridal white I
was just asking myself if I should not be a happier man with a home
of my own and a little wife hanging on my arm than drifting about the
world as I do now with only myself to care for."

"I know you would!" and Ruth spoke so earnestly that Randal was both
touched and startled, fearing he had ventured too far in a mood of
unwonted sentiment, born of the romance of the hour and the sweet
frankness of his companion.

"Then you don't think it would be rash for some sweet woman to take me
in hand and make me happy, since fame is a failure?"

"Oh, no; it would be easy work if she loved you. I know some one--if I
only dared to tell her name."

"Upon my soul, this is cool," and Randal looked down, wondering if the
audacious lady on his arm could be shy Ruth.

If he had seen the malicious merriment in her eyes he would have been
more humiliated still, but they were modestly averted, and the face
under the little hat was full of a soft agitation rather dangerous
even to a man of the world.

"She is a captivating little creature, but it is too soon for anything
but a mild flirtation. I must delay further innocent revelations or I
shall do something rash."

While making this excellent resolution Randal had been pressing the
hand upon his arm and gently pacing down the dimly lighted hall
with the sound of music in his ears, Ruth's sweetest roses in his
button-hole, and a loving little girl beside him, as he thought.

"You shall tell me by and by when we are in town. I am sure you will
come, and meanwhile don't forget me."

"I am going in the spring, but I shall not be with Sophie," answered
Ruth, in a whisper.

"With whom then? I shall long to see you."

"With my husband. I am to be married in May."

"The deuce you are!" escaped Randal, as he stopped short to stare at
his companion, sure she was not in earnest.

But she was, for as he looked the sound of steps coming up the back
stairs made her whole face flush and brighten with the unmistakable
glow of happy love, and she completed Randal's astonishment by running
into the arms of the young minister, saying with an irrepressible
laugh, "Oh, John, why didn't you come before?"

The court gentleman was all right in a moment, and the coolest of
the three as he offered his congratulations and gracefully retired,
leaving the lovers to enjoy the tryst he had delayed. But as he went
down stairs his brows were knit, and he slapped the broad railing
smartly with his cocked hat as if some irritation must find vent in a
more energetic way than merely saying, "Confound the little baggage!"
under his breath.

Such an amazing supper came from Aunt Plumy's big pantry that the city
guests could not eat for laughing at the queer dishes circulating
through the rooms, and copiously partaken of by the hearty young
folks.

Doughnuts and cheese, pie and pickles, cider and tea, baked beans and
custards, cake and cold turkey, bread and butter, plum pudding and
French bonbons, Sophie's contribution.

"May I offer you the native delicacies, and share your plate? Both
are very good, but the china has run short, and after such vigorous
exercise as you have had you must need refreshment. I'm sure I do!"
said Randal, bowing before Emily with a great blue platter laden with
two doughnuts, two wedges of pumpkin pie and two spoons.

The smile with which she welcomed him, the alacrity with which she
made room beside her and seemed to enjoy the supper he brought, was so
soothing to his ruffled spirit that he soon began to feel that there
is no friend like an old friend, that it would not be difficult to
name a sweet woman who would take him in hand and would make him happy
if he cared to ask her, and he began to think he would by and by, it
was so pleasant to sit in that green corner with waves of crimson
brocade flowing over his feet, and a fine face softening beautifully
under his eyes.

The supper was not romantic, but the situation was, and Emily found
that pie ambrosial food eaten with the man she loved, whose eyes
talked more eloquently than the tongue just then busy with a doughnut.
Ruth kept away, but glanced at them as she served her company, and her
own happy experience helped her to see that all was going well in that
quarter. Saul and Sophie emerged from the back entry with shining
countenances, but carefully avoided each other for the rest of the
evening. No one observed this but Aunt Plumy from the recesses of her
pantry, and she folded her hands as if well content, as she murmured
fervently over a pan full of crullers, "Bless the dears! Now I can die
happy."

Every one thought Sophie's old-fashioned dress immensely becoming, and
several of his former men said to Saul with blunt admiration, "Major,
you look to-night as you used to after we'd gained a big battle."

"I feel as if I had," answered the splendid Major, with eyes much
brighter than his buttons, and a heart under them infinitely prouder
than when he was promoted on the field of honor, for his Waterloo was
won.

There was more dancing, followed by games, in which Aunt Plumy shone
pre-eminent, for the supper was off her mind and she could enjoy
herself. There were shouts of merriment as the blithe old lady twirled
the platter, hunted the squirrel, and went to Jerusalem like a girl of
sixteen; her cap in a ruinous condition, and every seam of the purple
dress straining like sails in a gale. It was great fun, but at
midnight it came to an end, and the young folks, still bubbling over
with innocent jollity, went jingling away along the snowy hills,
unanimously pronouncing Mrs. Basset's party the best of the season.

"Never had such a good time in my life!" exclaimed Sophie, as the
family stood together in the kitchen where the candles among the
wreaths were going out, and the floor was strewn with wrecks of past
joy.

"I'm proper glad, dear. Now you all go to bed and lay as late as you
like to-morrow. I'm so kinder worked up I couldn't sleep, so Saul and
me will put things to rights without a mite of noise to disturb you;"
and Aunt Plumy sent them off with a smile that was a benediction,
Sophie thought.

"The dear old soul speaks as if midnight was an unheard-of hour for
Christians to be up. What would she say if she knew how we seldom go
to bed till dawn in the ball season? I'm so wide awake I've half a
mind to pack a little. Randal must go at two, he says, and we shall
want his escort," said Emily, as the girls laid away their brocades in
the press in Sophie's room.

"I'm not going. Aunt can't spare me, and there is nothing to go for
yet," answered Sophie, beginning to take the white chrysanthemums out
of her pretty hair.

"My dear child, you will die of ennui up here. Very nice for a week
or so, but frightful for a winter. We are going to be very gay, and
cannot get on without you," cried Emily dismayed at the suggestion.

"You will have to, for I'm not coming. I am very happy here, and so
tired of the frivolous life I lead in town, that I have decided to
try a better one," and Sophie's mirror reflected a face full of the
sweetest content.

"Have you lost your mind? experienced religion? or any other dreadful
thing? You always were odd, but this last freak is the strangest of
all. What will your guardian say, and the world?" added Emily in the
awe-stricken tone of one who stood in fear of the omnipotent Mrs.
Grundy.

"Guardy will be glad to be rid of me, and I don't care that for the
world," cried Sophie, snapping her fingers with a joyful sort of
recklessness which completed Emily's bewilderment.

"But Mr. Hammond? Are you going to throw away millions, lose your
chance of making the best match in the city, and driving the girls of
our set out of their wits with envy?"

Sophie laughed at her friend's despairing cry, and turning round said
quietly,--

"I wrote to Mr. Hammond last night, and this evening received my
reward for being an honest girl. Saul and I are to be married in the
spring when Ruth is."

Emily fell prone upon the bed as if the announcement was too much
for her, but was up again in an instant to declare with prophetic
solemnity,--

"I knew something was going on, but hoped to get you away before you
were lost. Sophie, you will repent. Be warned, and forget this sad
delusion."

"Too late for that. The pang I suffered yesterday when I thought Saul
was dead showed me how well I loved him. To-night he asked me to stay,
and no power in the world can part us. Oh! Emily, it is all so sweet,
so beautiful, that _everything_ is possible, and I know I shall be
happy in this dear old home, full of love and peace and honest hearts.
I only hope you may find as true and tender a man to live for as my
Saul."

Sophie's face was more eloquent than her fervent words, and Emily
beautifully illustrated the inconsistency of her sex by suddenly
embracing her friend, with the incoherent exclamation, "I think I
have, dear! Your brave Saul is worth a dozen old Hammonds, and I do
believe you are right."

It is unnecessary to tell how, as if drawn by the irresistible magic
of sympathy, Ruth and her mother crept in one by one to join the
midnight conference and add their smiles and tears, tender hopes and
proud delight to the joys of that memorable hour. Nor how Saul, unable
to sleep, mounted guard below, and meeting Randal prowling down to
soothe his nerves with a surreptitious cigar found it impossible to
help confiding to his attentive ear the happiness that would break
bounds and overflow in unusual eloquence.

Peace fell upon the old house at last, and all slept as if some magic
herb had touched their eyelids, bringing blissful dreams and a glad
awakening.

"Can't we persuade you to come with us, Miss Sophie?" asked Randal
next day, as they made their adieux.

"I'm under orders now, and dare not disobey my superior officer,"
answered Sophie, handing her Major his driving gloves, with a look
which plainly showed that she had joined the great army of devoted
women who enlist for life and ask no pay but love.

"I shall depend on being invited to your wedding, then, and yours,
too, Miss Ruth," added Randal, shaking hands with "the little
baggage," as if he had quite forgiven her mockery and forgotten his
own brief lapse into sentiment.

Before she could reply Aunt Plumy said, in a tone of calm conviction,
that made them all laugh, and some of them look conscious,--

"Spring is a good time for weddin's, and I shouldn't wonder ef there
was quite a number."

"Nor I;" and Saul and Sophie smiled at one another as they saw how
carefully Randal arranged Emily's wraps.

Then with kisses, thanks and all the good wishes that happy hearts
could imagine, the guests drove away, to remember long and gratefully
that pleasant country Christmas.




ON PICKET DUTY

"Better late than never."


"What air you thinkin' of, Phil?"

"My wife, Dick."

"So was I! Ain't it odd how fellers fall to thinkin' of thar little
women, when they get a quiet spell like this?"

"Fortunate for us that we do get it, and have such memories to keep
us brave and honest through the trials and temptations of a life like
ours."

October moonlight shone clearly on the solitary tree, draped with
gray moss, scarred by lightning and warped by wind, looking like a
venerable warrior, whose long campaign was nearly done; and underneath
was posted the guard of four. Behind them twinkled many camp-fires on
a distant plain, before them wound a road ploughed by the passage of
an army, strewn with the relics of a rout. On the right, a sluggish
river glided, like a serpent, stealthy, sinuous, and dark, into a
seemingly impervious jungle; on the left, a Southern swamp filled the
air with malarial damps, swarms of noisome life, and discordant sounds
that robbed the hour of its repose. The men were friends as well as
comrades, for though gathered from the four quarters of the Union,
and dissimilar in education, character, and tastes, the same spirit
animated all; the routine of camp-life threw them much together, and
mutual esteem soon grew into a bond of mutual good fellowship.

Thorn was a Massachusetts volunteer; a man who seemed too early old,
too early embittered by some cross, for, though grim of countenance,
rough of speech, cold of manner, a keen observer would have soon
discovered traces of a deeper, warmer nature hidden behind the
repellent front he turned upon the world. A true New Englander,
thoughtful, acute, reticent, and opinionated; yet earnest withal,
intensely patriotic, and often humorous, despite a touch of Puritan
austerity.

Phil, the "romantic chap," as he was called, looked his character to
the life. Slender, swarthy, melancholy-eyed, and darkly-bearded; with
feminine features, mellow voice, and alternately languid or vivacious
manners. A child of the South in nature as in aspect, ardent and
proud; fitfully aspiring and despairing; without the native energy
which moulds character and ennobles life. Months of discipline and
devotion had done much for him, and some deep experience was fast
ripening the youth into a man.

Flint, the long-limbed lumberman, from the wilds of Maine, was a
conscript who, when government demanded his money or his life,
calculated the cost, and decided that the cash would be a dead loss
and the claim might be repeated, whereas the conscript would get both
pay and plunder out of government, while taking excellent care
that government got very little out of him. A shrewd, slow-spoken,
self-reliant specimen, was Flint; yet something of the fresh flavor of
the backwoods lingered in him still, as if Nature were loath to give
him up, and left the mark of her motherly hand upon him, as she leaves
it in a dry, pale lichen, on the bosom of the roughest stone.

Dick "hailed" from Illinois, and was a comely young fellow, full of
dash and daring; rough and rowdy, generous and jolly, overflowing with
spirits and ready for a free fight with all the world.

Silence followed the last words, while the friendly moon climbed up
the sky. Each man's eye followed it, and each man's heart was busy
with remembrances of other eyes and hearts that might be watching and
wishing as theirs watched and wished. In the silence, each shaped for
himself that vision of home that brightens so many camp-fires, haunts
so many dreamers under canvas roofs, and keeps so many turbulent
natures tender by memories which often are both solace and salvation.

Thorn paced to and fro, his rifle on his shoulder, vigilant and
soldierly, however soft his heart might be. Phil leaned against the
tree, one hand in the breast of his blue jacket, on the painted
presentment of the face his fancy was picturing in the golden circle
of the moon. Flint lounged on the sward, whistling softly as he
whittled at a fallen bough. Dick was flat on his back, heels in air,
cigar in mouth, and some hilarious notion in his mind, for suddenly he
broke into a laugh.

"What is it, lad?" asked Thorn, pausing in his tramp, as if willing to
be drawn from the disturbing thought that made his black brows lower
and his mouth look grim.

"Thinkin' of my wife, and wishin' she was here, bless her heart! set
me rememberin' how I see her fust, and so I roared, as I always do
when it comes into my head."

"How was it? Come, reel off a yarn, and let's hear houw yeou hitched
teams," said Flint, always glad to get information concerning his
neighbors, if it could be cheaply done.

"Tellin' how we found our wives wouldn't be a bad game, would it,
Phil?"

"I'm agreeable; but let's have your romance first."

"Devilish little of that about me or any of my doin's. I hate
sentimental bosh as much as you hate slang, and should have been a
bachelor to this day if I hadn't seen Kitty jest as I did. You see,
I'd been too busy larkin' round to get time for marryin', till a
couple of years ago, when I did up the job double-quick, as I'd like
to do this thunderin' slow one, hang it all!"

"Halt a minute till I give a look, for this picket isn't going to be
driven in or taken while I'm on guard."

Down his beat went Thorn, reconnoitring river, road, and swamp,
as thoroughly as one pair of keen eyes could do it, and came back
satisfied, but still growling like a faithful mastiff on the watch;
performances which he repeated at intervals till his own turn came.

"I didn't have to go out of my own State for a wife, you'd better
believe," began Dick, with a boast, as usual; "for we raise as fine a
crop of girls thar as any State in or out of the Union, and don't mind
raisin' Cain with any man who denies it. I was out on a gunnin' tramp
with Joe Partridge, a cousin of mine,--poor old chap! he fired his
last shot at Gettysburg, and died game in a way he didn't dream of the
day we popped off the birds together. It ain't right to joke that way;
I won't if I can help it; but a feller gets awfully kind of heathenish
these times, don't he?"

"Settle up them scores byme-by; fightin' Christians is scurse raound
here. Fire away, Dick."

"Well, we got as hungry as hounds half a dozen mile from home, and
when a farmhouse hove in sight, Joe said he 'd ask for a bite, and
leave some of the plunder for pay. I was visitin' Joe, didn't know
folks round, and backed out of the beggin' part of the job; so he went
ahead alone. We'd come out of the woods behind the house, and while
Joe was foragin', I took a reconnoissance. The view was fust-rate, for
the main part of it was a girl airin' beds on the roof of a stoop.
Now, jest about that time, havin' a leisure spell, I'd begun to think
of marryin', and took a look at all the girls I met, with an eye to
business. I s'pose every man has some sort of an idee or pattern of
the wife he wants; pretty and plucky, good and gay was mine, but I'd
never found it till I see Kitty; and as she didn't see me, I had the
advantage and took an extra long stare."

"What was her good p'ints, hey?"

"Oh, well, she had a wide-awake pair of eyes, a bright, jolly sort
of a face, lots of curly hair tumblin' out of her net, a trig little
figger, and a pair of the neatest feet and ankles that ever stepped.
'Pretty,' thinks I; 'so far so good.' The way she whacked the pillers,
shook the blankets, and pitched into the beds was a caution; specially
one blunderin' old feather-bed that wouldn't do nothin' but sag round
in a pigheaded sort of way, that would have made most girls get mad
and give up. Kitty didn't, but just wrastled with it like a good one,
till she got it turned, banged, and spread to suit her; then she
plumped down in the middle of it, with a sarcy little nod and chuckle
to herself, that tickled me mightily. 'Plucky,' thinks I, 'better
'n' better.' Jest then an old woman came flyin' out the back-door,
callin', 'Kitty! Kitty! Squire Partridge's son's here, 'long with a
friend; been gunnin', want luncheon, and I'm all in the suds; do come
down and see to 'em.'

"'Where are they?' says Kitty, scrambling up her hair and settlin' her
gown in a jiffy, as women have a knack of doin', you know.

"'Mr. Joe's in the front entry; the other man's somewheres round,
Billy says, waitin' till I send word whether they can stop. I darsn't
till I'd seen you, for I can't do nothin', I'm in such a mess,' says
the old lady.

"'So am I, for I can't get in except by the entry window, and he'll
see me,' says Kitty, gigglin' at the thoughts of Joe.

"'Come down the ladder, there's a dear. I'll pull it round and keep it
stiddy,' says the mother.

"'Oh, ma, don't ask me!' says Kitty, with a shiver. 'I'm dreadfully
scared of ladders since I broke my arm off this very one. It's so
high, it makes me dizzy jest to think of.'

"'Well, then, I'll do the best I can; but I wish them boys was to
Jericho!' says the old lady, with a groan, for she was fat and hot,
had her gown pinned up, and was in a fluster generally. She was goin'
off rather huffy, when Kitty called out,--

"'Stop, ma! I'll come down and help you, only ketch me if I tumble.'

"She looked scared but stiddy, and I'll bet it took as much grit for
her to do it as for one of us to face a battery. It don't seem much to
tell of, but I wish I may be hit if it wasn't a right down dutiful
and clever thing to see done. When the old lady took her off at the
bottom, with a good motherly hug, 'Good,' thinks I; 'what more do you
want?'"

"A snug little property wouldn't a ben bad, I reckon," said Flint.

"Well, she had it, old skin-flint, though I didn't know or care about
it then. What a jolly row she'd make if she knew I was tellin' the
ladder part of the story! She always does when I get to it, and makes
believe cry, with her head in my breast-pocket, or any such handy
place, till I take it out and swear I'll never do so ag'in. Poor
little Kit, I wonder what she's doin' now. Thinkin' of me, I'll bet."

Dick paused, pulled his cap lower over his eyes, and smoked a minute
with more energy than enjoyment, for his cigar was out and he did not
perceive it.

"That's not all, is it?" asked Thorn, taking a fatherly interest in
the younger man's love passages.

"Not quite. 'Fore long, Joe whistled, and as I always take short cuts
everywhar, I put in at the back-door, jest as Kitty come trottin' out
of the pantry with a big berry-pie in her hand. I startled her, she
tripped over the sill and down she come; the dish flew one way, the
pie flopped into her lap, the juice spatterin' my boots and her clean
gown. I thought she'd cry, scold, have hysterics, or some confounded
thing or other; but she jest sat still a minute, then looked up at
me with a great blue splash on her face, and went off into the
good-naturedest gale of laughin' you ever heard in your life. That
finished me. 'Gay,' thinks I; 'go in and win.' So I did; made love
hand over hand, while I stayed with Joe; pupposed a fortnight after,
married her in three months, and there she is, a tiptop little woman,
with a pair of stunnin' boys in her arms!"

Out came a well-worn case, and Dick proudly displayed the likeness of
a stout, much bejewelled young woman with two staring infants on her
knee. In his sight, the poor picture was a more perfect work of art
than any of Sir Joshua's baby-beauties, or Raphael's Madonnas, and the
little story needed no better sequel than the young father's praises
of his twins, the covert kiss he gave their mother when he turned
as if to get a clearer light upon the face. Ashamed to show the
tenderness that filled his honest heart, he hummed "Kingdom Coming,"
relit his cigar, and presently began to talk again.

"Now, then, Flint, it's your turn to keep guard, and Thorn's to tell
his romance. Come, don't try to shirk; it does a man good to talk of
such things, and we're all mates here."

"In some cases it don't do any good to talk of such things; better let
'em alone," muttered Thorn, as he reluctantly sat down, while Flint as
reluctantly departed.

With a glance and gesture of real affection, Phil laid his hand upon
his comrade's knee, saying in his persuasive voice, "Old fellow,
it _will_ do you good, because I know you often long to speak of
something that weighs upon you. You've kept us steady many a time,
and done us no end of kindnesses; why be too proud to let us give our
sympathy in return, if nothing more?"

Thorn's big hand closed over the slender one upon his knee, and the
mild expression, so rarely seen upon his face, passed over it as he
replied,--

"I think I could tell you almost anything if you asked me that way,
my boy. It isn't that I am too proud,--and you're right about my
sometimes wanting to free my mind,--but it's because a man of forty
don't just like to open out to young fellows, if there is any danger
of their laughing at him, though he may deserve it. I guess there
isn't now, and I'll tell you how I found my wife."

Dick sat up, and Phil drew nearer, for the earnestness that was in
the man dignified his plain speech, and inspired an interest in his
history, even before it was begun. Looking gravely at the river and
never at his hearers, as if still a little shy of confidants, yet
grateful for the relief of words, Thorn began abruptly:--

"I never hear the number eighty-four without clapping my hand to my
left breast and missing my badge. You know I was on the police in New
York, before the war, and that's about all you do know yet. One bitter
cold night I was going my rounds for the last time, when, as I turned
a corner, I saw there was a trifle of work to be done. It was a bad
part of the city, full of dirt and deviltry; one of the streets led to
a ferry, and at the corner an old woman had an apple-stall. The poor
soul had dropped asleep, worn out with the cold, and there were her
goods left with no one to watch 'em. Somebody was watching 'em.
however; a girl, with a ragged shawl over her head, stood at the mouth
of an alley close by, waiting for a chance to grab something. I'd seen
her there when I went by before, and mistrusted she was up to some
mischief; as I turned the corner, she put out her hand and cribbed an
apple. She saw me the minute she did it, but neither dropped it nor
ran, only stood stock still with the apple in her hand till I came up.

"'This won't do, my girl,' said I. I never could be harsh with 'em,
poor things! She laid it back and looked up at me with a miserable
sort of a smile, that made me put my hand in my pocket to fish for a
ninepence before she spoke.

"'I know it won't,' she says. 'I didn't want to do it, it's so mean,
but I'm awful hungry, sir.'

"'Better run home and get your supper, then.'

"'I've got no home.'

"'Where do you live?'

"'In the street.'

"'Where do you sleep?'

"'Anywhere; last night in the lock-up, and I thought I'd get in there
again, if I did that when you saw me. I like to go there, it's warm
and safe.'

"'If I don't take you there, what will you do?'

"'Don't know. I could go over there and dance again as I used to, but
being sick has made me ugly, so they won't have me, and no one else
will take me because I have been there once.'

"I looked where she pointed, and thanked the Lord that they wouldn't
take her. It was one of those low theatres that do so much damage to
the like of her; there was a gambling place one side of it, an eating
saloon the other. I was new to the work then, but though I'd heard
about hunger and homelessness often enough, I'd never had this sort of
thing, nor seen that look on a girl's face. A white, pinched face hers
was, with frightened, tired-looking eyes, but so innocent! She wasn't
more than sixteen, had been pretty once, I saw, looked sick and
starved now, and seemed just the most helpless, hopeless little thing
that ever was.

"'You 'd better come to the Station for to-night, and we'll see to you
to-morrow,' says I.

"'Thank you, sir,' says she, looking as grateful as if I'd asked her
home. I suppose I did speak kind of fatherly. I ain't ashamed to say I
felt so, seeing what a child she was; nor to own that when she put her
little hand in mine, it hurt me to feel how thin and cold it was. We
passed the eating-house where the red lights made her face as rosy as
it ought to have been; there was meat and pies in the window, and the
poor thing stopped to look. It was too much for her; off came her
shawl, and she said in that coaxing way of hers,--

"'I wish you'd let me stop at the place close by and sell this;
they'll give a little for it, and I'll get some supper. I've had
nothing since yesterday morning, and maybe cold is easier to bear than
hunger.'

"'Have you nothing better than that to sell?' I says, not quite sure
that she wasn't all a humbug, like so many of 'em. She seemed to see
that, and looked up at me again with such innocent eyes, I couldn't
doubt her when she said, shivering with something beside the cold,--

"'Nothing but myself.' Then the tears came, and she laid her head
clown on my arm, sobbing,--'Keep me! oh, do keep me safe somewhere!'"

Thorn choked here, steadied his voice with a resolute hem! but could
only add one sentence more,--

"That's how I found my wife."

"Come, don't stop thar. I told the whole o' mine, you do the same.
Whar did you take her? how'd it all come round?"

"Please tell us, Thorn."

The gentler request was answered presently, very steadily, very
quietly.

"I was always a soft-hearted fellow, though you wouldn't think it now,
and when that little girl asked me to keep her safe, I just did it.
I took her to a good woman whom I knew, for I hadn't any women folks
belonging to me, nor any place but that to put her in. She stayed
there till spring working for her keep, growing brighter, prettier,
every day, and fonder of me, I thought. If I believed in witchcraft, I
shouldn't think myself such a fool as I do now, but I don't believe in
it, and to this day I can't understand how I came to do it. To be sure
I was a lonely man, without kith or kin, had never had a sweetheart in
my life, or been much with women since my mother died. Maybe that's
why I was so bewitched with Mary, for she had little ways with her
that took your fancy and made you love her whether you would or no.
I found her father was an honest fellow enough, a fiddler in some
theatre; that he'd taken good care of Mary till he died, leaving
precious little but advice for her to live on. She'd tried to get
work, failed, spent all she had, got sick, and was going to the bad,
as the poor souls can hardly help doing with so many ready to give
them a shove. It's no use trying to make a bad job better; so the long
and short of it was, I thought she loved me; God knows I loved her!
and I married her before the year was out."

"Show us her picture; I know you've got one; all the fellows have,
though half of 'em won't own up."

"I've only got part of one. I once saved my little girl, and her
picture once saved me."

From an inner pocket Thorn produced a woman's housewife, carefully
untied it, though all its implements were missing but a little
thimble, and from one of its compartments took a flattened bullet and
the remnants of a picture.

"I gave her that the first Christmas after I found her. She wasn't as
tidy about her clothes as I liked to see, and I thought if I gave her
a handy thing like this, she'd be willing to sew. But she only made
one shirt for me, and then got tired, so I keep it like an old fool,
as I am. Yes, that's the bit of lead that would have done for me, if
Mary's likeness hadn't been just where it was."

"You'll like to show her this when you go home, won't you?" said Dick,
as he took up the bullet, while Phil examined the marred picture, and
Thorn poised the little thimble on his big finger, with a sigh.

"How can I, when I don't know where she is, and camp is all the home
I've got!"

The words broke from him like a sudden groan, when some old wound is
rudely touched. Both of the young men started, both laid back the
relics they had taken up, and turned their eyes from Thorn's face,
across which swept a look of shame and sorrow, too significant to be
misunderstood. Their silence assured him of their sympathy, and, as if
that touch of friendliness unlocked his heavy heart, he eased it by
a full confession. When he spoke again, it was with the calmness of
repressed emotion, a calmness more touching to his mates than the most
passionate outbreak, the most pathetic lamentation; for the coarse
camp-phrases seemed to drop from his vocabulary; more than once his
softened voice grew tremulous, and to the words "my little girl,"
there went a tenderness that proved how dear a place she still
retained in that deep heart of his.

"Boys, I've gone so far; I may as well finish; and you'll see I'm not
without some cause for my stern looks and ways; you'll pity me, and
from you I'll take the comfort of it. It's only the old story,--I
married her, worked for her, lived for her, and kept my little girl
like a lady. I should have known that I was too old and sober for a
young thing like that, for the life she led before the pinch came
just suited her. She liked to be admired, to dress and dance and make
herself pretty for all the world to see; not to keep house for a quiet
man like me. Idleness wasn't good for her, it bred discontent; then
some of her old friends, who'd left her in her trouble, found her out
when better times came round, and tried to get her back again. I was
away all day, I didn't know how things were going, and she wasn't open
with me, afraid she said; I was so grave, and hated theatres so. She
got courage finally to tell me that she wasn't happy; that she wanted
to dance again, and asked me if she mightn't. I'd rather have had her
ask me to put her in a fire, for I _did_ hate theatres, and was bred
to; others think they're no harm. I do; and knew it was a bad life for
a girl like mine. It pampers vanity, and vanity is the Devil's help
with such; so I said No, kindly at first, sharp and stern when she
kept on teasing. That roused her spirit. 'I will go!' she said, one
day. 'Not while you are my wife,' I answered back; and neither said
any more, but she gave me a look I didn't think she could, and I
resolved to take her away from temptation before worse came of it.

"I didn't tell her my plan; but I resigned my place, spent a week or
more finding and fixing a little home for her out in the wholesome
country, where she'd be safe from theatres and disreputable friends,
and maybe learn to love me better when she saw how much she was to
me. It was coming summer, and I made things look as home-like and as
pretty as I could. She liked flowers, and I fixed a garden for her;
she was fond of pets, and I got her a bird, a kitten, and a dog to
play with her; she fancied gay colors and tasty little matters, so I
filled her rooms with all the handsome things I could afford, and when
it was done, I was as pleased as any boy, thinking what happy times
we'd have together and how pleased she'd be. Boys, when I went to tell
her and to take her to her little home, she was gone."

"Who with?"

"With those cursed friends of her; a party of them left the city just
then; she was wild to go; she had money now, and all her good looks
back again. They teased and tempted her; I wasn't there to keep her,
and she went, leaving a line behind to tell me that she loved the old
life more than the new; that my house was a prison, and she hoped I'd
let her go in peace. That almost killed me; but I managed to bear it,
for I knew most of the fault was mine; but it was awful bitter to
think I hadn't saved her, after all."

"Oh, Thorn! what did you do?"

"Went straight after her; found her dancing in Philadelphia, with
paint on her cheeks, trinkets on her neck and arms, looking prettier
than ever; but the innocent eyes were gone, and I couldn't see my
little girl in the bold, handsome woman twirling there before the
footlights. She saw me, looked scared at first, then smiled, and
danced on with her eyes upon me, as if she said,--

"'See! I'm happy now; go away and let me be.'

"I couldn't stand that, and got out somehow. People thought me mad, or
drunk; I didn't care, I only wanted to see her once in quiet and try
to get her home. I couldn't do it then nor afterwards by fair means,
and I wouldn't try force. I wrote to her, promised to forgive her,
begged her to come back, or let me keep her honestly somewhere away
from me. But she never answered, never came, and I have never tried
again."

"She wasn't worthy of you, Thorn; you jest forgit her."

"I wish I could! I wish I could!" In his voice quivered an almost
passionate regret, and a great sob heaved his chest, as he turned his
face away to hide the love and longing, still so tender and so strong.

"Don't say that, Dick; such fidelity should make us charitable for
its own sake. There is always time for penitence, always certainty of
pardon. Take heart, Thorn, you may not wait in vain, and she may yet
return to you."

"I know she will! I've dreamed of it, I've prayed for it; every battle
I come out of safe makes me surer that I was kept for that, and when
I've borne enough to atone for my part of the fault, I'll be repaid
for all my patience, all my pain, by finding her again. She knows how
well I love her still, and if there comes a time when she is sick and
poor and all alone again, then she'll remember her old John, then
she'll come home and let me take her in."

Hope shone in Thorn's melancholy eyes, and long-suffering,
all-forgiving love beautified the rough, brown face, as he folded his
arms and bent his gray head on his breast, as if the wanderer were
already come.

The emotion which Dick scorned to show on his own account was freely
manifested for another, as he sniffed audibly, and, boy-like, drew his
sleeve across his eyes. But Phil, with the delicate perception of a
finer nature, felt that the truest kindness he could show his friend
was to distract his thoughts from himself, to spare him any comments,
and lessen the embarrassment which would surely follow such unwonted
confidence.

"Now I'll relieve Flint, and he will give you a laugh. Come on, Hiram,
and tell us about your Beulah."

The gentleman addressed had performed his duty by sitting on a fence
and "righting up" his pockets, to beguile the tedium of his exile.
Before his multitudinous possessions could be restored to their native
sphere, Thorn was himself again, and on his feet.

"Stay where you are, Phil; I like to tramp, it seems like old times,
and I know you're tired. Just forget all this I've been saying, and go
on as before. Thank you, boys! thank you," and with a grasp of the two
hands extended to him, he strode away along the path already worn by
his own restless feet.

"It's done him good, and I'm glad of that; but I'd like to see the
little baggage that bewitched the poor old boy, wouldn't you, Phil?"

"Hush! here's Flint."

"What's up naow? want me tew address the meetin', hey? I'm willin',
only the laugh's ruther ag'inst me, ef I tell that story; expect
you'll like it all the better fer that." Flint coiled up his long
limbs, put his hands in his pockets, chewed meditatively for a moment,
and then began, with his slowest drawl:--

"Waal, sir, it's pretty nigh ten year ago, I was damster daown tew
Oldtaown, clos't to Banggore. My folks lived tew Bethel; there was
only the old man, and Aunt Siloam, keepin' house fer him, seein' as I
was the only chick he hed. I hedn't heared from 'em fer a long spell,
when there come a letter sayin' the old man was breakin' up. He'd said
it every spring fer a number er years, and I didn't mind it no more'n
the breakin' up er the river; not so much, jest then; fer the gret
spring drive was comin' on, and my hands was tew full to quit work all
tew oncet. I sent word I'd be 'long 'fore a gret while, and byme-by I
went. I ought tew hev gone at fust; but they'd sung aout 'Wolf!' so
often I warn't scared; an' sure 'nuff the wolf did come at last.
Father hed been dead and berried a week when I got there, and aunt
was so mad she wouldn't write, nor scurcely speak tew me for a
consider'ble spell. I didn't blame her a mite, and felt jest the wust
kind; so I give in every way, and fetched her raound. Yeou see I bed
a cousin who'd kind er took my place tew hum while I was off, an'
the old man hed left him a good slice er his money, an' me the farm,
hopin' to keep me there. He'd never liked the lumberin' bizness, an'
hankered arfter me a sight, I faound. Waal, seem' haow 'twas, I tried
tew please him, late as it was; but ef there was ennything I did
spleen ag'inst it was farmin', 'specially arfter the smart times I'd
ben hevin', up Oldtaown way. Yeou don't know nothin' abaout it; but ef
yeou want tew see high dewin's, jest hitch onto a timber-drive an' go
it daown along them lakes and rivers, say from Kaumchenungamooth tew
Punnobscot Bay. Guess yeou'd see a thing or tew, an' find livin' on a
log come as handy as ef you was born a turtle.

"Waal, I stood it one summer; but it was the longest kind of a job.
Come fall I turned contry, darned the farm, and vaowed I'd go back tew
loggin'. Aunt hed got fond er me by that time, and felt dreadful bad
abaout my leavin' on her. Cousin Siah, as we called Josiah, didn't
cotton tew the old woman, though he did tew her cash; but we hitched
along fust-rate. She was 'tached tew the place, hated tew hev it let
or sold, thought I'd go to everlastin' rewin ef I took tew lumberin'
ag'in, an' hevin' a tidy little sum er money all her own, she took
a notion tew buy me off. 'Hiram,' sez she, 'ef yeou'll stay to hum,
merry some smart girl, an' kerry on the farm, I'll leave yeou the hull
er my fortin. Ef yeou don't, I'll leave every cent on't tew Siah,
though he ain't done as waal by me as yeou hev. Come,' sez she, 'I'm
breakin' up like brother; I shan't wurry any one a gret while, and
'fore spring I dessay you'll hev cause tew rejice that yeou done as
Aunt Si counselled yeou.'

"Now, that idee kinder took me, seem' I hedn't no overpaourin' love
fer cousin; but I brewdid over it a spell 'fore I 'greed. Fin'lly, I
said I'd dew it, as it warn't a hard nor a bad trade; and begun to
look raound fer Mis Flint, Jr. Aunt was dreadf'l pleased; but 'mazin'
pertickler as tew who was goin' tew stan' in her shoes, when she was
fetched up ag'inst the etarnal boom. There was a sight er likely
womenfolks raound taown; but aunt she set her foot daown that Mis
Flint must be smart, pious, an' good-natered; harnsome she didn't say
nothin' abaout, bein' the humliest woman in the State er Maine. I hed
my own calk'lations on that p'int, an' went sparkin' two or three er
the pootiest gals, all that winter. I warn't in no hurry, fer merryin'
is an awful resky bizness; an' I wan't goan to be took in by nobuddy.
Some haouw I couldn't make up my mind which I'd hev, and kept dodgin',
all ready to slew raound, an' hitch on tew ary one that seemed
likeliest. 'Long in March, aunt, she ketched cold, took tew her bed,
got wuss, an' told me tew hurry up, fer nary cent should I hev, ef I
warn't safely merried 'fore she stepped out. I thought that was ruther
craoudin' a feller; but I see she was goan sure, an' I'd got inter a
way er considerin' the cash mine, so that it come hard to hear abaout
givin' on 't up. Off I went that evenin' an' asked Almiry Nash ef
she'd hev me. No, she wouldn't; I'd shilly-shallyed so long, she'd got
tired er waitin' and took tew keepin' company with a doctor daown ter
Banggore, where she'd ben visitin' a spell. I didn't find that as hard
a nub to swaller, as I'd a thought I would, though Almiry was the
richest, pootiest, and good-naterest of the lot. Aunt larfed waal, an'
told me tew try ag'in; so a couple er nights arfter, I spruced up, an'
went over to Car'line Miles's; she was as smart as old cheese, an'
waal off in tew the barg'in. I was just as sure she'd hev me, as I be
that I'm gittin' the rewmatiz a settin' in this ma'sh. But that minx,
Almiry, hed ben and let on abaout her own sarsy way er servin' on
me, an' Car'line jest up an' said she warn't goan to hev annybuddy's
leavin's; so daown I come ag'in.

"Things was gettin' desper't by that time; fer aunt was failin' rapid,
an' the story hed leaked aout some way, so the hull taown was gigglin'
over it. I thought I'd better quit them parts; but aunt she showed me
her will all done complete, 'sceptin the fust name er the legatee.
'There,' sez she, 'it all depends on yeou, whether that place is took
by Hiram or Josiah. It's easy done, an' so it's goan tew stan till the
last minit.' That riled me consid'able, an' I streaked off tew May
Jane Simlin's. She wan't very waal off, nor extra harnsome, but she
was pious the worst kind, an' dreadf'l clever to them she fancied.
But I was daown on my luck ag'in; fer at the fust word I spoke of
merryin', she showed me the door, an' give me to understan' that she
couldn't think er hevin' a man that warn't a church-member, that
hadn't experienced religion, or even ben struck with conviction, an'
all the rest on't. Ef anny one hed a wanted tew hev seen a walkin'
hornet's nest, they could hev done it cheap that night, as I went hum.
I jest bounced intew the kitchen, chucked my hat intew one corner,
my coat intew 'nother, kicked the cat, cussed the fire, drawed up a
chair, and set scaoulin' like sixty, bein' tew mad fer talkin'. The
young woman that was nussin' aunt,--Bewlah Blish, by name,--was a
cooking grewel on the coals, and 'peared tew understan' the mess I was
in; but she didn't say nothin', only blowed up the fire, fetched me a
mug er cider, an' went raound so kinder quiet, and sympathizing that I
found the wrinkles in my temper gettin' smoothed aout 'mazin' quick;
an' fore long I made a clean breast er the hull thing. Bewlah larfed,
but I didn't mind her doin' on't, for she sez, sez she, real sort o'
cunnin',--

"'Poor Hiram! they didn't use yeou waal. Yeou ought to hev tried some
er the poor an' humly girls; they'd a been glad an' grateful fer such
a sweetheart as yeou be.'

"I was good-natered ag'in by that time, an' I sez, larfin' along with
her, 'Waal, I've got three mittens, but I guess I might's waal hev
'nother, and that will make two pair complete. Say, Bewlah, will yeou
hev me?'

"'Yes, I will.' sez she.

"'Reelly?' sez I.

"'Solemn trew,' sez she.

"Ef she'd up an' slapped me in the face, I shouldn't hev ben more
throwed aback, fer I never mistrusted she cared two chips for me. I
jest set an' gawped; fer she was 'solemn trew,' I see that with half
an eye, an' it kinder took my breath away. Bewlah drawed the grewel
off the fire, wiped her hands, an' stood lookin' at me a minnet, then
she sez, slow an' quiet, but tremblin' a little, as women hev a way er
doin', when they've consid'able steam aboard,--

"'Hiram, other folks think lumberin' has spilt yeou; _I_ don't; they
call you rough an' rewd; _I_ know you've got a real kind heart fer
them as knows haow tew find it. Them girls give yeou up so easy,
'cause they never loved yeou, an' yeou give them up 'cause you only
thought abaout their looks an' money. I'm humly, an' I'm poor; but
I've loved yeou ever sence we went a-nuttin' years ago, an' yeou shook
daown fer me, kerried my bag, and kissed me tew the gate, when all the
others shunned me, 'cause my father drank an' I was shabby dressed,
ugly, an' shy. Yeou asked me in sport, I answered in airnest; but I
don't expect nothin' unless yeou mean as I mean. Like me, Hiram, or
leave me, it won't make no odds in my lovin' of yeou, nor helpin' of
yeou, ef I kin.'

"'Tain't easy tew say haouw I felt, while she was goin' on that way,
but my idees was tumblin' raound inside er me, as ef half a dozen dams
was broke loose all tew oncet. One think was ruther stiddier 'n the
rest, an' that was that I liked Bewlah more 'n I knew. I begun tew see
what kep' me loafin' tew hum so much, sence aunt was took daown; why I
wan't in no hurry tew git them other gals, an' haow I come tew pocket
my mittens so easy arfter the fust rile was over. Bewlah _was_ humly,
poor in flesh, dreadful freckled, hed red hair, black eyes, an' a gret
mold side of her nose. But I'd got wonted tew her; she knowed my ways,
was a fust rate housekeeper, real good-tempered, and pious without
flingin' on't in yer face. She was a lonely creeter,--her folks bein'
all dead but one sister, who didn't use her waal, an' somehow I kinder
yearned over her, as they say in Scripter. For all I set an' gawped, I
was coming raound fast, though I felt as I used tew, when I was goin'
to shoot the rapids, kinder breathless an' oncertin, whether I'd come
aout right side up or not. Queer, warn't it?"

"Love, Flint; that was a sure symptom of it."

"Waal, guess 'twas; anyway I jumped up all of a sudden, ketched Bewlah
raound the neck, give her a hearty kiss, and sung aout, 'I'll dew it
sure's my name's Hi Flint!' The words was scarcely out of my maouth,
'fore daown come Dr. Parr. He' d ben up tew see aunt, an' said she
wouldn't last the night threw, prob'ly. That give me a scare er the
wust kind; an' when I told doctor haow things was, he sez, kinder
jokin',--

"'Better git merried right away, then. Parson Dill is tew come an' see
the old lady, an' he'll dew both jobs tew oncet.'

"'Will yeou, Bewlah?' sez I.

"'Yes, Hiram, to 'blige yeou,' sez she.

"With that, I put it fer the license; got it, an' was back in less 'n
half an haour, most tuckered aout with the flurry of the hull concern.
Quick as I'd been, Bewlah hed faound time tew whip on her best gaoun,
fix up her hair, and put a couple er white chrissanthymums intew
her hand'chif pin. Fer the fust time in her life, she looked
harnsome,--leastways _I_ thought so,--with a pretty color in her
cheeks, somethin' brighter'n a larf shinin' in her eyes, and her lips
smilin' an' tremblin', as she come to me an' whispered so's't none er
the rest could hear,--

"'Hiram, don't yeou dew it, ef yeou'd ruther not. I've stood it a gret
while alone, an' I guess I can ag'in.'

"Never yeou mind what I said or done abaout that; but we was merried
ten minutes arfter, 'fore the kitchen fire, with Dr. Parr an' aour
hired man, fer witnesses; an' then we all went up tew aunt. She was
goan fast, but she understood what I told her, hed strength tew fill
up the hole in the will, an' to say, a-kissin' Bewlah, 'Yeou'll be a
good wife, an' naow yeou ain't a poor one.'

"I couldn't help givin' a peek tew the will, and there I see not Hiram
Flint nor Josiah Flint, but Bewlah Flint, wrote every which way, but
as plain as the nose on yer face. 'It won't make no odds, dear,'
whispered my wife, peekin' over my shoulder. 'Guess it won't!' sez I,
aout laoud; 'I'm glad on't, and it ain't a cent more'n yeou derserve.'

"That pleased aunt. 'Riz me, Hiram,' sez she; an' when I'd got her
easy, she put her old arms raound my neck, an' tried to say, 'God
bless you, dear--,' but died a doin' of it; an' I ain't ashamed
tew say I boohooed real hearty, when I laid her daown, fer she was
dreadf'l good tew me, an' I don't forgit her in a hurry."

"How's Bewlah?" asked Dick, after the little tribute of respect all
paid to Aunt Siloam's memory, by a momentary silence.

"Fust-rate! that harum-scarum venter er mine was the best I ever made.
She's done waal by me, hes Bewlah; ben a grand good housekeeper, kin
kerry on the farm better 'n me, any time, an' is as dutif'l an' lovin'
a wife as,--waal, as annything that _is_ extra dutif'l and lovin'."

"Got any boys to brag of?"

"We don't think much o' boys daown aour way; they're 'mazin' resky
stock to fetch up,--alluz breakin' baounds, gittin' intew the paound,
and wurryin' your life aout somehaow 'nother. Gals naow doos waal;
I've got six o' the likeliest the is goin', every one on 'em is the
very moral of Bewlah,--red hair, black eyes, quiet ways, an' a mold
'side the nose. Baby's ain't growed yet; but I expect tew see it in a
consid'able state o' forrardness, when I git hum, an' wouldn't miss it
fer the world."

The droll expression of Flint's face, and the satisfied twang of his
last words, were irresistible. Dick and Phil went off into a shout of
laughter; and even Thorn's grave lips relapsed into a smile at the
vision of six little Flints with their six little moles. As if the
act were an established ceremony, the "paternal head" produced his
pocket-book, selected a worn black-and-white paper, which he spread in
his broad palm, and displayed with the air of a connoisseur.

"There, thet's Bewlah! we call it a cuttin'; but the proper name's a
silly-hoot, I b'leeve. I've got a harnsome big degarrytype tew hum,
but the heft on't makes it bad tew kerry raound, so I took this. I
don't tote it abaout inside my shirt, as some dew,--it ain't my way;
but I keep it in my wallet long with my other valleu'bles, and guess I
set as much store by it as ef it was all painted up, and done off to
kill."

The "silly-hoot" was examined with interest, and carefully stowed away
again in the old brown wallet, which was settled in its place with a
satisfied slap; then Flint said briskly,--

"Naouw, Phil, yeou close this interestin' and instructive meeting; and
be spry, fer time's most up."

"I haven't much to tell, but must begin with a confession which I have
often longed but never dared to make before, because I am a coward."

"Sho! who's goan to b'leeve that o' a man who fit like a wild-cat, wuz
offered permotion on the field, and reported tew headquarters arfter
his fust scrimmage. Try ag'in, Phil."

"Physical courage is as plentiful as brass buttons, nowadays, but
moral courage is a rarer virtue; and I'm lacking in it, as I'll prove.
You think me a Virginian; I'm an Alabamian by birth, and was a Rebel
three months ago."

This confession startled his hearers, as he knew it would, for he
had kept his secret well. Thorn laid his hand involuntarily upon his
rifle, Dick drew off a little, and Flint illustrated one of his own
expressions, for he "gawped." Phil laughed that musical laugh of his,
and looked up at them with his dark face waking into sudden life, as
he went on:--

"There's no treason in the camp, for I'm as fierce a Federalist as any
of you now, and you may thank a woman for it. When Lee made his raid
into Pennsylvania, I was a lieutenant in the--well, never mind what
regiment, it hasn't signalized itself since, and I'd rather not hit my
old neighbors when they are down. In one of the skirmishes during our
retreat, I got a wound and was left for dead. A kind old Quaker found
and took me home; but though I was too weak to talk, I had my senses
by that time, and knew what went on about me. Everything was in
confusion, even in that well-ordered place: no surgeon could be got at
first, and a flock of frightened women thee'd and thou'd one another
over me, but hadn't wit enough to see that I was bleeding to death.
Among the faces that danced before my dizzy eyes was one that seemed
familiar, probably because no cap surrounded it. I was glad to have
it bending over me, to hear a steady voice say, 'Give me a bandage,
quick!' and when none was instantly forthcoming to me, the young lady
stripped up a little white apron she wore, and stanched the wound in
my shoulder. I was not as badly hurt as I supposed, but so worn-out,
and faint from loss of blood, they believed me to be dying, and so did
I, when the old man took off his hat and said,--

"Friend, if thee has anything to say, thee had better say it, for thee
probably has not long to live.'

"I thought of my little sister, far away in Alabama, fancied she came
to me, and muttered, 'Amy, kiss me good-by.' The women sobbed at that;
but the girl bent her sweet compassionate face to mine, and kissed me
on the forehead. That was my wife."

"So you seceded from Secession right away, to pay for that
lip-service, hey?"

"No, Thorn, not right away,--to my shame be it spoken. I'll tell
you how it came about. Margaret was not old Bent's daughter, but a
Massachusetts girl on a visit, and a long one it proved, for she
couldn't go till things were quieter. While she waited, she helped
take care of me; for the good souls petted me like a baby when they
found that a Rebel could be a gentleman. I held my tongue, and behaved
my best to prove my gratitude, you know. Of course, I loved Margaret
very soon. How could I help it? She was the sweetest woman I had ever
seen, tender, frank, and spirited; all I had ever dreamed of and
longed for. I did not speak of this, nor hope for a return, because I
knew she was a hearty Unionist, and thought she only tended me from
pity. But suddenly she decided to go home, and when I ventured to wish
she would stay longer, she would not listen, and said, 'I must not
stay; I should have gone before.'

"The words were nothing, but as she uttered them the color came up
beautifully over all her face, and her eyes filled as they looked away
from mine. Then I knew that she loved me, and my secret broke out
against my will. Margaret was forced to listen, for I would not let
her go, but she seemed to harden herself against me, growing colder,
stiller, statelier, as I went on, and when I said in my desperate
way,--

"'You should love me, for we are bid to love our enemies,' she flashed
an indignant look at me and said,--

"'I will not love what I cannot respect! Come to me a loyal man, and
see what answer I shall give you.'

"Then she went away. It was the wisest thing she could have done,
for absence did more to change me than an ocean of tears, a year
of exhortations. Lying there, I missed her every hour of the day,
recalled every gentle act, kind word, and fair example she had given
me. I contrasted my own belief with hers, and found a new significance
in the words honesty and honor, and, remembering her fidelity to
principle, was ashamed of my own treason to God and to herself.
Education, prejudice, and interest, are difficult things to overcome,
and that was the hottest fight I ever passed through, for as I tell
you, I was a coward. But love and loyalty won the day, and, asking no
quarter, the Rebel surrendered."

"Phil Beaufort, you're a brick!" cried Dick, with a sounding slap on
his comrade's shoulder.

"A brand snatched from the burnin'. Hallelujah!" chanted Flint,
seesawing with excitement.

"Then you went to find your wife? How? Where?" asked Thorn, forgetting
vigilance in interest.

"Friend Bent hated war so heartily that he would have nothing to do
with paroles, exchanges, or any martial process whatever, but bade me
go when and where I liked, remembering to do by others as I had been
done by. Before I was well enough to go, however, I managed, by means
of Copperhead influence and returned prisoners, to send a letter to my
father and receive an answer. You can imagine what both contained; and
so I found myself penniless, but not poor, an outcast, but not alone.
Old Bent treated me like a prodigal son, and put money in my purse;
his pretty daughters loved me for Margaret's sake, and gave me a
patriotic salute all round when I left them, the humblest, happiest
man in Pennsylvania. Margaret once said to me that this was the time
for deeds, not words; that no man should stand idle, but serve the
good cause with head, heart, and hand, no matter in what rank; for
in her eyes a private fighting for liberty was nobler than a dozen
generals defending slavery. I remembered that, and, not having
influential friends to get me a commission, enlisted in one of her own
Massachusetts regiments, knowing that no act of mine would prove my
sincerity like that. You should have seen her face when I walked in
upon her, as she sat alone, busied with the army work, as I'd so often
seen her sitting by my bed; it showed me all she had been suffering
in silence, all I should have lost had I chosen darkness instead of
light. She hoped and feared so much she could not speak, neither could
I, but dropped my cloak, and showed her that, through love of her, I
had become a soldier of the Union. How I love the coarse blue uniform!
for when she saw it, she came to me without a word and kept her
promise in a month."

"Thunder! what a harnsome woman!" exclaimed Flint, as Phil, opening
the golden case that held his talisman, showed them the beautiful,
beloved face of which he spoke.

"Yes! and a right noble woman too. I don't deserve her, but I will. We
parted on our wedding-day, for orders to be _off_ came suddenly, and
she would not let me go until I had given her my name to keep. We were
married in the morning, and at noon I had to go. Other women wept as
we marched through the city, but my brave Margaret kept her tears till
we were gone, smiling and waving her hand to me,--the hand that wore
the wedding-ring,--till I was out of sight. That image of her is
before me day and night, and day and night her last words are ringing
in my ears,--

"'I give you freely, do your best. Better a true man's widow than a
traitor's wife.'

"Boys, I've only stood on the right side for a month; I've only fought
one battle, earned one honor; but I believe these poor achievements
are an earnest of the long atonement I desire to make for
five-and-twenty years of blind transgression. You say I fight well.
Have I not cause to dare much?--for in owning many slaves, I too
became a slave; in helping to make many freemen, I liberate myself.
You wonder why I refused promotion. Have I any right to it yet? Are
there not men who never sinned as I have done, and beside whose
sacrifices mine look pitifully small? You tell me I have no ambition.
I have the highest, for I desire to become God's noblest work,--an
honest man,--living, to make Margaret happy in a love that every hour
grows worthier of her own,--dying to make death proud to take me."

Phil had risen while he spoke, as if the enthusiasm of his mood lifted
him into the truer manhood he aspired to attain. Straight and strong
he stood up in the moonlight, his voice deepened by unwonted
energy, his eye clear and steadfast, his whole face ennobled by the
regenerating power of this late loyalty to country, wife, and self,
and bright against the dark blue of his jacket shone the pictured
face, the only medal he was proud to wear.

Ah, brave, brief moment, cancelling years of wrong! Ah, fair and fatal
decoration, serving as a mark for a hidden foe! The sharp crack of a
rifle broke the stillness of the night, and with those hopeful words
upon his lips, the young man sealed his purpose with his life.




THE BARON'S GLOVES;

OR,

AMY'S ROMANCE

"All is fair in love and war."


I

HOW THEY WERE FOUND


"What a long sigh! Are you tired, Amy?"

"Yes, and disappointed as well. I never would have undertaken this
journey if I had not thought it would be full of novelty, romance, and
charming adventures."

"Well, we have had several adventures."

"Bah! losing one's hat in the Rhine, getting left at a dirty little
inn, and having our pockets picked, are not what I call adventures. I
wish there were brigands in Germany--it needs something of that sort
to enliven its stupidity."

"How can you call Germany stupid when you have a scene like this
before you?" said Helen, with a sigh of pleasure, as she looked from
the balcony which overhangs the Rhine at the hotel of the "Three
Kings" at Coblentz. Ehrenbreitstein towered opposite, the broad river
glittered below, and a midsummer moon lent its enchantment to the
landscape.

As she spoke, her companion half rose from the low chair where she
lounged, and showed the pretty, piquant face of a young girl. She
seemed in a half melancholy, half petulant mood; and traces of recent
illness were visible in the languor of her movements and the pallor of
her cheeks.

"Yes, it is lovely; but I want adventures and romance of some sort
to make it quite perfect. I don't care what, if something would only
happen."

"My dear, you are out of spirits and weary now, to-morrow you'll be
yourself again. Do not be ungrateful to uncle or unjust to yourself.
Something pleasant will happen, I've no doubt. In fact, something
_has_ happened that you may make a little romance out of, perhaps, for
lack of a more thrilling adventure."

"What do you mean?" and Amy's listless face brightened.

"Speak low; there are balconies all about us, and we may be
overheard," said Helen, drawing nearer after an upward glance.

"What is the beginning of a romance?" whispered Amy, eagerly.

"A pair of gloves. Just now, as I stood here, and you lay with your
eyes shut, these dropped from the balcony overhead. Now amuse yourself
by weaving a romance out of them and their owner."

Amy seized them, and stepping inside the window, examined them by the
candle.

"A gentleman's gloves, scented with violets! Here's a little hole
fretted by a ring on the third finger. Bless me! here are the
initials, 'S.P.,' stamped on the inside, with a coat of arms below.
What a fop to get up his gloves in this style! They are exquisite,
though. Such a delicate color, so little soiled, and so prettily
ornamented! Handsome hands wore these. I'd like to see the man."

Helen laughed at the girl's interest, and was satisfied if any trifle
amused her _ennui_.

"I will send them back by the _kellner_, and in that way we may
discover their owner," she said.

But Amy arrested her on the way to the door.

"I've a better plan; these waiters are so stupid you'll get nothing
out of them. Here's the hotel book sent up for our names; let us look
among the day's arrivals and see who 'S.P.' is. He came to-day, I'm
sure, for the man said the rooms above were just taken, so we could
not have them."

Opening the big book, Amy was soon intently poring over the long list
of names, written in many hands and many languages.

"I've got it! Here he is--oh, Nell, he's a baron! Isn't that charming?
'Sigismund von Palsdorf, Dresden.' We _must_ see him, for I know he's
handsome, if he wears such distracting gloves."

"You'd better take them up yourself, then."

"You know I can't do that; but I shall ask the man a few questions,
just to get an idea what sort of person the baron is. Then I shall
change my mind and go down to dinner; shall look well about me, and if
the baron is agreeable I shall make uncle return the gloves. He will
thank us, and I can say I've known a real baron. That will be so nice
when we go home. Now, don't be duennaish and say I'm silly, but let me
do as I like, and come and dress."

Helen submitted, and when the gong pealed through the house, Major
Erskine marched into the great _salle  manger_, with a comely niece
on each arm. The long tables were crowded, and they had to run the
gauntlet of many eyes as they made their way to the head of the upper
